R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

Resources to Help Teach the Gospel in the Home

Footnotes

24

Brothers and Sisters as Resources

The way my eight-year-old son's head popped up reminded me of a puppet on a string. "Dad, I thought God, Jesus, and the Holy Ghost were three separate people."

[Are My Children Going to Make It?: Brothers and Sisters as Resources, page 203] "That's true. They are three separate, distinct beings."

"Then why did Jesus say they were all one person?"

[Are My Children Going to Make It?: Brothers and Sisters as Resources, page 203] We were reading our nightly chapter in the Book of Mormon. Adam, our sixteen-year-old, had just read 3 Nephi 11:27: "For behold, verily I say unto you, that the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost are one; and I am in the Father, and the Father in me, and the Father and I are one."

[Are My Children Going to Make It?: Brothers and Sisters as Resources, page 203] Jimmy, our eight-year-old, had looked like he was half-asleep. However, he was paying much closer attention than I had thought. Susan, his twelve-year-old sister, had also picked up the apparent inconsistency.

[Are My Children Going to Make It?: Brothers and Sisters as Resources, page 203] With profound insight I began to explain this important gospel concept to my children, but Sam, our eighteen-year-old son, interrupted me. "Dad, may I try to explain it to them?"

[Are My Children Going to Make It?: Brothers and Sisters as Resources, page 203] "Sure, Son, go ahead."

[Are My Children Going to Make It?: Brothers and Sisters as Resources, page 203] Sam then clearly explained what the scripture meant, why it was written as it was, and how it applied to each of their lives. Frankly, I was very impressed. He did it much more simply than I would have, but what he said was consistent with gospel principles and indicated that he knew what he was talking about. Jimmy and Susan understood the explanation, so we continued reading.

[Are My Children Going to Make It?: Brothers and Sisters as Resources, page 204] After family prayer, Sam took me aside and said, "Dad, I apologize for interrupting you like that. I hope I didn't offend you. But I was concerned. You see, when you first explained that scripture to me, you fouled it up so badly that it took me months to figure it out. I didn't want that to happen to them."

[Are My Children Going to Make It?: Brothers and Sisters as Resources, page 204] After I thought about it for a minute, I realized he was probably right. I sometimes make simple things far too complex. But my greatest insight of the evening was a realization that my children can do a much better job of teaching each other the gospel than I had ever supposed.

Brothers and Sisters as Resources

When parents and children work and worship together, all the resources of the family come into play, and they are able to harness spiritual power available no other way. Under such circumstances, siblings have a profound influence on one another. Since children learn by example, the behavior of older brothers and sisters who keep the commandments becomes a testimony of the truthfulness of the principles their parents teach. Family norms are established, and the lessons of obedience, faith, charity, and integrity are reinforced. As a father of six boys explained, "One of the main reasons our five youngest sons served missions is because their oldest brother went and had such a great experience. The same is true for church attendance and the Word of Wisdom. When the older children live the gospel, our job as parents is much easier. When the younger children see the blessings that come from obedience, they are much more inclined to believe what we tell them."

Older children can contribute to teaching the gospel to their younger brothers and sisters in a variety of different ways. They can explain scriptures, advise against wrongdoing, share uplifting experiences, and warn against potential dangers and pitfalls. Indeed, one of the great benefits of reading the scriptures together as a family and holding regular family home evening is the opportunities children have to teach each other the gospel. Sometimes, however, they learn more through informal discussions. Note the comments from a stake president:

While growing up, I learned more about the gospel from what was discussed at the dinner table than from any other single place. Dad and Mom told us stories from the scriptures and shared their own spiritual experiences. They also asked questions and directed discussions. We, as children, did the same. It was a comfortable setting (mainly because we liked to eat), and the environment was safe and conducive to learning. We were also a captive audience. Even though that happened over fifty years ago, I can clearly remember many of the discussions. They are wonderful memories.

These dinner table discussions can take a variety of formats. For example, in one family Sunday dinner is accompanied by a discussion of what each child learned in his or her classes that day. The father of three boys and a girl described his family's experiences in the following way:

Each Sunday I ask the children what their teachers talked about that day. This process has several benefits. First, the children enjoy it, so it gives us something fun to talk about. Second, since they know they will be asked to share what they learned with the rest of the family, the children pay closer attention to their teachers. Third, the questions provide an excuse for us to informally discuss gospel principles. Fourth, if questions arise, we encourage the older children to teach the younger ones, which provides opportunities for them to bear their testimonies. And finally, it gives us a chance to correct doctrinal misunderstandings.

For example, just as dessert was being served one Sunday, our seven-year-old boy said, "Dad, you forgot to ask us what we learned today."

I said, "Hey, partner, you're right. What did your Primary teacher talk about today?"

With a great deal of enthusiasm and excitement, he reported the following: "We talked about the plan of salvation. We start out in the pre-earth life, where we are all children of Heavenly Father. Then we come to earth, and the veil is pulled over us so we can't remember what it was like. Then we die, and we go to paradise if we lived right on earth. If we lived wrong, we go to prison. Then we have the final judgment, and we go to the telestial kingdom if we have lived really bad. We go to the terrestrial kingdom if we are honest but don't join the Church. If we are baptized and keep all of Heavenly Father's commandments, we go to the cholesterol kingdom."

Children strongly influence the values of one another, and they can sometimes be more effective in teaching their siblings than their parents. Note the following example shared by a resourceful mother:

I wanted to teach my five-year-old son the original twelve apostles in order, so that he would recognize them when we talked about them in family home evening and when we read the scriptures. However, after working with him for over an hour, I was getting nowhere. So I took his eight-year-old sister aside and asked her if she could teach him what I had failed to do. She smiled and said that she thought she could. The two of them then went into the living room and started to talk softly.

Six minutes later, they came into the kitchen, smiling. Our daughter said she had an announcement to make. The task had been completed. Her brother then proudly recited the twelve apostles, in order of seniority, without missing a beat.

Because children have such a powerful influence on their brothers and sisters, they can also be a source of strength in times of difficulty. Consider the following example, related to us by the mother of seven children:

When our son was eleven, he developed a serious problem with a lack of self-esteem. Kids at school were giving him a rough time; and as the fall progressed, he began to believe what they said and to really think of himself as a "nobody." As hard as we tried, we could not change that new and undesirable self-perception.

Our fifteen-year-old daughter saw what was happening. As a secret Christmas present that year, she told us that she was going to give him a new self-image. With gentle tenacity she began her task. She consistently reminded him of his positive attributes. She told him how cute she thought he was. She reinforced the things he did well and discounted his mistakes. She invited him to do things with her, and she bragged about him to her friends—often within listening distance of her brother.

We soon saw a miracle take place before our eyes. As a result of the love, the concern, and the caring that she manifested, he began to change. Within a year he honestly believed that he was as good as she had been telling him he was. He has since successfully fulfilled a mission, married in the temple, graduated from college, and now owns his own business. His success is directly related to his self-image; and that self-image is, to a great extent, a result of the care and concern shown by his older sister.

The counsel of an older brother or sister can also be a powerful force in changing undesirable behavior, as the following example illustrates:

Six weeks after school started, we learned that Doug, our third grader, was misbehaving in his choral music class. In fact, he prided himself on how much noise he could make and how disruptive he could be. I talked with him about it, and he promised me that he would stop. During the next two weeks, however, things only got worse.

I asked Judy, my twelve-year-old daughter, to talk with him. She agreed, as long as she could do it her way. That night, at the dinner table, Judy matter-of-factly said, "Doug, if I were you, I would be quiet in music class. If you don't, the teacher won't respect you, and the children will start to make fun of you."

Doug stopped chewing and quietly looked at his sister, who casually continued eating her salad. Nothing more was said about the subject.

One week later his music teacher called and asked, "What happened to Doug? That little kid has behaved like a jewel this past week. Whatever you're doing, keep it up."

A few days later, while sitting with Doug in the living room, I asked what made the difference. "Judy told me that the other kids and the teachers wouldn't like me. She's already gone through grade school, and she had lots of friends. I just figured she knew what she was talking about, so I did what she said."

Obviously all problems cannot be resolved this easily. We certainly don't want to suggest that if older brothers and sisters merely talk with younger ones, all family problems will go away, because that won't happen. However, parents sometimes overlook their most obvious resources. Thus, our point is that siblings can be valuable resources to parents in teaching gospel principles, and wise parents will take advantage of all their resources in creating opportunities for children to have experiences with success.
