R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

25

The Role of Grandparents

"I could tell something was out there by the way the sheep were acting. Some of the farmers had reported seeing a mountain lion in the area, and a few had even had some of their livestock killed. Generally, mountain lions don't attack humans, so I wasn't too worried about my own safety. Besides, before I left home that morning we knelt in family prayer, and my father asked the Lord to protect me from harm and danger. But the last thing I wanted that night was to have some of the sheep killed."

The eyes of my four children got as big as saucers. They had sat spellbound for over an hour as they listened to their grandfather tell stories about his life as a boy. I was fascinated by how effectively he wove gospel principles into the experiences he shared.

"But something was out there, all right. The sheep could always tell when a predatory animal was around. So I went out to see what was going on. All of a sudden, I saw it, and I froze in my tracks: a big mountain lion over by some rocks about fifty yards away. It scared me to death.

"Now I knew that animals are afraid of fire. So I immediately put more wood on the bonfire I had built earlier, including a long limb that had the end covered with sap, because I knew it would burn very quickly. All the while the dogs kept the lion away from the sheep as much as they could.

"But then the mountain lion snarled and started to come toward me. In order to protect myself, I grabbed the large limb from the fire and ran toward the lion, hoping to scare it away. As I charged, the lion opened its mouth and snarled, so I stuck the burning limb right inside the lion's mouth. Thus the lion was persuaded to leave, and the sheep were protected." My children shrieked with mirth.

Dad then pointed his index finger at them and said, "Never underestimate the power of family prayer. Never. It is only because of the Lord's protection that I was not killed that night."

The Role of Grandparents

Grandparents can be extremely influential in helping their grandchildren understand the gospel and live Christlike lives. Indeed, the concepts discussed in this book apply as much to grandparents as to parents; and grandparents, in many instances, can reach children in ways that nobody else is able to do. In recalling a great teaching moment, a young elder said:

Dad traveled a lot when I was younger, so he wasn't around much to discipline us. When I turned thirteen, I started to talk back to my mother. One day, while visiting my grandparents, my grandmother talked with me privately. She told me about the importance of honoring my parents and asked me to be more respectful. Because of my love for that great woman, I promised to change my behavior. There are few people that I would have done that for.

Grandparents can also help their family members build links to their ancestors and gain a better understanding of their spiritual heritage. For example, the oldest of six children related the following experience about her grandmother:

Some of my most enjoyable childhood memories are the hours I spent at my grandmother's knee, listening to her talk about her own childhood and the lives of family members. Her mother walked across the plains when she was six. She watched the seagulls save the crops in the Salt Lake Valley. She attended the dedication of the Salt Lake Temple. Church history became much more meaningful for me once I realized that my great-grandmother was there when it happened.

Grandparents often have wonderful opportunities to render service to family members, particularly during times of serious illness and hardship. Such experiences often make indelible impressions on children. Note, for example, the experience of one grandson:

When I was six, my mom spent five weeks in the hospital. On several occasions she was so close to death that the doctors told my dad to notify the family. When they finally brought her home, my grandmother, who lived in our little town, spent weeks at our home. Even though that happened fifty years ago, I can still remember the rice puddings she fixed, the stories she read to me from the Bible, and the Primary songs we sang together.

Sometimes, because of family circumstances, grandparents have unusual opportunities to serve, as in the following example: "Since my mother always worked, many of my values came from my grandmother. She lived two doors from us and looked after me and my brother and sister; in fact, she raised us. My parents married outside the temple when they were very young, and they were never active in the Church. It is because of my grandmother that I am active in the Church today."

Because of their central role in the lives of family members, grandparents have unique opportunities to teach their grandchildren gospel principles.

I learned to serve others by watching my grandmother. She baked bread twice a week and always took a loaf to someone who needed it. I went with her on almost every delivery. She always canned an extra bushel of vegetables or fruit and took it to someone in need. It was just a way of life for her. She never wavered from it. Nobody ever asked her for help. She saw people in need and administered relief.

Children can also learn the meaning of gospel service from watching their grandparents.

I learned to love visiting teaching because Grandma enjoyed it so much. In fact, she loved to go visiting teaching. She saw every one of her sisters every month. I never heard her complain about it. It was never a burden to her. She looked forward to going, and by doing so she instilled in me at a very young age a testimony of the importance of visiting teaching and the joy that comes from serving others.

However, not all children are fortunate enough to have grandparents who live close by. Nonetheless, grandparents can still positively influence their children. Letters from grandparents are highlights in a child's life, and they can make contributions to the lives of their posterity for generations to come. A mother of six shared the following experience:

On the day my first child was born, my father wrote him a one-page letter in which he bore his testimony and expressed his love for me, for my husband, and for my new little boy. He also sent a little bank with three compartments—tithing, savings, and spending—and a silver dollar to start his missionary fund. He wrote, "I'm giving you this silver dollar in hopes that you will share the great blessings that you have received with others. My testimony and the first dollar of your missionary fund is an indication of the commitment of this family to serving the Lord and keeping his commandments." Dad has done this for each of his seventeen grandchildren. In the process, he has provided us with evidence of his love for the Lord and of the strength of his testimony.

Grandparents can also contribute to family unity in spite of distance. For example, a couple with seven children and twenty grandchildren started a family newsletter. The father described its impact on the lives of his grownup children and their children:

After our seven children got married and moved away, they began to complain that they were losing touch with each other. Since they're scattered all over the world, communication is difficult and expensive. So we started a monthly newsletter. Each month they send us a two-page letter describing what has gone on in their families that month. We encourage them to also send pictures, graduation and ordination certificates, letters containing mission calls, awards, and anything else they think is important.

My wife and I assemble the material, make the copies, and send the packet to each family. The project takes us no more than two days a month, and it's really turned out to be a nice little project. The newsletter is a great way to keep in touch, since it brings everyone up to date on all the news. They put the packets in three-ringed binders, and the letters become a family history. We're essentially writing our family history a month at a time. It's painless, and it has done a great deal to strengthen our family ties.

Even if visits are limited to once a year or once every several years, private time with each child can have a lasting impact on a child's values. In one family, for example, the nonmember grandfather interviewed each of his grandchildren when they visited. Years later, his granddaughter reported the following:

Some of my fondest childhood memories revolve around the private interviews my grandpa and I had. It was in that setting that I learned to love him and appreciate him for who he was. I knew that he loved me. I knew that I was important to him. I knew that he trusted me and really believed that I could be successful. Even though he wasn't a member of our church, he counseled me to keep the commandments, to be honest, and to be dependable. He sometimes said, "No, you don't want to do that," when I told him about something I was going to do. I also loved it when he said, "I'm darn proud of you." When I heard that, I wanted to do things that would make him even more proud of me.

Teaching does not have to be serious in order to be effective. A young missionary recently shared the following about his grandfather: "While driving along a sparsely traveled road with two of my cousins and me, Grandpa drove right down the middle of the road. He then looked at us and said, 'After I am dead and gone, and people ask you about your grandfather, you can tell them that he veered neither to the right nor to the left, and that he drove down the center of the road.'"

Grandparents can teach children unselfishness in a variety of different ways. Consider, for example, this grandfather's description of the unique way he and his wife teach their children and grandchildren to serve:

All of our children are married and rearing their own families. Some of them are really struggling, so they tend to get rather self-centered and forget that there are other people in the world who are worse off than they. Just before Thanksgiving each year we send each family two fifty-dollar bills, with the instructions that they can't spend one of them until they have spent the other on somebody less fortunate. It's amazing how creative they have become in serving others. It's also rewarding to see the joy that has come into their lives by forgetting about themselves and doing something for someone less fortunate.

Grandparents can also teach the gospel very effectively by their example, as the following illustrates:

I will never forget the few minutes I spent with my grandmother that winter evening. My wife and I were preparing to drive back to our home in Provo after visiting my grandmother in northern Utah. Thick fog had settled in, making driving hazardous. Before we left, my grandmother said, "Let's go in the other room and have prayer." We then knelt by the rocking chair in her living room, and I have never heard a person speak with the Lord so intimately, as if he were actually there, as did my grandmother that evening. I will never forget that experience. That happened almost thirty years ago, and I still can't describe that experience to others without weeping.

Consider as well the wonderful example this grandmother is setting for her posterity, as told by her granddaughter:

My eighty-four-year-old grandmother is the perfect example of how to address the problems of life. During the last eighteen months, her husband, her only remaining brother, and twelve of her close friends have died, and she has had two major operations. However, she continuously tells her children, "I have control over my life, and I refuse to let it get me down." To keep herself active, she daily reads the scriptures and other church books, and she rides her stationary bicycle several miles every day. She goes to the temple once each week, regularly visits the sick and less fortunate; and she never misses a baptism, a confirmation, an ordination, or a piano recital of her grand- and great-grandchildren. In spite of it all, she consistently prays that the Lord will help her to understand and fulfill her mission here in mortality.

Few people have the potential to play a more important role in the lives of children than their grandparents. They are great resources who can be relied upon to bless the lives of their posterity and instill righteous principles in the hearts and minds of family members.
