R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

26

You Don't Have to Do It Alone: Church Members and Friends as Resources

I could "smell" another one coming, just by the way he was talking. School had started three weeks earlier, and Brad, our six-year-old, loved his new teacher. As a result, much of his conversation around the dinner table centered on her. This particular evening he said, "She's really rich. In fact, I saw her paycheck today. She makes about ah, er, ah, ten million dollars a year!"

This was only one of a series of whoppers Brad had told in the past six weeks. They weren't malicious, in the sense that he wasn't telling lies about other people or trying to cover his own disobedience. They were just extreme exaggerations. But it was still dishonest. Furthermore, if this behavior continued, we would have some real problems. I had tried everything I knew to help him stop, but nothing worked.

During my interview with Frank Dixon, our home teacher, I mentioned the problem. Frank agreed to talk with Brad. So after his next visit to our home, he and Brad talked privately for a few minutes. At the end of their conversation, Brad promised to stop telling lies. The two of them also agreed that Frank would check with him periodically to see how he was doing.

To our home teacher, however, "periodically" meant every time Frank saw him: in the foyer before and after church services, during home-teaching visits, in the grocery store, and at the movie theater. Within three weeks the problem was resolved. With our home teacher's help, we were able to accomplish something my wife and I had been unable to do in twice the amount of time.

You Don't Have to Do It All by Yourself

For some parents the responsibility of teaching their children the gospel seems overwhelming. It's one thing to teach them gospel principles, but it's quite another to teach them in a way that they will learn. Although the responsibility for teaching our children the gospel falls on us as their parents, fortunately we don't have to do it alone. The Lord has provided others to help carry the burden. This includes home teachers, visiting teachers, other Church leaders, and friends.

Home Teachers and Visiting Teachers

The purpose of the Church and all its organizations and programs is to create eternal family units. To accomplish this, the Lord declared that those ordained to the priesthood have the responsibility to "teach, expound, exhort, baptize, and watch over the church . . . and visit the house of each member, exhorting them to pray vocally and in secret and attend to all family duties; . . . to watch over the church always, and be with and strengthen them; and see that there is no iniquity in the church, neither hardness with each other, neither lying, backbiting, nor evil speaking." (D&C 20:42-54.)

To fulfill this responsibility, the Church calls priesthood holders as home teachers to visit the homes of all Church members every month. They go in pairs, two Melchizedek Priesthood bearers as partners or one Aaronic Priesthood bearer accompanying a Melchizedek Priesthood bearer.

Effective home teaching can make a significant contribution to the lives of people. Since home teachers are called to work directly with families, they are in a better position to help the members of those families than are other Church officers or teachers. Thus, they should be the first people called in times of need.

For home teachers to be effective, however, family members must understand that their visitors are servants of the Lord and treat them accordingly. Sometimes that happens. Sometimes it doesn't, as the following example illustrates:

When I was fourteen, Dad and I were assigned to home teach an inactive family who had gone through several sets of home teachers during the thirteen months since they moved into our ward. During our first visit we understood why. Five minutes after we arrived, their three little boys were making so much noise in the kitchen that we could hardly hear the TV, which remained on during our visit. After putting up with as much as she could stand, the mother yelled, "If you kids don't stop that noise, I'm going to make you come in here and listen to the home teachers!" They didn't make a sound for the rest of our visit. We were not surprised, therefore, that we had little impact on that family.

Instead, for home teachers to effectively bless families, we as parents need to support them and teach our children that they are the Lord's servants. A returned missionary described his experience as follows:

I knew our home teachers were special because of the way my folks treated them. Whenever they came to our home, we stopped what we were doing and joined them in the living room. Before they left we always knelt in prayer and thanked the Lord for their visits. Whenever we had problems, our home teachers were the first people we called. Every time we knelt in family prayer, we prayed for them. As a result, when I was growing up, I thought our home teachers were the most important people in the Church!

Thus it should be in every home. Under such conditions, home teachers can be instruments in the Lord's hands in meeting the temporal and spiritual needs of family members.

When home teachers have clearly defined goals, they are better able to meet the family's needs. One of the easiest ways for parents to insure that effective home teaching takes place is for the head of the home to conduct regular interviews with his or her home teacher to identify needs and request help in specific areas. A single mother of three girls and a boy gave this account:

By the time Steve was seven, I had no idea how to help him. There were things I simply couldn't do for him, like fixing his bicycle and participating in sports activities. I also couldn't provide the adult male companionship that he so desperately needed.

I met with Brother Callister, our new home teacher, and explained my problem. A plan was put in place, and things started to happen. Once each week he and his son took Steve with them to the playground to play baseball, followed by a trip to the ice cream parlor. A bond of love developed, and Steve realized that he had a friend whom he could trust.

Brother Callister also went to work on building self-esteem in my son, which including helping with school work, giving positive feedback on things well done (and also on things not so well done), and teaching gospel principles during his monthly visits—all the while telling Steve what a great kid he was. When Steve turned eight, he and Brother Callister entered the baptismal font together.

Nobody can replace a young man's father. But Brother Callister has come as close as anyone possibly could. For the past six years, he has helped Steve build his pinewood derby cars, taken him on Scouting trips and family vacations, helped him repair his bicycle, encouraged him to start playing the trumpet, attended his concerts, assisted him in earning his Scouting ranks and badges, and created within him a burning desire to serve a mission. Steve considers Brother Callister his best friend and will do anything he suggests. Such is the power of an effective home teacher.

Visiting teachers can also provide wonderful assistance to families by delivering compassionate service and by helping mothers understand and fulfill their responsibilities. They make invaluable contributions to homes by teaching, inspiring, helping, and loving those whom they serve. A recently divorced mother of three young children described the help she has received:

One of my visiting teachers has children about the same ages as mine. The other sister's children are much older. Both women have been extremely helpful to me as I face the challenge of rearing my children in the gospel. They have become my closest and most trusted friends. Whenever I have problems, questions, or concerns about my children, I go to them for counsel. They bolster my confidence and share suggestions and ideas that have worked for them in rearing their own children. I know that I can call on them day or night for help, and they will respond. I no longer feel like I am alone. I thank my Heavenly Father daily for two visiting teachers who are consistently there when I need them.

Church Leaders

Church leaders are also valuable resources to parents in helping children learn and live the gospel. Priesthood and auxiliary leaders, teachers, and other Church officers can have a profound impact on the lives of young people. When leaders have consistent contact with our children, their influence can be far-reaching. Such was the case of a young man. Years later he described his experience this way.

During the summer after my high-school graduation, I began dating a girl whose behavior was not consistent with gospel standards. I liked her a lot, and I could feel myself getting involved. On my way to Sunday School class one Sunday, I stopped to talk with the second counselor in the bishopric. For the next forty minutes we visited about college, missions, and marriage. Even though he was completely unaware of the dilemma I faced, his comments couldn't have been more to the point. He told me about his courtship with his wife and described the many blessings that had come into his life as a result of his marriage in the temple. As he spoke, the Spirit bore witness to me that the road I was on would not lead me where I wanted to go. I resolved at that moment to do nothing that would prevent me from serving a worthy mission and getting married in the temple. I will be forever grateful for that forty-minute conversation.

Church leaders can offer help and encouragement in areas that parents may not be able to do much in or supplement what parents are already doing. One father reported this fortunate experience that his fifteen-year-old daughter had:

Our Young Women's president was a dynamo, and the girls all loved her. But then she was released, and a talented but stricter leader was called. My daughter Lori was especially disappointed, and since she is quite talkative and independent, she and the new leader clashed a bit. My wife and I encouraged Lori to give the new leader time and pointed out that everyone has different styles of leadership.

The new president, because of her skills at dance, music, and art, expanded the range of the Young Women activities, and Lori at last found an outlet for her interest in song and dance. The leader helped coach her in learning a few songs for performance and let her practice on her piano. They have become close friends, and the leader has provided some opportunities for our daughter that my wife and I could not give her.

Friends

Good friends are of inestimable value. Interest in and subsequent activity in the Church for both members and nonmembers often result from close friendships. In fact, for many, their spiritual survival depends on the quality of those friendships. Therefore, we need to teach our children how to be good friends and how to develop close friendships with others. We also need to do all in our power to foster close friendships between our children and others with whom they share similar values. Obviously, we can't force children to like each other. But we can actively promote conditions under which those friendships can grow. The mother of five children described how her family handled this challenge:

Bill was the only other deacon in our ward when we arrived here seventeen years ago. My husband and I realized that if Mike, our twelve-year-old, was to have any member friends, his choice was limited to one person. The two boys initially liked each other, so we had something positive to work with.

Since the chances of them becoming good friends was hampered because they went to different junior high schools, we informally adopted Bill into our family and did everything we could to foster that friendship. We invited him to Church activities and sleepovers on weekends. He spent most Sunday afternoons in our home. We used every excuse we could think of to get the two together for positive interaction. As a result, their friendship grew to the point that they became almost inseparable, and that friendship continued throughout high school. The strength they provided one another both protected them from difficulties and encouraged them during challenging times. Even though they have both returned from their missions, married in the temple, and have families of their own, they still remain in close contact.

In addition, close friendships for our children are not limited to children their own age. Adults can play key roles in the lives of children and can exercise a positive influence, teaching them to walk in the ways of the Lord. A father described the impact one elderly man has had on his ward and his own daughter:

Earl Hammond is a saintly man whose life epitomizes humble and Christlike service to others. For over four decades he has blessed the lives of the members of the Boulder First Ward in the Boulder Colorado Stake. At age ninety (born in 1901), he is still the first to volunteer for welfare projects and temple assignments and to help new families moving into the area. Children flock to his side each Sunday to shake his hand and receive a warm greeting; he calls them all by name.

Several years ago my seven-year-old daughter complained because she never got to see President Spencer W. Kimball. She asked, "Daddy, do you think President Kimball will ever come to our ward?"

I responded, "There are so many wards in the Church and so many people who need him that he may never be able to visit our ward, sweetheart."

She looked very contemplative. Then she smiled and with a great deal of excitement said, "Oh, that's okay. We don't need President Kimball. We have Brother Hammond!"

Parents need not feel that good influences are hard to find outside the home. The more our children associate with good people, the greater their tendency to acquire characteristics and values consistent with gospel standards. Our children can be greatly blessed when we foster positive relationships between them and their home teachers, their Church leaders and friends, and the Brother Hammonds of the world.
