R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

27

Other Resources to Help Lighten the Load

The thought of it alone was enough to scare me to death. I had been a member of the Church for only six months, and I didn't even understand the gospel myself. How was I supposed to teach my children?

My role as single parent didn't help things either. My husband had died three years earlier, leaving me with three small children and few resources. When the missionaries taught us the first lesson seven months earlier, I immediately knew their message was true. My oldest daughter and I were baptized four weeks later.

When I shared my concern with my home teacher, he suggested that we might find something in the ward meetinghouse library that could give me some ideas. I was so naive that I didn't even know that the library existed! He made an appointment for the two of us the following evening.

As soon as we arrived, the librarian took us on a brief tour. I was amazed at the variety of resources available to Church members: filmstrips, videotapes, audiotapes, books, Church magazines, pictures, flannel boards, and lesson manuals. I was even more surprised to learn that members could check them out for use in their own homes. I had an entire library at my disposal, all at no cost!

The librarian handed me the Five Year Index to Periodicals of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, January 1, 1981, to December 31, 1985. She said that a new index came out every year, and every five years, the five yearly indexes were compiled into one large index. To my surprise, that one volume contained fifty-six references on the subject of teaching children. The three volumes for 1986-88 contained twenty-nine more. I had discovered a gold mine! Thirty minutes later I walked out of the library with a stack of publications containing nine articles on ways to help me more effectively teach the gospel to my children.

Resources for Teaching the Gospel in the Home

Because of the magnitude of parents' responsibility to rear their children in light and truth, the task may, at first, seem overwhelming. Fortunately, parents are not left to themselves. Numerous resources exist to assist us in fulfilling this sacred responsibility. Examples include videocassettes, audiocassettes, music, and community resources.

Videocassettes

Videocassette technology provides a vehicle for gospel instruction that was impossible only a few years ago. Videotapes of general conference, Church broadcasts, and movies can aid parents in more effectively and memorably teaching children gospel principles. As a mother of six children explained:

When I want to teach my children about the missions of John the Baptist and Peter, James, and John, we watch The Restoration of the Priesthood. Johnny Lingo portrays the destructive impact of criticism and the importance of self-esteem. John Baker's Last Race is a tear-jerker that contains important lessons about service and enduring to the end. And I don't know of a better way to help children understand the circumstances under which the Savior and Old Testament prophets taught the gospel than to watch The New Media Bible: King James Version.

One advantage of using videotapes is the way they help children visualize what is going on. As my ten-year-old son said, "When I read the story about the restoration of the priesthood, I can see John the Baptist putting his hands on the heads of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. I can also see them standing in the river, with water running down their faces, hugging each other after they got baptized."

Videotapes also preserve important moments in Church history, such as general conference speeches. Fortunately, the conference talks are published and readily available. The printed word can provide a moving testimony to the reader. The visual presentation of the word, however, can provide added impact for children, as a father explained:

During a recent family home evening, we had a lesson on the importance of developing a personal testimony. I will never forget the reaction of my three teenage children when they watched the tape of Elder Bruce R. McConkie sharing his final testimony in the April 1985 Annual General Conference, just ten days before his death. He said, "And now, as pertaining to this perfect atonement, wrought by the shedding of the blood of God—I testify that it took place in Gethsemane and at Golgotha, and as pertaining to Jesus Christ, I testify that he is the son of the Living God and was crucified for the sins of the world. He is our Lord, our God, and our King.

"I am one of his witnesses, and in a coming day I shall feel the nail marks in his hands and in his feet and shall wet his feet with my tears.

"But I shall not know any better then than I know now that he is God's Almighty Son, that he is our Savior and Redeemer, and that salvation comes in and through his atoning blood and in no other way." [^1]

As Elder McConkie's voice broke with emotion, I looked at my children. All three of them were weeping. After he finished his sermon, we sat in silence for several minutes. It was one of those unforgettable experiences that bless our lives.

Because of their effectiveness in teaching, the Church has made a major commitment to provide resources via videotapes, and the number of movies, speeches, and broadcasts in that format is growing rapidly.

Audiotapes

The abundance of material available on audiotape makes this an extremely valuable resource for teaching children; and the portability of these tapes makes their enjoyment possible under a variety of different circumstances. They also provide opportunities for gospel study that are both instructive and time-saving. One father, for example, reported that he had listened to the entire Book of Mormon during a three-week period while driving to and from work. A mother of five children had listened to Jesus the Christ three times in six months while running errands with her children.

Parents don't always know how much information their children actually absorb from these informal teaching experiences. Often, however, they pick up much more than we realize. As one father said:

For several years I listened to tapes of the scriptures while driving my car. Whenever I ran errands, I always invited my children to accompany me. Since those errands frequently took us by the local ice-cream shop, the children gladly came along.

Years later, when my oldest son started early morning seminary, he studied the New Testament. After a month of getting up at 5:30 A.M. he reported that he loved seminary and found that the exams were a snap. He said that from listening to the tapes while running errands with me as a youngster, he practically had the four Gospels memorized!

A mother whose family makes a semiannual eleven-hour trip from Colorado to Utah each year to visit relatives reported the advantage of using travel time to teach her children:

Whenever we drive to Utah, we always listen to Charlie's Monument and The Bishop's Horse Race, two of Blaine and Brenton Yorgason's books that have been put on audiotape. They are fun. They contain important gospel messages for children; and they make the scenery through the desert stretches almost bearable.

On the way back, we usually listen to tapes on the life of Christ. We start them as we leave Salt Lake City, and they typically finish about the time we arrive home. They make the time go more quickly; and they are great tools for teaching my children the gospel in ways that they enjoy.

Children's stories of the Old Testament, New Testament, Book of Mormon, and Church history are available on audiotape with companion books in a cartoon format, written at the second-grade level. As a result, children can learn the gospel in a medium that they love—cartoons. A young mother shared how she taught her daughter to love the scriptures:

Every night before my four-year-old daughter goes to bed, I put on one of the tapes from either the New Testament Stories or Book of Mormon Stories and let her follow along in the cartoon book. She has the stories almost memorized, and I often hear her telling them to her two-year-old sister. She has developed a love for the scriptures and, when given a choice, prefers listening to stories from the scriptures to watching television.

The advantage of many of these tapes is that they are entertaining and, at the same time, deliver important gospel messages in ways with which children can identify. The more enjoyable that learning the gospel can be, the greater the tendency for children to believe what they hear. Even the weekly cleaning of a bedroom can be made enjoyable with the tape recorder on.

Music

Music is the universal language of feelings and emotions. Thus, few things have the capacity to edify, inspire, and touch our souls quite like good music. In the preface to the Church hymnbook, the First Presidency said:

Music has boundless powers for moving families toward greater spirituality and devotion to the gospel. Latter-day Saints should fill their homes with the sound of worthy music. . . . The hymns can bring families a spirit of beauty and peace and can inspire love and unity among family members.

Teach your children to love the hymns. Sing them on the Sabbath, in home evening, during scripture study, at prayer time. Sing as you work, as you play, and as you travel together. Sing hymns as lullabies to build faith and testimony in your young ones. [^2]

The availability of Church hymns on audiocassette has made following this counsel possible for every family in the Church. For about the price of two commercially made audiotapes, members can buy all eighteen cassettes containing every hymn in our hymnbook. As a result, the opportunity for children to learn and enjoy the sacred hymns of the Restoration has increased manyfold. Note the comments of a mother of six children, three of whom are of preschool age:

Little did I know at the time I bought them what a valuable resource it would be—for less than a dollar a tape. We play them continuously in our home and when we travel in the car. The younger children have many of them memorized and sing along enthusiastically whenever they are played. This single item has added a greater dimension of spirituality to our home than any single thing we have ever done.

A fifteen-year-old girl also described the impact that the hymns have on her: "Whenever I hear them, they remind me of special occasions when I have felt the Holy Ghost. 'Onward Christian Soldiers' reminds me of my brother's missionary farewell. When I hear 'I Believe in Christ,' I can see in my mind Elder Marvin J. Ashton sitting on the stand in our stake conference, and I remember how strongly I felt the Spirit. That was one of the most spiritual times of my life."

If we want our children to have spiritual experiences, we must invite the Spirit to come into our homes. One of the best ways to do that is to sing the hymns together. As one teenage girl explained:

Singing hymns is an easy way to bring the Spirit into your life. Some are very reverent, while others are really fun to sing. Some of my fondest memories are of our family singing our favorite hymns as we stood around the piano. My little brother and I sang the melody, Dad sang bass, and Mom played. I'm sure people would have found it hilarious if they had heard us, but we still enjoyed it. Sometimes we even sounded pretty good!

In describing the benefit of hymns on us as individuals, the First Presidency said, "Hymns can lift our spirits, give us courage, and move us to righteous action. They can fill our souls with heavenly thoughts and bring us a spirit of peace." [^3] For example, note the experience of a fourteen-year-old girl after a particularly difficult day:

It had been the worst day of my life. Everything had gone wrong. My friends got mad at me. I forgot some assignments. I flunked a test. And to top it off, I had a lousy soccer practice, and the coach yelled at me. I felt awful.

When my dad and little brother picked me up from school, they had the hymns playing in the car. I immediately felt the Holy Ghost. It really hit the spot; and it's the only thing that I know of that could have helped me so much so quickly. As soon as I closed the door, I felt better. Within less than a block, I was singing along with them and thoroughly enjoying myself.

The Lord said, "For my soul delighteth in the song of the heart; yea, the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me." (D&C 25:12.) Thus music can also be a source of strength in times of physical difficulty and danger. Consider, for example, the experience of a soldier who served in Vietnam:

One night, as my buddies and I returned from a mission, we had to cross an area infested with land mines. Many of my colleagues had lost their lives on similar assignments. I remember repeating, over and over, the words to the song I had learned as a child: "Lead me, guide me, walk beside me. Help me find the way." Indeed, that song became as sincere a prayer as I had ever offered.

Gospel-oriented music creates a spiritual atmosphere and sends messages in unmistakable terms as to what a family stands for and the kind of climate that is desired. As Lex De Azevedo explained, "When we consider music's impact on us, and how many thousands of hours we listen to it throughout our lives, it seems wise to choose for ourselves and our families music which builds up our spiritual reserves rather than that which continually wears them down." [^4] As family members sing the hymns of the Restoration together, they build traditions and create spiritual experiences that, in turn, build testimonies and feelings of love that they will cherish for a lifetime.

Community Resources

The thirteenth Article of Faith affirms, "If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy, we seek after these things." Fortunately, most communities have a variety of activities and resources that can contribute to the richness of family members' lives.

For example, through public libraries, museums, art galleries, local music guilds, symphony orchestras, and drama, children can obtain materials and attend activities that will help them gain an appreciation for the beautiful, aesthetic things in life. Many of these materials and activities are free or available at little cost. Most cities, for instance, have numerous free concerts and recitals, readings, and art displays every year. Many libraries offer free story times, plays, and workshops (as well as tapes, movies, and posters that can be checked out).

A mother described her own experience the following way: "Each year during junior high and high school, I attended the community symphony concert series with my mother. As a result, I learned to love classical music, to the point that if given a choice, I preferred classical music to the popular music of the time. That love remains with me to this day."

As children come to appreciate and value things that are virtuous, lovely, of good report, and praiseworthy, they will be less inclined to participate in activities that are contrary to gospel standards.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bruce R. McConkie, "The Purifying Power of Gethsemane," Ensign, May 1985, 11.
[^2] Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1985), x.
[^3] Hymns, x.
[^4] Lex De Azevedo, Pop Music and Morality (North Hollywood, California: Embryo Books, 1982), 115.
