Do you like where you live? Do you have special friends there? Do you have a favorite toy or book? Imagine that your family needed to leave all their favorite things behind and travel to a new land. Do you think that would be hard to do?

Nephi’s father, Lehi, was a prophet. The Lord warned Lehi that Jerusalem was going to be destroyed and that he and his family should leave. The Lord told Lehi He had prepared a new land for his family. As they left Jerusalem and traveled in the desert, Nephi’s brothers Laman and Lemuel constantly complained. They did not want to leave everything behind, and they didn’t believe Jerusalem would be destroyed. Nephi and his brother Sam did not complain. They knew their father was a prophet of God, and they obeyed him. Because of Nephi’s faith and obedience, the Lord gave him a wonderful promise: As long as Nephi’s descendants obeyed Heavenly Father, they would be blessed in the new land.

When we study the Book of Mormon, we see that the Lord kept His promise to Nephi. Whenever the people followed the prophet and obeyed the commandments, they were blessed. When they would not listen to the prophets and were disobedient, there were hard times and the people were not happy.

Heavenly Father loves all of us and wants us to be happy. If we follow His prophets, we will be blessed. President Gordon B. Hinckley has asked us to read the scriptures daily, to keep the Sabbath day holy, to share the gospel with our friends, and to stand for the right. It isn’t always easy to do what the prophet asks us to do. But when we do, Heavenly Father will bless us, and we will find true happiness.

1.  Assign several adults to portray various prophets. For example: Adam (Moses 5:4–12, 58–59), Enoch (Moses 6:26–28; Moses 7:13–21), Noah (Gen. 6–8), Moses (Ex. 3; Num. 14), Daniel (Dan. 6). Place the adults at different locations around the room. Divide the children into groups and have them interview the “prophets.” Suggest questions that will help them discover who each prophet is, what he asked the people to do, and how the people who obeyed his teachings were blessed. Rotate the groups. Have each child draw a picture of one of the prophets. Have some of the children tell what their prophet taught and how the people who obeyed were blessed. Ask the children what our living prophet has asked us to do. Bear your testimony that as we obey our prophet, we are blessed just as people were in ancient times.

2.  Cut a large paper heart into several puzzle pieces. Tape the pieces underneath some of the chairs before the children come into Primary. Invite a priesthood holder to portray the prophet Alma. Have him tell the children about what Alma taught by the Waters of Mormon (see Mosiah 18). Have him explain Mosiah 18:21. Have the children look under their seats for a puzzle piece. Ask those who find puzzle pieces to tell how our hearts can be knit together. As they respond, have them place their piece on the wall. Tell the children that the prophet today wants our hearts to be knit together in love just as Alma did in his day.

Match each prophet on the left (A–G) with his teaching below (1–7).

Answers:
