Various General Authorities, Prophet and His Work: Essays from General Authorities on Joseph Smith and the Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1996)

At the Heart of the Church

Elder Russell M. Nelson

For more than a quarter of a century I have been in the daily practice of "getting to the heart" of the matter. Even though my present calling has taken me out of the surgical operating room, the habit still seems to persist.

I would like to discuss a topic that is at the very heart of our religion. Central to our faith, of course, are the living God, our Father, and his Son, the Lord Jesus Christ. We worship God in the name of his Only Begotten Son, through the power of the Holy Ghost. The appearance of these two heavenly Beings to the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1820 elevates him to that select center from which the very pulse of life for this Church has emanated. He was tutored by Deity and by their appointed angelic messengers. We are privileged to share those revealed truths as we study the holy scriptures. This theophany, transcendent in importance, with its heart-throbbing vitality, ushered in the work of the Restoration—the "restitution of all things" (see Acts 3:21) that had been promised centuries before.

Yet, as the work of the Restoration progresses, we can expect accelerating attacks from opposing forces. The enemy opposed the Church when first established in the early 1800s, and assaults from the enemy continue even today against the institutional Church and its members. Some of these attacks will be aimed at their peripheral activities, but the sharply focused thrusts of the future will chiefly be aimed at the heart of the Church—the prophetic mission of Joseph Smith and the doctrines he taught. The crucial fact of the matter is that Joseph Smith's integral role is central to this work. God knows it. We know it. Satan knows it, and so do many of those who follow satanic ideologies.

So, with the hope of assisting in your preparation for the attacks that will be directed at the heart of the Church, I will quote the Prophet, scriptures ancient and modern, and authoritative testimonies of eyewitnesses and of those who succeeded Joseph Smith as President of the Church.

Attacks have been authored by many, and more will yet write, to rationalize in mundane terms the work of Joseph Smith, the modern prophet. Indeed, his experiences may not be comprehended by a finite mind unaided by the Holy Spirit. Such was the case with Josiah Quincy, who rejected what he called the "monstrous claims" of Mormonism, but recognized Joseph Smith to be an extraordinary leader of unquestionable influence and power. In the closing paragraph of his essay on the Prophet, Quincy summed up his dilemma in these words:

I have endeavored to give details of my visit to the Mormon Prophet with absolute accuracy. If the reader does not know just what to make of Joseph Smith, I cannot help him out of the difficulty. I myself stand helpless before the puzzle.1

Some critics will arise from clusters of the so-called scholars or philosophers, or others schooled in scientific theory. Even the unschooled and the godless may take their turn stabbing barbs at the Prophet Joseph Smith.

But before one can accept a man as a prophet of God, one must first accept God. We declare that God lives and that he has frequently in times past spoken through his prophets so that they in turn may teach and testify to all of God's children upon the earth. Even though the worldly have repeatedly rejected prophets, that does not diminish the truths they have taught or the prophetic nature of their work.

In the high and holy calling to which I have been summoned, just as it is my conviction as a special witness to proclaim the divinity of Jesus Christ as our Lord and Savior, so it is my solemn privilege to proclaim the role of Joseph Smith as a prophet, seer, and revelator to this modern era, the dispensation of the fulness of times.

Joseph's own words provide eloquent evidence of this truth:

I had actually seen a light, and in the midst of that light I saw two Personages, and they did in reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil against me falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my heart: Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision; and who am I that I can withstand God, or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen? For I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it; at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation. (JS-H 1:25)

The most prominent account of the First Vision, from which I have quoted, was prepared by the Prophet for publication in 1838. At least three other accounts of the vision were also recorded. These accounts were given under different circumstances to different audiences and for different purposes. Because each account emphasizes a different aspect of the same experience, some of the detractors of the Church have attempted to point out discrepancies in the several accounts. In the January 1985 Ensign appears a most noteworthy article by Milton V. Backman, Jr., entitled "Joseph Smith's Recitals of the First Vision." You will want to study this and become familiar with each of the recorded accounts of the First Vision so that you will not be disarmed if you hear that more than one account was given.

The 1838 account of the visitation of the Father and the Son is recorded in the Pearl of Great Price. It was approved by the Church as scripture. This means that it is the "will of the Lord, . . . the mind of the Lord, [and] . . . the word of the Lord" to the Saints (see D&C 68:4). No one can be a member of the Church in full faith who does not accept this testimony of Joseph Smith as truth.

In his account, Joseph Smith bore witness of the fact that he saw God the Father and his Son, Jesus Christ. It was more than a vision or a dream. These two heavenly, holy Personages appeared to him. The reality of that appearance is just as central to our theology as our declaration and belief in the atonement and resurrection of our Lord and Savior, Jesus the Christ. This theophany is at the very heart of our faith.

But this is not all. The bringing forth of the Book of Mormon and the restitution of the priesthood, which are also central to our faith, are realities occasioned through the further work of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

The Book of Mormon is a physical, tangible evidence of his prophetic calling. He declared the Book of Mormon to be a record of former inhabitants of ancient America who kept a record on golden plates. These plates, he said, were given to him by an angel of the Lord who came to him on an annual visitation on the same day of the same month over a period of four years. Finally the records were delivered into Joseph's hands for translation and subsequent publication. Today this record is known to the world as the Book of Mormon—Another Testament of Jesus Christ.

Opponents have tried to explain the origin of the Book of Mormon. Their explanations range from the discredited Solomon Spaulding manuscript theory to the idea that Sidney Rigdon collaborated with Joseph Smith in producing the manuscript. Some opponents even deny the account that an angel—a heavenly messenger—gave Joseph Smith custody of ancient records.

In fact, many heavenly messengers participated in the restoration of the Church. An eyewitness account to some of the impact of these revelations is shared with us by Joseph's mother, Lucy Mack Smith, who related the following recollection of evening conversations that took place in the Smith home after the visits of the angel Moroni to the Prophet:

From this time forth [following Moroni's first visits in 1823], Joseph continued to receive instructions from the Lord, and we continued to get the children together every evening for the purpose of listening while he gave us a relation of the same. I presume our family presented an aspect as singular as any that ever lived upon the face of the earth—all seated in a circle, father, mother, sons and daughters, and giving the most profound attention to a boy, eighteen years of age, who had never read the Bible through in his life: he seemed much less inclined to the perusal of books than any of the rest of our children, but far more given to meditation and deep study. . . .

During our evening conversations, Joseph would occasionally give us some of the most amusing recitals. . . . He would describe the ancient inhabitants of this continent, their dress, mode of traveling, and the animals upon which they rode; their cities, their buildings, with every particular; their mode of warfare; and also their religious worship. This he would do with as much ease, seemingly, as if he had spent his whole life among them.2

Where do you suppose Joseph got that information to describe the Nephite culture? How does one account for the fact that he could describe their culture as if he had spent his whole life among them? The answer: God revealed that information to him. He was God's appointed seer, and since truth includes knowledge of things as they were, God condescended to show him the civilizations of the Book of Mormon in order that Joseph might be prepared for his divine commission as a prophet on this consecrated land.

Another eyewitness account was given by John Taylor, a contemporary of Joseph Smith who later became third President of the Church:

Joseph Smith in the first place was set apart by the Almighty according to the counsels of the gods in the eternal worlds, to introduce the principles of life among the people, of which the Gospel is the grand power and influence, and through which salvation can extend to all peoples, all nations, all kindreds, all tongues and all worlds. It is the principle that brings life and immortality to light, and places us in communication with God. God selected him for that purpose, and he fulfilled his mission and lived honorably and died honorably. I know of what I speak for I was very well acquainted with him and was with him a great deal during his life, and was with him when he died. The principles which he had, placed him in communication with the Lord, and not only with the Lord, but with the ancient apostles and prophets; such men, for instance, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Noah, Adam, Seth, Enoch, and Jesus and the Father, and the apostles that lived on this continent as well as those who lived on the Asiatic continent. He seemed to be as familiar with these people as we are with one another.3

Not only was the Prophet Joseph familiar with the culture of ancient civilizations, but I would again emphasize the words of John Taylor that he was "as familiar with [ancient prophets] as we are with one another." That tutoring process with heavenly beings and the spiritual giants of the past, I believe, was a marvelous preparation for the work the Lord had appointed for him to do.

Joseph knew of the doctrines imparted by Deity to Abraham and to Moses. Their sacred writings have become available to us by virtue of that inspired intimacy (see Moses and Abraham).

Another quiet clue to interchange with prophets of old is revealed in section seven of the Doctrine and Covenants. The explanatory heading of that section states that "the revelation is a translated version of the record made on parchment by John and hidden up by himself." This section contains a dialogue between the Lord Jesus and John, the beloved disciple. John wrote while banished to the Isle of Patmos, one of the Greek islands. I marvel at the process by which information known to a prophet of one age and of one hemisphere is made known to another prophet of another hemisphere in another age. This transfer of knowledge seems to defy the ordinary mortal constraints of time and space.

Isn't it interesting that just as Joseph Smith knew of the writings of Abraham, Moses, John, and others, so did ancient prophets likewise know of Joseph Smith even millennia before he was born?

The eleventh son of Jacob, or Israel, was named Joseph. This patriarchal prophet saw that a choice seer named Joseph would come from his lineage. Hear these words of Lehi:

Wherefore, Joseph truly saw our day. And he obtained a promise of the Lord, that out of the fruit of his loins the Lord God would raise up a righteous branch unto the house of Israel. . . .

For Joseph truly testified, saying: A seer shall the Lord my God raise up, who shall be a choice seer unto the fruit of my loins.

Yea, Joseph truly said: Thus saith the Lord unto me: A choice seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and he shall be esteemed highly. . . . And unto him will I give commandment that he shall do a work for the fruit of thy loins, his brethren, which shall be of great worth unto them, even to the bringing of them to the knowledge of the covenants which I have made with thy fathers.

And I will give unto him a commandment that he shall do none other work, save the work which I shall command him. And I will make him great in mine eyes for he shall do my work.

And he shall be great like unto Moses, whom I have said I would raise up unto you, to deliver my people, O house of Israel. (2 Ne. 3:5-9)

You will note in this remarkable prophecy by Lehi to his own son, whose name was also Joseph, that a latter-day seer would be raised up from the lineage of Joseph, son of Jacob, to bring Israel to a knowledge of their covenants. But again review this sentence: "He shall do none other work, save the work which I shall command him. And I will make him great in mine eyes; for he shall do my work" (2 Ne. 3:8).

Some critics have suggested that Joseph Smith failed in his efforts to bring about the utopian society he conceived. They say his economic program—the United Order—failed, that Zion was not redeemed as he had hoped, and that he finally went to his own martyrdom because of a failure to obey the voice of the Spirit to him. Other opponents continue to search for faults or shortcomings in the earthly activities of the Prophet. These critics may be unmindful of two revelations that state very clearly what Joseph was to accomplish and also the limitations on the work the Lord gave him to do.

Shortly after the Lord revealed that Independence, Missouri, was to be the "center place" of Zion (see D&C 57:2-3), a revelation was given 1 August 1831, the first Sabbath day after the Prophet arrived in Jackson County, Missouri. In this revelation the Lord told Joseph Smith what he was to do:

Behold, verily I say unto you, for this cause I have sent you—that you might be obedient, and that your hearts might be prepared to bear testimony of the things which are to come;

And also that you might be honored in laying the foundation, and in bearing record of the land upon which the Zion of God shall stand. (D&C 58:6-7; emphasis added)

A second revelation asserts that "the Prophet Joseph Smith, . . . Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and other choice spirits . . . were reserved to come forth in the fulness of times to take part in laying the foundations of the great latter-day work" (D&C 138:53; emphasis added).

In both these revelations, you will note the consistent limitation that was placed on the work the Lord gave to the Prophet Joseph. He and his early successors were only to "lay the foundation" of the great latter-day work. He was not to lead the Church into the millennial reign of the Lord, as some supposed. He was not to perfect the United Order. He did only that which the Lord told him to do—no more, no less. It would be left to others to build on the foundation which Joseph laid. In fact, the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith that certain conditions must be met before Zion was fully established: The Saints were first to be taught more perfectly, to gain experience and learn more about their duties, to become very great in numbers, and to become sanctified before the Lord (see D&C 105:10, 31).

Even now we can see that the amount of work that must yet be done portends that it will be some time before the Lord shall begin his millennial reign on earth. Meanwhile, as we patiently work toward that day, we reflect again on the fruits resulting from the foundations laid by the Prophet Joseph.

Jesus declared, "Ye shall know [prophets] by their fruits. . . . Every good tree bringeth forth good fruit" (Matt. 7:16-17). What are some of the fruits of Joseph's prophetic ministry?

The dynamic growth of the Church is certainly one of them. In October of 1831, while the Church was yet in its infancy, while there were no stakes or missions and the Church had less than a thousand members, the Prophet Joseph Smith offered a prayer by revelation, one verse from which I quote:

The keys of the kingdom of God are committed unto man on the earth, and from thence shall the gospel roll forth unto the ends of the earth, as the stone which is cut out of the mountain without hands shall roll forth, until it has filled the whole earth. (D&C 65:2)

Using the imagery of the ancient prophet Daniel, this young man foretold that this little church would roll forth until it filled the whole earth.

One of the major challenges confronting the Church today is that imposed by its own phenomenal rate of growth. No wonder a prophecy made by the angel Moroni takes on such relevance today. This pronouncement was made when Joseph Smith was but seventeen years of age:

[The angel Moroni] called me by name, and said unto me that he was a messenger sent from the presence of God to me . . . ; that God had a work for me to do; and that my name should be had for good and evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues, or that it should be both good and evil spoken of among all people. (JS-H 1:33)

This was also foreseen in a special blessing given to the Prophet by the Patriarch Joseph Smith, Sr., in 1835:

Thy testimony shall yet convince thousands and tens of thousands; it shall shine like the sun, and though the wicked seek to overthrow it, it shall be in vain, for the Lord God shall bear it off victorious.4

Today the name of Joseph Smith is known far and wide. Either men praise him or revile him, but few remain neutral. Even the Prophet himself prepared us for the attacks that now come and will continue to be levied upon him. These are his words:

I never told you I was perfect; but there is no error in the revelations which I have taught. Must I, then, be thrown away as a thing of naught?5

President George Albert Smith had this to say about those who would defame the Prophet:

There have been some who have belittled him, but I would like to say that those who have done so will be forgotten and their remains will go back to mother earth, if they have not already gone, and the odor of their infamy will never die, while the glory and honor and majesty and courage and fidelity manifested by the Prophet Joseph Smith will attach to his name forever.6

These warnings notwithstanding, there will still be those who grovel for a word or a thought that would cast in poor light the Prophet Joseph Smith and his work. But the wise know that a single word or a single communication must not be viewed nor contorted beyond the importance of all else an individual may have said or done.

Even at the time of Jesus, people searched for a particular word to confuse his ministry. Those who conspired against Jesus deliberately sought "to provoke him to speak of many things . . . to catch something out of his mouth, that they might accuse him" (Luke 11:53- 54). Those conspiring against Jesus, particularly the Pharisees, actually "took counsel how they might entangle him in his talk" (Matt. 22:15).

Paul, testifying before Agrippa and the Jewish hierarchy, indicated that he had been called by the Lord to go to the gentiles. At once, the word gentiles offended the audience: "Away with such a fellow from the earth: for it is not fit that he should live. And . . . they . . . cast off their clothes, and threw dust into the air" (Acts 22:21-23). Paul was made an offender for a single word!

Isaiah, who foretold many details of the Book of Mormon and the attacks that would come upon the prophet responsible for its translation, saw that Paul's fate would beset Joseph. Isaiah wrote:

[Those] that watch for iniquity . . . [would] make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of nought. (Isa. 29:20-21)

Prophets ancient and modern have risen above the obstacles imposed by offenders and have addressed themselves to the mighty missionary endeavors assigned to them by their Lord and Master.

The Prophet Joseph Smith made two statements on separate occasions that, to some critics, may seem contradictory. He said, "The greatest and most important duty is to preach the Gospel."7 He also said, "The greatest responsibility in this world that God has laid upon us is to seek after our dead."8 These statements, in fact, are not contradictory since both involve the saving of souls. The first statement focuses on saving the souls of the living; the second, on saving the souls of the dead.

The importance of salvation for both the living and the dead as a prelude to the Millennium was declared by Jesus:

And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come. (Matt. 24:14)

But the missionary work among the five billion inhabitants of the earth is dwarfed by the relative magnitude of the assignment to bring salvation to the many billions of deceased souls who never had the opportunity to hear the gospel while living. There is no doctrine that demonstrates the mercy and love of God, the Father, for his children more than the doctrine of salvation for the dead, while at the same time giving men and women today opportunities for Christlike service to others.

So many fruits of the bounteous labors of the Prophet Joseph Smith stand today as evidence of his prophetic ministry. The Church is restored with its priesthood authority. Ordinances have been revealed that bless lives here and hereafter. Doctrines of Deity are recorded in Joseph's translated and inspired writings, which are so monumental in scope that they nearly defy description.

Can anything exceed the conviction and sincerity of testimony as it was delivered by the man whose wife and children clung to him as he went like "a lamb to the slaughter"?

Yes, one of the most convincing evidences of the commitment of the Prophet to the truth for which he lived, and to the cause for which he died, was the resolute certitude of his statements as he approached his death. Here is one example as recorded by an eyewitness, Dan Jones. These, he reported, were the Prophet's words:

I do not fear the consequence, be it even the most horrible death, as much as I fear dying with a blemish on my character, or for the world to disgrace the religion which I profess.9

I add my voice to those leaders contemporary with the Prophet who paid this tribute to him:

Joseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord, has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in it. In the short space of twenty years, he has brought forth the Book of Mormon, which he translated by the gift and power of God, and has been the means of publishing it on two continents; has sent the fulness of the everlasting gospel, which it contained, to the four quarters of the earth; has brought forth the revelations and commandments which compose this book of Doctrine and Covenants, and many other wise documents and instructions for the benefit of the children of men; gathered many thousands of the Latter-day Saints, founded a great city, and left a fame and name that cannot be slain. He lived great, and he died great in the eyes of God and his people; and like most of the Lord's anointed in ancient times, has sealed his mission and his works with his own blood. (D&C 135:3)

To be as authoritative as possible, I have quoted scripture and competent authority, even prophetic and presidential. But there is another witness. I, too, have fasted and prayed, studied and searched to know for myself the truth of these things.

During decades prior to my call to the Twelve, I, with Sister Nelson, have been to the place of the Prophet's birth in Vermont and to the vicinity of his childhood, where he was operated upon without the mercy of an anesthetic. I have trod their farmland in the State of New York and have reverently entered that grove made sacred by his First Vision in 1820. I have climbed Cumorah's Hill as well as the steps of Kirtland's Temple inwardly rejoicing in the experiences he had there. I have wept for him at the jails of Liberty and Carthage. Now, I do know for myself that these things are true. The Lord God has manifest them unto me by the power of his Spirit. This is the witness of revelation which is in me.

I testify not only to the reality that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, that this is his church restored in these latter days, but I fervently and sincerely declare that Joseph Smith is a prophet of God foreordained from before the foundations of the earth to the mission assigned to him, for which he paid with his life. I commit myself to continue the work, building on the foundation that he laid, in full recognition that each of the Lord's anointed risks his all for that commitment as did the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Notes

4

1996 Deseret Book
