In a world so full of difficulties, it is important to stay close to the Lord and to heed the inspired words that come to us through our leaders. The Liahona (Spanish) is a source of light and truth for all of God’s children. It has great converting power, and it answers many of my questions.

I would like to make special mention of “A Second Birth,” President James E. Faust’s message in the June 1998 issue. It explains that as women we should feel important and needed no matter what our marital status is.

Elvira López de Aybar,
Villa Carmen Ward, Santo Domingo Dominican Republic Oriental Stake

About six years ago, the influence of Jesus Christ entered my heart, and a small sprout of faith began to grow and get stronger each day. Later my Savior gave me the blessing of finding and becoming a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Church has been in my city of Saratov, Russia, only a few years. But it has grown quickly, and those who have joined the Church know that we are not alone. We are all part of a big family of loving Church members.

Anna Ulyanova,
Engels Branch, Russia Samara Mission

I am very grateful to God for the opportunity to have the fulness of the restored gospel in our dispensation and for a living prophet and inspired General Authorities to guide us. I am grateful for their teachings. My goal each month is to read L’Etoile (French) so I can hear the Lord’s voice speaking to me through His servants. I know that God lives and that Jesus Christ is His Only Begotten Son and our Savior.

Timothée Bwanga,
Masina Third Branch, Kinshasa Democratic Republic of Congo Masina District

Editors’ note: We receive many requests from readers wanting to contact others through the International Magazine. Although the need is a valid one, our guidelines do not allow us to list or distribute the names and addresses of Church members. This policy was adopted to protect our readers and contributors. The Church is sensitive to the need for single members to get to know one another and provides youth and single adult activities on a local basis to help meet that need. We hope that by supporting these activities single adult members will find the friendships they seek. We appreciate our readers’ support of the International Magazine, and we hope to continue serving those who depend on the inspiration and guidance of the magazine.
