Nathan and his cousins were playing by a large ditch. They knew they shouldn’t play so close to it, but it was fun to throw rocks into the water. Suddenly Nathan slipped and fell into the ditch. His cousins yelled for help. Fortunately, Uncle Gary ran and pulled Nathan from the water just before he went into a large pipe. Uncle Gary saved Nathan’s life that day.

Nathan will die someday. Everyone will die someday. But Jesus Christ made it possible for us to live again. He gave His life upon the cross for us. Three days later He was resurrected—His spirit body reunited with His physical body—never to be parted again. Because He did this, each of us will be resurrected. He is our Savior.

It would not be a blessing to live forever if we were still burdened with our sins and sorrows. But Jesus Christ took upon Himself the burden of our sins. His suffering in the Garden of Gethsemane and on the cross paid the price for our sins. He suffered so we would not have to suffer if we will repent. Because He redeemed us from sin, all those who believe in Him and repent of their sins can return to live with Him forever. He is our Redeemer.

You can probably imagine how grateful Nathan’s family was to Uncle Gary. How much more grateful we ought to be to Jesus Christ! His Atonement made it possible for us to live forever. He paid the price for our sins if we repent. No wonder we celebrate Easter! In some parts of the world, people greet each other at Easter time by saying, “Christ is risen!” And their friends reply, “In truth, He is risen.” Jesus Christ—our Savior and our Redeemer—is risen! How great is our joy!

Make a picture to remind you of the joy we can feel knowing that the Savior is risen. Trace the picture on page 13 onto plain white paper. Color the traced picture, brush it very lightly with salad oil, and blot it with a towel. Tape the picture to a construction-paper frame and hang it in your window.

1.  Take the children on a “flight” to Jerusalem (line up chairs in a hallway for the plane) and a short walk to a “garden” just outside the city (display a picture of the Garden Tomb). Hold an Easter morning “sunrise service.” Open and close with prayer. Tell about Palm Sunday (see John 12:12–15 and “Palms for the Lord” on pages 10–11 of this issue). Assign helpers to hold pictures of the first Easter from the Primary 7 manual or the Gospel Art Picture Kit. In advance assign (1) an adult to tell the events of the first Easter morning (see John 20:1–18); (2) a member of the bishopric, branch presidency, or Primary presidency to give a short message about how we can always remember Jesus Christ; and (3) several children to share why they are grateful for the Savior and how they know He loves them. After their presentations, sing “Beautiful Savior” (Children’s Songbook, 62–63; The Friend, October 1998, 4–5).

2.  Have the children fold pieces of paper to make cards and write on the front, “I am thankful for …” Have them write or draw on the inside what they are thankful for. Then have them write on the back, “Because I am thankful, I will …” and list or draw what people do to show they are thankful (for example, express thanks, sing praises, help others, be understanding, write thank-you notes). Have the children put a star by three ways they will give thanks this week. Ask them to think of one way they can show their gratitude to Jesus Christ and write it at the bottom of the page. Tell them to put their thank-you note where they can see it during the week.
