Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Signs of the Times ( 1999)

Introduction

"Behold, I Come Quickly"

"Tell us . . . what shall be the sign of thy coming?" the disciples asked Jesus (Matt. 24:3). The pivotal occasions when Christ has come to the earth, meaning both his first and his second comings, have been preceded by signs, so that the faithful may know and be blessed. Signs help the Lord's people to be prepared and, because they know what to watch for, to avoid deception.

"Behold, this will I give unto you for a sign at the time of his coming," said Samuel, speaking to the Nephites before the first coming of Christ. "There shall be great lights in heaven, insomuch that . . . there shall be one day and a night and a day, as if it were one day and there were no night; and this shall be unto you for a sign; for ye shall know of the rising of the sun and also of its setting; . . . nevertheless the night shall not be darkened; and it shall be the night before he is born. And behold, there shall a new star arise, such an one as ye never have beheld; and this also shall be a sign unto you. And behold this is not all, there shall be many signs and wonders in heaven. And it shall come to pass that ye shall all be amazed, and wonder, insomuch that ye shall fall to the earth" (Hel. 14:3-7).

The writers of the four Gospels also spoke of many signs the Old Testament prophets had given, marking the circumstances of Christ's first sojourn on the earth. By these signs, those with eyes to see might recognize him:

He would be born of a virgin (Isa. 7:14; Matt. 1:22-23).

He would be born in Bethlehem (Micah 5:2; Matt. 2:4-6).

He would come forth out of Egypt (Hosea 11:1; Matt. 2:13-15).

In his childhood, the children in Bethlehem "and in all the coasts thereof" would be slain (Matt. 2:16-18; Jer. 31:15).

He would be called a Nazarene (Matt. 2:23).

He would be preceded by another who would come out of the wilderness to prepare the way of the Lord (Isa. 40:3; Matt. 3:1-3).

He would proclaim the gospel to the people of Zabulon and Nephthalim (Matt. 4:13-16; Isa. 9:1-2 ).

He would preach the gospel to the poor (Isa. 61:1-2; Luke 4:17-18).

He would heal the sick (Matt. 8:16-17).

He would speak in parables (Ps. 78:2; Matt. 13:34-35).

He would come unto the people riding on an ass (Zech. 9:9; Matt. 21:1-11).

The people would hate him (Ps. 69:4; John 15:24-25).

He would be betrayed by one who broke bread with him (Ps. 41:9; John 13:18).

He would be sold for thirty pieces of silver (Zech. 11:12; Matt. 27:3-5).

The thirty pieces of silver would be used to purchase a potter's field (Zech. 11:13; Matt. 27:6-10).

Enemies would cast lots for his clothing (Ps. 22:18; Matt. 27:35).

He would be numbered with the transgressors (Isa. 53:12; Mark 15:27-28).

He would thirst and be given vinegar to drink (Ps. 69:21; John 19:28-29).

None of his bones would be broken, though he would be pierced (Ps. 34:20; Zech. 12:10; John 19:33-37).

All of these events came to pass just as the prophets had foreseen: a new star appeared; the people in the Americas experienced a day, a night, and a day without any darkness; and every one of the prophecies about the mortal Jesus were fulfilled. Those who studied the prophecies in advance may have been confused by the seeming contradiction involving his beginnings: he would be born in Bethlehem, he would come out of Egypt, and he would be called a Nazarene. Only after the prophecies were fulfilled did their meaning become clear. The same can be said about some of the prophecies of our time: we will certainly understand them much better with hindsight.

A Pattern of Prophecy

Just as prophets saw in advance many of the details of Christ's life, so too did they see and record in prophecy many details of the last days and his second coming. The record begins with Adam, the first prophet on the earth. Toward the end of his life, Adam met with the righteous people of his posterity and "predicted whatsoever should befall [them] unto the latest generation" ( D&C 107:53, 56). Surely such a prediction included the first coming of Christ to the earth and his return in glory. The end of the earth and its return to an Edenic state were seen from the beginning.

Many prophets in the millennia that followed were given visions and truths about the second coming of Christ and the signs that would mark the years before his return. Enoch, Moses, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Zechariah, John, Nephi, Mormon, and others saw our day, the last days of the earth before Jesus returns, and made a record of the signs that will be shown forth for those who have eyes to see that his coming is nigh.

Jesus Christ himself prophesied of his second coming and the signs that would precede it. During his last week on the earth, he taught his disciples the things that would befall the earth before he came again—the signs of his coming, "and of the end of the world, or the destruction of the wicked, which is the end of the world" (JS-M 1:4). He named those things we have become familiar with: false Christs and false prophets, wars and rumors of war, famines, pestilences, earthquakes, "the love of men shall wax cold," the gospel "shall be preached in all the world," "the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven. . . . Verily, I say unto you, this generation, in which these things shall be shown forth, shall not pass away until all I have told you shall be fulfilled" ( JS-M 1:22-23, 28-34).

Weeks after uttering these prophecies, having ministered among his people for forty days, the risen Christ was lifted up into heaven while the disciples watched him ascend. "And while they looked stedfastly toward heaven as he went up, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel; which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven" (Acts 1:10-11).

Perhaps only a week then passed before the day of Pentecost, [^1] when the apostles were "all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues" (Acts 2:3-4). On that historic day, Peter stood and bore testimony of Christ, saying that He would come again after showing "wonders in heaven above, and signs in the earth beneath; blood, and fire, and vapour of smoke: The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before that great and notable day of the Lord come" (Acts. 2:19-20; see also Joel 2:30-31). Other testimonies followed, sprinkled throughout the New Testament, culminating in John's remarkable vision, wherein he saw "things which must shortly come to pass" (Rev. 1:1), including the Great Apostasy, earthquakes, plagues, wars, and the triumphal return of the Lord Jesus Christ.

One sign of the Lord's return would be the restoration of the gospel. When Moroni appeared to Joseph Smith in 1823, he was thus part of the fulfillment of prophecy, and at the same time he reaffirmed other prophecies to Joseph Smith and to all who have since accepted Joseph as a prophet. After telling young Joseph of the Book of Mormon, Moroni "commenced quoting the prophecies of the Old Testament," including Malachi's prophecy that "the day cometh that shall burn as an oven," referring to the second coming of Christ (JS-H 1:36-37). He also quoted Joel 2:28-32, the same prophecy Peter had quoted on the day of Pentecost. When Moroni returned later that night, he repeated all that he had previously said and also told Joseph "of great judgments which were coming upon the earth, with great desolations by famine, sword, and pestilence" (JS-H 1:45).

To make certain that this generation fully received the message of the signs of the last days, the Lord declared in his preface to the Doctrine and Covenants that all mankind must hearken to his voice, "and the voice of warning shall be unto all people." The Lord said he would send forth messengers "to seal them [the wicked] up unto the day when the wrath of God shall be poured out upon the wicked without measure. . . . Wherefore the voice of the Lord is unto the ends of the earth, that all that will hear may hear: Prepare ye, prepare ye for that which is to come, for the Lord is nigh" ( D&C 1:2, 4, 9, 11-12).

Knowing that his judgments were falling upon the earth, the Lord in his mercy revealed himself to a latter-day prophet, Joseph Smith, and gave him commandments whereby the gospel could go forth in its fulness to bless the people of the world (D&C 1:17-23): "The hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion. And also the Lord shall have power over his saints, and shall reign in their midst, and shall come down in judgment upon . . . the world" (D&C 1:35-36).

Further signs were given in subsequent revelations. In the "appendix" to the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord revisited this theme: "Hearken, O ye people of my church," he said, "and hear the word of the Lord concerning you—The Lord who shall suddenly come to his temple; the Lord who shall come down upon the world with a curse to judgment; yea, upon all the nations that forget God, and upon all the ungodly among you. For he shall make bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations, and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of their God" (D&C 133:1-3).

The signs that will precede the second coming of Jesus Christ are a recurring theme in the scriptures in all dispensations. The Lord has felt it needful to tell his people in all generations about these great events to come. But ours is the generation that is seeing many of these things come to pass, and we, along with our children, and perhaps our children's children, will live through the days in which the Lord increasingly stretches forth his arm over the world, both in blessing and in cursing.

After telling his disciples of the signs of the times, the Lord spoke comfort to them, saying, "Be not troubled, for, when all these things shall come to pass, ye may know that the promises which have been made unto you shall be fulfilled." Then he gave them a parable. You see the fig trees, he said, and know that "when they begin to shoot forth, and their leaves are yet tender, that summer is now nigh at hand." In the same way, by watching the signs we have been given, we can know that the hour of his coming is nigh. "He that feareth me shall be looking forth for the great day of the Lord to come, even for the signs of the coming of the Son of Man" (D&C 45:35-39). "Wherefore, go forth, crying with a loud voice, saying: The kingdom of heaven is at hand. . . . Go forth baptizing with water, preparing the way before my face for the time of my coming; for the time is at hand; the day or the hour no man knoweth; but it surely shall come." Those who receive the gospel covenant "shall be looking forth for the signs of my coming, and shall know me. Behold, I come quickly" ( D&C 39:19-21, 23-24).

The Lord Will Not Come as a Thief to the "Children of Light"

"Of that day, and hour, no one knoweth," the Lord said concerning his coming, "no, not the angels of God in heaven, but my Father only" (JS-M 1:40). Many have supposed from this statement that the Lord has not given us any understanding about the time of his coming. After all, won't he come "as a thief in the night"? (1 Thes. 5:2). And don't thieves come when we least expect them?

The answer, clearly, is that we are to "watch" and "be ready" (D&C 50:46). Even though the Lord's coming may be "as a thief in the night," "if the good man of the house had known in what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house to have been broken up, but would have been ready. Therefore be ye also ready, for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son of Man cometh" (JS-M 1:47-48). "And again, verily I say unto you, the coming of the Lord draweth nigh, and it overtaketh the world as a thief in the night—Therefore, gird up your loins, that you may be the children of light, and that day shall not overtake you as a thief" (D&C 106:4-5).

Here we have the key: we need to be "the children of light."

Paul wrote plainly: "Of the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have no need that I write unto you. For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night. . . . But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief. Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day: we are not of the night, nor of darkness. Therefore let us not sleep, as do others; but let us watch and be sober" (1 Thes. 5:1-6). Unto the children of light, the Lord says, "It shall be given to know the signs of the times, and the signs of the coming of the Son of Man" (D&C 68:11). It is for us that the signs have been given. We have both a duty and a privilege to watch, so that we may know the "times" during which the Lord will come; by watching in soberness, we can have our lives, our hearts, our families, and our overall circumstances in readiness for his coming. On the other hand, "he that watches not for me shall be cut off," the Lord has said (D&C 45:44).

And so we watch and pray, seeking his coming to cleanse a wicked world, to bring millennial peace and glory, and to deliver his people from the tyranny of the latter-day Babylon, the symbol for a world of sin. And when he comes, perhaps we will sing in triumph and rejoicing a song that is much more than a Christmas carol:

Joy to the world, the Lord is come; Let earth receive her King! Let ev'ry heart prepare him room, And Saints and angels sing. . . .

No more will sin and sorrow grow, Nor thorns infest the ground; He'll come and make the blessings flow Far as the curse was found. [^2]

These Are the Last Days

"Come, O thou King of Kings!" we sing. "We've waited long for thee, / With healing in thy wings / To set thy people free." [^3] We have indeed waited long for the second coming of the Lord. And we have longer still to wait as the promised signs gradually (or perhaps quickly) are shown forth for those who have the wisdom to watch.

Latter-day prophets and apostles have repeatedly warned us that these are the last days of the world as we know it, and that the coming of the Lord is nigh. As this dispensation opened, Joseph Smith said, "The scripture is ready to be fulfilled when great wars, famines, pestilence, great distress, judgments, &c., are ready to be poured out on the inhabitants of the earth." [^4] Nearly eighty years later, Elder Orson F. Whitney of the Council of the Twelve Apostles wrote: "We stand at the present moment in the Saturday Evening of Time. . . . Morning will break upon the Millennium, the thousand years of peace, the Sabbath of the World!" [^5]

Obviously, the ensuing decades have only brought us closer to the foreordained time of the Lord's coming, as our leaders have taught. [^6] Using the same imagery that Elder Whitney used, Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "We are now living during the final years of the sixth seal, that thousand year period which began in a.d. 1000 and will continue through the Saturday night of time and until just before the Sabbatical era when Christ shall reign personally on earth, when all of the blessings of the Great Millennium shall be poured out upon this planet. This, accordingly, is the era when the signs of the times shall be shown forth, and they are in fact everywhere to be seen." [^7]

In recognizing the times, Elder Neal A. Maxwell advised that we be careful to become neither complacent nor out of balance in our lives: "I have no hesitancy in saying that there are some signs—but certainly not all—suggesting that 'summer is nigh' (Matt. 24:32). We would do well to notice and to ponder, but without either becoming preoccupied or ignoring any sprouting leaves because of being 'overcharged' with the 'cares of this life' (Luke 21:34)." [^8]

The Last Days: A Time of Fear and Blessing

Often when we think of prophecies of the last days, we focus on the challenging and the frightening. The Lord and his prophets have told us to watch for wars and rumors of wars, plagues and pestilences, devastating earthquakes. We have been warned of the spreading evil in the world and the growing power of Babylon. But the last days are also times of joy and triumph. They bring the restoration of the gospel with its prophets, powers, gifts, and spiritual blessings. They bring the gathering of Israel, the establishment of Zion, the building of the New Jerusalem. They bring the Lord himself, as he returns in brightness and glory.

Satan rages in the world, but the Lord will conquer in the end. To focus on the frightening judgments to come, to the exclusion of the positive events that have been promised, is to have a distorted view of the future. It is to fail to see as God sees. With his eternal perspective, the Lord knows that the judgments are designed to bring the wicked to repentance and then to cleanse the earth of those who will not repent. He tells us further that Satan will be conquered and cast out, whereas the righteous who "have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived . . . shall abide the day" (D&C 45:57). Elder Neal A. Maxwell declared: "Yes, there will be wrenching polarization on this planet, but also the remarkable reunion with our colleagues in Christ from the City of Enoch. Yes, nation after nation will become a house divided, but more and more unifying Houses of the Lord will grace this planet. Yes, Armageddon lies ahead. But so does Adam-ondi-Ahman!" [^9]

The Lord's work in the world is to bring to pass righteousness and holiness and to bring us to eternal life. Satan's work is to bring increasing darkness and evil into the world. The last days are marked by the monumental efforts of these two opposing forces: the destroyer seeking to tear down, to ruin, to waste; the Creator seeking to build, establish, bless, and prosper. Even in the trials, however, we can see the hand of the Lord. In his love and mercy, he will use judgments to seek to bring his children to repentance. If they will let their hearts be softened, if they will hearken and repent, they will have an opportunity to receive a fulness of the blessings of the Atonement. They will hear the words, "Well done, thou good and faithful servant: . . . enter thou into the joy of thy lord" ( Matt. 25:21, 23).

If they choose not to repent, they will continue to suffer until, in the end, the judgments of God sweep them from the face of the earth. As in Noah's day, the great judgments that cleanse the earth serve three purposes:

Thus, even though Satan rages, in the end he will be defeated, as the Lord our God emerges victorious over the devil and all his degraded forces of evil.

The Saints Will Escape Some of the Judgments

The scriptures make it plain that the current generation will see many dire events, so it is comforting to know that the Lord will care for his Saints. They are not promised immunity from the judgments to come, but those in Zion will receive a significant degree of protection. "Fear not, little children," the Lord has said, "for you are mine, and I have overcome the world, and you are of them that my Father hath given me; and none of them that my Father hath given me shall be lost. . . . Wherefore, I am in your midst, and I am the good shepherd, and the stone of Israel. He that buildeth upon this rock shall never fall. And the day cometh that you shall hear my voice and see me, and know that I am. Watch, therefore, that ye may be ready" ( D&C 50:41-42, 44-46).

In 1894, President Wilford Woodruff spoke of his visions of calamities that would be poured out on the earth and offered hope of protection to the righteous: "I want to ask this congregation a question: When I have the vision of the night opened continually before my eyes, and can see the mighty judgments that are about to be poured out upon this world, when I know these things are true, and are at the door of Jew and Gentile; while I know they are true and while I am holding this position before God and this world, can I withhold my voice from lifting up a warning to this people and to the nations of the earth? . . . While I live and see these things continually before my eyes I shall raise my warning voice.

"Now, the question I wanted to ask you is this: We have fourteen [hundred] million people on this earth, and over them all there hangs a cloud of darkness almost entirely upon their shoulders. Can you tell me where the people are who will be shielded and protected from these great calamities and judgments which are even now at our doors?

"I'll tell you. The priesthood of God who honor their priesthood, and who are worthy of their blessings are the only ones who shall have this safety and protection. They are the only mortal beings. No other people have a right to be shielded from these judgments. They are at our very doors; not even this people will escape them entirely. They will come down like the judgments of Sodom and Gomorrah. And none but the priesthood will be safe from their fury.

"God has held the angels of destruction for many years, lest they should reap down the wheat with the tares. But I want to tell you now, that those angels have left the portals of heaven, and they stand over this people and this nation now, and are hovering over the earth waiting to pour out the judgments. And from this very day they shall be poured out. Calamities and troubles are increasing in the earth, and there is a meaning to these things.

"Remember this, and reflect upon these matters. If you do your duty, and I do my duty, we'll have protection, and shall pass through the afflictions in peace and in safety. Read the scriptures and the revelations. They will tell you about all these things. Great changes are at our doors. . . .

"I have felt oppressed with the weight of these matters, and I felt I must speak of them here. It's by the power of the Gospel that we shall escape." [^10]

Other prophets and apostles have given us like reassurances of divine protection for the Lord's people, particularly when, as President Woodruff said, they are doing their duty:

"I promise you in the name of the Lord whose servant I am," President Howard W. Hunter said, "that God will always protect and care for his people. We will have our difficulties the way every generation and people have had difficulties. But with the gospel of Jesus Christ, you have every hope and promise and reassurance. The Lord has power over his Saints and will always prepare places of peace, defense, and safety for his people." [^11]

In a 1981 message, President Marion G. Romney recalled the days of his childhood in war-torn Mexico. He told of living through days and nights of terror and uncertainty, fearful for his life and safety. His mother would sing at night to her children, seeking to comfort them. For example, she sang these words from "Guide Us, O Thou Great Jehovah":

When the earth begins to tremble, Bid our fearful thoughts be still; When thy judgments spread destruction, Keep us safe on Zion's hill. [^12]

She also sang these words from W. W. Phelps's hymn "Now Let Us Rejoice":

In faith we'll rely on the arm of Jehovah To guide through these last days of trouble and gloom, And after the scourges and harvest are over, We'll rise with the just when the Savior doth come. [^13]

As President Romney grew older, he learned from the scriptures that the Lord has promised to "care for his Saints through the calamities which he foresaw and foretold. . . . I think we are not safe because we say we intend to do what's right. I think the people who are safe are those who have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide and have not been deceived. . . . If I receive the Holy Ghost and follow his guidance, I will be among those who are protected and carried through these troubled times. And so will you, and so will every other soul who lives under his direction. If ye are prepared, ye need not fear." [^14]

Fear or Optimism?

One need not be an alarmist to see the reality of the trials ahead. But when we put our lives in the hands of a loving and powerful God, we know that we will come forth in triumph through the fiery trials of the last days. The attitude of Elder Gordon B. Hinckley is a blessing to us:

"I stand here today as an optimist concerning the work of the Lord. I cannot believe that God has established his work in the earth to have it fail. I cannot believe that it is getting weaker. I know that it is getting stronger. I realize, of course, that we are beset with many tragic problems. I am a newspaper reader, and I have seen a good deal of this earth. I have seen its rot and smelled its filth. I have been in areas where war rages and hate smolders in the hearts of people. I have seen the appalling poverty that hovers over many lands. I have seen the oppression of those in bondage and the brutality of their overlords. . . . I have watched with alarm the crumbling morals of our society.

"And yet I am an optimist. I have a simple and solemn faith that right will triumph and that truth will prevail." [^15]

This attitude is a common theme among the general Church leaders of our day. As we consider the challenge of the coming events, we can remember the encouragement of our prophets. The Lord will be with his Saints; he is ultimately in control of the events of the world; and in the end, he will order all things to the fulfillment of his purposes. Thus, as we have faith and as we obey, we will belong to the "winning team" and will emerge victorious with our Lord.

Here are just four of the many messages of hope from our leaders:

President Joseph Fielding Smith: "Trouble in the earth will continue; there will be distress, calamity, and perplexity among the nations. . . .

" . . . Nevertheless, we may look forward with rejoicing; we need not be downcast, but in the spirit of faith and hope, and in the fear of the Lord, we should look to the future with feelings of joy, of humility, and of worship, with the desire in our hearts, stronger if possible than ever, of serving the Lord and keeping his commandments, for the day of his coming draws near." [^16]

Elder Marion G. Romney: "Naturally, . . . even those who have a mature faith in the gospel . . . are concerned and disturbed by the lowering clouds on the horizon. But they need not be surprised or frantic about their portent, for . . . the Lord [has] made it abundantly clear that through the tribulations and calamity . . . there would be a people who, through acceptance and obedience to the gospel, would be able to recognize and resist the powers of evil, build up the promised Zion, and prepare to meet the Christ and be with him in the blessed millennium. And we know further that it is possible for every one of us, who will, to have a place among those people. It is this assurance and this expectation that gives us understanding of the Lord's admonition, 'be not troubled.'" [^17]

President Howard W. Hunter: "Despair, doom, and discouragement are not acceptable views of life for a Latter-day Saint. . . .

"The scriptures . . . indicate that there will be seasons of time when the whole world will have some difficulty. . . . But our task is to live fully and faithfully and not worry ourselves sick about the woes of the world or when it will end. . . .

"In this last dispensation there will be great tribulation. (See Matt. 24:21.) . . . All dispensations have had their perilous times, but our day will include genuine peril. (See 2 Tim. 3:1.) . . .

"Inevitably the natural result of some of these kinds of prophecies is fear. . . . But I want to stress that these feelings are not necessary for faithful Latter-day Saints, and they do not come from God. . . .

"For Latter-day Saints this is a time of great hope and excitement. . . . We need to have faith and hope, two of the great fundamental virtues of any discipleship of Christ. We must continue to exercise confidence in God, inasmuch as that is the first principle in our code of belief. We must believe that God has all power, that he loves us, and that his work will not be stopped or frustrated in our individual lives or in the world generally. He will bless us as a people because he always has blessed us as a people. He will bless us as individuals because he always has blessed us as individuals." [^18]

Elder M. Russell Ballard: "Living in these difficult times . . . requires each one of us to maintain a positive, hopeful perspective about the future. . . .

"The Lord is in control. He knows the end from the beginning. He has given us adequate instruction that, if followed, will see us safely through any crisis. . . . We must be careful to not overreact, nor should we be caught up in extreme preparations, but what we must do is keep the commandments of God and never lose hope!

"But where do we find hope in the midst of such turmoil and catastrophe? Quite simply, our one hope for spiritual safety during these turbulent times is to turn our minds and our hearts to Jesus Christ." [^19]

In deciding what attitude we should have toward the troubles of the last days, we can follow the lead of our prophets. We can know that the Lord will see us through the fiery trial; that if we stand with him, he will stand with us, just as he did Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego in the furnace (Dan. 3:19-28) or that if we are killed in the fire, we can cry out as did Abinadi, "O God, receive my soul" (Mosiah 17:19).

The Lord warned Joseph Smith and his associates in words that apply also to us: "The enemy in the secret chambers seeketh your lives. Ye hear of wars in far countries, and you say that there will soon be great wars in far countries, but ye know not the hearts of men in your own land. . . . But if ye are prepared ye shall not fear" (D&C 38:28-30). If we are prepared temporally, spiritually, and with a good understanding of that which is to come, and if we are built upon that rock which is Christ, we shall not fear, but surely shall "abide the day" (Hel. 5:12; Mal. 3:2; D&C 35:21; 38:8; 45:57; 61:39).

Interpreting Prophecy

As we look at the signs of the times and try to understand scripture, we need to be cautious. Even when we know prophecy, it is not possible to predict precisely how the future will unfold, for the Lord seldom gives us all the details of a future event. He may say, for example, in reference to the return of the ten tribes, "an highway shall be cast up in the midst of the great deep" (D&C 133:27), but he may not tell us whether the highway is literal or symbolic, or where this highway will be found, or who will cast it up, or how. The Lord's purpose often seems to be to give us impressions and general understandings rather than specific details. It is more important to know that the Lord will bring the ten tribes safely back from their long dispersion than it is to know exactly what and where the highway is.

Our understanding of prophecy is also limited by what we now understand. Our understanding of the future is greatly affected by our perceptions in the present. Events in the world at large can change our anticipations of the future and can change how we understand prophecy. For example, before this century, no one had even conceived of a nuclear bomb. Although Albert Einstein and others began to develop theories about what was possible, before World War II few people were even aware of the possibility. In the years following that war, however, a nuclear holocaust came to be universally feared. The reality of nuclear warfare in our time may make one wonder if some of the wars and plagues seen by John the Revelator might be connected to the nuclear bomb. [^20] A hundred years ago, such an interpretation was not even a possibility, because the atomic bomb was unknown and was not part of people's perceptions.

As another example, before the mid-1980s anyone who predicted the collapse of the Soviet Union was laughed at as extreme. But the social and political changes in Eastern Europe came virtually overnight, radically changing the face of the world. Those changes have opened nations to the prophesied missionary work in unexpected ways.

What unforeseen developments await us in future years? What will happen in the year 2010, or 2015, or 2025 that will suddenly cast new light on prophecies that at present we do not fully understand? What exactly are we to understand by "the moon shall be turned into blood" (D&C 29:14), by "every mountain and island [shall be] moved out of their places" (Rev. 6:14), by "a great mountain burning with fire was cast into the sea" (Rev. 8:8)? These picturesque expressions stand for future events. Precisely how will those events come to pass? Without prophetic vision of our own, we can only guess. Sometimes our understandings are deepened by explanations that appear elsewhere in the scriptures. Sometimes a living prophet gives insight. Sometimes the Lord simply has not clarified what a given prophecy means.

Our latter-day leaders are likewise concerned about interpreting prophecy. President Harold B. Lee warned against "loose writings predicting the calamities which are about to overtake us." He added wryly, "Most of such writers are not handicapped by having any authentic information on their writings." [^21]

Elder John A. Widtsoe observed: "Much effort has been expended to reduce . . . general prophecies to exact dates, times, and persons. This has been a waste of time and energy, as prophecy uttered under divine inspiration usually contains all that the divine will desires to reveal. It behooves those to whom the prophecy is made to prepare for coming events, to watch for them, and to recognize them when they do appear. If more is needed, the power that gave the prophecy will no doubt furnish the interpretation. . . .

"The futility of reducing general prophecy to exact times or places is well illustrated by the famous visions of Daniel. It is conceded that the stone that broke the image to pieces is the Kingdom of God; but there has been and is interminable debate as to the historical kingdoms and meaning represented by the gold, silver, iron, and clay portions of the image; the horns of the beasts; the thousand, three hundred and five and thirty days; and the several other statements of Daniel. . . . Hundreds, perhaps thousands, of books have been published and tens of thousands of sermons have been preached in the attempt to interpret Daniel's prophecies. It has been a fruitless effort, at best a doubtful conjecture. There remains only the general meaning of these glorious visions: that righteousness will triumph in its battle with evil." [^22]

Elder Neal A. Maxwell has taught how challenging it can be to foresee or understand specific future events, even when the general events are known: "Even as believers, . . . when we are a part of encapsulating events, we can scarcely savor all that swirls about us. It is unlikely, for instance, on that night so long ago in Bethlehem, that Joseph and Mary looked at the newly born Christ child's feet with the realization that those feet would, one day, walk the length and breadth of the Holy Land. And, further, that, later on, spikes would pierce those feet.

"As a loving Mary grasped those tiny hands, and, as in the months ahead those tiny hands clasped her, did she know that those hands, when grown, would ordain the original Twelve or, still later, carry the rough-hewn cross?

"As she heard her Baby cry, did she hear intimations of Jesus' later weeping at the death of Lazarus or after blessing the Nephite children? (See John 11:35; 3 Ne. 17:21-22.) Did she foresee that those baby-soft knees would later be hardened by so much prayer, including those glorious but awful hours in Gethsemane? (See Matt. 26:36-56.)

"As she bathed that Babe so many times to cleanse His pores, could she have been expected to foresee that one day, years later, drops of blood would come from His every pore? (See Mosiah 3:7.)

"There is such a thing as cheerful, believing participation—even without full understanding—when you and I keep certain things in our hearts and are nourished as we ponder them! (See Luke 2:19.)" [^23]

Even though we know the general outline of what is to come, it is difficult to say just how it will come to pass. That challenge is increased when things come about naturally, as President George Q. Cannon taught they would: "Even Latter-day Saints have doubtless, in many instances, entertained erroneous views respecting the fulfillment of revelation and prophecies of the Bible. . . .

" . . . The Lord works in the midst of this people by natural means, and the greatest events that have been spoken of by the holy prophets will come along so naturally as the consequence of certain causes, that unless our eyes are enlightened by the Spirit of God, and the spirit of revelation rests on us, we will fail to see that these are the events predicted by the holy prophets.

" . . . They will come along in so natural a manner, the Lord will bring them to pass in such a way that they will not be accepted by the people, except by those who can comprehend the truth, as the fulfillment of the predictions of the prophets. It requires the Spirit of God to enable men and women to understand the things of God; it requires the Spirit of God to enable the people to comprehend the work of God and to perceive his movements and providences among the children of men. The man who is destitute of the Spirit of God cannot comprehend the work of God." [^24]

Because of these and other dangers, we have generally avoided interpreting current events. The specific meaning of the Lord's word will be made manifest in the Lord's time. On the other hand, some events seem plainly to fit a pattern shown in the scriptures (an example is the increase of devastating wars on the earth since the American Civil War); in many such cases we have pointed out that pattern. In presenting these latter-day events, we have also avoided establishing any sequence in which they might come to pass. It does not seem to be the Lord's desire that we have such a sequence, for he has not given us one through either scriptural or latter-day prophets. Further complicating such an effort is that many events surely overlap with each other, and some events may occur more than once.

More important than sequence or multiple fulfillments is knowing what to watch for, so that we can continue to prepare ourselves. The Lord never intended that we know of the signs of the times simply to satisfy our curiosity. "Watch" the signs, he says—but why? So we can "be ready." We watch the signs of the times so we can be prepared. And the best way to be ready is to be the kind of person the Lord would have us be, a man or woman who has the Holy Ghost as a companion, as President Cannon said. Only then can we "comprehend the work of God."

Watch and Be Ready

What is our duty, then? As the Lord said, we must "watch" and "be ready" (D&C 50:46). We "watch" by knowing the signs of the times and being aware of what is transpiring in the world. We stand "ready" by continuing in worthiness, by keeping all the covenants we have made before God, and by following the counsel of our living prophets. Elder Gordon B. Hinckley gave this vital counsel on being ready: "Let us . . . live each day so that if the Lord does come while we are yet upon the earth we shall be worthy of that change which will occur as in the twinkling of an eye and under which we shall be changed from mortal to immortal beings. And if we should die before he comes, then—if our lives have conformed to his teachings—we shall arise in that resurrection morning and be partakers of the marvelous experiences designed for those who shall live and work with the Savior in that promised Millennium. We need not fear the day of [Christ's] coming; the very purpose of the Church is to provide the incentive and the opportunity for us to conduct our lives in such a way that those who are members of the kingdom of God will become members of the kingdom of heaven when he establishes that kingdom on the earth." [^25]

Concerning that readiness, the Lord said: "Prepare ye the way of the Lord, prepare ye the supper of the Lamb, make ready for the Bridegroom. . . . Call upon the Lord, that his kingdom may go forth upon the earth, that the inhabitants thereof may receive it, and be prepared for the days to come, in the which the Son of Man shall come down in heaven, clothed in the brightness of his glory, to meet the kingdom of God which is set up on the earth" ( D&C 65:3, 5).

"And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia: for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honour to him: for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made herself ready. And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white: for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints" (Rev. 19:6-8).

"Wherefore, be faithful, praying always, having your lamps trimmed and burning, and oil with you, that you may be ready at the coming of the Bridegroom—For behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, that I come quickly. Even so. Amen" (D&C 33:17).

---
Notas:
[^1] To bring people to repentance, if they will. Christ was crucified the day after the Passover feast (during which feast he had performed the Last Supper for his apostles), on a Friday. He rose from the dead on Sunday. Thereafter, he walked and talked with his disciples for forty days (Acts 1:3). The day of Pentecost was fifty days after the Passover feast (LDS Bible Dictionary, s.v. "Feasts"), or approximately a week after Christ ascended into heaven.
[^2] To remove them from mortality if they refuse to repent, cutting short their wickedness so that they sin no more in this sphere—and so that they will no longer inflict their wickedness on others. Isaac Watts, alt. by William W. Phelps, "Joy to the World," Hymns, no. 201.
[^3] To eventually cleanse the earth for the blessing of the righteous. Parley P. Pratt, "Come, O Thou King of Kings," Hymns, no. 59.
[^4] History of the Church, 6:364.
[^5] Saturday Night Thoughts, 12.
[^6] Elder Bruce R. McConkie taught that the time of Christ's return is predetermined, or "fixed"; see Millennial Messiah, 26-27, 649-50.
[^7] Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:485-86.
[^8] Ensign, May 1988, 7; see also Maxwell, Time to Choose, 10.
[^9] Ensign, Nov. 1981, 10.
[^10] In Gates, "Temple Workers' Excursion," 512-13; paragraphing has been modernized for readability.
[^11] Ensign, Oct. 1993, 72.
[^12] William Williams, "Guide Us, O Thou Great Jehovah," Hymns, no. 83.
[^13] "Now Let Us Rejoice," Hymns, no. 3.
[^14] "'If Ye Are Prepared Ye Shall Not Fear,'" 3-5. For other such apostolic promises, see Stapley, Conference Report, Oct. 1971, 101; McConkie, Conference Report, Apr. 1979, 133.
[^15] Conference Report, Oct. 1969, 113; see also Hinckley, "'We Need Not Fear His Coming,'" 83.
[^16] Doctrines of Salvation, 3:51-52.
[^17] Conference Report, Oct. 1966, 53-54.
[^18] Ensign, Oct. 1993, 70-72.
[^19] Ensign, Nov. 1992, 31-32; see also Ballard, "When Shall These Things Be?" 192.
[^20] Elder Bruce R. McConkie envisioned nuclear warfare in our future; see McConkie, Conference Report, Apr. 1979, 133; Millennial Messiah, 382-86.
[^21] Conference Report, Oct. 1972, 128.
[^22] Evidences and Reconciliations, 93-95.
[^23] Conference Report, Oct. 1982, 97-98.
[^24] Journal of Discourses, 21:266-67.
[^25] "'We Need Not Fear His Coming,'" 83.
