Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Signs of the Times ( 1999)

The Lord's Work Prospers in the Last Days

Chapter 1

The Church Prepares for the Second Coming

Signs of the Times

Without a doubt, the greatest sign to herald the second coming of Christ is the restoration of the gospel. [^1] Paradoxically, the Restoration began quietly and unobserved, with one mortal boy kneeling in a grove in upstate New York, and it continues quietly to this day, through the Lord's whisperings to his living prophet. Other signs of the times are manifestly more obvious and more outwardly dramatic. Plagues and wars and earthquakes, with their attendant devastation and loss of life, attract much attention; such signs are sensational and may arouse fears in those who read and believe such scriptural prophecies. But plagues and wars and earthquakes have happened almost from the beginning of the world. In the last days, these events will likely be unequaled in their intensity and effect, yet we have seen such things before.

But when in the world's history has the gospel been sent forth from the heavens, restored after a long period of dark apostasy, with a promise that it will never again be taken from the earth? (Dan. 2:44). Such a promise is reserved for our time, the last days of the world before Christ returns. The restoration of the true gospel will reach much further with its divine blessings than any judgments will, both around the globe and also into the spirit world and the celestial world to come.

What a precious gift a loving God has promised to his children on the earth! For the restoration of the gospel not only must precede the second coming of Christ but also is an essential preparation for his return. Without the restoration of the gospel, there would be no priesthood, no keys, no worldwide missionary effort, no gathering of a people with knowledge of the truth, no gift of the Holy Ghost, no spiritual gifts, no true ordinances, no temples, no people of Zion, no building of the New Jerusalem—all of which are essential elements that help prepare the world for the Lord's return. No wonder the Lord designed that his gospel would precede his coming. And no wonder the restoration of the gospel may be considered the greatest of all the signs of the times. That this prophecy has largely been fulfilled makes it no less exciting, for the restoration of the gospel also sets the stage for other essential events of the last days, such as the calling of the 144,000, the gathering at Adam-ondi-Ahman, and the establishment and growth of temple work. [^2]

The Coming of the Mighty Prophet

Isa. 11:10

10 And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek: and his rest shall be glorious.

"In that day," meaning the last days, the Lord will send a prophet who is called the "root of Jesse." That prophet will be "an ensign of the people" (Isa. 11:10). Lehi also taught that the Lord would send forth a latter-day prophet, one who is called "mighty . . . , both in word and in deed, being an instrument in the hands of God, with exceeding faith," who will "work mighty wonders, and do that thing which is great in the sight of God" (2 Ne. 3:24).

The root of Jesse and the mighty prophet of Lehi's prophecy likely are one and the same person, Joseph Smith, the prophet called to bring to pass "much restoration unto the house of Israel" (2 Ne. 3:24). How great was Joseph Smith? John Taylor wrote of him, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord, has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in it" (D&C 135:3). Wilford Woodruff, who also knew the Prophet personally, testified, "No greater prophet than Joseph Smith ever lived on the face of the earth save Jesus Christ." [^3] The coming of this mighty prophet is one of the signs of the times, indicating that the Lord is preparing all things on the earth for his return.

Notes and Commentary

Isa. 11:10 root of Jesse. "What is the root of Jesse?" we read in the Doctrine and Covenants. "Behold, thus saith the Lord, it is a descendant of Jesse, as well as of Joseph, unto whom rightly belongs the priesthood, and the keys of the kingdom, for an ensign, and for the gathering of my people in the last days" (D&C 113:5-6; Rom. 15:12). Latter-day Saint scholars generally agree that the root of Jesse refers to the Prophet Joseph Smith. [^4] He is a descendant of both Jesse and Joseph; he held the priesthood; he possessed the keys of the kingdom; he played a primary role in the lifting of the ensign upon the tops of the mountains; and the keys of the gathering of Israel were committed into his hands (D&C 110:11).

an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek. Elsewhere in scripture, we read that the ensign is God's everlasting covenant (D&C 45:9) or Zion (D&C 64:41-42), to which the peoples of the earth would come. Here we learn that the Lord's promised prophet is himself an ensign and would have an essential role in the gathering of Israel.

his rest shall be glorious. The prophet's reward in God's kingdom would be rich and wonderful (Alma 40:12; D&C 84:23-24; 132:49).

The Restoration of the Gospel

Acts 3:20-21

20 . . . [God] shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you:

21 Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began.

Beginning with Adam, the gospel was given from God to man through prophets. Unfortunately, however, the blessing of the gospel was periodically and inevitably interrupted by times of apostasy. After the crucifixion of Christ, the earth suffered a falling away from the truth, called the Great Apostasy; this apostasy began within decades of Christ's ascension into heaven and continued until all true believers of that dispensation had either died or were martyred. This same scene eventually played out in every locality that had the gospel, such as among the Nephites and Lamanites: the believers either fell away, died, or were persecuted unto death. [^5] The world slipped into the dark ages, a period of time when the gospel and its light were no longer on the earth among any people.

These things were foreseen by ancient prophets, as well as by Christ's apostles in the meridian of time (see chap. 5 for a discussion of the Apostasy): they saw a day when the gospel and its powers and blessings were no longer found on the earth. "The Lord hath poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep," Isaiah prophesied, "and hath closed your eyes: the prophets and your rulers, the seers hath he covered. Wherefore the Lord said, . . . this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men." Then, speaking of the Restoration, the Lord said through Isaiah, "Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid" ( Isa. 29:10, 12-14).

In 1820 the promised restoration began, when God began to send forth anew his keys and powers and covenants, his scriptures and spiritual gifts, his revelations, his authority to organize a church according to the ancient pattern. [^6] As Parley P. Pratt wrote:

The morning breaks, the shadows flee; Lo, Zion's standard is unfurled! The dawning of a brighter day Majestic rises on the world. [^7]

The dark night of apostasy was breached by the bright and shining light of the gospel revealed anew.

The Apostasy cannot be viewed as one of the signs that the Lord's return is imminent, but the Restoration is a preeminent sign of that return, because the Lord has stated that he will not come again until his people have performed certain labors, such as taking the gospel to all the world and building the city of New Jerusalem (JS-M 1:31; D&C 45:65-66; 84:4). The Restoration was clearly and repeatedly prophesied, with Jesus Christ saying that Elias [^8] would come to "restore all things," with Peter testifying that heaven would "receive" Christ until "the times of restitution of all things," and with John adding his witness that he saw an angel coming from heaven with the "everlasting gospel," implying that the gospel was not on the earth before the angel came (Matt. 17:11; Acts 3:21; Rev. 14:6; see also 1 Ne. 13:34-36; 15:13; D&C 77:9). We have an equally clear record of the fulfillment of those prophecies in the writings and revelations of Joseph Smith: "I am the Lord thy God," the Lord said through Joseph Smith, "and I gave unto thee, my servant Joseph, an appointment, and restore all things. . . . For I have conferred upon you the keys and power of the priesthood, wherein I restore all things, and make known unto you all things in due time" ( D&C 132:40, 45; see also 86:10).

Notes and Commentary

Acts 3:20 [God] shall send Jesus Christ. This apparently refers to the second coming of Christ, which occurs under the direction of his Father. According to the next verse, Jesus would not return "until the times of restitution of all things."

Acts 3:21 restitution of all things. The word restitution is a synonym for restoration. Joseph Smith described the fulfillment of this prophecy in these words: "Truly this is a day long to be remembered by the Saints of the last days,—a day in which the God of heaven has begun to restore the ancient order of His kingdom unto His servants and His people,—a day in which all things are concurring together to bring about the completion of the fullness of the Gospel, a fullness of the dispensation of dispensations, even the fullness of times; a day in which God has begun to make manifest and set in order in His Church those things which have been, and those things which the ancient prophets and wise men desired to see but died without beholding them; a day in which those things begin to be made manifest, which have been hid from before the foundations of the world, and which Jehovah has promised should be made known in His own due time unto His servants, to prepare the earth for the return of His glory, . . . which is to come to pass in the restitution of all things." [^9]

all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets. The double use of the word all in this phrase indicates how all-inclusive the Restoration would be. None of the Lord's words or works would be exempted. The inclusiveness of this promise is also a witness to the breadth and depth of the Great Apostasy. It would not be necessary to restore all things unless all things had been lost from the earth.

The Restoration of Priesthood Keys

Mal. 4:5-6

5 Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord:

6 And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse.

An essential part of the restoration of the gospel was the restoration of priesthood keys. Without the keys of the priesthood, the gospel truth could be restored in its fulness, but there would be no authorized administrators of its ordinances, nor would there be anyone to pass the priesthood from generation to generation. Thus, we would have the truth without having the true kingdom of God. We would have saving knowledge without the power of salvation that the full gospel brings.

The priesthood is commonly defined as the power and authority to act in the name of God. The keys of the priesthood are the right and authority to preside over and direct the work of the priesthood—to call and release, to give permission to perform ordinances, and to perpetuate the priesthood on the earth by passing it from generation to generation. "While the majority of the male members hold the priesthood and are called to officiate in a general way in the ordinances of the gospel," President Joseph Fielding Smith taught, "yet we, one and all, should realize that it is the power vested in the President of the Church by virtue of the keys he holds, which come from Elijah in particular and from the other prophets of old in general, which makes valid the authority which we possess. Without that central authority with its commanding keys and the privilege extended to the men holding the priesthood by this one person who presides, the acts of those who are ordained to the priesthood could not be administered in righteousness." [^10]

It should come as no surprise, then, that the Lord promised that the restoration of the gospel would be accompanied by the restoration of the keys of the priesthood. One of the most prominent of these promises was made through the prophet Malachi, through whom the Lord announced his intention to send Elijah back to earth sometime before the second coming of Christ. Elijah would restore a power to turn the hearts of the fathers and the children to one another. This power is known as the sealing power, but it is much more than simply the power to seal families together in the temple. Joseph Smith explained: "The spirit, power, and calling of Elijah is, that ye have power to hold the key of the revelations, ordinances, oracles, powers and endowments of the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood and of the kingdom of God on the earth; and to receive, obtain, and perform all the ordinances belonging to the kingdom of God. . . .

" . . . What you seal on earth, by the keys of Elijah, is sealed in heaven; and this is the power of Elijah." [^11]

The keys of the priesthood were restored, in fulfillment of prophecy, at the beginning of the dispensation of the fulness of times. First, John the Baptist restored the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood, conferring them upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery on 15 May 1829 ( D&C 13). Next, Peter, James, and John came with the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood (D&C 27:12). Then, on 3 April 1836, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery received a marvelous visitation in the Kirtland Temple. After seeing the Lord himself, in transcendent glory, they received a bestowal of keys from some of the Lord's great prophets:

First, Moses appeared and "committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north."

Next, Elias came and "committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham," and pronounced upon Joseph and Oliver the promise God gave to Abraham, "saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed.

"After this vision had closed, another great and glorious vision burst upon us; for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death, stood before us, and said: Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi—testifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come—To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse—Therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors" (D&C 110:11-16).

Notes and Commentary

Mal. 4:5 I will send you Elijah the prophet. Elijah would come because God had sent him. But why Elijah? Why not Noah or Abraham or Moses?

Joseph Smith answered that question in one of his sermons: "Elijah was the last prophet that held the keys of this priesthood, and who will, before the last dispensation, restore the authority and deliver the keys of this priesthood in order that all the ordinances may be attended to in righteousness. . . . Why send Elijah? Because he holds the keys of the authority to administer in all the ordinances of the priesthood. And without the authority is given, the ordinances could not be administered in righteousness." [^12]

great and dreadful day of the Lord. The "day of the Lord" is the day of his return to earth in power and glory. It is great in its scope and magnificence, and it is a great day of rejoicing for the righteous. It is dreadful to the wicked, because on that day they will be destroyed by fire, receiving a just punishment for the evil they have done in the world.

Mal. 4:6 turn the heart of the fathers. The restoration of the priesthood keys held by Elijah provides the power to bind the living and the dead into one great family. When that power was restored to the earth, the knowledge of the sealing blessings was also restored, and the hearts of the living (the children) began to be turned to their ancestors (the fathers), who in turn now look with fresh hope to their living children for the blessings of the gospel.

Joseph Smith clarified the meaning of turn: "Now the word turn here should be translated bind or seal." [^13] He further explained that "without us, they could not be made perfect, nor we without them; the fathers without the children, nor the children without the fathers.

"I wish you to understand this subject, for it is important; and if you receive it, this is the spirit of Elijah, that we redeem our dead, and connect ourselves with our fathers which are in heaven, and seal up our dead to come forth in the first resurrection; and here we want the power of Elijah to seal those who dwell on earth to those who dwell in heaven. This is the power of Elijah and the keys of the kingdom of Jehovah." [^14]

smite the earth with a curse. The Lord's purpose in creating the earth is given in Moses 1:39: "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." [^15] Our immortality is assured, as a free gift of grace through the atonement of Jesus Christ. But to receive eternal life we must turn to God with all our hearts, becoming, as individuals, all that he requires of us. Then, having brought ourselves to Christ, we need to reach out to others, beginning with our families, including both the living and the dead. Should we fail to bring ourselves and others, being sealed up as one great family before the Lord, through the keys restored by Elijah, the earth would fail of its purpose. And we, the inhabitants of the earth, would fall short of God's promise of eternal life—certainly a curse of the highest magnitude.

The Coming Forth of the Book of Mormon

Isa. 29:11-12, 18-19, 24

11 And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed:

12 And the book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I am not learned. . . .

18 And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness.

19 The meek also shall increase their joy in the Lord, and the poor among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel. . . .

24 They also that erred in spirit shall come to understanding, and they that murmured shall learn doctrine.

As part of the restoration of the gospel, the Lord, through his prophets, promised the restoration of the record we know as the Book of Mormon. These prophecies are found not only in the Old Testament but also in the Book of Mormon itself: "For, behold, saith the Lamb: I will manifest myself unto thy seed, that they shall write many things which I shall minister unto them, which shall be plain and precious; and after thy seed shall be destroyed, and dwindle in unbelief, and also the seed of thy brethren, behold, these things shall be hid up, to come forth unto the Gentiles, by the gift and power of the Lamb. And in them shall be written my gospel, saith the Lamb, and my rock and my salvation" (1 Ne. 13:35-36).

The Book of Mormon was an essential part of the Restoration. In fact, as Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote, "The Book of Mormon is the foundation upon which the house of the restoration is built. Take it away and there is no restoration, no true church and kingdom of God on earth, no plan of salvation, no power and authority whereby man may be saved and exalted." [^16] As promised, the Book of Mormon has the power to help the spiritually deaf hear the word of the Lord and the spiritually blind to see the things of God. Its truths bring rejoicing to the meek and humble. Its doctrines correct many false understandings of those who adhere to the Bible alone.

The Book of Mormon would be viewed as "plain and precious" to those who read and believe it. It would contain the gospel of the Lamb, "and my rock and my salvation" (1 Ne. 13:35-36). Other scriptures give additional understanding about the purposes of the restoration of the Book of Mormon:

It "shall make known to all kindreds, tongues, and people, that the Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal Father, and the Savior of the world; and that all men must come unto him, or they cannot be saved" (1 Ne. 13:40).

It was given "that the Lamanites [and everyone else] . . . may believe the gospel and rely upon the merits of Jesus Christ, and be glorified through faith in his name, and that through their repentance they might be saved" (D&C 3:20).

It contains "the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles and to the Jews also; . . . proving to the world that the holy scriptures are true, and that God does inspire men and call them to his holy work in this age and generation, as well as in generations of old; thereby showing that he is the same God yesterday, today, and forever" (D&C 20:9-12).

Nephi recorded the words of an angel who taught that the Bible and the Book of Mormon would work together in establishing their testimony of Christ (1 Ne. 13:40-41). This joining of testimonies is likewise a fulfillment of a prophecy Ezekiel received, whereon he performed the inspired action of bringing together into one hand two "sticks" (scrolls or wooden tablets), one representing Judah (the Bible) and the other representing Joseph (the Book of Mormon). "Thus saith the Lord God," the Lord announced through Ezekiel, "Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his fellows, and will put them with him, even with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and they shall be one in mine hand" (Ezek. 37:19; see also vv. 15-20). For other prophecies that foretell the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, see 1 Ne. 13:40; 2 Ne. 29:8; Enos 1:16.

"Let us take the Book of Mormon," Joseph Smith said, "which a man took and hid in his field, securing it by his faith, to spring up in the last days, or in due time; let us behold it coming forth out of the ground, which is indeed accounted the least of all seeds, but behold it branching forth, yea, even towering, with lofty branches, and God- like majesty, until it, like the mustard seed, becomes the greatest of all herbs. And it is truth, and it has sprouted and come forth out of the earth, and righteousness begins to look down from heaven, and God is sending down His powers, gifts and angels, to lodge in the branches thereof." [^17]

Later he recorded, "I told the brethren that the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book." [^18]

For its role in the restoration of the gospel, truly the Book of Mormon is a treasure. It also is a tangible and specific sign of the last days, since the gospel and the Book of Mormon had to be restored to the earth before the Lord would return.

Notes and Commentary

Isa. 29:11 a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned. This prophecy was fulfilled in a remarkable and literal way, as recorded in Joseph Smith's historical account: "Sometime in this month of February, the aforementioned Mr. Martin Harris came to our place, got the characters which I had drawn off the plates, and started with them to the city of New York. For what took place relative to him and the characters, I refer to his own account of the circumstances, as he related them to me after his return, which was as follows:

"'I went to the city of New York, and presented the characters which had been translated, with the translation thereof, to Professor Charles Anthon, a gentleman celebrated for his literary attainments. Professor Anthon stated that the translation was correct, more so than any he had before seen translated from the Egyptian. I then showed him those which were not yet translated, and he said that they were Egyptian, Chaldaic, Assyriac, and Arabic; and he said they were true characters. He gave me a certificate, certifying to the people of Palmyra that they were true characters, and that the translation of such of them as had been translated was also correct. I took the certificate and put it into my pocket, and was just leaving the house, when Mr. Anthon called me back, and asked me how the young man found out that there were gold plates in the place where he found them. I answered that an angel of God had revealed it unto him.

"'He then said to me, "Let me see that certificate." I accordingly took it out of my pocket and gave it to him, when he took it and tore it to pieces, saying that there was no such thing now as ministering of angels, and that if I would bring the plates to him he would translate them. I informed him that part of the plates were sealed, and that I was forbidden to bring them. He replied, "I cannot read a sealed book." I left him and went to Dr. Mitchell, who sanctioned what Professor Anthon had said respecting both the characters and the translation'" (JS-H 1:63-65).

Isa. 29:18 in that day. This phrase has reference to the day of the restoration of the gospel.

deaf hear the words of the book. The Book of Mormon will empower the spiritually deaf to hear the word of God, if they so choose.

blind shall see out of obscurity. The Book of Mormon removes darkness from our minds and hearts, permitting us to draw closer to God. President Ezra Taft Benson said, "There is a power in the book which will begin to flow into your lives the moment you begin serious study of the book. You will find greater power to resist temptation. You will find the power to avoid deception. You will find the power to stay on the strait and narrow path." [^19]

Isa. 29:19 The meek also shall increase their joy/the poor among men shall rejoice. The terms meek and poor seem to refer to disciples of Christ (Matt. 5:3, "poor in spirit"; 5:5, "meek"). True disciples of Christ (the meek and the poor) will increase in their joy and rejoicing in Christ and his atonement, as they study the Book of Mormon, Another Testament of Jesus Christ.

Isa. 29:24 They also that erred in spirit shall come to understanding/shall learn doctrine. By making "known the plain and precious things which have been taken away" (1 Ne. 13:40) and by the "confounding of false doctrines and laying down of contentions, and establishing peace" (2 Ne. 3:12), the Book of Mormon will teach true doctrine to those who have erred in spirit.

Elder Orson Pratt taught: "Oh, how precious must be the contents of a book which shall deliver us from all the errors taught by the precepts of uninspired men! Oh, how gratifying to poor, ignorant, erring mortals who have murmured because of the multiplicity of contradictory doctrines that have perplexed and distracted their minds, to read the plain, pure and most precious word of God, revealed in the Book of Mormon!" [^20]

The Restoration Will Be Assisted by Angelic Visitors

Rev. 14:6-7

6 And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people,

7 Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come.

The work of restoration is primarily a work involving angels and prophets. Joseph Smith spoke of "having received many visits from the angels of God unfolding the majesty and glory of the events that should transpire in the last days." [^21] Elder Dallin H. Oaks has said: "The Prophet Joseph had no role models from whom he could learn how to be a prophet and leader of the Lord's people. He learned from heavenly messengers and from the harvest of his unique spiritual gifts." [^22]

In a passage of inspired rejoicing, Joseph Smith wrote about those angels and their role in the gospel's restoration: "Now, what do we hear in the gospel which we have received? A voice of gladness! A voice of mercy from heaven; and a voice of truth out of the earth; glad tidings for the dead; a voice of gladness for the living and the dead; glad tidings of great joy. . . .

"And again, what do we hear? Glad tidings from Cumorah! Moroni, an angel from heaven, declaring the fulfilment of the prophets—the book to be revealed. A voice of the Lord in the wilderness of Fayette, Seneca county, declaring the three witnesses to bear record of the book! . . . The voice of Peter, James, and John in the wilderness . . . on the Susquehanna river, declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom, and of the dispensation of the fulness of times!

"And again, the voice of God . . . at sundry times, and in divers places through all the travels and tribulations of this Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints! And the voice of Michael, the archangel; the voice of Gabriel, and of Raphael, and of divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, and there a little; giving us consolation by holding forth that which is to come, confirming our hope!

"Brethren, shall we not go on in so great a cause? Go forward and not backward. Courage, brethren; and on, on to the victory! Let your hearts rejoice, and be exceedingly glad. Let the earth break forth into singing. Let the dead speak forth anthems of eternal praise to the King Immanuel, who hath ordained, before the world was, that which would enable us to redeem them out of their prison; for the prisoners shall go free.

"Let the mountains shout for joy, and all ye valleys cry aloud; and all ye seas and dry lands tell the wonders of your Eternal King! And ye rivers, and brooks, and rills, flow down with gladness. Let the woods and all the trees of the field praise the Lord; and ye solid rocks weep for joy! And let the sun, moon, and the morning stars sing together, and let all the sons of God shout for joy! And let the eternal creations declare his name forever and ever! And again I say, how glorious is the voice we hear from heaven, proclaiming in our ears, glory, and salvation, and honor, and immortality, and eternal life; kingdoms, principalities, and powers!" (D&C 128:19-23).

Notes and Commentary

Rev. 14:6 another angel. After seeing many angels perform many functions pertaining to the last days, John the Revelator saw another angel, who was assigned to bring the everlasting gospel to the earth. This angel was Moroni, who brought the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated, which book has the fulness of the gospel. [^23] In latter-day revelation, the Lord confirmed that this angel has already come to earth: "And now, verily saith the Lord, that these things might be known among you, O inhabitants of the earth, I have sent forth mine angel flying through the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel, who hath appeared unto some and hath committed it unto man, who shall appear unto many that dwell on the earth" (D&C 133:36).

everlasting gospel. This is the gospel of Jesus Christ, which is the same from generation to generation.

every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. The Lord's plan is for the gospel to be heard in every part of the globe. As the resurrected Jesus said to his disciples immediately before he ascended into heaven, "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost" (Matt. 28:19).

Rev. 14:7 the hour of his judgment. The restoration of the gospel is to precede the judgments of God. The Lord will not execute his final judgments against the wicked until after he has restored the gospel and sent its word around the earth.

The Restoration of Spiritual Gifts

Joel 2:28-29

28 And it shall come to pass afterward that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions:

29 And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit.

In the days of Joseph Smith, many said that God had removed his gifts from the earth. When young Joseph tried to tell others of his First Vision, they rejected it out of hand because they did not believe that such a manifestation was possible. When Joseph told a Methodist minister of his vision, for example, "he treated my communication not only lightly, but with great contempt, saying it was all of the devil, that there were no such things as visions or revelations in these days; that all such things had ceased with the apostles, and that there would never be any more of them" (JS-H 1:21). Such an attitude was a denial of the power of the Spirit and also a denial of prophecy, as given by the prophet Joel (Joel 2:28-29). [^24]

In January 1833, Joseph Smith recorded that that prophecy was beginning to be fulfilled: "The gifts which follow them that believe and obey the Gospel, as tokens that the Lord is ever the same in His dealings with the humble lovers and followers of truth, began to be poured out among us, as in ancient days." [^25] The restoration of these spiritual gifts is not reserved only for the first prophet of the Restoration or only for his successor prophets. These gifts are promised to all who will seek the Lord with diligence and turn their hearts to him in sacrifice and desire (Alma 26:22; D&C 46:10-33), including both young and old ("sons," "daughters," "young men," "old men") and male and female ("sons," "daughters," "servants," "handmaids").

With Peter, with Joel, with Joseph Smith, we, in these last days, can sing with great rejoicing the words written by William W. Phelps:

The Spirit of God like a fire is burning! The latter-day glory begins to come forth; The visions and blessings of old are returning, And angels are coming to visit the earth.

The Lord is extending the Saints' understanding, Restoring their judges and all as at first. The knowledge and power of God are expanding; The veil o'er the earth is beginning to burst.

We'll call in our solemn assemblies in spirit, To spread forth the kingdom of heaven abroad, That we through our faith may begin to inherit The visions and blessings and glories of God.

We'll sing and we'll shout with the armies of heaven, Hosanna, hosanna to God and the Lamb! Let glory to them in the highest be given, Henceforth and forever, Amen and amen! [^26]

Notes and Commentary

Joel 2:28 And it shall come to pass afterward. Peter changed this phrase to "it shall come to pass in the last days," and he saw one fulfillment of it on the marvelous day of Pentecost, when the apostles "were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance" ( Acts 2:17, 4). fulfillment continues in our day among those who receive these gifts of the Spirit.

I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh. There are at least two possible ways to read this promise, both of which have been used by leaders of the Church, thus suggesting that we may appropriately look for a dual fulfillment of the prophecy.

As mankind began to emerge from the Dark Ages, the Lord poured out his Spirit, the light of Christ, upon all, to enlighten their minds and bless their lives. That blessing has continued to this day. "Whatsoever is light is Spirit, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ," the Lord said to Joseph Smith. "And the Spirit giveth light to every man that cometh into the world; and the Spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit. And every one that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit cometh unto God, even the Father" (D&C 84:45-47). Thus, as we receive the Lord's Spirit (meaning the light of Christ) and let it magnify within us, it will bring us closer to God and bring us closer as well to the eventual blessing of receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost, which, in turn, brings such gifts as dreams, visions, and prophesying.

Another fulfillment of this prophecy may actually be millennial, when "all flesh" may eventually come to the rich and varied gifts of the Spirit. In 1833 the Lord seemed to suggest that this prophecy had not yet come to pass; he spoke of yet bringing "to pass my strange act, that I may pour out my Spirit upon all flesh" (D&C 95:4). Also, the context of the prophecy in Joel seems to have overtones of the millennial day (Joel 2:21-29).

Whatever the case may be, we know that the restoration of the gospel includes the gifts of the Spirit—prophesying, dreams, visions from God, and others.

your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions. This prophecy was renewed to Joseph Smith when the angel Moroni visited him in September 1823. Moroni "said that this was not yet fulfilled, but was soon to be" (JS-H 1:41). The fulfillment likely began after the Melchizedek Priesthood was restored in 1829. With the higher priesthood on the earth, people could receive the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, who then could bring such gifts as these to those who sought them in righteousness.

One great truth shown in these verses is the universal availability of the Lord's gifts to those who will pay the necessary price. He desires to give the blessings of his Spirit to all who will qualify through obedience and a broken heart. Age, gender, worldly experience, social position, or wealth—none of these matter to the Lord. Instead, he desires that we love him and seek to serve him, and then he will grant to us all we are able to receive.

Joel 2:29 upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit. In quoting this prophecy on the day of Pentecost, Peter changed it to say, "On my servants and on my handmaidens I will pour out in those days of my Spirit; and they shall prophesy" (Acts 2:18). His change clarified that the recipients of this gift were not simply servants and handmaids but servants and handmaidens to the Lord. He also specified the result of their receiving the Spirit: "They shall prophesy."

The Establishment of the Latter-day Kingdom

Dan. 2:44-45

44 And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.

45 Forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone was cut out of the mountain without hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold; the great God hath made known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter: and the dream is certain, and the interpretation thereof sure.

The Lord promised to establish a kingdom as well as a Church in the latter days. [^27] The Lord will return as king, and a king must have a kingdom to rule over. Especially would that be true of the King of kings. This kingdom of God will eventually destroy all other kingdoms on the earth.

In a dream given to the Babylonian king Nebuchadnezzar, as interpreted by Daniel, the Lord compared the kingdom of God to a stone that was cut out of a mountain. That stone apparently rolled down the mountainside to break the kingdoms of the earth "in pieces." In our dispensation, the Lord declared, "The keys of the kingdom of God are committed unto man on the earth, and from thence shall the gospel roll forth unto the ends of the earth, as the stone which is cut out of the mountain without hands shall roll forth, until it has filled the whole earth" (D&C 65:2).

That kingdom has now been established and is growing strong. Speaking in testimony of the restoration of the kingdom and its accompanying gifts and powers, President Ezra Taft Benson wrote: "I solemnly declare that the God of heaven has established his latter-day kingdom upon the earth in fulfillment of prophecies uttered by his ancient prophets and apostles. Holy angels have again communed with men on the earth. God has again revealed himself from heaven and restored to the earth his holy priesthood with power to administer in all the sacred ordinances necessary for the exaltation of his children. His Church has been reestablished among men with all the spiritual gifts enjoyed anciently.

"All this is done in preparation for Christ's second coming." [^28]

Notes and Commentary

Dan. 2:44 And in the days of these kings/set up a kingdom. In his dream, Nebuchadnezzar saw an image representing a series of kingdoms of the earth, each symbolized by a metal: gold (head), silver (breast and arms), brass (belly and thighs), iron (legs), and a mixture of iron and clay (feet). The kingdoms represented by the feet, which were made of the mixture of iron and clay, suggest a combination of strength and weakness and also may indicate that the great kingdoms of antiquity would be divided into smaller kingdoms. In the days of the weaker kingdoms, the Lord would begin to establish his own kingdom. We know by revelation that the fulfillment of this prophecy began in the 1820s and 1830s under the inspired direction of Joseph Smith, the founding prophet of our dispensation (D&C 65:2).

never be destroyed/shall stand for ever. In other dispensations, the Lord's kingdom was established only to be lost from the earth by persecution and apostasy. But the latter-day kingdom will stand until the Lord returns, ushering in the Millennium, and it will continue to stand "for ever."

the kingdom shall not be left to other people. The Lord's authorized administrators (those holding the keys of the kingdom), with the Lord's covenant people (who have joined the kingdom through legal ordinances), will possess his kingdom; those who do not receive the covenant ("other people") will not have part of the kingdom.

break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms. How will the kingdoms of man on the earth be destroyed? By the power of God, as it is manifest through his own kingdom on the earth. When Jesus, the king of that kingdom, returns in glory, he will put down all his enemies, including the kingdoms of mankind (1 Cor. 15:24; for further discussion of the final destruction of all nations, see chap. 6).

Dan. 2:45 the stone. The stone represents the kingdom of God. The symbol is one of power and durability. In other scriptures, Christ himself is referred to as a stone (Ps. 78:35; Moses 7:53). The imagery suggests that the kingdom of God will share those characteristics of power and durability with its maker, Jesus Christ.

cut out of the mountain without hands. The mountain may represent the earth: the stone is cut out of the earth and later supersedes it, becoming itself a new mountain (Dan. 2:34-35). The hands are likely human hands, for the kingdom of God is established by God and not by the hands of man.

it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold. In the last days, the Lord will make an end to all earthly nations (Jer. 30:11; D&C 87:6) as he prepares the way for his own kingdom.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Lord remembers his covenant to gather Israel. 2. The Lord restores the keys of the gathering. 3. The gathering involves missionary work and conversion. 4. Ephraim will be gathered first. 5. A voice of warning goes forth to all people; after the Lord's warnings come his judgments. 6. Israel is gathered from many lands. 7. The gathered include the elect. 8. The Lamanites will blossom as a rose. 9. The coming forth of the Book of Mormon is a sign that the gathering is proceeding. 10. The Lord calls 144,000 high priests to help in the gathering. 11. The Saints are commanded to flee Babylon. 12. The Saints gather at the temples. 13. The times of the Gentiles are fulfilled. 14. The Jews gather to the land of Palestine. 15. The ten tribes are brought in from their long dispersion and are blessed to return to the lands of their inheritance. 16. The Saints gather to Zion, where the New Jerusalem is built. See McConkie, New Witness, 515; Millet and McConkie, Our Destiny, 66-67. There are, however, exceptions to the rule that Israel was scattered because of Israel's wickedness: Sometimes branches of Israel were dispersed to other locations to protect them from the wickedness of others (1 Ne. 17:36-38; 21:1; 2 Ne. 10:20-22) sometimes branches were scattered in order to bless other parts of the Lord's vineyard (Smith, "Mission of Ephraim," 2.)
[^2] For a discussion of the gathering to New Jerusalem, see McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 294- 96; and McConkie, New Witness, 519.
[^3] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 183.
[^4] History of the Church, 5:423.
[^5] The changes in this verse are from 1 Ne. 21:17.
[^6] See the commentary on the restoration of priesthood keys, page 31.
[^7] Conference Report, Apr. 1948, 55.
[^8] Conference Report, Oct. 1992, 102.
[^9] McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 202.
[^10] Ibid., 202-3.
[^11] SÃ£o Paulo Brazil Area Conference Report, Feb.-Mar. 1975, 73.
[^12] Conference Report, Oct. 1989, 44.
[^13] "When Shall These Things Be?" 190.
[^14] Witness and a Warning, 18.
[^15] Great Prologue, 5.
[^16] "Mission of Ephraim," 2-3. For a brief explanation of how Ephraim came to be called the firstborn of Jacob, even though he was a grandson and was descended from Joseph, the eleventh son, see 1 Chr. 5:1-2 and Jer. 31:9.
[^17] Conference Report, Oct. 1965, 72.
[^18] Statistics for years before 1999 are from Deseret News 1993-1994Â½ Church Almanac, 396-99; statistics for 1999 are from "Statistical Report, 1998," Ensign, May 1999, 22.
[^19] See the commentary on God's judgments upon Satan's followers, page 321.
[^20] See also History of the Church, 2:309, 418-19.
[^21] Ensign, Oct. 1974, 4-5.
[^22] Conference Report, Oct. 1975, 145.
[^23] Conference Report, Oct. 1984, 17.
[^24] See Ballard, Our Search for Happiness, 72-73; Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:134-35.
[^25] See the commentary on the gathering of Israel through missionary work, page 59, and the commentary on Israel being gathered to their lands of inheritance, page 113.
[^26] McConkie, Millet, and Top, Doctrinal Commentary on the Book of Mormon, 4:25.
[^27] For further reference on the concept that "few" are chosen, see Smith, History of the Church, 6:185; McConkie, Mortal Messiah, 3:310.
[^28] Come unto Christ, 115; see also Lee, Stand Ye in Holy Places, 22.
