Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Signs of the Times ( 1999)

Chapter 2

The Gathering of Israel

Signs of the Times

"We believe in the literal gathering of Israel and in the restoration of the Ten Tribes" ( A of F 10). Probably no event of the last days has been prophesied more often than the gathering of Israel. Because of their wickedness, the Lord allowed the children of Israel to be scattered among the nations in the millennium before the birth of Christ as well as afterward, by the hand of Rome. But though they were lost to history, the Lord knows where he placed them, and he ever remembers his promises to restore them to their inheritance.

The scattering had two phases. First, the people of Israel turned from God and his gospel and the covenant he had made with them, and their hearts became lost from him. Next, the people of Israel were removed from their land of promise, a symbol of the covenant, and were dispersed among the nations. These phases were prophesied by Moses many centuries before they actually took place. "If thou wilt not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God," he said, "to observe to do all his commandments and his statutes which I command thee this day . . . [you will be] removed into all the kindoms of the earth.Â½Â½Â½ . . . And the Lord shall scatter thee among all people, from the one end of the earth even unto the other; and there thou shalt serve other gods, which neither thou nor thy fathers have known" ( Deut. 28:15, 25, 64; see also Jer. 16:11-13). First came the apostasy of heart—"if thou wilt not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God"—the spiritual removal from God's presence. Then came the scattering, the physical removal from the promised land. [^1]

The gathering will have the same two phases, restoring that which was lost. First, the people of Israel (and Gentiles who are adopted into the family of Abraham) will receive the opportunity to come unto Christ and his Church. Their hearts will be restored to their true Redeemer. This gathering is a gathering of souls to Zion in the broad sense, to the wards and branches and stakes of the Church in all places throughout the world. Then, in due time, a representative part of those who come unto Christ and his Church will have the opportunity to go to the place called Zion (centered in the New Jerusalem on the American continent, specifically in Missouri); [^2] also, in time, those of blood Israel will be restored to their lands of promise. This might be termed a gathering by migration.

Some might say that for Jews the gathering has the same two phases but in reverse: First, they return to the land of their inheritance, the place called Zion (also known as Jerusalem). Then, in time, many will accept the returning Jesus Christ as their Messiah.

In truth, though, the gathering of the Jews will follow the same pattern as that of everyone else who comes (or returns) to the covenant. Jacob taught that the Lord "has spoken unto the Jews, by the mouth of his holy prophets, even from the beginning down, from generation to generation, until the time comes that they [the Jews, and by extension, all the house of Israel; see 2 Ne. 9:1] shall be restored to the true church and fold of God; when they shall be gathered home to the lands of their inheritance, and shall be established in all their lands of promise" (2 Ne. 9:2). First, Israel (including the Jews) would be "restored to the true church," after which they would be "gathered home to the lands of their inheritance." The spiritual gathering precedes and leads to the temporal gathering.

Jacob gave the entire pattern of scattering and gathering, in sequence: "Because of their iniquities, destructions, famines, pestilences, and bloodshed shall come upon them [the Jews]; and they who shall not be destroyed shall be scattered among all nations.

"But behold, thus saith the Lord God: When the day cometh that they shall believe in me, that I am Christ, then have I covenanted with their fathers that they shall be restored in the flesh, upon the earth, unto the lands of their inheritance. And it shall come to pass that they shall be gathered in from their long dispersion, from the isles of the sea, and from the four parts of the earth; and the nations of the Gentiles shall be great in the eyes of me, saith God, in carrying them forth to the lands of their inheritance" (2 Ne. 10:6-8).

First came the iniquity, and then the scattering, followed in some by a return to faith in Christ, which brings them to the true Church, culminating in a restoration to "the lands of their inheritance."

These promises of gathering, both spiritual and temporal, all flow from covenants the Lord made with his people anciently. The people of Israel have always been a covenant people. The covenant stems from the promises made to Abraham that his descendants would be very great in number, that his name would be great on the earth, that "in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed" (Gen. 12:2-3; 13:16). These promises were granted as well to Abraham's son, Isaac (Gen. 26:4), and to Isaac's son Jacob after him (Gen. 28:14). Jacob is the man who became known as Israel (Gen. 32:28). The covenant could be fulfilled only as Abraham's descendants received the priesthood and the gospel.

But even though this covenant was a promise to Abraham and his descendants, it was conditioned on righteousness. When Jesus was teaching the unbelieving Jews, he said, "Bring forth . . . fruits meet for repentance: and think not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham" (Matt. 3:8-9). With the Lord, righteousness is of greater significance than lineage. It follows, then, that those who join Abraham in righteousness will be privileged to join in his covenant. Nephi taught this truth: "As many of the Gentiles as will repent are the covenant people of the Lord; and as many of the Jews as will not repent shall be cast off; for the Lord covenanteth with none save it be with them that repent and believe in his Son, who is the Holy One of Israel" (2 Ne. 30:2). (In this context, Gentiles seems to refer to all who are not Jews.)

The gathering is clearly a last days event, one of the signs of the times. Jesus declared that the coming forth of the Book of Mormon was a sign that the gathering was about to begin ( 3 Ne. 20-21). In 1836, seven years after the publication of the Book of Mormon, the keys for gathering all of Israel were restored to Joseph Smith; the gathering thus occurs under the direction of those who have succeeded the Prophet in his presidency. The Prophet recorded, "Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north" (D&C 110:11). Once the keys were restored to the earth, the gathering could begin.

Joseph Smith explained an overriding purpose of the gathering: to tap into the great blessings of combined righteousness. He said: "The greatest temporal and spiritual blessings which always come from faithfulness and concerted effort, never attended individual exertion or enterprise. The history of all past ages abundantly attests this fact. In addition to all temporal blessings, there is no other way for the Saints to be saved in these last days [than by the gathering] as the concurrent testimony of all the holy prophets clearly proves. . . .

"It is also the concurrent testimony of all the prophets, that this gathering together of all the Saints, must take place before the Lord comes to 'take vengeance upon the ungodly,' and 'to be glorified and admired by all those who obey the Gospel.'" [^3]

In another sermon Joseph Smith connected the gathering to the blessing of temples: "What was the object of gathering the Jews, or the people of God in any age of the world? . . .

"The main object was to build unto the Lord a house whereby He could reveal unto His people the ordinances of His house and the glories of His kingdom, and teach the people the way of salvation; for there are certain ordinances and principles that, when they are taught and practiced, must be done in a place or house built for that purpose." [^4]

Providing protection for the Saints is another purpose of the gathering. As the Lord said in the early days of the Church, "Verily I say unto you all: Arise and shine forth, that thy light may be a standard for the nations; and that the gathering together upon the land of Zion, and upon her stakes, may be for a defense, and for a refuge from the storm, and from wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth" (D&C 115:5-6).

The Lord Remembers His Covenant

Isa. 49:13-19

13 Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O earth; and break forth into singing, O mountains: for the Lord hath comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted.

14 But Zion said, The Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me.

15 Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee.

16 Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands; thy walls are continually before me.

17 Thy children shall make haste [against] thy[destroyers[;] and they that made thee waste shall go forth [of] thee. [^5]

18 Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold: all these gather themselves together, and come to thee. As I live, saith the Lord, thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all, as with an ornament, and bind them on thee, as a bride doeth.

19 For thy waste and thy desolate places, and the land of thy destruction, shall even now be too narrow by reason of the inhabitants, and they that swallowed thee up shall be far away.

In the last days, the Lord promises, "I [will] remember my covenant which I have made unto my people, O house of Israel, and I will bring my gospel unto them. And I will show unto thee, O house of Israel, that the Gentiles shall not have power over you; but I will remember my covenant unto you, O house of Israel, and ye shall come unto the knowledge of the fulness of my gospel" (3 Ne. 16:11-12).

In a broad sense, God's covenant with Israel is the Abrahamic covenant, where the Lord promised priesthood blessings and a land of promise to Abraham and his posterity. Specifically here, the covenant seems to be that the Lord will gather Israel, both to the gospel of Jesus Christ and to her promised lands.

As Isaiah saw, the Lord's people would come to feel that the Lord had forgotten them, and they would be fearful that the covenant would not be fulfilled (Isa. 49:14). But the Lord answers with compassion, saying that though a mother might forget her infant child, he would never forget (Isa. 49:15). He reminds them of his suffering in the Atonement ("I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands"). Having paid such a price for them, how can he ever forget? (Isa. 49:16).

In time, the Lord says, many will "gather themselves together, and come to thee [Zion]" (Isa. 49:18). So many will gather that the land will actually become crowded (Isa. 49:19-20). "Therefore ye need not suppose that ye can turn the right hand of the Lord unto the left, that he may not execute judgment unto the fulfilling of the covenant which he hath made unto the house of Israel" (3 Ne. 29:9).

Notes and Commentary

Isa. 49:13 Sing, O heavens/be joyful, O earth/singing, O mountains. This passage suggests that the very creations of God will rejoice at the fulfillment of his promises to gather Israel to the true gospel (see also Isa. 44:23; 52:9; 55:12; D&C 128:22). Or heavens may refer to God and those with him (in Moses 7:28 the weeping of God is described as the weeping of the heavens; perhaps the rejoicing of the heavens here represents the rejoicing of God); earth may refer to the righteous people on earth; mountains may refer to the Zion of God, established in the land of the everlasting hills.

his people/his afflicted. The Lord's people are afflicted because of their dispersion and long exile. They also are afflicted spiritually as a consequence for sin; but through the Atonement, the Lord will comfort and be merciful to the repentant, who are truly the Lord's people.

Isa. 49:14 Zion. Zion can be the Lord's people or a geographical location. In this context it seems to refer to scattered Israel, who felt that God had forgotten them.

The Lord hath forsaken me. So many millennia have passed since the Lord made his promises that the people of the covenant feel that the Lord has turned his back on them (compare Gideon's expression in Judg. 6:13).

Isa. 49:15 woman forget her sucking child/son of her womb. A loving mother would never forget her precious baby, "the son of her womb." But the Lord loves us even more than that (see also Isa. 43:4; 44:21; 46:3).

Isa. 49:16 graven thee/palms of my hands. This imagery refers to the crucifixion of Christ, in which nails pierced his hands and left scars that the Father caused to remain in the Resurrection (3 Ne. 11:13-14; Luke 24:39-40). These nail marks are a sign to Israel and to the world that Christ has indeed fulfilled his mission as Savior ( Isa. 22:23, 25; John 20:25; 3 Ne. 11:14-15; D&C 6:37; 45:48). The marks in his palms are also a constant reminder to him of the cost and the depth of his love for us.

walls/before me. The walls of Jerusalem are ever-present to those who dwell in the city. In the same way, an awareness of Israel is ever- present with the Lord (see also Isa. 60:18). Walls may also be a barrier or hindrance. The Lord is ever aware of our concerns, worries, problems, barriers—all those things that hinder us from being what he would have us be.

Isa. 49:17 Thy children shall make haste [against] thy destroyers. The children are the descendants of ancient Israel. The destroyers are the nations that attacked and captured ancient Israel. In the days when Israel shall be restored to her former blessings, the descendants of ancient Israel will quickly turn against their ancient enemies, who continue to oppress. This may also refer to the success the faithful of Israel will have against those who would destroy them spiritually, including Satan and his followers.

made thee waste/go forth. Those who conquered and wasted Israel will depart.

Isa. 49:18 clothe/ornament. As additional souls are gathered unto Zion, they will add to the glory of those already there. As fine clothing or expensive jewelry add beauty to a bride, so will the souls of those gathered add beauty to the Church.

bind/bride. In various scriptures, the bride is depicted as being the Saints (Isa. 61:10), the Church (D&C 109:73-74), and the New Jerusalem (Rev. 21:2). In this verse, the bride represents Zion. In Zion, we bind others to ourselves with a bond of charity. This binding, which brings us to union and oneness, is the very essence of Zion. Binding might also refer to the sealing ordinance.

Isa. 49:19 waste/desolate places/narrow. Israel's promised land has been laid waste and made empty, but when the gathering occurs, the available land will be too small for the great influx of those who are gathered (Isa. 54:1-3). The waste places of Zion are symbolic of Israel's loss, both spiritual and physical, that shall be restored (Isa. 58:12; D&C 101:75; 103:11). The restoration of the waste places thus brings joy and comfort ( Isa. 48:13, 19; 51:3; 52:9; D&C 101:18).

they that swallowed thee shall be far away. Israel's enemies, or our spiritual enemies, will be far from us.

The Gathering Will Be Directed by Priesthood Keys

D&C 110:11

11 . . . the heavens were . . . opened unto us; and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north.

The Lord directs his Church to function by proper authority in all it does. "Mine house is a house of order," he said to Joseph Smith, "and not a house of confusion" (D&C 132:8). To ensure that order, the Lord has delegated keys of authority to his servants who preside over the Church. [^6] "I have appointed unto my servant Joseph to hold this power in the last days, and there is never but one on the earth at a time on whom this power and the keys of this priesthood are conferred" (D&C 132:7). The keys have been passed from Joseph Smith in proper succession to the current president of the Church. The work of the kingdom, in matters both great and small, is directed by the keys of authority that the Lord has given to his servants, the prophets.

The gathering of Israel is an example of a work that is directed by these keys. The president of the Church, assisted by the Twelve and others to whom he has delegated authority, determines where missions are established and where individual missionaries serve. The president of the Church decides where temples, which are focal points of gathering, will be built, and where stakes will be established. And should the divine direction for gathering ever change, that change will come through the president of the Church.

Elder Harold B. Lee taught this principle when he said: "Clearly, the Lord has placed the responsibility for directing the work of gathering in the hands of the leaders of the Church to whom he will reveal his will where and when such gatherings would take place in the future. It would be well . . . before the frightening events concerning the fulfillment of all God's promises and predictions are upon us, that the Saints in every land prepare themselves and look forward to the instruction that shall come to them from the First Presidency of this Church as to where they shall be gathered and not be disturbed in their feelings until such instruction is given to them as it is revealed by the Lord to the proper authority." [^7]

Elder Boyd K. Packer taught similarly, warning against those who might seek to take the Church in the wrong direction: "Those deceivers say that the Brethren do not know what is going on in the world or that the Brethren approve of their teaching but do not wish to speak of it over the pulpit. Neither is true. The Brethren, by virtue of traveling constantly everywhere on earth, certainly know what is going on and by virtue of prophetic insight are able to read the signs of the times.

"Do not be deceived by them—those deceivers. If there is to be any gathering, it will be announced by those who have been regularly ordained and who are known to the Church to have authority.

"Come away from any others. Follow your leaders, who have been duly ordained and have been publicly sustained, and you will not be led astray." [^8]

The restoration of the keys of gathering is one of the signs of the times. According to the plan and purpose of God, the gathering will proceed as directed by the man who holds those keys, the living prophet of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Notes and Commentary

D&C 110:11 The heavens were . . . opened unto us. As part of a remarkable series of visions in the newly dedicated Kirtland Temple, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery saw first the Lord, then Moses, then Elias, then Elijah, with each of the prophets bestowing sacred priesthood keys upon them.

Moses appeared before us. In rather matter-of-fact language, Joseph Smith informs us that the great ancient prophet who led Israel from its bondage in Egypt returned in 1836 to give him the "keys of the gathering of Israel." Why Moses? Perhaps because he once led Israel forth from Egypt in mighty power, taking them to their promised land. Likewise, when our prophets lead Israel forth from spiritual Egypt, or Babylon, in the last days, they will do so with mighty power, like unto Moses.

keys. "Keys are the right of presidency; they are divine authorization to use the priesthood for a specified purpose; they empower those who hold them to use the power of God to do the work of Him whose power it is." [^9]

keys of the gathering of Israel. Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "How was Israel gathered the first time? In what way came they out of Egypt, free from bondage, carrying the riches of the land with them? Truly it was by the power of God. With a mighty hand and a stretched-out arm and with fury poured out, Jehovah led his ancient people. And he did it by the hand of Moses, his servant, who held the keys of the gathering, the keys and power to use the priesthood to part the Red Sea and do all else that must needs be.

"When 'the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people' (Isa. 11:11) from all the countries whither he hath driven them, how shall the work be done? It shall be again as it was before. His prophets, holding again the keys and powers possessed by Moses, shall lead Israel out of the bondage of a modern Egypt. . . .

"Thus Israel returns at the direction of the president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Thus when the Ten Tribes come forth from the lands of the north to receive their blessings in the temples of God, they will come at the command of the presiding officer in the true Church. . . . He alone is empowered to use all of the keys in their eternal fulness. There is never but one on earth at a time who can preside over and direct all of the affairs of the Lord among mortals, and this includes the gathering of all Israel as well as all else involved in the heaven-directed work." [^10]

four parts of the earth. See the commentary on the gathering of Israel from many lands, page 71.

leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north. See the commentary on the restoration of the ten tribes, page 103.

The Gathering of Israel through Missionary Work and Conversion

D&C 39:11

11 . . . Thou shalt preach the fulness of my gospel, which I have sent forth in these last days, the covenant which I have sent forth to recover my people, which are of the house of Israel.

The gathering will occur not only through the migration of peoples but also by the bringing of people to the true gospel of Jesus Christ. As the Lord said to Joseph Smith, by preaching the gospel we also carry to the house of Israel the covenant "to recover my people." In other words, the very act of preaching the gospel to the house of Israel causes the covenant to be renewed to them, if they will repent and turn to the Lord.

Through Jeremiah the Lord described this same gathering process, that of the missionaries going forth diligently to find the honest in heart among those of the earth. The Lord called his missionaries fishers and hunters, who would "hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the holes of the rocks" (Jer. 16:16).

The Lord used a different image when he spoke through Zechariah: "I will hiss for them, and gather them; for I have redeemed them" (Zech. 10:8; see also Isa. 5:26). The Lord "hisses" or calls to his people through the missionaries, and if they will hearken, they will be gathered, "one by one," as Isaiah prophesied (Isa. 27:12), or "one of a city, and two of a family," as Jeremiah foresaw (Jer. 3:14). The Savior taught the Nephites that through the Gentiles, the scattered Jews would be brought to a knowledge of Christ and would be gathered in from all parts of the earth. This same promise, he said, applied to "all the people of the house of Israel" (3 Ne. 16:4-5).

"The gathering of Israel is now in progress," President Spencer W. Kimball taught. "Hundreds of thousands of people have been baptized into the Church. Millions more will join the Church. And this is the way that we will gather Israel. . . .

"It is to be done by missionary work." [^11]

As a snapshot of one point in time, in 1989 Elder M. Russell Ballard gave us a progress report of the growth of the Church missionary effort around the world: "In recent years the Lord's servants have unlocked the door and opened the work in the German Democratic Republic, Poland, Hungary, and Yugoslavia. They have opened many nations of Africa, including Nigeria, Ghana, Zaire, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Swaziland, Ivory Coast, and Namibia; they have also opened Papua New Guinea. Thirteen nations and territories have been opened for missionary work in just the past four years. Many others will be opened to the preaching of the gospel. Truly, no unhallowed hand can stop the sacred work of proclaiming life and salvation to all nations and peoples, but this work will not continue without challenges and risks." [^12]

Six and a half years later, Elder Ballard said: "In the past six years we have carried the gospel to thirty-nine new countries. . . . This work is moving; it is beginning to cover the earth. While it is true that many of our Heavenly Father's children have never had the opportunity to hear the message of the Restoration, it's also true that the circumstances preventing them from receiving the gospel could quickly change—just as it did in eastern Europe. Who would have dreamed a decade ago that the Iron Curtain would be gone, almost overnight? It was remarkable—even miraculous—and today our missionaries are teaching the gospel where for fifty years we were prohibited from establishing a gospel presence. So it is happening, my brothers and sisters. Christ's gospel is going to all the world." [^13]

Notes and Commentary

D&C 39:11 fulness of my gospel. The Book of Mormon contains the "fulness of the everlasting Gospel" (JS-H 1:34; see also D&C 20:9; 42:12). President Ezra Taft Benson wrote: "That does not mean it contains every teaching, every doctrine ever revealed. Rather, it means that in the Book of Mormon we will find the fulness of those doctrines required for our salvation." [^14]

the covenant. The covenant the Lord has sent forth in our day is a renewal of the Abrahamic covenant, in which the ordinances of the priesthood are given to those who come unto the Lord. Through the priesthood and its ordinances the world is blessed by the power of the atonement of Christ. As the gathering proceeds, the descendants of Abraham, whether through blood or by adoption, are brought unto Christ and his gospel. At the same time, Abraham's descendants are instruments in bringing the gathering to pass, in accordance to the promise of God to Abraham many millennia ago. All this, Nephi explained, will "be fulfilled in the latter days" (1 Ne. 15:18).

A fuller text of God's promises to Abraham, as restored in our day, explains how Abraham and his seed would bless "all the families of the earth"—and gives the relationship of that blessing to the gathering of Israel: "I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations; and I will bless them through thy name; for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father; And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee; and in thee (that is, in thy Priesthood) and in thy seed (that is, thy Priesthood), for I give unto thee a promise that this right shall continue in thee, and in thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal" (Abr. 2:9-11).

As we follow Abraham, seeking to emulate his life and live according to the covenant blessings he received, we participate in the first step of the gathering: coming unto Christ and his Church. Then, filled with desire to bless others through the priesthood and the gospel, we reach out to help them be gathered as well.

recover my people. This is a scriptural expression that means "gather my people," meaning the covenant people of the Lord (see also Isa.11:11; 2 Ne. 29:1, 5; Jacob 6:2; 3 Ne. 3:10).

Ephraim Shall Be Gathered First

Isa. 49:22-23

22 Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people: and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders.

23 And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing mothers: they shall bow down to thee with their face toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt know that I am the Lord: for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me.

As the Lord begins the gathering, he will follow a prophesied sequence. First, he will bring the gospel forth to the Gentiles (those who received the gospel first, of course, were Joseph Smith and those who followed him). The Gentiles then have a responsibility to take it to all the nations of the world. Finally, the testimony of Christ will go to the Jews. As Isaiah saw, through the Gentiles the Lord would "set up my standard to the people." The Gentiles would gently and lovingly receive those of Israel who would come to the gospel of Jesus Christ, treating them with great respect. It would be through the ministrations of the Gentiles that the generality of the house of Israel would come to the gospel.

The Gentiles are sometimes defined as any people who are not Jews. But the Gentiles are also the many nations that received the dispersed people of Israel. They are the nations in which the blood of Israel was freely intermingled, making those nations also of Israel. In one important sense, then, the Gentile nations are the present home to the tribes of Israel. Elder Mark E. Petersen gave this valuable explanation, after citing 1 Ne. 22:7-9 and 3 Ne. 21:2-4: "Since Israel was scattered among all nations, the gospel would have to be taken to all those nations in order to reach the house of Israel living among them. That is why we send our missionaries to all parts of the world.

"And it is made clear that the gospel was destined to come to Israel from believing Gentiles in this land to whom the gospel would be revealed in latter days, and by them to be taken abroad. This is now being done. Note the clear statement that the gospel would be given first to the Gentiles in these latter days—and by act of the Father!

"Note also that it would be the mission of these same Gentiles to become the ministers of God, seeking out the house of Israel, even 'out of the holes of the rocks,' as one prophet said, that they might believe the gospel and be gathered home. (Jer. 16:16.)

"And who are these modern Gentiles? We are!

"We are they to whom the gospel was restored, and we have the keys of gathering as brought back by Moses and committed to the Prophet Joseph Smith to be used for this very purpose. (See D&C 110.) And we are they who have been commanded to preach the gospel to all the world. (See D&C 68:8; 112:28; 133:37.)

"We are also of Israel, however—mostly of Ephraim—but we are Gentiles too, inasmuch as Ephraim was widely scattered among the Gentiles in ancient times and intermarried with them.

"Ephraim now is the first of the scattered tribes to be gathered, since Ephraim holds the birthright in Israel." [^15]

As the Gentiles who first received the gospel, who were also of Ephraim, go forth to the Gentile nations to share the good news they have received, they hunt for and find those members of the house of Israel who are willing to come unto Christ and his true Church. Those who are being converted through their missionary efforts, for the most part, are descendants of Ephraim, who are also Gentiles. Thus, in one sense the Gentile nations are Israelite nations, though they know it not.

Elder Joseph Fielding Smith bore testimony of the role of Ephraim in the gathering process: "It is essential in this dispensation that Ephraim stand in his place at the head, exercising the birthright in Israel which was given to him by direct revelation. Therefore Ephraim must be gathered first to prepare the way, through the Gospel and the Priesthood, for the rest of the tribes of Israel when the time comes for them to be gathered to Zion. The great majority of those who have come into the Church are Ephraimites. It is the exception to find one of any other tribe, unless it is of Manasseh. . . .

"It is Ephraim, today, who holds the Priesthood. It is with Ephraim that the Lord has made covenant and has revealed the fulness of the Everlasting Gospel. It is Ephraim who is building Temples and performing the ordinances in them for both the living and for the dead. When the 'lost tribes' come . . . , they will have to receive the crowning blessings from their brother Ephraim, the 'firstborn' in Israel." [^16]

Notes and Commentary

Isa. 49:22 lift up mine hand. This phrase may signify the Lord's lifting his right arm in covenant, stretching forth his hand to accomplish his work, or perhaps reaching out to invite the Gentiles to come unto him (Gen. 14:22; Deut. 32:39-40; Isa. 5:26; 13:2).

standard. A standard is a flag or ensign that serves as a rallying point around which people may gather. The scriptures define the standard as God's words (specifically, the Book of Mormon; 2 Ne. 29:2), the everlasting covenant (D&C 45:9), the great Zion of the last days (D&C 64:41-43), and the light of the righteous or the Church and its faithful members (D&C 115:3-5). Overall, the standard is the true gospel and church of Jesus Christ (Isa. 5:26; 11:10; 62:10; Zech. 9:16).

Isa. 49:22-23 thy sons/thy daughters/kings/queens. Nephi comments on these verses in 1 Ne. 22:6-9, explaining that the Gentiles will bless his seed both temporally (meaning with physical nourishment) and spiritually (with spiritual nourishment, the gospel). Jacob casts further light on this prophecy of Isaiah. In 2 Ne. 10:5-9 he explains that when the Jews come to believe in Christ, they will be "gathered in from their long dispersion, . . . and the nations of the Gentiles shall be great in the eyes of me, saith God, in carrying them forth to the lands of their inheritance. Yea, the kings of the Gentiles shall be nursing fathers unto them, and their queens shall become nursing mothers" (see also Isa. 45:14; 49:7; 60:4).

One interpretation of these words was given by Elder Spencer W. Kimball: "The brighter day has dawned. The scattering has been accomplished; the gathering is in process. May the Lord bless us all as we become nursing fathers and mothers (see Isa. 49:23 and 1 Ne. 21:23) unto our Lamanite brethren and hasten the fulfillment of the great promises made to them." [^17] The kings and queens may well be the righteous men and women who have entered into the covenants of the fulness of the priesthood in the temple of God.

Isa. 49:23 bow down/face toward the earth/lick up the dust. In the ancient Near East, bowing and other such actions were signs of submission to a king or ruler (Gen. 42:6; 1 Sam. 24:8; Ps. 72:8-11). In times past, Israel was repeatedly conquered and forced to submit to the kings of the earth. But in the last days, kings and queens will bow in obeisance and submission to the children of Israel (2 Ne. 6:13). If the kings and queens are the righteous people of covenant, however, this phrase would likely have a different meaning, which at present remains obscure.

not be ashamed that wait for me. Those who wait for the Lord are those who trust patiently in his plan. Their faith will be vindicated; they will not be ashamed that they believed, because all God's promises are fulfilled. The psalmist said, "O my God, I trust in thee: . . . let none that wait on thee be ashamed" (Ps. 25:2-3).

The Voice of Warning Precedes the Voice of Judgments

D&C 88:81, 88-92

81 Behold, I sent you out to testify and warn the people, and it becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor. . . .

88 And after your testimony cometh wrath and indignation upon the people.

89 For after your testimony cometh the testimony of earthquakes, that shall cause groanings in the midst of her, and men shall fall upon the ground and shall not be able to stand.

90 And also cometh the testimony of the voice of thunderings, and the voice of lightnings, and the voice of tempests, and the voice of the waves of the sea heaving themselves beyond their bounds.

91 And all things shall be in commotion; and surely, men's hearts shall fail them; for fear shall come upon all people.

92 And angels shall fly through the midst of heaven, crying with a loud voice, sounding the trump of God, saying: Prepare ye, prepare ye, O inhabitants of the earth; for the judgment of our God is come.

The Lord calls on his servants to carry the word of the gospel unto the world "to testify and warn the people." Further, not only are we to warn those in distant lands but everyone who hears the gospel has an obligation to tell those around him, to "warn his neighbor." This essential part of the gathering is part of the great missionary effort the Lord requires of his people in the last days. Our broad missionary endeavor began in the days of Joseph Smith, and it has continued with power and effectiveness from his day to ours, causing the Church to grow from 6 members in 1830, to 600 the following year, to 6,000 in 1835, to 60,000 in 1853, to 600,000 in 1925, to 6 million in 1986. By 1999, the Church had more than 10 million members. [^18]

What is the warning? That if people don't repent, they will suffer the judgments of God. They will be subject to his deep and righteous anger. And if they escape the judgments here in mortality, they certainly will not escape the eternal consequences for their actions in the world to come. They will receive a lesser glory, with lessened opportunities, "worlds without end" (D&C 76:112).

Of course, much of the missionaries' message is a testimony of joy and rejoicing for the great gifts our Savior has given us through his love and his atonement: repentance and forgiveness, the blessing of covenants with God, gifts of the Spirit, the opportunity of eternal glory, fellowship with the Saints, and much, much more.

Unfortunately, the testimony of the servants of the Lord will be rejected by many. After the world has had its opportunity to receive and embrace the word, the Lord will send his judgments upon the unrepentant—judgments of wrath and indignation, earthquakes, great storms with thunder and lightning, tempests and dangerous ocean waves (which suggests tsunamis, or seismic sea waves that sometimes follow earthquakes at sea). These judgments will be so pervasive that truly it will be felt that "all things shall be in commotion." "Men's hearts shall fail them" because of their fright, and "all people" will be filled with terror at what they see and hear and experience in the natural world around them. [^19]

After the voice of the missionaries goes forth, and after the voice of judgments is sent, then the Lord himself "shall utter his voice out of heaven, saying: Hearken, O ye nations of the earth, and hear the words of that God who made you. O, ye nations of the earth, how often would I have gathered you together as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, but ye would not! How oft have I called upon you by the mouth of my servants, and by the ministering of angels, and by mine own voice, and by the voice of thunderings, and by the voice of lightnings, and by the voice of tempests, and by the voice of earthquakes, and great hailstorms, and by the voice of famines and pestilences of every kind, and by the great sound of a trump, and by the voice of judgment, and by the voice of mercy all the day long, and by the voice of glory and honor and the riches of eternal life, and would have saved you with an everlasting salvation, but ye would not! Behold, the day has come, when the cup of the wrath of mine indignation is full" (D&C 43:23-26). [^20]

Notes and Commentary

D&C 88:81 warn his neighbor. Warning is a key element of missionary work: the missionary warns the listener that he must repent or suffer the consequences of lost opportunities, lost blessings, and eventual deep sorrow for sin. The concept of warning one's neighbor suggests the principle of member-missionary work. Not only are the full-time missionaries to warn others but each person who has received the warning is to share it with others.

D&C 88:88 wrath and indignation. The deep and righteous anger of God.

D&C 88:89 testimony of earthquakes. The prophesied earthquakes will underscore and support the judgments as pronounced by God. They will help to accomplish the judgments as well as give an object lesson that the wicked are indeed punished.

not be able to stand. The earthquakes will be so powerful that people will be unable to keep their footing on the ground.

D&C 88:91 all things shall be in commotion. This passage suggests that "all things" particularly refers to the elements of nature, with specific examples of earthquakes, thunderstorms, and tempests.

men's hearts shall fail them. Although some have suggested that this passage refers to an increase in heart disease among mankind, the context of this phrase implies that the hearts of men and women will fail because of their fear as they see the judgments of God. "Hearts shall fail them," then, probably means that they will lose courage (see also 1 Sam. 17:32; D&C 124:75).

D&C 88:92 trump of God. The trump of God is a trumpet blown by an angel, as in ancient times a herald would blow a trumpet before making an announcement or introducing the arrival of a king. In the last days, the Lord will have his angels sound a number of trumpets to herald the coming of judgments and other important events. Whether these trumpets will be heard by those on earth or whether they are literal or symbolic is not yet clear.

The Voice of Warning Is Extended to All People

D&C 1:4-5, 11-14

4 And the voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days.

5 And they shall go forth and none shall stay them, for I the Lord have commanded them. . . .

11 Wherefore the voice of the Lord is unto the ends of the earth, that all that will hear may hear:

12 Prepare ye, prepare ye for that which is to come, for the Lord is nigh;

13 And the anger of the Lord is kindled, and his sword is bathed in heaven, and it shall fall upon the inhabitants of the earth.

14 And the arm of the Lord shall be revealed; and the day cometh that they who will not hear the voice of the Lord, neither the voice of his servants, neither give heed to the words of the prophets and apostles, shall be cut off from among the people.

In his preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord emphasizes that his gospel shall go to all people through his servants. They shall go to the "ends of the earth" with their message, giving all the opportunity to hear the true gospel of Jesus Christ. No one will have power to stop the onward course of the gospel as it moves across the world, for the Lord has so decreed ("none shall stay them"; D&C 1:5; see also 133:37).

Latter-day prophets and apostles have acknowledged the greatness of our commission. For example, President Spencer W. Kimball said: "It seems to me that the Lord chose his words when he said 'every nation,' 'every land,' 'uttermost bounds of the earth,' 'every tongue,' 'every people,' 'every soul,' 'all the world,' 'many lands.'

"Surely there is significance in these words!" [^21] "We accept the responsibility to preach the gospel to every person on earth," Elder Boyd K. Packer has said. "And if the question is asked, 'You mean you are out to convert the entire world?' the answer is, 'Yes. We will try to reach every living soul.'" [^22] And Elder M. Russell Ballard declared: "At the present time, more people are born in one day than are baptized into the Church in one year. The magnitude of our missionary task can appear to be overwhelming. Yet the assignment to the members of the Church is very clear. We are to take the gospel of Jesus Christ to every human soul." [^23]

Receiving or rejecting the gospel message and the voice of warning is a matter of agency—"all that will hear may hear"—but the time will come when those who refuse to hear the message will be cut off from among the people. Spiritually, those who refuse the gospel will not be counted among the Lord's people. Temporally, those who continue in sin will be cut off from mortal life by the judgments of the last days and the fire at the coming of the Lord. As the Lord put it elsewhere, "This Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come, or the destruction of the wicked" (JS-M 1:31).

Notes and Commentary

D&C 1:4 voice of warning. The voice of warning is to go to "all people" through the Lord's chosen ministers—including his prophets and the missionaries. The warning is that the day of the Lord is near, and all must prepare by repenting of their sins and adhering to the commandments of God.

D&C 1:5 none shall stay them. Though some may attempt to hinder the Lord's missionaries in their work, they will not be able to do so, for the Lord's power and blessing are with his disciples (Dan. 4:35; Morm. 8:26). Further, the Lord has commanded his disciples to go forth with the warning voice, and no one—whether on earth, in heaven, or in hell—has power to countermand that which the Lord has decreed (D&C 1:38).

D&C 1:12 Prepare ye, prepare ye. This command is emphasized by the repetition. We are to prepare for that which is to come: the Lord's judgments on the earth.

the Lord is nigh. The time of the Lord's second coming is near (Joel 2:1; Jacob 5:71; D&C 1:12; 29:9; 43:17; 133:17).

D&C 1:13 his sword is bathed in heaven, and it shall fall. The sword is symbolic of the Lord's terrible judgments; it will fall from heaven upon the inhabitants of the earth to punish them for their wickedness (Isa. 34:5).

D&C 1:14 arm of the Lord shall be revealed. The Lord will make his power manifest for the people of the world to see (D&C 1:14; 90:10).

cut off from among the people. Those who refuse to listen to the Lord, his prophets, or his other servants will be cut off from fellowship among the Saints. Perhaps this means they will be excommunicated, or perhaps they will be physically cut off by death, so that they no longer have opportunity to mingle with the righteous on the earth (Acts 3:22-23; D&C 50:8; 56:3).

Israel Shall Be Gathered from Many Lands

3 Ne. 5:24-26

24 And as surely as the Lord liveth, will he gather in from the four quarters of the earth all the remnant of the seed of Jacob, who are scattered abroad upon all the face of the earth.

25 And as he hath covenanted with all the house of Jacob, even so shall the covenant wherewith he hath covenanted with the house of Jacob be fulfilled in his own due time, unto the restoring all the house of Jacob unto the knowledge of the covenant that he hath covenanted with them.

26 And then shall they know their Redeemer, who is Jesus Christ, the Son of God; and then shall they be gathered in from the four quarters of the earth unto their own lands, from whence they have been dispersed; yea, as the Lord liveth so shall it be. Amen.

The voice of warning is to all the people on the earth. By premortal covenant, the Lord has promised that all will have the opportunity to hear and accept the gospel sometime between their birth and their resurrection. [^24] But the Lord has also specifically made covenant to gather in the descendants of Jacob from the "four quarters of the earth," because they are "scattered abroad upon all the face of the earth." Once those who belong to the tribes of Israel (or Jacob) are found and accept the gospel, they will first be gathered to the Church through baptism, and then later they will be gathered to the lands of their inheritance through migration. [^25] The gathering to lands seems to be secondary to the gathering to the Church and the gospel. The promised restoration to lands is symbolic of the greater restoration to Christ and the way he cares for his children.

The gathering of Israel from many lands will be seen as a great miracle, surpassing even the impressive events that led to the deliverance of Israel from Egypt ( Ex. 7-14): "Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that it shall no more be said, The Lord liveth, that brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; but, The Lord liveth, that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from all the lands whither he had driven them: and I will bring them again into their land that I gave unto their fathers" (Jer. 16:14-15).

Many prophets have added their testimony that the Lord would gather Israel from their scattered condition throughout the world. In fact, this miracle of gathering Israel has been prophesied more frequently than most other latter-day events. The combined testimonies of these prophets is impressive. What follows is but a sampling:

Moses: "The Lord thy God will turn thy captivity, and have compassion upon thee, and will return and gather thee from all the nations, whither the Lord thy God hath scattered thee" (Deut. 30:3).

David: "And [the Lord] gathered them out of the lands, from the east, and from the west, from the north, and from the south" (Ps. 107:3).

Isaiah: "And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea" (Isa. 11:11).

Jeremiah: "And I will be found of you, saith the Lord: and I will turn away your captivity, and I will gather you from all the nations, and from all the places whither I have driven you, saith the Lord; and I will bring you again into the place whence I caused you to be carried away captive" (Jer. 29:14; see also 32:37).

Ezekiel: "Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord God; I will even gather you from the people, and assemble you out of the countries where ye have been scattered, and I will give you the land of Israel.Â½Â½Â½Â½ . . . For I will take you from among the heathen, and gather you out of all countries, and will bring you into your own land" (Ezek. 11:17; 36:24).

Nephi: "Then will he remember the isles of the sea; yea, and all the people who are of the house of Israel, will I gather in, saith the Lord, according to the words of the prophet Zenos, from the four quarters of the earth" (1 Ne. 19:16).

Jacob: "And it shall come to pass that they shall be gathered in from their long dispersion, from the isles of the sea, and from the four parts of the earth; and the nations of the Gentiles shall be great in the eyes of me, saith God, in carrying them forth to the lands of their inheritance" (2 Ne. 10:8).

To these prophecies must be added that of the resurrected Lord himself, as he spoke to the Nephites at the temple: "The remnants, which shall be scattered abroad upon the face of the earth, [shall] be gathered in from the east and from the west, and from the south and from the north; and they shall be brought to the knowledge of the Lord their God, who hath redeemed them" (3 Ne. 20:13).

Notes and Commentary

3 Ne. 5:24 as surely as the Lord liveth. By this statement of comparison and testimony, the Lord indicates how certain the gathering is—as certain as the truth of his existence. He repeats this expression at both the beginning and ending of this passage.

the four quarters of the earth. This common scriptural expression (1 Ne. 19:16; 3 Ne. 16:5; D&C 33:6; Moses 7:62) simply means "all parts of the earth." This phrase is repeated in verse 26.

remnant of the seed of Jacob. Jacob is another name for Israel, the son of Isaac and grandson of Abraham. The seed of Jacob are his descendants. The remnant of that seed are those who remain unto our day. In the last days, the Lord will gather that remnant from all parts of the earth. Captain Moroni said, "Let us remember the words of Jacob, before his death, for behold, he saw that a part of the remnant of the coat of Joseph was preserved and had not decayed. And he said—Even as this remnant of garment of my son hath been preserved, so shall a remnant of the seed of my son be preserved by the hand of God, and be taken unto himself, while the remainder of the seed of Joseph shall perish, even as the remnant of his garment" (Alma 46:24). In fulfillment of this prophecy, the Lord will gather his people from throughout the world.

3 Ne. 5:25 he hath covenanted with all the house of Jacob. The Lord has covenanted to remember the descendants of Jacob, bring them to the blessings of the gospel (if they will), renew in them the Abrahamic covenant, and restore them to their lands of promise. "The testimony of these verses [ 3 Ne. 5:23-25] is that the tribe of Joseph, which along with all the tribes of Jacob has been scattered among all people throughout the earth, will in the last days be restored to that covenant relationship known to their ancient fathers. That is, they shall come to 'know their Redeemer, who is Jesus Christ, the Son of God.'" [^26] As we learn from this verse, not only will Jacob be restored to the covenant but he will also be restored to a knowledge of the covenant.

in his own due time. The Lord will bring Israel back from their long dispersal according to his own timetable, not that of anyone else.

The Lord Will Gather His Elect

D&C 33:6

6 And even so will I gather mine elect from the four quarters of the earth, even as many as will believe in me, and hearken unto my voice.

The Lord will remember all of Israel, according to his promises, but he will specifically gather those who are called his "elect." He defines the elect as those who "believe in me, and hearken unto my voice." Elsewhere the Lord says to the elders of his Church, "Ye are called to bring to pass the gathering of mine elect; for mine elect hear my voice and harden not their hearts" (D&C 29:7). All will hear the voice of the missionaries (either here or in the spirit world), but relatively few will accept their message and receive the ordinance of baptism (Matt. 7:13-14; D&C 132:22). Of those, fewer still will be valiant, fitting the definitions of the elect: first believing in Christ, then hearkening to his voice, and then continuing faithful without hardening their hearts (D&C 95:5; 121:34). [^27]

Jesus' true disciples are those who recognize his voice and follow him: "My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me" (John 10:27). These are the elect; and these are they who will be gathered to the Church. "And now I show unto you a parable. Behold, wheresoever the carcass is, there will the eagles be gathered together; so likewise shall mine elect be gathered from the four quarters of the earth" (JS-M 1:27). Just as eagles are drawn to the life-giving meat (the carcass), and just as their hunger is not satisfied until they come to that meat, so will the Lord's elect in all parts of the world find Christ, come unto his Church, and be satisfied.

Notes and Commentary

D&C 33:6 gather mine elect. As with many other aspects of the gathering, the Lord's elect are gathered through the efforts of the missionaries of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

four quarters of the earth. See the discussion of this phrase on page 73.

believe in me. Some teach that all one must do to demonstrate belief in Christ is to confess him as their Savior. True belief, however, brings submission and obedience to that which Jesus Christ requires of us.

hearken unto my voice. To hearken is to listen and obey. How does the voice of the Lord come to us? We can hear his voice as we read scriptures, listen to living prophets, hear inspired talks and lessons, and receive inspired counsel given in many settings. But the most important ingredient in all these sources of the word of God is the Holy Ghost. When he is present with us, whatever the setting, we will hear the voice of the Savior. That voice will generally come as the still small voice of the Spirit, giving us feelings, impressions, and understandings.

The Gathering of Israel Is like a Harvest of Wheat

D&C 101:64-67

64 That the work of the gathering together of my saints may continue, that I may build them up unto my name upon holy places; for the time of harvest is come, and my word must needs be fulfilled.

65 Therefore, I must gather together my people, according to the parable of the wheat and the tares, that the wheat may be secured in the garners to possess eternal life, and be crowned with celestial glory, when I shall come in the kingdom of my Father to reward every man according as his work shall be;

66 While the tares shall be bound in bundles, and their bands made strong, that they may be burned with unquenchable fire.

67 Therefore, a commandment I give unto all the churches, that they shall continue to gather together unto the places which I have appointed.

Here the Lord compares the gathering of Israel to the process of harvesting wheat. First, a farmer scatters the seed across the field. Then, when the wheat has grown to maturity, he gathers the grain and puts it into a safe place to keep until his time of need. He also gathers the tares—essentially weeds that look like wheat—binds them into bundles, and burns them.

In D&C 86 the Lord explains the symbolism of the wheat and the tares (referring to the parable of the wheat and the tares found in Matt. 13:24-30). "The field was the world," he said, "and the apostles were the sowers of the seed." After the apostles died, Satan sowed the tares, which began to "choke the wheat and drive the church into the wilderness." In the last days, the angels are "ready and waiting to be sent forth to reap down the fields." But the Lord tells them to wait until the wheat is more fully matured. "Then ye shall first gather out the wheat from among the tares, and after the gathering of the wheat, behold and lo, the tares are bound in bundles, and the field remaineth to be burned" (D&C 86:1-7).

The imagery of the gathering as a wheat harvest is used often in scripture, with the wheat representing the souls of men and women. For example, in speaking to potential missionaries, the Lord says, "Behold the field is white already to harvest; and lo, he that thrusteth in his sickle with his might, the same layeth up in store that he perisheth not, but bringeth salvation to his soul" (D&C 4:4; see also 3 Ne. 20:18; D&C 33:2-11).

Notes and Commentary

D&C 101:64 build them up unto my name. Other scriptures speak of building "an house unto the name of the Lord" (1 Kgs. 5:3; D&C 124:22) and building "cities unto my name" (D&C 125:2-3). When we build up a temple or a city or a people unto the name of God, we do it according to his will, for his purposes, and for his glory.

upon holy places. One of the Lord's names is "the Holy One of Israel" (Isa. 47:4; 54:5; 2 Ne. 9:41), and the place where he dwells is "holy" (Isa. 57:15; see also Moses 6:57). Thus we see that holiness is one of the attributes of God. When we gather unto holy places, we come to places that are dedicated to God and that are blessed by the presence of God (Ex. 3:5). In the coming days of trial, holy places can be a safe haven for the Saints (D&C 45:32). President Ezra Taft Benson wrote, "Holy men and women stand in holy places, and these holy places consist of our temples, our chapels, our homes, and the stakes of Zion." [^28]

for the time of harvest is come. A farmer harvests his crop when it is sufficiently ripe and ready to be eaten or stored. Likewise, the Lord "harvests" his people when the world is ripe in sin and the Zion of his Saints is fully ripe in righteousness.

D&C 101:65 according to the parable of the wheat and the tares. Jesus taught his disciples the parable of the wheat and the tares, in which a man sowed good seed in his field, but an enemy sowed tares in the same field. In time, the man harvested both the wheat and the tares. He stored the wheat in his barn, but he bound the tares in bundles to be burned. This parable is given and explained in Matt. 13:24-30, 36-43, and D&C 86:1-7.

secured in the garners. A garner is a storehouse or granary. The righteous (the wheat) will be securely gathered into the safety provided by God in his love and his power, where they will be crowned with eternal life. The garner into which the Lord brings us may be the temple, the ultimate gathering place of the Saints.

D&C 101:66 the tares shall be bound in bundles, and their bands made strong. Just as the righteous will be securely brought into the Lord's storehouse, so will the wicked be securely bound by the bands of justice, prepared to be punished for their sins.

burned with unquenchable fire. This passage seems to refer to the fervent, hot fire with which the Lord will burn the wicked when he comes. [^29]

The Lord Will Gather His People As a Shepherd Does His Flock

Ezek. 34:11-16

11 For thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I, even I, will both search my sheep, and seek them out.

12 As a shepherd seeketh out his flock in the day that he is among his sheep that are scattered; so will I seek out my sheep, and will deliver them out of all places where they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day.

13 And I will bring them out from the people, and gather them from the countries, and will bring them to their own land, and feed them upon the mountains of Israel by the rivers, and in all the inhabited places of the country.

14 I will feed them in a good pasture, and upon the high mountains of Israel shall their fold be: there shall they lie in a good fold, and in a fat pasture shall they feed upon the mountains of Israel.

15 I will feed my flock, and I will cause them to lie down, saith the Lord God.

16 I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick: but I will destroy the fat and the strong; I will feed them with judgment.

The Lord is the Good Shepherd, who cares for his sheep. As he said during his mortal ministry, "What man of you having a hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, doth not leave the ninety and nine, and go into the wilderness after that which is lost, until he find it? And when he hath found it, he layeth it on his shoulders, rejoicing. And when he cometh home, he calleth together his friends and neighbors, and saith unto them, Rejoice with me; for I found my sheep which was lost" (JST Luke 15:4-6; KJV Luke 15:5).

The gathering is like this shepherd, who leaves safely in the fold those sheep that have already been found and then goes forth to find those that are lost. The language of this passage tells us of the commitment and loving care the Lord has for his sheep. He will search for them and seek them out; he will seek them and deliver them; he will bring them out from the people and will gather them and will bring them to their own land and will feed them. Their pasture will beÂ½ good; their fold will be good; they will lie down in safety (see also Jer. 23:3; 31:10). Through Nephi we have this wonderful promise: "He gathereth his children from the four quarters of the earth; and he numbereth his sheep, and they know him; and there shall be one fold and one shepherd; and he shall feed his sheep, and in him they shall find pasture" (1 Ne. 22:25).

Notes and Commentary

Ezek. 34:12 in the cloudy and dark day. This phrase seems to refer to days of trouble and affliction (see also D&C 109:61).

Ezek. 34:13 I will bring them out from the people. The Lord will find his people wherever they have been scattered and will separate them from the people of the world.

Ezek. 34:13-15 feed them upon the mountains/in a good pasture/in a good fold/in a fat pasture/cause them to lie down. These expressions combine to reinforce the concept that we are sheep and that the Lord is our Shepherd: he will care for us as a good shepherd cares for his flock. These descriptions of the Lord as the Shepherd who gathers his sheep are reminiscent of the Lord's care of his people as described in the Twenty- third Psalm.

Ezek. 34:16 I will seek that which was lost/that which was driven away. As a good shepherd would do, the Lord as Shepherd will find his lost sheep. Israel is not lost to the Lord: he knows where they have been taken, but many have been lost from the gospel. This prophecy applies to the peoples of Israel who have been lost among the nations of the world but also to those who are lost from activity in the Church.

bind up that which was broken/strengthen that which was sick. The Lord not only will find his sheep but will heal them (see also 3 Ne. 9:13). The most significant injury the repentant have received is a broken heart, which the Lord stands ready to bind up in the bandages of his atonement and thereby bring healing (D&C 138:42).

destroy the fat and the strong. This passage likely refers to the wicked rich and the proud, who will be destroyed by the Lord at his coming (Mal. 4:1).

I will feed them with judgment. The New International Version of the Bible renders this phrase as "I will shepherd the flock with justice"—meaning, he will bring judgment upon the wicked, but will bless the repentant among his people according to his mercies.

The Lord Will Gather His People As a Hen Gathers Her Chickens

D&C 29:1-2

1 Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ, your Redeemer . . .

2 Who will gather his people even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, even as many as will hearken to my voice and humble themselves before me, and call upon me in mighty prayer.

The symbol of a hen and her chicks suggests tenderness, safety, and watchful care. As a hen is attentive to all her little ones, drawing them safely to her, so will the Lord gather his people to him. His people are those who hearken, who hear and obey, who are humble before the Lord, and who seek his blessings with all their hearts. As we do these things, we will be gathered to the true Church, to the latter-day Zion, and to the bosom of the Lord (see also D&C 10:65; 43:24).

In the meridian day, after the great destructions that followed the crucifixion, the Lord cried out to the Nephites and Lamanites: "O ye people of these great cities which have fallen, who are descendants of Jacob, yea, who are of the house of Israel, how oft have I gathered you as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and have nourished you. And again, how oft would I have gathered you as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, yea, O ye people of the house of Israel, who have fallen; yea, O ye people of the house of Israel, ye that dwell at Jerusalem, as ye that have fallen; yea, how oft would I have gathered you as a hen gathereth her chickens, and ye would not. O ye house of Israel whom I have spared, how oft will I gather you as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, if ye will repent and return unto me with full purpose of heart" (3 Ne. 10:4-6).

Notes and Commentary

D&C 29:2 as a hen gathereth her chickens. This figure of speech appears often in the scriptures, suggesting the Lord's tenderness and continuing, watchful love for his children (Matt. 23:37; D&C 10:65; 43:24).

under her wings. This image describes a place of safety and peace (Ps. 17:8). It is a place of nourishment (3 Ne. 10:4), a place where we can feel the loving kindness of the Lord (Ps. 36:7). It is a place of intimacy, where one is brought close to the Lord's heart (Ps. 17:8; 91:4).

hearken to my voice and humble themselves. This passage defines the elect, the souls who will be gathered to the bosom of Christ. We see essentially the same concept a few verses later: "Mine elect hear my voice and harden not their hearts" (D&C 29:7).

mighty prayer. One of the best examples of mighty prayer in the scriptures is found in the story of Enos: "My soul hungered; and I kneeled down before my Maker, and I cried unto him in mighty prayer and supplication for mine own soul; and all the day long did I cry unto him; yea, and when the night came I did still raise my voice high that it reached the heavens" (Enos 1:4; see also 2 Ne. 4:24; Alma 6:6; 8:10; 3 Ne. 27:1; Moro. 2:2; D&C 5:24). Mighty prayer seems to involve deep faith and a whole-souled, true-hearted pleading before God.

Those who call upon the Lord in this kind of prayer will be gathered to his bosom—under his wings.

The Gathering of Lehi's Descendants Is a Type of the Gathering ofÂ½ Israel

1 Ne. 15:12-18

12 Behold, I say unto you, that the house of Israel was compared unto an olive-tree, by the Spirit of the Lord which was in our father; and behold are we not broken off from the house of Israel, and are we not a branch of the house of Israel?

13 And now, the thing which our father meaneth concerning the grafting in of the natural branches through the fulness of the Gentiles, is, that in the latter days, when our seed shall have dwindled in unbelief, yea, for the space of many years, and many generations after the Messiah shall be manifested in body unto the children of men, then shall the fulness of the gospel of the Messiah come unto the Gentiles, and from the Gentiles unto the remnant of our seed—

14 And at that day shall the remnant of our seed know that they are of the house of Israel, and that they are the covenant people of the Lord; and then shall they know and come to the knowledge of their forefathers, and also to the knowledge of the gospel of their Redeemer, which was ministered unto their fathers by him; wherefore, they shall come to the knowledge of their Redeemer and the very points of his doctrine, that they may know how to come unto him and be saved.

15 And then at that day will they not rejoice and give praise unto their everlasting God, their rock and their salvation? Yea, at that day, will they not receive the strength and nourishment from the true vine? Yea, will they not come unto the true fold of God?

16 Behold, I say unto you, Yea; they shall be remembered again among the house of Israel; they shall be grafted in, being a natural branch of the olive-tree, into the true olive- tree.

17 And this is what our father meaneth; and he meaneth that it will not come to pass until after they are scattered by the Gentiles; and he meaneth that it shall come by way of the Gentiles, that the Lord may show his power unto the Gentiles, for the very cause that he shall be rejected of the Jews, or of the house of Israel.

18 Wherefore, our father hath not spoken of our seed alone, but also of all the house of Israel, pointing to the covenant which should be fulfilled in the latter days; which covenant the Lord made to our father Abraham, saying: In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed.

This scripture teaches a number of truths about the gathering of Israel:

As we learn in verse 18, the prophecies about the descendants of Lehi apply as well to "all the house of Israel." These promises to the descendants of Lehi and to the house of Israel both fulfill the "covenant the Lord made to our father Abraham."

Lehi compares the house of Israel to an olive tree. Over time, Israel "shall have dwindled in unbelief" for "many years." In the "latter days," which will occur "many generations" after the mortal ministry of Christ, the fulness of the gospel will be given to the Gentiles, who in turn will give it to the house of Israel.

These events will occur after Israel has been "scattered by the Gentiles."

"At that day" the descendants of Lehi will "know that they are of the house of Israel, and that they are the covenant people of the Lord." They will come to a knowledge of Jesus Christ and his gospel, and will come unto him and "receive the strength and nourishment from the true vine." Again, the Lehites are a type of all Israel in this passage.

Because of apostasy, Israel has been cut off from the tree that represented them. But when they repent and return to Christ, they will be restored to the tree, as a branch is reunited with its tree by the grafting process.

This prophecy tells us the Gentiles will be divine instruments in both the scattering and gathering of Israel. It tells us that the gathering by conversion will occur in the latter days, when the fulness of the gospel has been placed in the hands of the Gentiles. It tells us that even though apostasy has cut Israel off, faith and repentance will restore them to their place.

Notes and Commentary

1 Ne. 15:12 the house of Israel was compared unto an olive-tree. See Jacob 5.

1 Ne. 15:13 grafting in of the natural branches. The natural branches of Israel have been cut off and planted in various parts of the world. In time, they will be brought back, or gathered in, to the "true olive-tree" (v. 16), which seems to be a symbol for Christ himself. [^30]

fulness of the Gentiles. This appears to mean that the Gentiles receive the fulness of the gospel; it should not be confused with the "times of the Gentiles [being] fulfilled" (Luke 21:24; D&C 45:25, 28, 30). [^31] Elsewhere Nephi taught as he did here: "After the Gentiles had received the fulness of the Gospel, the natural branches of the olive- tree, or the remnants of the house of Israel, should be grafted in, or come to the knowledge of the true Messiah, their Lord and their Redeemer" (1 Ne. 10:14).

from the Gentiles unto the remnant of our seed. The Gentiles will receive the restored gospel first; they then will take it to the surviving descendants of Lehi, the Lamanites (as well as the Nephites who had intermingled with them).

1 Ne. 15:14 they are of the house of Israel/the covenant people of the Lord. Through centuries of apostasy, the descendants of Lehi lost the understanding that they are members of the house of Israel, descendants of Abraham of old, and heirs of Abraham's covenant. When the gospel is taken to them, they are renewed in their understanding of who they are, of their heritage and their destiny.

they may know how to come unto him and be saved. We do not come to Christ and receive the blessings of his atonement merely by knowing of him and having a desire to be saved. There is a proper process that must be followed, involving priesthood authority, ordinances, covenants, service in the Lord's kingdom, and a change of one's heart and nature. Nephi prophesies that the descendants of Lehi will come to this saving knowledge when the Gentiles bring it to them "in the latter days" (v. 13).

1 Ne. 15:15 will they not rejoice and give praise? This response is typical among those who truly come to a knowledge of Jesus Christ, their redeemer, and his true gospel on the earth (Mosiah 4:3; 5:4). The descendants of Lehi will respond in this way when they learn of Christ and learn "how to come unto him and be saved."

the strength and nourishment from the true vine. Spiritual strength and nourishment come from Jesus Christ, who is the true vine (John 15:1). The descendants of Lehi will receive this spiritual strength and nourishment when they are gathered.

come unto the true fold of God. The true fold is The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which keeps us safely in Christ (John 10:7-16; Alma 5:38-39, 60). Nephi prophesies that in the latter days the descendants of Lehi will come to the true vine and the true fold of God.

1 Ne. 15:16 they shall be grafted in, being a natural branch. The descendants of Lehi are a natural branch of the true olive tree, meaning they are lineal descendants of Abraham, heirs according to the flesh. But through the wickedness of the people, they lost their way and became separated from the rest of the house of Israel. By returning to the fold through faith and repentance, they are brought back to the tree and are grafted in by participating in ordinances and receiving covenants.

1 Ne. 15:18 the covenant which should be fulfilled in the latter days. This is the same covenant the Lord made with Abraham, that "in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed." The blessing will come as the gospel, with its covenants and power, goes forth from Abraham's descendants to the entire world.

The Lamanites Shall Blossom As the Rose

D&C 49:24

24 But before the great day of the Lord shall come, Jacob shall flourish in the wilderness, and the Lamanites shall blossom as the rose.

Nephi prophesied that in the last days the Lamanites would accept the gospel and become a "pure and a delightsome people" (2 Ne. 30:6), perhaps meaning that through the power of the Atonement they would be changed in their very natures (Mosiah 3:19). In the Doctrine and Covenants we are told that the Lamanites will "come to the knowledge of their fathers, and that they might know the promises of the Lord, and that they may believe the gospel and rely upon the merits of Jesus Christ, and be glorified through faith in his name, and that through their repentance they might be saved" (D&C 3:20).

These prophecies seem to combine in the Lord's statement that the Lamanites would "blossom as the rose," that they will be converted to the gospel, receive the blessings of the Atonement, and thereby become "pure" and "delightsome" before the Lord. These things must occur before the Lord comes. An eye to the incredible missionary success in Mexico and Central and South America suggests that this prophecy is even now being fulfilled.

Elder Marion G. Romney offered an enlightening commentary: "It is concerning the covenants the Lord made with their fathers which run in favor of the Lamanites and culminate in their blossoming as the rose that I wish to speak. . . .

"Other covenants which the Lord made with their fathers were to the effect that the remnant would accept the gospel, regain their inheritance and former blessings and take part in the latter-day redemption of Zion. . . .

" . . . The Lord is pouring out his spirit upon the Lamanites. They are accepting the record of their fathers and are coming to a knowledge of the 'things' referred to by Jesus. . . . And they will continue to accept it in ever-increasing numbers. As they receive and live it, they are certain to regain their favored status in the house of Israel and participate in the redemption of Zion and the building of the New Jerusalem here in America. Jacob, even now, flourishes in the wilderness, and shortly the 'Lamanites shall blossom as the rose,' heralding 'the great day of the Lord.'" [^32]

Notes and Commentary

D&C 49:24 the great day of the Lord. This expression refers to the day of the Lord's second coming (D&C 128:24; 133:10).

Jacob shall flourish in the wilderness. This statement is parallel to "the Lamanites shall blossom as the rose" (D&C 49:24). Just as the Lamanites will blossom spiritually, so will Jacob flourish spiritually. Jacob refers to the descendants of Jacob of old, or Israel. To flourish is to thrive, to prosper. The wilderness may be the actual wilderness, or desert, of Israel or Utah or Mexico; more important, the thriving will be in the spiritual wilderness of the world, where the people of Jacob will return to the covenant once made with their father Abraham (see also Ps. 72:7; D&C 35:24).

The Book of Mormon Is a Sign of the Promised Blessings

3 Ne. 21:1-7

1 And verily I say unto you, I give unto you a sign, that ye may know the time when these things shall be about to take place—that I shall gather in, from their long dispersion, my people, O house of Israel, and shall establish again among them my Zion;

2 And behold, this is the thing which I will give unto you for a sign—for verily I say unto you that when these things which I declare unto you, and which I shall declare unto you hereafter of myself, and by the power of the Holy Ghost which shall be given unto you of the Father, shall be made known unto the Gentiles that they may know concerning this people who are a remnant of the house of Jacob, and concerning this my people who shall be scattered by them;

3 Verily, verily, I say unto you, when these things shall be made known unto them of the Father, and shall come forth of the Father, from them unto you;

4 For it is wisdom in the Father that they should be established in this land, and be set up as a free people by the power of the Father, that these things might come forth from them unto a remnant of your seed, that the covenant of the Father may be fulfilled which he hath covenanted with his people, O house of Israel;

5 Therefore, when these works and the works which shall be wrought among you hereafter shall come forth from the Gentiles, unto your seed which shall dwindle in unbelief because of iniquity;

6 For thus it behooveth the Father that it should come forth from the Gentiles, that he may show forth his power unto the Gentiles, for this cause that the Gentiles, if they will not harden their hearts, that they may repent and come unto me and be baptized in my name and know of the true points of my doctrine, that they may be numbered among my people, O house of Israel;

7 And when these things come to pass that thy seed shall begin to know these things—it shall be a sign unto them, that they may know that the work of the Father hath already commenced unto the fulfilling of the covenant which he hath made unto the people who are of the house of Israel.

The coming forth of the Book of Mormon is a sign the Lord has given us to show that the prophecies of the gathering are in the process of being fulfilled. Specifically, this passage tells us that the knowledge of the Lord's visit to the descendants of Lehi will come forth to the Gentiles, and at the same time the Gentiles will come to know "concerning this people" (v. 2), meaning the descendants of Lehi. In turn, Lehi's descendants themselves will receive the Book of Mormon from the Gentiles (vv. 3, 5). This blessing will be given to the people of Lehi to fulfill the covenant the Lord has made with them (v. 4). Therefore, when the descendants of Lehi begin to know about the Book of Mormon and the true gospel, they can receive it as a sign that the Lord has already begun to fulfill his covenant with Israel that he would remember them, that he would gather them, and that he would send his true gospel unto them (v. 7).

Not only is the Book of Mormon a sign that the events preliminary to the gathering have "already commenced" but it is also an essential instrument of the gathering. President Ezra Taft Benson asked, "What is the instrument that God has designed for this gathering?" and then gave this answer: "It is the same instrument that is designed to convince the world that Jesus is the Christ, that Joseph Smith is His prophet, and that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter- day Saints is true. It is that scripture which is the keystone of our religion.

"It is that most correct book which, if men will abide by its precepts, will get them closer to God than any other book. It is the Book of Mormon." [^33]

The Calling of the 144,000

Rev. 14:1-5

1 And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his Father's name written in their foreheads.

2 And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harps:

3 And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four beasts, and the elders: and no man could learn that song but the hundred and forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth.

4 These are they which were not defiled with women; for they are virgins. These are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth. These were redeemed from among men, being the firstfruits unto God and to the Lamb.

5 And in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without fault before the throne of God.

Concerning this scripture, Joseph Smith wrote: "Q. What are we to understand by sealing the one hundred and forty-four thousand, out of all the tribes of Israel—twelve thousand out of every tribe?

"A. We are to understand that those who are sealed are high priests, ordained unto the holy order of God, to administer the everlasting gospel; for they are they who are ordained out of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, by the angels to whom is given power over the nations of the earth, to bring as many as will come to the church of the Firstborn" (D&C 77:11). The purpose and mission of the 144,000, then, is focused on the gathering: they are called "to administer the everlasting gospel," and their specific assignment is "to bring as many as will come to the church of the Firstborn." They are missionaries and ministers of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Joseph Smith taught that the sealing mentioned here "signifies sealing the blessing upon their heads, meaning the everlasting covenant, thereby making their calling and election sure." [^34] God figuratively marks and seals the righteous with his seal, making them his and placing them under his protection.

In the last days, those who possess God's seal on their foreheads will be protected from at least some of the judgments that come upon the earth (Rev. 7:1-3). The Prophet explained: "Having this promise [of one's calling and election made sure] sealed unto them, it was an anchor to the soul, sure and steadfast. Though the thunders might roll and lightnings flash, and earthquakes bellow, and war gather thick around, yet this hope and knowledge would support the soul in every hour of trial, trouble and tribulation." [^35]

The calling of the 144,000, which is noted in Rev. 7:4-8, will occur during our dispensation. We read in Doctrine and Covenants 77: "Q. What time are the things spoken of in this chapter [ Rev. 7] to be accomplished?

"A. They are to be accomplished in the sixth thousand years, or the opening of the sixth seal" (v. 10). On 4 February 1844, Joseph Smith commented regarding the 144,000: "I attended prayer-meeting with the quorum in the assembly room, and made some remarks respecting the hundred and forty-four thousand mentioned by John the Revelator, showing that the selection of persons to form that number had already commenced." [^36] He explained: "There will be 144,000 saviors on Mount Zion, and with them an innumerable host that no man can number. Oh! I beseech you to go forward, go forward and make your calling and your election sure." [^37] Some commentators believe that the number 144,000 is not to be taken literally but that it signifies all the redeemed of the Lord. [^38]

Notes and Commentary

Rev. 14:1 a Lamb. The Lamb is Jesus Christ ( Rev. 5:5-6).

mount Sion. This place appears to be the Mount Zion called New Jerusalem (D&C 84:2; 133:18, 56), which will be centered in Jackson County, Missouri. Mount Zion also sometimes refers to the temple; [^39] thus, the Lord likely is standing on the temple mount or in the temple itself.

having his Father's name written in their foreheads. In Rev. 13:16-17, we see that the people of the world had the name of the beast written on their foreheads. Here the righteous have the Father's name written on their foreheads. We are marked by the name of him to whom we give our true loyalty. The Father's name is written on the righteous in a figurative rather than a literal way.

There is another way in which we may receive the name of the Father and the Son in our foreheads. A name stands for the person it belongs to. When Alma asked, "Can ye look up to God at that day [the day of judgment] . . . having the image of God engraven upon your countenances?" (Alma 5:19), he may have been referring to the same idea John is speaking of here.

Rev. 14:2 a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, andÂ½ . . . great thunder. The voice may be that of the Lord (Rev. 1:15; D&C 110:3) or of the multitude of angels in heaven (Rev. 19:6). It is likely to be the latter, for the angels join in the song in the next verse. The sound is so loud it is like the roar of the ocean or of a rushing river; it is like the clapping of mighty thunder (see also Ezek. 1:24; 43:2).

the voice of harpers harping with their harps. John also hears the sound of harps accompanying the multitude in the song. Harps appear to be the musical instrument most often used by those in God's heavenly kingdom (see also Rev. 5:8; 15:2). The harps symbolize the praise and joy in the hearts of those in this scene.

Rev. 14:3 they sung as it were a new song. The harpers are singing a song before the throne of God. The song and its setting are likely those described in D&C 84:96-102.

before the throne, and before the four beasts, and the elders. John reminds us that he is seeing a vision of the heavenly temple with God's throne (Rev. 4:2), before which are twenty-four exalted elders and four beasts (Rev. 4:4, 6-11). The singers proclaim their song in the heavenly temple.

no man could learn that song but the hundred and forty and four thousand. The song is sung by heavenly beings before the throne of God. But there are also some on earth who can learn the song: the 144,000 who stand on Mount Zion with Christ. Why are these the only ones who can learn the song? Perhaps it can be known only by revelation. Or perhaps such knowledge requires a certain relationship with God and his Spirit.

Rev. 14:4 they are virgins. The descriptions in Rev. 14:4-5 may apply to all who are exalted, although in this case they refer particularly to the 144,000. They are virgins in having refrained from any unlawful sexual intercourse, and they are also virgins in having remained true to Christ as their Bridegroom (Rev. 19:7; 21:9; see also Jer. 2:1-4)—in other words, having refrained from spiritual adul-Â½ tery (Ezek. 16; Hosea 1-3). The Lord has often referred to his true people as a virgin (2 Kgs. 19:21; Jer. 18:13; Lam. 2:13; Amos 5:2; 2 Cor. 11:2). The virgins in John's revelation are contrasted with the wicked who worship the beast in Rev. 13 and who join in consort with the "mother of harlots" that is Babylon (Rev. 17:5).

follow the Lamb. Those who are chosen of Christ are those who follow him in all circumstances. They have the attitude expressed in Luke, "Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest" (Luke 9:57).

redeemed. Christ, the Redeemer, has paid the price for the sins of the 144,000: they are redeemed from the demands of justice and the bonds of the devil (Mosiah 15:9; Alma 12:32-34; 34:15).

the firstfruits unto God. Under the law of Moses, the firstfruits of the harvest were offered to God in sacrifice (Ex. 34:22, 26). Because Jesus is the firstfruits of all the dead, being the first to be resurrected (1 Cor. 15:20), so are these 144,000 "the first fruits of the harvest of salvation" [^40] (see also Jer. 2:2-3).

Rev. 14:5 in their mouth was found no guile. The 144,000 speak no deceit, being honest and true like their Master (Isa. 53:9). This characteristic is in contrast to the wicked, who include the liars (Rev. 21:8).

without fault before the throne of God. A proper sacrifice had to be without blemish (Lev. 1:3, 10; 22:21). These 144,000 are like the Lamb, "without blemish and without spot" (1 Pet. 1:19; Heb. 9:14). This purity and perfection, of course, are made possible through the sacrifice of that Lamb (Heb. 13:20-21; Moro. 10:33).

The Saints Are Commanded to Flee Babylon

D&C 133:1-2, 4-5, 7

1 Hearken, O ye people of my church, saith the Lord your God, and hear the word of the Lord concerning you—

2 The Lord who shall . . . come down upon the world with a curse to judgment; yea, upon all the nations that forget God, and upon all the ungodly among you. . . .

4 Wherefore, prepare ye, prepare ye, O my people; sanctify yourselves; gather ye together, O ye people of my church, upon the land of Zion, all you that have not been commanded to tarry.

5 Go ye out from Babylon. Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord. . . .

7 Yea, verily I say unto you again, the time has come when the voice of the Lord is unto you: Go ye out of Babylon; gather ye out from among the nations, from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other. [^41]

This scripture is directed to members of the Church (D&C 133:1, 4). Lord is coming with judgments upon the earth. The Saints must therefore be prepared: they must sanctify themselves, and for safety, they must gather to Zion. For people to gather to Zion, the place of righteousness, they must of necessity leave Babylon, or wickedness. This instruction to "go ye out from Babylon" is so important that the Lord repeats it twice (D&C 133:5, The 7; see also Isa. 48:10; Jer. 51:6). In addition, the Church is to send missionaries to the nations of the world, giving them similar counsel: go to Zion, prepare yourselves to meet the coming Lord, and leave Babylon, which is explicitly defined as "wickedness" (D&C 133:8-14).

How does one flee Babylon? Spiritually, it is done by turning from sin and turning to Christ, repenting, receiving sacred ordinances, and living the life of a Saint. It is done by gathering to the wards and stakes of Zion and joining with the Saints in a true unity of heart and mind. [^42]

Notes and Commentary

D&C 133:2 come down . . . with a curse to judgment. When the Lord comes again, he will bring judgment upon the wicked. To put it another way, the wicked have brought a curse upon them-Â½ selves through their sins, which curse the Lord will fulfill with his judgments when he returns in glory. (For the curses pronounced on those who choose not to obey the Lord, see Deut. 28:15-68.)

upon all the nations that forget God, and upon all the ungodly among you. The Lord here names two groups that will be subject to his judgments: the ungodly nations and the ungodly individuals among the Saints.

D&C 133:4 sanctify yourselves. Make yourselves pure and clean and holy, set apart for the Lord.

the land of Zion. See the commentary on Zion and the New Jerusalem, page 152.

all you that have not been commanded to tarry. In the days of Joseph Smith, the Saints were generally commanded to hasten to the central gathering place of the Church, unless they were specifically told to do otherwise (exceptions may have been those called to serve in missions or to assist the Saints in other ways). This commandment was modified in 1911, when the First Presidency under Joseph F. Smith wrote, "The establishment of the latter-day Zion on the American continent occasions the gathering of the Saints from all nations. This is not compulsory, and particularly under present conditions, is not urged, because it is desirable that our people shall remain in their native lands and form congregations of a permanent character to aid in the work of proselyting." [^43]

D&C 133:5 Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord. This passage refers to the sacred vessels of the temple (Ezra 1:7-11), which could be borne only by those who held the priesthood. Here the vessels probably represent the ordinances of the priesthood. Thus the Lord is commanding priesthood holders to be clean, that they may be worthy to officiate in their office (Isa. 52:11; D&C 38:42).

D&C 133:7 from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other. This symbolic language indicates that the righteous are to gather from all parts of the world as they flee Babylon.

The Saints Will Gather at the Temples

Isa. 2:2-3

2 And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it.

3 And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

To understand this prophecy, we must first understand the expression "the mountain of the Lord's house." Among the people of God, a mountain can be a temple. As Elder Joseph Fielding Smith explained, "No man can get the fullness of the priesthood outside of the temple of the Lord. There was a time when that could be done, for the Lord could give these things on the mountain tops—no doubt that is where Moses got it, that is no doubt where Elijah got it—and the Lord said that in the days of poverty, when there was no house prepared in which to receive these things, that they can be received on the mountain tops. But now we have got temples, and you cannot get these blessings on the mountain tops, you will have to go into the house of the Lord, and you cannot get the fullness of the priesthood unless you go there." [^44] Isaiah recorded, "Them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer: their burnt offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar" (Isa. 56:7; see also Ezek. 20:40).

The holy mountain of the Lord is the house of the Lord, the Lord's temple. In the last days, the Lord said he would establish his temple in the top of the mountains. Members of the Church from all nations would be drawn to that temple, saying, "Let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths" (Isa. 2:3).

We have seen the partial fulfillment of this prophecy. In the temple we do indeed learn the ways of the Lord, and we do make promises to walk in his paths. It appears, however, that the prophecy will not be completely fulfilled until a temple of the Lord is built in Jerusalem (see Isa. 2:1; see also the commentary on Isa. 2:1-3,Â½ page 125).

The building of temples is directly related to the gathering of Israel. As noted earlier, Joseph Smith wrote, "The object of gathering the Jews, or the people of God in any age of the world . . . was to build unto the Lord a house whereby He could reveal unto His people the ordinances of His house and the glories of His kingdom, and teach the people the way of salvation." [^45]

Notes and Commentary

Isa. 2:2 mountain of the Lord's house. This term represents the temple of God (Isa. 56:7; Ex. 15:17). "The whole of America is Zion itself from north to south, and is described by the Prophets, who declare that it is the Zion where the mountain of the Lord should be, and that it should be in the center of the land." [^46] Jerusalem is also "Zion." The principal features of both Zions will be the temple that will be established in each, and the Lord who will sit as king in the throne rooms of the temples (D&C 133:12-13).

mountains/hills. Isa. 2:2 is a prophecy with multiple applications; it refers to the Salt Lake Temple, nestled in the hills and mountains: to the future temple of Jerusalem, established in the mountains of Judea; and to other temples. Joseph Smith learned through revelation that "Zion shall flourish upon the hills and rejoice upon the mountains, and shall be assembled together unto the place which I [God] have appointed" (D&C 49:25).

shall be exalted. Spiritually, the temple represents the highest point on earth, which symbolically connects heaven and earth; it is where God's word is revealed to his prophet.

all nations shall flow. Joseph Smith taught that "there should be a place where all nations shall come up from time to time to receive their endowments." [^47] All nations (which means some people from all nations) shall come to obey the God of all nations and to build the kingdom of God. For something to "flow," like a river, up a mountain, a power greater than gravity must be at work; this power is the power of God.

Isa. 2:3 house. The temple is the Lord's house. As with a family home, the temple is a home where individuals can enjoy the family of God, can delight in peace and quiet away from the world's troubles and concerns, and can offer up their personal prayers to Heavenly Father.

he will teach us of his ways. The Lord will teach us through revelation given through his prophets and apostles, through the scriptures, and by way of personal revelation (Isa. 54:13). Specifically, we will learn of God's ways in his temple.

walk in his paths. The "path of the just" (Prov. 4:18) or the "strait and narrow path" (2 Ne. 31:18) leads first through the gates of baptism and then past the portals of the Lord's holy temple. Before being able to walk in God's paths, though, we must first let the Lord teach us his laws and his ways. Jesus Christ, of course, is the path or the way in which we must walk (John 14:6).

out of Zion/from Jerusalem. These will be the two religious "capitals for the kingdom of God during the millennium." [^48] One will be in Independence, Missouri (D&C 57:3; 84:2) the other will be in old Jerusalem (Ether 13:2-11). Both centers will be called Zion and Jerusalem, and both will possess great temples.

shall go forth the law. President Harold B. Lee wrote: "I have often wondered what the expression meant, that out of Zion shall go forth the law. Years ago I went with the brethren to the Idaho Falls Temple, and I heard in that inspired prayer of the First Presidency a definition of the meaning of that term 'out of Zion shall go forth the law.' Note what they said: 'We thank thee that thou hast revealed to us that those who gave us our constitutional form of government were men wise in thy sight and that thou didst raise them up for the very purpose of putting forth that sacred document [as revealed in Doctrine and Covenants section 101]. . . .

"'We pray that kings and rulers and the peoples of all nations under heaven may be persuaded of the blessings enjoyed by the people of this land by reason of their freedom and under thy guidance and be constrained to adopt similar governmental systems, thus to fulfill the ancient prophecy of Isaiah and Micah that " . . . out of Zion shall go forth the law and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." ' (Improvement Era, October 1945, p. 564.)" [^49]

This prophecy could also mean that the laws of the millennial kingdom will originate in the millennial Zion.

word of the Lord. Joseph Smith taught the manner in which the Lord's word would proceed forth: "Moses received the word of the Lord from God Himself; he was the mouth of God to Aaron, and Aaron taught the people, in both civil and ecclesiastical affairs; . . . so will it be when the purposes of God shall be accomplished: when 'the Lord shall be King over the whole earth' and 'Jerusalem His throne.' 'The law shall go forth from Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.'" [^50]

The Times of the Gentiles Shall Be Fulfilled

D&C 45:25, 28-30

25 [The Jews] shall be gathered again; but they shall remain until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. . . .

28 And when the times of the Gentiles is come in, a light shall break forth among them that sit in darkness, and it shall be the fulness of my gospel;

29 But they receive it not; for they perceive not the light, and they turn their hearts from me because of the precepts of men.

30 And in that generation shall the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

The "times of the Gentiles" is the time period during which the Gentiles will have an opportunity to hear the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ. The gospel will be as a light that suddenly shines on those who are in darkness, but instead of receiving the light with rejoicing, many will not even perceive its shining. They will cling to the understandings they already had ("the precepts of men") and thus will turn their hearts from God. In the generation that the Gentiles turn from God, their opportunity will be ended, for "the times of the Gentiles [will] be fulfilled." After the Gentiles have had a chance to hear the gospel, the gathering of the Jews will commence. When Moroni visited Joseph Smith, he "stated that the fulness of the Gentiles was soon to come in" (JS-H 1:41), meaning, the times of the Gentiles was about to begin.

Jesus said that the Jews would "fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive into all nations: and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled" (Luke 21:24). This prophecy seems to coincide with what John saw in his vision. An angel declared to him that the Gentiles would tread the holy city "under foot forty and two months" (Rev. 11:2). Probably during that same period, two prophets will prophesy in great power, "clothed in sackcloth" (Rev. 11:3), a symbol of humility. After these witnesses have completed their mission, they will be killed by their enemies (Rev. 11:7), the Lord will begin his winding-up scenes (Rev. 11:7-18), and the times of the Gentiles will be completed.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "This present era, which is named, the times of the Gentiles, shall come to an end before our Lord returns in power and glory. Then, with his return, the times of the Jews shall begin; that is the era will commence in which the Jews shall accept the gospel and be blessed spiritually in an abundant way.

"Within the meaning of these terms, all men are either Jews or Gentiles. The Jews are that portion of the house of Israel who inhabited Jerusalem and who were the remnant of the kingdom of Judah. (2 Ne. 30:4; 33:8.) All others were Gentiles, including the portion of Israel scattered among the Gentiles proper." [^51]

Recognizing the times of the Gentiles gives us a clue as to where we are in the sequence of time. Elder Wilford Woodruff said: "No man knows the day or the hour when Christ will come, yet the generation has been pointed out by Jesus himself. . . . The Savior, when speaking to his disciples of his second coming and the establishment of his kingdom on the earth, said the Jews should be scattered and trodden under foot until the times of the Gentiles were fulfilled. But, said he, when you see light breaking forth among the Gentiles, referring to the preaching of his Gospel amongst them; when you see salvation offered to the Gentiles, and the Jews—the seed of Israel—passed by, the last first and the first last; when you see this you may know that the time of my second coming is at hand as surely as you know that summer is nigh when the fig tree puts forth its leaves; and when these things commence that generation shall not pass away until all are fulfilled. We are living in the dispensation and generation to which Jesus referred." [^52]

Notes and Commentary

D&C 45:25 they shall remain. The Jews will remain in their scattered condition until the times of the Gentiles is fulfilled, though there appears to be a transition period during which the Jews begin to return to their homeland.

D&C 45:28 them that sit in darkness. These are the people of the world in general, who are subject to the general state of apostasy on the earth.

D&C 45:29 they perceive not the light. How can people sitting in darkness not perceive it when a light is turned on? The Lord gives us the key elsewhere, telling us that their eyes are blind (Isa. 42:6-7). Such blindness is caused through the agency of man, which chooses to regard "the precepts of men" more than the "fulness of [the] gospel" sent by the Lord.

D&C 45:30 in that generation. "There have been various interpretations of the meaning of a generation. It is held by some that a generation is one hundred years; by others that it is one hundred and twenty years; by others that a generation as expressed in this and other scriptures has reference to a period of time which is indefinite. The Savior said: 'An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign.' This did not have reference to a period of years, but to a period of wickedness. A generation may mean the time of this present dispensation." [^53]

The Gathering of the Jews to Palestine

Zech. 2:1-5, 12

1 I lifted up mine eyes again, and looked, and behold a man with a measuring line in his hand.

2 Then said I, Whither goest thou? And he said unto me, To measure Jerusalem, to see what is the breadth thereof, and what is the length thereof.

3 And, behold, the angel that talked with me went forth, and another angel went out to meet him,

4 And said unto him, Run, speak to this young man, saying, Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without walls for the multitude of men and cattle therein:

5 For I, saith the Lord, will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in the midst of her. . . .

12 And the Lord shall inherit Judah his portion in the holy land, and shall choose Jerusalem again.

The return of the Jews is one of the best known aspects of the gathering, and it clearly will occur, at least to a degree, before the coming of Christ. As Zechariah learned, Jerusalem, which once was utterly laid waste, will be rebuilt and inhabited by a "multitude." The Lord also will be there (that seems to be millennial), providing protection and blessing the people with his glory.

More important than this gathering, however, is the spiritual gathering of the Jews that precedes it. As Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "Judah will gather to old Jerusalem in due course; of this, there is no doubt. But this gathering will consist of accepting Christ, joining the Church, and receiving anew the Abrahamic covenant as it is administered in holy places. The present assembling of people of Jewish ancestry into the Palestinian nation of Israel is not the scriptural gathering of Israel or of Judah. It may be prelude thereto, and some of the people so assembled may in due course be gathered into the true church and kingdom of God on earth, and they may then assist in building the temple that is destined to grace Jerusalem's soil. But a political gathering is not a spiritual gathering, and the Lord's kingdom is not of this world." [^54]

Notes and Commentary

Zech. 2:4 towns without walls. This expression suggests that the inhabitants of Jerusalem will be so numerous that the walls of the city cannot contain them. It also indicates that the people there will be safe from enemies; they therefore will not need to have walls around their city to protect them.

Zech. 2:5 a wall of fire round about. Fire is often an indication of the presence of the Lord, as it is here. (See, for example, Ex. 3:2; 13:21; 19:18; 24:17.)

The Restoration of the Ten Tribes

D&C 133:26-34

26 And they who are in the north countries shall come in remembrance before the Lord; and their prophets shall hear his voice, and shall no longer stay themselves; and they shall smite the rocks, and the ice shall flow down at their presence.

27 And an highway shall be cast up in the midst of the great deep.

28 Their enemies shall become a prey unto them,

29 And in the barren deserts there shall come forth pools of living water; and the parched ground shall no longer be a thirsty land.

30 And they shall bring forth their rich treasures unto the children of Ephraim, my servants.

31 And the boundaries of the everlasting hills shall tremble at their presence.

32 And there shall they fall down and be crowned with glory, even in Zion, by the hands of the servants of the Lord, even the children of Ephraim.

33 And they shall be filled with songs of everlasting joy.

34 Behold, this is the blessing of the everlasting God upon the tribes of Israel, and the richer blessing upon the head of Ephraim and his fellows. [^55]

This passage gives an impressive description of the miraculous return of the lost ten tribes of Israel. Just as Israel was led from Egypt by great miracles (Ex. 7-14), so will the ten tribes return through miracles: prophets will smite the rocks with power, ice will flow down as they pass through, a highway will emerge from the ocean, the enemies of Israel will fall victim to them, deserts will flourish with water, and the hills will tremble at their presence. Such a display of power is also reminiscent of that exercised by Enoch: he successfully led his people against their enemies; when he spake the earth trembled; and rivers were turned out of their courses (Moses 7:13).

The miracles that brought the children of Israel forth from Egypt were literal, but they were also symbolic in that they represented the great power of God over the Egyptians and their pharaoh-gods. Will the latter-day miracles that bring the ten tribes from their lost condition be literal or symbolic? Whatever the answer may be, we know that those with eyes to see will greatly marvel at the wonderful work the Lord has done in the return of the ten tribes (Jer. 16:14-15).

In the return of the ten tribes, those with priesthood authority ("their prophets") will receive revelation ("hear his voice") commanding the people to go forth, and they will do so in power ("ice flow down"). A highway of righteousness (perhaps this is the strait and narrow path) [^56] will be established on which the lost tribes may return. Those who might hinder them (or the servants of unrighteousness) will instead become their prey (the scriptures do not explain how this will occur). Hearts and souls that once were symbolically as barren as deserts will now be full of the knowledge and testimony of Jesus Christ, turned to him who is the living water. Where once there was drought ("parched ground"), there now will be abundance. In their return, the ten tribes will bring to Ephraim (the Church) "their rich treasures," perhaps referring to their scriptures, which likely includes a record of the visit of Christ to the ten tribes (2 Ne. 29:13; 3 Ne. 17:4), their genealogies, their righteous families—or all of these. They will be crowned with glory, perhaps through temple blessings, and will rejoice with singing.

Where are the ten tribes? The scriptures tell us that the ten tribes are in the lands of the north, the south, the west, "the ends of the earth," "all countries whither I had driven them," "the coasts of the earth," "all nations," "spread . . . abroad as the four winds of the heaven," "scattered . . . with a whirlwind among all the nations whom they knew not," "far countries," and "the four quarters of the earth" (Isa. 43:6; 49:12; Jer. 3:12, 18; 16:15; 23:8; 31:8; Amos 9:9; Zech. 2:6; 7:14; 10:9; Ether 13:11; D&C 110:11; see also 1 Ne. 22:3-5; D&C 77:11; 109:67). In other words, the ten tribes have been dispersed among nations throughout the world.

Over the years, a number of theories have been presented about who and where the ten tribes are, but far more important than any such ideas is the truth that the Lord will keep his promise to bring them to the gospel covenant and to unity and fellowship with the rest of covenant Israel in the last days.

Are the ten tribes all in one group? It has traditionally been thought by many in the Church that the ten tribes continued as one discrete and independent group of people from the time they were deported by Assyria until today, some twenty-seven hundred years later. They point to D&C 133:26-34 to suggest that the ten tribes are together, having their own "prophets" (v. 26) and seeming to return as a group. But to others these verses in D&C 133 seem metaphorical rather than literal ("highway shall be cast up in the midst of the great deep," "pools of living water," "everlasting hills shall tremble at their presence," "crowned with glory," and so forth). It may therefore be appropriate to understand at least parts of this passage symbolically. Further, it is an important principle of scriptural interpretation that scripture must always be read in the light of other scripture.

The combined witnesses of many prophets in the scriptures clearly indicate that the ten tribes were dispersed to the four corners of the earth. More important than physical location, however, is spiritual placement. To be scattered is to be separated from Christ and the keys, power, and blessings of his gospel. To be gathered ultimately means to be gathered to Christ. When the ten tribes come unto Christ and his true Church, they will then be united as one group, regardless of their geographical location.

Who are the prophets of the ten tribes? The prophets of the ten tribes are men with divinely appointed stewardship over the people who also have the gift of the Spirit that enables them to lead by revelation. Because the Lord's house is a house of order, these leaders will not teach anything contrary to that which is being taught elsewhere in the Lord's kingdom, nor will they have ascendancy over the president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, who holds all the keys of the kingdom of God on the earth. Because there is only one at a time who holds all those keys (D&C 132:7), including the keys of the gathering (D&C 110:11), they will be subject to him. In fact, given the nature of the gathering, it seems very likely that the "prophets" of the ten tribes will either be one and the same as the prophets and apostles we sustain as leaders of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, or they will be called by those leaders and given their authority in the same way any area authority, stake president, or bishop receives his authority. [^57]

How will the ten tribes be gathered? Those who are dispersed among the nations will be found through missionary work, which is the primary means of the gathering of Israel in general, and thus they will be brought to the true fold of God. In time, many will also be gathered by migration, when the Lord so commands through his prophet, the president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

One of the primary instruments of their gathering, in addition to the testimony of missionaries, is the Book of Mormon. Mormon pointed out that he was writing to the Gentiles and the house of Israel: "Yea, behold, I write unto all the ends of the earth; yea, unto you, twelve tribes of Israel" (Morm. 3:17-18). It is the design of the Lord that they receive the Book of Mormon and, with its help, come unto Christ.

Where shall the ten tribes go in their return? Initially, the ten tribes will likely be gathered into the stakes and wards and branches of the Church around the world, which is the established pattern for the gathering in our generation. [^58] In time, many of them will migrate to the place where Ephraim dwells, which is a symbolic reference to the location of the headquarters of the Church (D&C 133:30-34). [^59] Eventually, many of them will be restored to the original lands of their inheritance, in the region of Palestine (Jer. 3:18; 16:15; 23:8).

When will the ten tribes return? Joseph Smith taught that the return of the ten tribes would occur after the earth had experienced great judgments: "Not many years shall pass away before the United States shall present such a scene of bloodshed as has not a parallel in the history of our nation; pestilence, hail, famine, and earthquake will sweep the wicked of this generation from off the face of the land, to open and prepare the way for the return of the lost tribes of Israel from the north country." [^60] Not only will these judgments help to cleanse the earth, but perhaps they will help to soften the hearts ofÂ½ the ten tribes, making them more open to receiving the word of the gospel.

This statement by Joseph Smith suggests that the return of the ten tribes is yet in the future. Yet we also know from revelation that a substantial part of this gathering will occur before the Lord returns. D&C 77 tells us that during the sixth seal of time, or "in the sixth thousand years" of the earth's "temporal existence," twelve thousand men from each tribe of Israel will be faithful high priests in the Church (vv. 10-11, 6).

The most important thing to know is that the ten tribes are in the hands of the Lord and that he will fully keep all his promises to them. [^61]

Notes and Commentary

D&C 133:26 they who are in the north countries. Those in the north countries are the lost tribes of Israel (Jer. 23:8; Ether 13:11), who were last seen traveling northward from the area of the Middle East. [^62] Of course, as we have already said, the lost tribes are not only in the north but scattered all over the earth.

come in remembrance before the Lord. The Lord will "remember" his covenant to restore Israel to the gospel and to the lands of their inheritance (3 Ne. 29:1-3; Morm. 5:20).

their prophets. See the commentary on prophets of the ten tribes, page 106.

shall no longer stay themselves. Guided by the Lord, the leaders of the ten tribes will no longer hold back but will help their people to come forth from their place or places of dispersal.

they shall smite the rocks/ice shall flow down. When Moses led the tribes of Israel from captivity in Egypt, he followed the instructions of the Lord to smite a rock to provide water for the people (Ex. 17:6). When the Lord's prophets lead the ten tribes of Israel from their long dispersal, they will likewise exercise God's power to "smite the rocks." Moses' action was both literal (providing water to thirsty people) and symbolic (showing that Jehovah, or Jesus Christ, was the source of living water). The meaning of the action of the prophets among the ten tribes is not clear.

D&C 133:27 an highway shall be cast up in the midst of the great deep. This highway may be a literal passageway through or across the water, as was the highway Moses created through the deep of the Red Sea when he led the tribes of Israel from Egypt (Ex. 14:26-30). Or it may refer to the "highway of holiness," the strait and narrow path that leads through the "great deep" of the trials and temptations of mortality to the tree of life (Isa. 11:16; 35:8; 40:3; 42:16; 49:11; 51:10; 57:14; 62:10; 1 Ne. 11:8).

D&C 133:28 Their enemies shall become a prey unto them. Those who once sought to conquer or injure the ten tribes will instead be subject to them. In other words, no enemy will be able to permanently hinder the progress of Israel as she returns to God and to those promises which the Lord has made to her.

D&C 133:29 in the barren deserts there shall come forth pools of living water. This prophecy may have literal fulfillment as the deserts of both Utah and Israel are renewed and revitalized by the refreshment of water. And in the change of the earth that shall accompany the millennial day, all the barren deserts of the earth will "be renewed and receive [their] paradisiacal glory" (A of F 10).

But the use of the term living water also tells us that this passage has a symbolic meaning (Jer. 2:13; John 4:10-14). When in the deserts of our lives we partake of the living water, which provides us with truth and hope beyond price, we never thirst again. That is the promise to each of the Lord's people in all ages, and it is given as a promise to the ten tribes in the last days.

D&C 133:30 they shall bring forth their rich treasures. The rich treasures of the ten tribes may be the money and goods they bring with them, prepared to consecrate all they own to the Church and kingdom of God, or they may be their genealogies and family histories, their scriptures, or their righteous posterity—or all of these together.

the children of Ephraim, my servants. The children of Ephraim who are also the servants of the Lord are the established Church in the latter day, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The ten tribes will submit themselves to the authority of "the children of Ephraim."

D&C 133:31 the boundaries of the everlasting hills shall tremble at their presence. The lost tribes shall come to the place where Ephraim is, to the headquarters of the Church, to the place where the everlasting hills are. That place seems to be the Rocky Mountains or perhaps America in general. [^63] The land will tremble when they come, perhaps metaphorically with joy or literally with an earthquake. Eventually, however, the ten tribes will return to the land of their inheritance, the land of Palestine; and perhaps the hills of Judea will tremble when they return.

D&C 133:32 crowned with glory. When the ten tribes return to the true gospel of Christ, they will be crowned with glory. This expression likely refers to the blessings of the temple endowment and sealing and ultimately to the blessings of celestial glory.

D&C 133:33 filled with songs of everlasting joy. When Israel returns to the covenant and the gospel, she will indeed be filled with great joy, as is any person who finds the riches of the gospel of Jesus Christ (Isa. 35:10; D&C 128:23).

D&C 133:34 the richer blessing upon the head of Ephraim and his fellows. What is the richer blessing that Ephraim shall receive? What can be a greater blessing than to receive the gospel and be crowned with glory? Perhaps it is to add to those blessings the great privilege of bringing others to Christ, of assisting the Savior in his work of bringing others to exaltation: "And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father! And now, if your joy will be great with one soul that you have brought unto me into the kingdom of my Father, how great will be your joy if you should bring many souls unto me!" (D&C 18:15-16). Thus there are levels of joy: the joy of receiving the gospel, the greater joy of bringing another soul unto Christ, and the still greater joy in bringing many souls unto him. Perhaps this highest level of joy constitutes the "richer blessing" that Ephraim will receive as he brings many others to the true Church and gospel in the last days.

The Gathering to Zion, the New Jerusalem

D&C 45:66-71

66 And it shall be called the New Jerusalem, a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God;

67 And the glory of the Lord shall be there, and the terror of the Lord also shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it, and it shall be called Zion.

68 And it shall come to pass among the wicked, that every man that will not take his sword against his neighbor must needs flee unto Zion for safety.

69 And there shall be gathered unto it out of every nation under heaven; and it shall be the only people that shall not be at war one with another.

70 And it shall be said among the wicked: Let us not go up to battle against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible; wherefore we cannot stand.

71 And it shall come to pass that the righteous shall be gathered out from among all nations, and shall come to Zion, singing with songs of everlasting joy.

The scriptures give us the following characteristics of the establishment of New Jerusalem, as well as of those who are privileged to enter and dwell there:

New Jerusalem will be "prepared" "when it shall be revealed unto you from on high" (D&C 42:9).

"The city New Jerusalem shall be built by the gathering of the saints" (D&C 84:4).

New Jerusalem will be built by the Gentiles who "repent and hearken unto my words, and harden not their hearts," by the Lamanites, and by "as many of the house of Israel as shall come" (3 Ne. 21:22-23).

New Jerusalem will be centered in the land of Missouri (D&C 57:1).

The Lord will cleanse the land of Zion of his enemies (D&C 105:15).

Those in New Jerusalem will be "my people and I will be your God" (D&C 42:9).

Those who dwell in New Jerusalem are "they whose garments are white through the blood of the Lamb" (Ether 13:10).

Those who come to New Jerusalem are those who will later come to a celestial glory (D&C 76:66).

Those who are gathered to the New Jerusalem are "mine elect" (D&C 29:7-8).

Those who "call on the name of the Lord" are those who will be delivered in "mount Zion and in Jerusalem" (Joel 2:32).

People will be gathered "one of a city, and two of a family" (Jer. 3:14).

The elect will be gathered as "righteousness and truth" sweeps the earth "as with a flood" (Moses 7:62).

Those among the Gentiles who will hearken are invited to "flee unto Zion" (D&C 133:12).

Those who gather to Zion will find refuge from the storms of judgment and trouble that come upon the earth (D&C 115:6).

The gathering to New Jerusalem will occur before the second coming of Christ (Moses 7:62).

The temple of God will be found in New Jerusalem (Moses 7:62).

Joseph Smith wrote of the gathering to Zion: "In speaking of the gathering, we mean to be understood as speaking of it according to scripture, the gathering of the elect of the Lord out of every nation on earth, and bringing them to the place of the Lord of Hosts, when the city of righteousness shall be built, and where the people shall be of one heart and one mind, when the Savior comes: yea, where the people shall walk with God like Enoch, and be free from sin. The word of the Lord is precious; and when we read that the veil spread over all nations will be destroyed, and the pure in heart see God, and reign with Him a thousand years on earth, we want all honest men to have a chance to gather and build up a city of righteousness, where even upon the bells of the horses shall be written 'Holiness to the Lord.'" [^64]

Prophets in this generation have explained that the gathering to the New Jerusalem remains in the future. For now, Saints are to gather to branches and wards and stakes in their own countries. President Spencer W. Kimball said: "In the early days of the Church we used to preach for the people to come to Utah as the gathering process, largely because that was the only place in the whole world where there was a temple. Now we have [many] temples, and . . . more that have been approved, scattered throughout the world. So it is no longer necessary that we bring the people all to Salt Lake City. Our missionaries preach baptism and confirmation. And then we come to you with conferences and to organize stakes. So we say again, stay in Korea. This is a beautiful land. In this land you can teach your children just as well as you could in Salt Lake City. Stay in Korea where you can teach the gospel to millions of people.

"And so the gathering is taking place. Korea is the gathering place for Koreans, Australia for Australians, Brazil for Brazilians, England for the English. And so we move forward toward the confirmation of this great program the Lord has established for us." [^65]

Israel Will Be Gathered to Their Lands of Inheritance

Ezek. 37:21-22, 25

21 . . . Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the heathen, whither they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own land:

22 And I will make them one nation in the land upon the mountains of Israel; and one king shall be king to them all: and they shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms any more at all. . . .

25 And they shall dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob my servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt; and they shall dwell therein, even they, and their children, and their children's children for ever: and my servant David shall be their prince for ever.

Before Israel was scattered among all nations, the children of Israel were divided into two kingdoms: the kingdom to the south comprised the tribe of Judah, most of Benjamin, and much of Levi; the northern kingdom held the remaining tribes. Eventually, of course, all the tribes were dispersed around the world. In the last days, perhaps during the Millennium, all of Israel will be restored to the lands God promised to their fathers (see also 2 Ne. 9:2; 3 Ne. 20:29; 29:1). They will no longer dwell in two nations but will live together in one united kingdom.

The land seems to be a symbol of the Abrahamic covenant; it also symbolizes spiritual blessings, temporal security, unity, the presence of God (with the temple), wealth, abundance, and a child's inheritance from its parent.

Notes and Commentary

Ezek. 37:21 gather them on every side. The New International Version gives a clearer reading: "gather them from all around."

bring them into their own land. When Israel returns, they will return to their own land, meaning the land from whence they were dispersed, the land of Israel. Verse 25 reemphasizes this truth: "They shall dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob my servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt." They and their posterity will receive that land as an inheritance forever.

Ezek. 37:22 one nation. As Israel was one nation under Moses, Joshua, and David, so will they be one under Christ.

one king shall be king to them all. The king, of course, is the King of kings, Jesus Christ (A of F 10).

Ezek. 37:25 my servant David shall be their prince for ever. The scriptures indicate that when the tribes of Israel are reunited as Ezekiel saw, their king will be like David of old, who reigned over a united Israel. Jeremiah prophesied that Israel would "serve the Lord their God, and David their king, whom I will raise up unto them"Â½ (Jer. 30:9; see also Ezek. 34:23-24; Hosea 3:5). This king is almost certainly Jesus Christ himself, of whom it was prophesied that God would give him "the throne of his father David: and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end" (Luke 1:32-33; see also Acts 2:30). [^66]

---
Notas:
[^1] The Jews return to the Holy Land. 2. A temple is built in Jerusalem. 3. All nations visit the temple of Jerusalem. 4. Water flows from the temple and heals the waters of the Dead Sea. 5. Voices of joy are heard in Jerusalem. 6. Two prophets work miracles and prophesy in Jerusalem. 7. The Messiah battles against the Jews' enemies and stands on the Mount of Olives. 8. Some ask Christ, "What are these wounds in thine hands?" 9. Judah and Jerusalem are redeemed. Conference Report, Apr. 1950, 72-75.
[^2] Ensign, Dec. 1976, 71. President Joseph Fielding Smith similarly called the gathering of the Jews "a miracle being performed before our eyes" which is "in fulfillment of the prophecies" (14). See also the statements of Wilford Woodruff (Journal of Discourses, 15:278-79), Heber J. Grant (285), George Albert Smith (2), and Mark E. Petersen (16).
[^3] Conference Report, Oct. 1920, 34.
[^4] Millennial Messiah, 225, 229.
[^5] "Epistle of Elder Woodruff," 244.
[^6] See Encyclopaedia Britannica, s. v. "Peking."
[^7] Latter-day prophets have applied this prophecy to the Salt Lake Temple. Elder Bruce R. McConkie applied the prophecy to the temple in Jerusalem, to the Salt Lake Temple, and to "all of the temples now built or that may be built in the high mountains of America" (Millennial Messiah, 276). This prophecy will have a dual fulfillment, including the latter-day temple in Jerusalem.
[^8] See also McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 276.
[^9] McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 277, places the building of temples in both the old and the new Jerusalem before the Second Coming. See also Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 286.
[^10] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 286.
[^11] Keown, Scalise, Smothers, Jer. 26-52, 164.
[^12] Millennial Messiah, 390.
[^13] For the significance of these numbers, see Parry and Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation, 137-38.
[^14] For a discussion of the beasts in Rev. 13, see Parry and Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation, 162-77.
[^15] History of the Church, 5:361.
[^16] See the commentary on Armageddon, page 264.
[^17] Benson, Come unto Christ, 113-14; see also Smith, Signs of the Times, 61; McConkie, New Witness, 637.
[^18] Conference Report, Apr. 1911, 125.
[^19] See the commentary on Zech. 14:4, page 142.
[^20] See the commentary on Zech. 14:4, page 142.
[^21] Millennial Messiah, 231.
[^22] Conference Report, Oct. 1975, 145.
[^23] Conference Report, Oct. 1984, 17.
[^24] See Ballard, Our Search for Happiness, 72-73; Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:134-35.
[^25] See the commentary on the gathering of Israel through missionary work, page 59, and the commentary on Israel being gathered to their lands of inheritance, page 113.
[^26] McConkie, Millet, and Top, Doctrinal Commentary on the Book of Mormon, 4:25.
[^27] For further reference on the concept that "few" are chosen, see Smith, History of the Church, 6:185; McConkie, Mortal Messiah, 3:310.
[^28] Come unto Christ, 115; see also Lee, Stand Ye in Holy Places, 22.
[^29] See the commentary on Jesus' second coming in power and glory, page 381.
[^30] See Thomas, "Jacob's Allegory," 13.
[^31] See the commentary on the times of the Gentiles, page 99.
[^32] Conference Report, Apr. 1963, 75-78.
[^33] Conference Report, Apr. 1987, 107-8.
[^34] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 321.
[^35] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 298.
[^36] History of the Church, 6:196.
[^37] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 366.
[^38] Draper, Opening the Seven Seals, 83; Metzger, Breaking the Code, 61.
[^39] D&C 84:32; Anchor Bible Dictionary, 6:1096.
[^40] Harrington, Revelation, 147.
[^41] Some of these verses, with additional commentary, are also discussed in chap. 7, which treats Babylon in detail; see page 296.
[^42] See the commentary on Babylon, page 283.
[^43] Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, 4:222.
[^44] Elijah the Prophet, 28-29.
[^45] History of the Church, 5:423.
[^46] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 362.
[^47] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 367; see also 27.
[^48] Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3:71.
[^49] Ensign, Nov. 1971, 15.
[^50] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 252.
[^51] McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:656.
[^52] Journal of Discourses, 14:5.
[^53] Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, 2:102.
[^54] New Witness, 519-20. For a more detailed view of the gathering of the Jews, see the commentary on the gathering of Israel, page 71. See the commentary on the conversion of the Jews to Christ, page 144.
[^55] For more on the restoration of the ten tribes, see McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 215-17, 319- 29; Millet and McConkie, Our Destiny, 103-17.
[^56] See the commentary on D&C 133:27, page 108.
[^57] Elder Bruce R. McConkie addressed this question in New Witness, 520-21, and Millennial Messiah, 325-26.
[^58] Kimball, Seoul Korea Area Conference Report, Aug. 1975, 60-61; McConkie, Mexico City Mexico Area Conference Report, Aug. 1972, 45.
[^59] Joseph Smith wrote: "The land of America is a promised land unto [the Lamanites], and unto it all the tribes of Israel will come, with as many of the Gentiles as shall comply with the requisitions of the new covenant. But the tribe of Judah will return to old Jerusalem" (History of the Church, 1:315).
[^60] History of the Church, 1:315-16.
[^61] Elder Bruce R. McConkie held the view that the return of the ten tribes was primarily a millennial event; see Millennial Messiah, 323-29.
[^62] 2 Esdras 13.
[^63] Smith, Gospel Doctrine, 137-38; Smith, Restoration of All Things, 93; Whitney, Saturday Night Thoughts, 69-70.
[^64] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 93.
[^65] Seoul Korea Area Conference Report, Aug. 1975, 60-61; see also Kimball, SÃ£o Paulo Brazil Area Conference Report, Feb.-Mar. 1975, 73; McConkie, Mexico City Mexico Area Conference Report, Aug. 1972, 45. See the commentary on Zion and the New Jerusalem, page 152.
[^66] Most Latter-day Saint scholars agree that the millennial David is none other than Jesus Christ. See, for example, McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 602-11; New Witness, 518; Millet, "Life in the Millennium," 182; Jackson, "The Lord Is There," 306-7.
