Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Signs of the Times ( 1999)

Chapter 3

Judah, Jerusalem, and the Holy Land

Signs of the Times

Many prophets, ancient and modern, have identified Jerusalem and Israel to be the scene of great events that will take place in the last days. Ether, for instance, prophesied that the time would come when Jerusalem would once again become "a holy city unto the Lord." He spoke "concerning the house of Israel, and the Jerusalem from whence Lehi should come—after it should be destroyed it should be built up again, a holy city unto the Lord; wherefore, it could notÂ½ be a new Jerusalem for it had been in a time of old; but it should be built up again, and become a holy city of the Lord; and it should be built unto the house of Israel" (Ether 13:5). This and other marvelous prophecies concerning Jerusalem, the Jews, and the land of Israel will be fulfilled during the last days, at Christ's coming, or in theÂ½ Millennium. A summary of several such prophecies follows (not in chronological order):

The wealth of many will be used for the gathering of Israel (Isa. 60:9, 13-14; Jer. 32:41-44; Zech. 14:14).

All nations will battle against Jerusalem (Ezek. 38-39; Joel 3:1-17; Zech. 12:6-9; 14:1).

Judah will again inhabit Jerusalem and the "land of Jerusalem," the Lord will again choose Jerusalem, and he will defend its inhabitants (Zech. 2:11-12; 12:6; 3 Ne. 20:29, 33-34, 46).

Judah will be saved and made holy (Jer. 23:5-6; D&C 133:35).

The Jews will someday believe in Jesus Christ, and they will not look for another Messiah (Deut. 4:29-31; Jer. 31:31-34; 1 Ne. 10:11-14; 2 Ne. 6:11; 9:2; 10:7; 25:16; 30:7; 3 Ne. 20:29-31; Morm. 5:12-14).

A temple will be built in Jerusalem (Isa. 2:1-3; Ezek. 37:26-28; chs. 40-46; D&C 124:36-37; 133:13).

Water will flow from the temple and heal the Dead Sea (Ezek. 47:1-12; Joel 3:18; Zech. 14:8).

Jerusalem and the New Jerusalem will be the two world capitals during the Millennium (Isa. 2:3; Ether 13:4-11; D&C 133:20-25).

Jerusalem will again become a holy city (Ether 13:5, 8).

Two prophets in Jerusalem will work miracles, prophesy, and be martyred (JST Isa. 51:18-20; Zech. 4:11-14; Rev. 11:3-12; D&C 77:15).

Christ will appear on the Mount of Olives (Zech. 14:3-5; D&C 45:48; 133:20).

Judah will return to the lands of their inheritance (Isa. 11:12; 14:1; 1 Ne. 19:13-16; 2 Ne. 6:11; 9:2; 10:7; Ether 13:11-12).

Jerusalem and its environs will become fruitful (Ezek. 36:33-36; Amos 9:14-15; cf. Isa. 35:1-2, 6-7).

The Jews Return to the Holy Land

Zech. 8:1-8

1 Again the word of the Lord of hosts came to me, saying,

2 Thus saith the Lord of hosts; I was jealous for Zion with great jealousy, and I was jealous for her with great fury.

3 Thus saith the Lord; I am returned unto Zion, and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: and Jerusalem shall be called a city of truth; and the mountain of the Lord of hosts the holy mountain.

4 Thus saith the Lord of hosts; There shall yet old men and old women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, and every man with his staff in his hand for very age.

5 And the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls playing in the streets thereof.

6 Thus saith the Lord of hosts; If it be marvellous in the eyes of the remnant of this people in these days, should it also be marvellous in mine eyes? saith the Lord of hosts.

7 Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Behold, I will save my people from the east country, and from the west country;

8 And I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God, in truth and in righteousness.

The headnote to Zech. 8 reads, "In the last days, Jerusalem shall be restored, Judah shall be gathered, and the Lord will bless his people beyond anything of the past." One prominent sign of the times is the return of the Jews to the Holy Land and its chief city, Jerusalem. Isaiah (Isa. 11:12), Jeremiah (Jer. 3:18; 32:37-44; 33:7-26), Ezekiel (Ezek. 11:17-21; 20:34-44; 37:21-25), Hosea (Hosea 1:11), Zechariah (Zech. 2; 10:6-12), Nephi (2 1 Ne. 25:11) and other ancient prophets prophesied of their return.

Many of our modern-day Church leaders also have spoken regarding the gathering of the Jews. Joseph Smith prayed concerning the redemption of Jerusalem and the return of the Jews: "We therefore ask thee to have mercy upon the children of Jacob, that Jerusalem, from this hour, may begin to be redeemed; . . . and the children of Judah may begin to return to the lands which thou didst give to Abraham, their father" (D&C 109:62, 64). Elder Ezra Taft Benson explained in 1950 that the gathering of the Jews "is one of the signs of the times, and is very important. . . .

"This miracle of the return of the Jews was to be one of the events to precede Christ's second coming, and the scriptures are very clear with reference to this fact." [^1]

Approximately a quarter of a century later, Elder Benson stated: "Since 1948, the people of the world have witnessed a marvelous drama taking place before their eyes; and yet it is a miracle that has gone unnoticed and unappreciated. One of the greatest events in history is the literal gathering of the Jews to their homeland from the 'four corners of the earth.' It is, as Isaiah prophesied, 'a marvelous work and a wonder.' (See Isa. 29:14.)" [^2]

Elder Orson Hyde (in 1841), and President George A. Smith (in 1872) dedicated the Holy Land for the "return of the Jews and the rebuilding of Jerusalem." Elder Orson F. Whitney recorded: "In the year 1872 a mission went from Salt Lake City to the Holy Land. President George A. Smith headed the party, which also included Lorenzo Snow, one of the Twelve Apostles, and his gifted sister, the poet, Eliza R. Snow. Upon reaching Palestine, President Smith duplicated the work done by Orson Hyde in 1841, dedicating the land for the return of the Jews and the rebuilding of Jerusalem. Other elders of the Church have since visited that once favored and yet to be glorified region. President Anthon H. Lund was there in 1898; and he likewise offered up an earnest prayer for the great consummation. All this because Moses restored the keys for the gathering of Israel in this dispensation." [^3]

The present gathering of the Jews to the Holy Land is called by Elder Bruce R. McConkie a "political gathering" or a "preliminary gathering," an "Elias going before Messias; it is a preparatory work; it is the setting of the stage for the grand drama soon to be played on Olivet." The spiritual gathering of the Jews, Elder McConkie explained, will take place when they "believe the Book of Mormon and when they accept the gospel. . . . They shall come again to the Holy One of Israel, . . . accept Christ as their Savior and plead with the Father in the name of the Son for the cleansing power of his blood. They shall return when they join the true Church, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." [^4]

Notes and Commentary

Zech. 8:2 Thus saith the Lord of hosts. We are reminded in Zech. 8 that it is the Lord who speaks, because "thus saith the Lord of hosts" appears nine times (vv. 2, 4, 6, 7, 9, 14, 19, 20, 23) in addition to "thus saith the Lord" (v. 3).

I was jealous for Zion with great jealousy. In scripture the Lord is depicted as a husband (Isa. 54:5; Jer. 31:32), and his people collectively are portrayed as his wife (Isa. 54:1-6). In Zech. 8:2, God declares that in the past he has been jealous because his wife, who is here called Zion (speaking of members of the house of Judah), had committed spiritual adultery by worshipping the gods of the world (Jer. 3:8-9; Hosea 3:1) while shunning her true Lord (Hosea 1:2).

Zech. 8:3 I am returned unto Zion, and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem. These two phrases, separated by the comma, produce a parallelism, with the names Zion and Jerusalem forming a synonymous word pair. During the Millennium the Lord will once again come unto Zion and will dwell in her midst.

Jerusalem shall be called a city of truth. Perhaps Jerusalem will be named city of truth because God, who is "the truth of the world" (Ether 4:12) and a "God of truth" (Deut. 32:4), will dwell there. In a future day, people from many nations will seek the Lord and his truth in the city of truth (Zech. 2:11; 8:20).

the mountain of the Lord of hosts the holy mountain. The temple of the Lord is called "the mountain of the Lord" (Isa. 2:2-3) it is called "holy" because it is his dwelling place. This verse brings together the concepts of Zion, Jerusalem, and temple in a way similar to that of Joel 3:17 and Isa. 2:2-3. The Lord spoke through his servant Joel "so shall ye know that I am the Lord your God dwelling in Zion, my holy mountain: then shall Jerusalem be holy" (Joel 3:17) and Isaiah prophesied, "Let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; . . . for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem" (Isa. 2:3).

Zech. 8:4-5 old men and old women/boys and girls. Two generations are represented in these verses: "old men and old women," and "boys and girls." The city's inhabitants will dwell there long enough to become old, while a rising generation of boys and girls are seen playing in the streets. The elderly are pictured as leaning on their canes in comfort and peace. Children playing in the streets indicate a safe and carefree society. That the elderly are not working suggests a healthy economy; they are not required to produce goods but leave such labors for those who are younger. This scene of peace, comfort, and safety, which may come to fruition in the Millennium, is far different from the one in Lamentations, which portrays a depopulated Jerusalem and an exiled and downtrodden people shortly after the city was destroyed at the time of Jeremiah and Lehi. Lam. 2:21 reads, "The young and the old lie on the ground in the streets: my virgins and my young men are fallen by the sword; thou hast slain them in the day of thine anger."

Zech. 8:7 I will save my people from the east country, and from the west country. East and west express totality. The Lord will gather Judah from the rising of the sun (east) to its setting (west), or from all parts of the earth. Isaiah used similar language when he prophesied that the Lord would gather his people from "the islands of the sea" and from "the four corners of the earth" (Isa. 11:11-12).

Zech. 8:8 I will bring them. The Lord takes an active role and uses his "mighty hand" and "stretched out arm" (Ezek. 20:34) in the gathering of the Jews. He promises: "Thus saith the Lord God; I will even gather you from the people, and assemble you out of the countries where ye have been scattered, and I will give you the land of Israel" (Ezek. 11:17). President Wilford Woodruff added: "The Lord has decreed that the Jews should be gathered from all the Gentile nations where they have been driven, into their own land, in fulfillment of the words of Moses their law-giver." [^5]

they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem. Zechariah's prophecy is very specific: he provides the exact name Jerusalem as one of the cities to which the Jews will gather in the last days. In fact, in Zech. 8:1-8, the prophet identifies Jerusalem by name on four occasions. Certainly, without the spirit of prophecy, Zechariah could not have known in 520-518 b.c. that Jerusalem would continue to exist for approximately twenty-five hundred years and would have the same name after that long period of time. Few cities exist so long, and those that do have often had their names changed one or more times. For example, the city of Beijing, China, has been in existence for three millennia; but it has been variously named Ch'i, Yen, Yu-chow, Nan-ching, Yenching, Chung-tu, Khanbaliq, Peiping, and Peking. [^6]

Nephi also prophesied of the return of the Jews to their land and city: "Notwithstanding they have been carried away they shall return again, and possess the land of Jerusalem; wherefore, they shall be restored again to the land of their inheritance" (2 Ne. 25:11).

they shall be my people, and I will be their God. This statement speaks of the covenant relationship that will exist between God and his people after their gathering. The Lord through Jeremiah explains: "But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; after those days [after their return], saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people" (Jer. 31:33).

The Temple in the Midst of Israel

Ezek. 37:26-28

26 Moreover I will make a covenant of peace with them; it shall be an everlasting covenant with them: and I will place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore.

27 My tabernacle also shall be with them: yea, I will be their God, and they shall be my people.

28 And the heathen shall know that I the Lord do sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore.

Twice in these three verses the Lord promises that he will set his sanctuary in the midst of Israel forever, and he declares once that his tabernacle will also be with them. Ezekiel received this remarkable prophecy during his exile in the land of Babylon. It pertains to the last days, when we, as members of the house of Israel, will again choose Jehovah to be our God, and he will elect us to be his people. Such is the "covenant of peace" spoken of here and more fully in Ezek. 34:24-31. Part of this covenant includes the promise of peace and protection for the Saints who follow their great Shepherd.

Notes and Commentary

Ezek. 37:26 I will make a covenant of peace with them. This covenant, or two-way promise, as explained in Ezek. 34:24-31, is between God and the house of Israel in the last days. On the one hand, God promises Israel that he will be "their God" (Ezek. 34:24), and as such he will bless them with safety (Ezek. 34:25, 27), temporal blessings (Ezek. 34:26-27), and protection from wicked peoples and ravenous beasts, so that his people "shall dwell safely, and none shall make them afraid" (Ezek. 34:28). Further, God will break the bands of their bondage—speaking perhaps of both their physical bondage as well as their bonds of sin (Ezek. 34:27)—and he also promises that they will no longer suffer hunger (Ezek. 34:29). In short, God promises conditions of safety to his people, or a "covenant of peace."

In return for these great blessings, God's people promise him that he will be their God and they will be his people and his flock (Ezek. 34:30-31). As Ezekiel writes, "Thus shall they know that I the Lord their God am with them, and that they, even the house of Israel, are my people, saith the Lord God. And ye my flock, the flock of my pasture, are men, and I am your God" (Ezek. 34:30-31).

it shall be an everlasting covenant with them. The covenant of peace will last beyond our days of mortality and continue throughout eternity.

I will place them. God will establish us, his people, upon our lands of promise (America and the Holy Land), just as he set ancient Israel on their land after their forty years of wandering in the wilderness.

multiply them. He will also multiply us until we are great in numbers. The Lord spoke of this through Isaiah: "For thy waste and thy desolate places, and the land of thy destruction, shall even now be too narrow by reason of the inhabitants. . . . The children which thou shalt have, after thou hast lost the other, shall say again in thine ears, The place is too strait for me: give place to me that I may dwell" (Isa. 49:19-20; see also D&C 105:26, 31).

[I] will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore. The meaning of the passage, which is repeated in verse 28 for emphasis, is not clear. It may refer to the temple in Jerusalem, which will be built in the last days before the Second Coming; or it may refer to any of the temples that now dot the earth; or it may refer to the temple as a blessing restored to the Lord's people; thus, any and all true temples serve as fulfillment of the Lord's promise.

Ezek. 37:27 My tabernacle also shall be with them. Ezekiel uses language that recalls to mind the Mosaic tabernacle, or the portable temple that Israel carried with them through their wilderness wanderings (Num. 9:15-22). This same tabernacle will not exist with Israel in the last days, however, for we now have temples in many countries of the world; instead, Ezekiel may be referring to the spiritual protection that God will provide for his people. As a tent offers protection from the elements, including the wind, sun, and hail, so also God's tabernacle will protect his people from spiritual harm and physical danger. Such is also the picture provided in Isa. 4:6, wherein the prophet states that "there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the daytime from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain." The underlying idea is that Christ himself will dwell with his people in the last days.

I will be their God, and they shall be my people. This phrase summarizes the "covenant of peace" identified in Ezek. 37:26, wherein God promises to be Israel's God and provide them with countless blessings if they will but promise to be his people (see also Ezek. 34:24-31).

Ezek. 37:28 the heathen shall know that I the Lord do sanctify Israel. When the Lord establishes his sanctuary again in the midst of his people, the heathen or the nations of the world will know that God sanctifies (or cleanses, through the Atonement and the sanctifying power of the Holy Ghost) Israel. Complete fulfillment of this prophecy may not come to pass until the Millennium.

All Nations Shall Flow to the Temple of Jerusalem

Isa. 2:1-3

1 The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem.

2 And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it.

3 And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

Quite familiar to Latter-day Saints, these verses are often quoted with reference to the Salt Lake Temple, the first temple to be commenced in Utah, "in the top of the mountains." [^7] Isaiah's prophecy also refers to the temple in Jerusalem, for verse 1, which introduces this section of Isaiah, states that it is about "Judah and Jerusalem," [^8] and Jerusalem is also mentioned in verse 3. These verses identify theÂ½ temple explicitly. It is called "the Lord's house," "the mountain of the Lord," and "the house of the God of Jacob." The time frame for the establishment of the temple is the "last days." [^9]

We can also read about the latter-day Jerusalem temple in the Doctrine and Covenants. In one passage, the Lord commands the Gentiles to flee to Zion, where temples have been built, and the people of Judah to flee to "Jerusalem, unto the mountains of the Lord's house" (D&C 133:12-13). A second passage identifies Zion and Jerusalem as places of refuge where the Saints will conduct sacred ordinances in the temple: "For it is ordained that in Zion and in her stakes, and in Jerusalem, those places which I have appointed for refuge, shall be the places for your baptisms for your dead. And again, verily I say unto you, how shall your washings be acceptable unto me, except ye perform them in a house which you have built to my name?" (D&C 124:36-37).

Notes and Commentary

Isa. 2:1 The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw. The word translated as saw means, literally, "to see in a vision" (Hebrew haza); Isaiah saw in a vision the temple that would be established in Jerusalem in the last days.

concerning Judah and Jerusalem. The words that follow verse 1 speak particularly about the people of Judah and the city of Jerusalem.

Isa. 2:2 it shall come to pass in the last days. Isaiah provides the general calendar for the establishment of the Lord's house when he writes that it will "come to pass in the last days."

mountain. In Isa. 2:2-3, Isaiah emphasizes through repetition the words mountains, hills, and mountain. It sounds as though the temple in Jerusalem will be built in the Judean hills of modern Israel, for this temple will "be established in the top of the mountains," "be exalted above the hills," and worshippers will "go up" to the temple. In the ancient world, mountain also refers symbolically to temples and temple worship. When the followers of Jehovah were unable to build a temple, they often worshipped on mountaintops. Such was the case with Moses, Nephi, Jared, and others.

Lord's house. In the Bible, the temple is called "the house of the Lord," because it was there that God's people sought peace and spiritual refreshment from their Father, even as children seek peace and refreshment in their earthly homes. In our day, too, the temple is called a house; for instance, a single verse of Joseph Smith's prayer dedicating the Kirtland Temple calls the temple house eight times (D&C 109:8).

all nations shall flow unto it. Like a vast river that flows to the sea, peoples from all nations will journey to the temple. Unlike a river that flows downward, however, the river of people will flow upward to reach the temple.

Isa. 2:3 many people. Through the decades since its dedication, the Salt Lake Temple has attracted hundreds of thousands of worshippers to its sacred halls and even more thousands of visitors to Temple Square. Similarly, a vast number of visitors, or "many people," will travel to the temple in Jerusalem, some to worship there and others to gaze upon its imposing structure.

he will teach us of his ways. Worshippers will receive a great endowment of knowledge in the temple, for it is "a house of learning" (D&C 109:8). Joseph Smith prayed concerning the Kirtland Temple: "And do thou grant, Holy Father, that all those who shall worship in this house may be taught words of wisdom out of the best books, and that they may seek learning even by study, and also by faith, as thou hast said" (D&C 109:14).

we will walk in his paths. There is a cause-and-effect relationship in this verse: God teaches us of his ways and we then walk in his paths. Jesus Christ is the Way (John 14:6), or the path, that we must walk. When we learn to know the Way, we will want to follow him.

for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Zion and Jerusalem are the two religious capitals that will exist during the Millennium. One will be in Independence, Missouri (D&C 57:3; 84:2) the other, in old Jerusalem (Ether 13:2-11). Both centers will be called Zion and Jerusalem, and both will have great temples.

Waters Flow from the Temple and Heal the Dead Sea

Ezek. 47:1-10

1 Afterward he brought me again unto the door of the house; and, behold, waters issued out from under the threshold of the house eastward: for the forefront of the house stood toward the east, and the waters came down from under from the right side of the house, at the south side of the altar.

2 Then brought he me out of the way of the gate northward, and led me about the way without unto the utter gate by the way that looketh eastward; and, behold, there ran out waters on the right side.

3 And when the man that had the line in his hand went forth eastward, he measured a thousand cubits, and he brought me through the waters; the waters were to the ankles.

4 Again he measured a thousand, and brought me through the waters; the waters were to the knees. Again he measured a thousand, and brought me through; the waters were to the loins.

5 Afterward he measured a thousand; and it was a river that I could not pass over: for the waters were risen, waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed over.

6 And he said unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen this? Then he brought me, and caused me to return to the brink of the river.

7 Now when I had returned, behold, at the bank of the river were very many trees on the one side and on the other.

8 Then said he unto me, These waters issue out toward the east country, and go down into the desert, and go into the sea: which being brought forth into the sea, the waters shall be healed.

9 And it shall come to pass, that every thing that liveth, which moveth, whithersoever the rivers shall come, shall live: and there shall be a very great multitude of fish, because these waters shall come thither: for they shall be healed; and every thing shall live whither the river cometh.

10 And it shall come to pass, that the fishers shall stand upon it from En-gedi even unto En-eglaim; they shall be a place to spread forth nets; their fish shall be according to their kinds, as the fish of the great sea, exceeding many.

These verses follow Ezekiel's lengthy prophecy regarding the future temple of Jerusalem (Ezek. 40-46). This section divides neatly into two parts: verses 1 through 7 pertain to waters that will flow from the temple; the result, described in verses "8 through 12" 8 through 12, is the healing of the Dead Sea (so named because its high concentration of salt and minerals prevents it from sustaining life). Joseph Smith seemed to view these events as literal: "Judah must return, Jerusalem must be rebuilt, and the temple, and water come out from under the temple, and the waters of the Dead Sea be healed. It will take some time to rebuild the walls of the city and the temple, &c.; and all this must be done before the Son of Man will make His appearance." [^10]

The prophecy regarding the waters flowing from the temple and the healing of the Dead Sea may speak of literal waters and an actual healing of the Dead Sea, or it may be figurative, or both. Unfortunately, Ezekiel's words remain somewhat veiled to us. In any case, the symbolic elements of Ezekiel's passage are important. The waters that flow from God's temple (cf. Rev. 22:1, "a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb"; see also Joel 3:18; Zech. 14:8) refer to Jesus Christ and the blessings he extends to those who worship in his temples. Jeremiah referred to the Lord as the "fountain of living waters" (Jer. 2:13; 17:13), meaning the Lord provides eternal life to all who drink from his fountain. The Dead Sea seems to represent all who are dead spiritually, or in whom there is little or no spiritual life. The living waters of Christ flow through us, changing our individual "Dead Sea," and we are cleansed and renewed as we attend the temple and keep the covenants we make there.

Notes and Commentary

Ezek. 47:1 Afterward he brought me again unto the door of the house. The heavenly messenger (Ezek. 40:3-4) who guides Ezekiel through the future temple now takes him to one of the doors of the temple.

waters issued out from under the threshold of the house eastward. Ezekiel sees water flow from under the threshold of the temple eastward, or in the direction of the Dead Sea, which is just a few miles from Jerusalem. Whether actual waters will flow from the temple remains to be seen.

Ezek. 47:3-5 he measured. On four occasions the heavenly messenger measures the depth of the flowing water, and Ezekiel observes that the water grows deeper as it moves away from the temple: first it is ankle deep, then it reaches the knees, next it reaches the waist, and finally it is deep enough "to swim in, a river that could not be passed over."

Ezek. 47:6-7 brink of the river/bank of the river. The river brings life to its banks. Vegetation grows as the waters flow through the desert, and Ezekiel notes that trees grow on each side of the river.

Ezek. 47:8-9 the waters shall be healed/they shall be healed. The messenger explains to the prophet the route of the waters, which flow eastward from the temple through the desert to the sea. These waters freshen the Dead Sea, so that the sea can now sustain life. The messenger's words are clearly set forth: "And it shall come to pass, that every thing that liveth, which moveth, whithersoever the rivers shall come, shall live: and there shall be a very great multitude of fish, because these waters shall come thither: for they shall be healed; and every thing shall live whither the river cometh."

Ezek. 47:10 fishers shall stand upon it. At present, no one fishes the Dead Sea, for this great body of water does not sustain life. When the waters flow from the threshold of the temple eastward to the Dead Sea, healing its waters, fishermen will stand on its shore or cast their nets into the waters to catch fish of many kinds—"exceeding many." These verses may be symbolic only.

The Voice of Joy Will Be Heard in Jerusalem

Jer. 33:7-11

7 And I will cause the captivity of Judah and the captivity of Israel to return, and will build them, as at the first.

8 And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby they have sinned against me; and I will pardon all their iniquities, whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have transgressed against me.

9 And it shall be to me a name of joy, a praise and an honour before all the nations of the earth, which shall hear all the good that I do unto them: and they shall fear and tremble for all the goodness and for all the prosperity that I procure unto it.

10 Thus saith the Lord; Again there shall be heard in this place, which ye say shall be desolate without man and without beast, even in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, that are desolate, without man, and without inhabitant, and without beast,

11 The voice of joy, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the voice of them that shall say, Praise the Lord of hosts: for the Lord is good; for his mercy endureth for ever: and of them that shall bring the sacrifice of praise into the house of the Lord. For I will cause to return the captivity of the land, as at the first, saith the Lord.

Jerusalem, which has been destroyed numerous times during the past three thousand years, will once again be built up, along with other cities in modern-day Israel. Jeremiah proclaims that activities of great joy will take place in these cities, and the voices of brides, grooms, and those who worship the true and living God will be heard.

The Lord takes an active and personal role in the gathering of Judah and Israel in the last days. Note his firsthand activities in the lives of his people; the pronoun I is repeated seven times in the following phrases:

I will cause the captivity . . . to return.

I will build them.

I will cleanse them.

I will pardon all their iniquities.

all the good that I do unto them.

all the prosperity that I procure unto it.

I will cause to return the captivity.

Notes and Commentary

Jer. 33:7 I will cause the captivity of Judah and the captivity of Israel to return. A better translation of this sentence reads, "I will bring about the restoration of Judah and the restoration of Israel." [^11]

[I] will build them. The phrase hearkens back to Jer. 30:18, where the Lord explains that he will restore "Jacob's tents, and have mercy on his dwellingplaces; and the city shall be builded upon her own heap" (see also Jer. 31:4).

as at the first. Jerusalem and other cities of Israel will be built "as at the first," or as in former times.

Jer. 33:8 their iniquity. This verse emphasizes the wickedness of Israel and Judah: "all their iniquity"; "they have sinned against me"; "all their iniquities"; "they have sinned"; "they have transgressed against me." Such emphasis on wickedness makes God's forgiveness even more remarkable, for he promises to "cleanse" and "pardon" despite the great and numerous sins.

Jer. 33:9 a name of joy, a praise and an honour. Through Moses (Deut. 26:19) God aimed to make Israel three things in the sight of the peoples of the earth: a name, a praise, and an honour. Here Jeremiah prophesies that in the last days Israel and Judah will be unto God "a name of joy, a praise and an honour before all the nations of the earth," because the nations will hear of "all the good" and "all the prosperity" that the Lord will give unto his people. As a result, the nations will fear and tremble (see also D&C 45:74; 64:43).

Jer. 33:10-11 Thus saith the Lord. God is the author of this prophecy.

Again there shall be heard in this place. Inasmuch as Jerusalem and the cities of Judah on a number of occasions have been destroyed by various world powers, people say that these cities "shall be desolate without man and without beast . . . and without inhabitant." In spite of this, Jeremiah prophesies that there will yet be heard "the voice of joy, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride." This prophecy is now being partially fulfilled in Jerusalem and the cities of Judah (the cities of modern Israel): they are filled with joyful sounds, including the voices of brides and bridegrooms. Unfortunately, these joyful sounds are at present mingled with the sounds of war and trouble and will be so until Christ's second coming.

the voice of them that shall say, Praise the Lord of hosts. In addition to the voices of joy already described, those who worship the Lord make joyful sounds. These will sing, "Praise the Lord of hosts: for the Lord is good; for his mercy endureth for ever." These words may be partially fulfilled in a number of our Church hymns, which contain the words "praise the Lord" (Hebrew halleluya).

bring the sacrifice of praise into the house of the Lord. The New Jerusalem Bible renders this passage as "those who bring thanksgiving sacrifices to the Temple of Yahweh."

For I will cause to return the captivity of the land. This phrase, used in Jer. 33:7, is repeated here for emphasis.

Two Prophets Work Miracles, Prophesy, and Are Martyred

Rev. 11:3-12

3 And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth.

4 These are the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks standing before the God of the earth.

5 And if any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed.

6 These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy: and have power over waters to turn them to blood, and to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will.

7 And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them.

8 And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified.

9 And they of the people and kindreds and tongues and nations shall see their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves.

10 And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another; because these two prophets tormented them that dwelt on the earth.

11 And after three days and an half the Spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet; and great fear fell upon them which saw them.

12 And they heard a great voice from heaven saying unto them, Come up hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud; and their enemies beheld them.

In the last days, two prophets will serve in Jerusalem. These two are called "prophets" and "witnesses," and as such they will prophesy, preach repentance, warn the nations regarding coming judgments, work mighty miracles, bear testimony of Jesus Christ and his great atonement, and invite souls to come unto Christ. The length of this ministry will be approximately three and one-half years (Rev. 11:3). Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote that "it is reasonable to suppose, knowing how the Lord has always dealt with his people in all ages, that they [the two prophets] will be two members of the Council of the Twelve or of the First Presidency of the Church." [^12]

The scriptures give several clues to when the two prophets will prophesy: after the Jews "are gathered and have built the city of Jerusalem" (D&C 77:15), "at the time of the restoration" (D&C 77:15), and after the opening of the seventh seal but before the Second Coming (D&C 77:12-13) in the timetable of John the Revelator, the two prophets will prophesy during the events of the second "woe" (Rev. 11:14). They will possess great power from God to devour "theirÂ½ enemies" with fire, "shut heaven, that it rain not," turn waters to blood, and smite the earth with plagues according to their will (Rev. 11:5-6). The sackcloth mentioned in Rev. 11:3 may be symbolic, recalling Old Testament prophets who actually wore sackcloth during their ministry and suggesting a spirit and attitude of humility.

Notes and Commentary

Rev. 11:3 I will give power unto my two witnesses. The word power does not belong in the text; it is not found in the original Greek (see note a to this verse in the LDS edition of the KJV); nevertheless, the verses that follow establish that the two witnesses will have great power indeed. With the number two, the law of witnesses is in effect: there are two witnesses so that God's word will be established (2 Cor. 13:1). The law of witnesses continues in our dispensation (D&C 6:28; 42:80). In Isa. 51:20 the two prophets are called "sons," perhaps suggesting that they are sons of Abraham, either literally or by covenant; Zech. 4:3 calls them "two olive trees," indicating that they possess oil and light. The two will bear witness to the people that Jesus is their Messiah, Savior, and God.

they shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore days. The period of the two prophets' ministry in Jerusalem will be the same as that of Jesus Christ, three and one-half years. Perhaps significantly, the length of their ministry corresponds to the length of time that the Gentiles will "tread [Jerusalem] under foot" (Rev. 11:2). The number three and one-half, forty-two months, or 1,260 days (three and one-half years) occurs several times in Daniel and Revelation (Dan. 7:25; 9:27; 12:7; Rev. 11:2, 3, 11; 12:14; 13:5). [^13]

clothed in sackcloth. Sackcloth was a coarse, rough fabric used in making sacks (Gen. 42:25; Lev. 11:32; Josh. 9:4). Its use as clothing symbolized humility and sorrow (1 Kgs. 21:27; 2 Kgs. 6:30; "Job 16:15;" Job 16:15; Isa. 22:11). The two prophets may not actually wear sackcloth, as did Isaiah and others (Isa. 20:2-4), but the phrase "clothed in sackcloth" does suggest a similarity between the two witnesses and the ancient prophets of Israel who were so attired. The two witnesses possess the same prophetic powers held by ancient prophets of Israel: the power to heal, shut the heavens, cause miracles, preach, teach, and bless lives in remarkable ways.

Rev. 11:4 These are the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks. The two witnesses are the same ones the prophet Zechariah envisioned (Zech. 4:11-14). He twice called them "two olive trees" (Zech. 4:3, 11), a symbolic expression that indicates they are "anointed ones" (Zech. 4:14), because olive trees produced the olive oil used in temple ritual. The two prophets as "anointed ones" perhaps means that they will have received the blessings of the holy temple, or perhaps it signifies that they have been anointed to their holy calling, as Christ, the Anointed One, was.

Rev. 11:5 fire proceedeth out of their mouth. The two witnesses will speak the word of God and thereby have power to destroy their enemies. They will possess immense God-given powers, as did Elijah, who caused fire to come down from heaven to consume his enemies by uttering the words, "If I be a man of God, then let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty" (2 Kgs. 1:10-14).

Rev. 11:6 These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not. The two prophets have threefold power: to shut heaven, to turn waters to blood, and to smite the earth with plagues. But these three are only representative of their powers; they will likely also have power to "put at defiance the armies of nations, to divide the earth, to break every band, to stand in the presence of God; to do all things according to his will, according to his command, to subdue principalities and powers; and this by the will of the Son of God" (JST Gen. 14:31).

Rev. 11:7 when they shall have finished their testimony. The two witnesses will not be destroyed by evil forces until after they have completed their appointed work on the earth. God will not permit his faithful servants to be killed before their time. The "testimony" they will bear is that Jesus Christ is the Messiah, the Son of God, the Savior of the world.

beast. John does not provide the identity of the beast, although it may be the same beast spoken of in Rev. 13:1-8. [^14]

the bottomless pit. The pit, also called the abyss, or hell, is identified in Joseph Smith Translation Isa. 14:15, 19. Although Satan is now the king of those in the pit (Rev. 9:11), God has total power over the pit (Rev. 20:1-3).

shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them. God will permit the "beast" to kill the two witnesses; evil forces do not have power over the righteous to harm or kill them, only insofar as it is part of God's plan. Later the beast and its allies will make war against Christ, but he will "overcome them, for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings" (Rev. 17:14; see also Rev. 19:11, 19).

Rev. 11:8 their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city. The "great city" identified here is Jerusalem, "where also our Lord was crucified."

Rev. 11:9 they of the people and kindreds and tongues and nations shall see their dead bodies. The Jerusalem Bible renders this passage as "men out of every people, race, language and nation will stare at their corpses." This event will be known internationally, perhaps through any number of modern communications systems (see also Rev. 11:10).

three days and an half. Similarly, Christ's body rested in the tomb three days ("after three days rise again"; Mark 8:31; 9:31; 10:34). For more on the number three and a half, see the commentary on Rev. 11:3, page 135.

shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves. Great disrespect will be shown to the two prophets, for their enemies will not permit their bodies to receive a proper burial (Ps. 79:3; 2 5:10). Joseph Macc. Smith explained, "It has always been considered a great calamity not to obtain an honorable burial: and one of the greatest curses the ancient prophets could put on any man, was that he should go without a burial." [^15]

Rev. 11:10 they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them. The pronoun they refers to "people and kindreds and tongues and nations" spoken of in the previous verse. The phrases "upon the earth" and "on the earth" emphasize that all people will be aware of the death of the two witnesses. That they will "make merry," exchange gifts, and not permit anyone to give the two prophets a proper burial indicates the wickedness of the people at this time. John explains that the wicked are making merry and exchanging gifts "because these two prophets tormented them." The torment may consist of the prophets' testimony against the world's wickedness, or it may be the plagues the prophets bring, or both.

Rev. 11:11-12 the Spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet. These words parallel Ezekiel's prophecy of the future resurrection of the house of Israel, suggesting that the two witnesses will not just come back to mortal life but will be resurrected at this time. Ezekiel's prophecy reads, "And the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet" (Ezek. 37:10).

great fear fell upon them which saw them. Many will witness the ascension of the two prophets: "their enemies beheld them" as "they ascended up to heaven."

Come up hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud. A heavenly being directs the two prophets to "come up hither." Their ascension into a cloud recalls the ascension into heaven of Elijah (2 Kgs. 2:11) and of Christ (Acts 1:9).

The Messiah Battles against the Jews' Enemies and Stands on the Mount of Olives

Zech. 14:1-5

1 Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, and thy spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee.

2 For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city.

3 Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations, as when he fought in the day of battle.

4 And his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the east, and the mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the east and toward the west, and there shall be a very great valley; and half of the mountain shall remove toward the north, and half of it toward the south.

5 And ye shall flee to the valley of the mountains; for the valley of the mountains shall reach unto Azal: yea, ye shall flee, like as ye fled from before the earthquake in the days of Uzziah king of Judah: and the Lord my God shall come, and all the saints with thee.

The Old Testament prophet Zechariah prophesied during the reign of Darius, king of Persia (Zech. 1:1). Zechariah described many of the signs of the times in his writings, especially regarding Jerusalem, the Jews, and Christ's appearance to them. Many of these signs will be fulfilled during the last of the last days, shortly before the Second Coming.

Zech. 14 pertains directly to Judah and Jerusalem: Judah is mentioned explicitly in verses 14 and 21, and Jerusalem in verses 2, 4, 8, 10, 11, 12, 14, 16, 17, and 21. The five verses cited above (Zech. 14:1-5) speak of a great war in the last days, in which all nations will battle against Jerusalem. Jerusalem will fall in that battle, and many of her inhabitants will be captured. [^16] During the heat of the battle, or perhaps at the time when total defeat appears imminent to the Jews, Jesus Christ will descend, set his feet on the Mount of Olives, and save the Jews.

Our modern prophets have spoken about these events as well. President Ezra Taft Benson said: "To these beleaguered sons of Judah, surrounded by hostile Gentile armies, who again threaten to overrun Jerusalem, the Savior—their Messiah—will set His feet on the Mount of Olives, 'and it shall cleave in twain, and the earth shall tremble, and reel to and fro, and the heavens also shall shake' (D&C 45:48).

"The Lord Himself will then rout the Gentile armies, decimating their forces. (See Ezek. 38:39.) Judah will be spared, no longer to be persecuted and scattered. The Jews will then approach their Deliverer and ask, 'What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet?' He will say to them: 'These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God. And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king.' (D&C 45:51-53.)

"What a touching drama this will be! Jesus—Prophet, Messiah, King—will be welcomed in His own country!" [^17]

Notes and Commentary

Zech. 14:1 the day of the Lord cometh. "The day of the Lord" is the time when the Lord will destroy Israel's enemies and then make his glorious appearance at his second coming. Other prophets give the same meaning to this expression (Isa. 2:12; Joel 1:15; 2:1, 11;Â½ Mal. 4:5). The "day of the Lord" theme continues throughout Zech. 14 with the phrase "in that day" (vv. 4, 6, 8, 9, 13, 20, and 21); each time, the phrase hearkens back to the opening phrase in verse 1.

thy spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee. The verb spoil (Hebrew salal) is used seventy-five times in the Bible, most frequently with reference to booty or plunder taken by a conquering army (for example, see Deut. 20:14; Josh. 7:21). Zechariah explains that the nations identified in the following verse will battle against Jerusalem, take spoil from her, and divide it.

Zech. 14:2 For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle. Shortly before Christ's coming, all nations will gather to battle against Jerusalem and Israel. Many prophets have prophesied of this event, including Joel (Joel 1-3, especially 2:2-4 and 3:2-14), Ezekiel (Ezek. 38-39, esp. 38:15-18), and John (Rev. 16:14-21). Joel describes these nations as "a great people and a strong; there hath not been ever the like, neither shall be any more after it" (Joel 2:2) he quotes the Lord, "I will also gather all nations. . . . Assemble yourselves, and come, all ye heathen, and gather yourselves together round about" (Joel 3:2, 11). The Lord said to Gog through Ezekiel, "Thou shalt come up against my people of Israel, as a cloud to cover the land; it shall be in the latter days, and I will bring thee against my land" (Ezek. 38:16). Apparently the nations will battle against Jerusalem at the same time the two prophets minister and prophesy in Jerusalem (Rev. 11:1-13).

Why do the prophecies say that the Lord, the Prince of Peace, will gather nations to war? (This question takes on added significance when we read in Rev. 16:14 that "spirits of devils" gather the nations to battle.) Perhaps these prophecies mean that God is in control of human history and that he ultimately orders all events for his purposes, to bring to pass his plan of happiness on the earth.

the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished. These three actions describe the horrors that will accompany this war, when earth's nations fight against Jerusalem: the city will be captured, the houses looted, and the women forcibly abused (Isa. 13:16). Similar horrors are common in the wars throughout history.

half of the city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city. During this war, approximately half of Jerusalem's population will be captured, but the remaining half will survive capture. Compare Zechariah's prophecy (Zech. 13:8-9) that in the land of Israel two-thirds will be destroyed and one-third will remain.

Zech. 14:3 Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations. Then is a chronological term; it suggests that the Lord will fight against Israel's enemies after the city has been taken. Anciently, the Lord won every battle that he fought against the nations that surrounded Palestine (see, for example, Josh. 6:1-16; Judg. 7:9-15) in the last days, he will again fight on behalf of Jerusalem and Judah and prevail against the nations. Isaiah prophesied, "The Lord shall go forth as a mighty man, he shall stir up jealousy like a man of war: he shall cry, yea, roar; he shall prevail against his enemies" (Isa. 42:13; see also 26:21).

The text here is not immediately clear on how the Lord will fight against the nations, although verses 12 and 13 of the same chapter (Zech. 14) give two clues: he will smite these nations with a plague, and he will cause a great tumult to arise among them. These verses read: "And this shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will smite all the people that have fought against Jerusalem; their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their tongue shall consume away in their mouth. And it shall come to pass in that day, that a great tumult from the Lord shall be among them; and they shall lay hold every one on the hand of his neighbour, and his hand shall rise up against the hand of his neighbour."

Perhaps the important thing for us to know is that the Lord will prevail in his battle against the nations. Elder Joseph Fielding Smith testified: "The Lord will come, according to His promise, unto His people in the hour of their distress, and will deliver them from their enemies. . . . And the nations that seek to destroy Jerusalem in that day will the Lord destroy, for he shall be King over all the earth and righteousness shall prevail among the people." [^18]

Zech. 14:4 his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives. This prophecy is very specific regarding when, where, and how Jesus Christ will appear and rescue the remaining Jews from destruction during this great war (see also D&C 45:48). This event will also fulfill the prophecy uttered by two heavenly messengers when Christ ascended from the same Mount of Olives soon after his resurrection: "Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven" (Acts 1:11).

On one side of the Mount of Olives is the garden of Gethsemane, where Christ was "sorrowful and very heavy," prayed to the Father to let the cup pass from him, bled from every pore, and was betrayed by a kiss from Judas (Matt. 26:30-50). On Jesus' mortal visit to this mount, he submitted himself to wicked men; on his future visit he will destroy the wicked.

The phrase "in that day" hearkens back to "the day of the Lord" in Rev. 14:1.

which is before Jerusalem on the east. The Mount of Olives is immediately east of Jerusalem, a few minutes' walk through the narrow valley Kidron, which separates Jerusalem from the Mount of Olives.

the mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the east and toward the west. Having complete power over the elements of the earth, Christ will cause the mount to be split in half. And as the cleft will run through the mountain from east to west, then "half of the mountain shall remove toward the north, and half of it toward the south." As a result, "a very great valley" will be created, through which the Jews will flee to safety.

Zech. 14:5 ye shall flee to the valley of the mountains. When Christ causes the Mount of Olives to divide in half, the beleaguered Jews will escape to safety through this newly created rift. The verb flee is used three times in this verse (flee twice and fled once), emphasizing that the Jews will find safety at the feet of their Messiah.

for the valley of the mountains shall reach unto Azal. The newly created rift will extend fully to Azal, but the location of Azal is at present unknown.

like as ye fled from before the earthquake in the days of Uzziah king of Judah. Little is known about the earthquake in Uzziah's days, but it was of such importance that Amos mentions it in the opening words of his book (Amos 1:1).

the Lord my God shall come, and all the saints with thee. Many will accompany Christ at his coming. Matthew's testimony promises that "the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his angels" (Matt. 16:27). Paul speaks of "the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints" (1 Thes. 3:13; see also D&C 76:63; 1 Thes. 4:13-17).

"What Are These Wounds in Thine Hands?"

D&C 45:47-53

47 Then shall the arm of the Lord fall upon the nations.

48 And then shall the Lord set his foot upon this mount, and it shall cleave in twain, and the earth shall tremble, and reel to and fro, and the heavens also shall shake.

49 And the Lord shall utter his voice, and all the ends of the earth shall hear it; and the nations of the earth shall mourn, and they that have laughed shall see their folly.

50 And calamity shall cover the mocker, and the scorner shall be consumed; and they that have watched for iniquity shall be hewn down and cast into the fire.

51 And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet?

52 Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God.

53 And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king.

These verses from the Doctrine and Covenants cite several passages from the book of Zechariah, including 12:10-11, 13:6 and 14:3-4. Zechariah detailed many events regarding the last days and Jerusalem in chapters 12 through 14 but did not set the events in chronological order. The verses cited above (D&C 45:48-53) seem to set the chronology for many of Zechariah's prophecies by using the chronological term then six times (vv. 47, 48, 51-53).

The main actors in these verses are the Lord, the nations, and the Jews. The Lord's actions include destroying the nations (vv. 47, 50), standing on the Mount of Olives (v. 48), uttering his voice (v. 49), and testifying of his divinity (v. 52). The nations will hear the Lord's voice and mourn, and many individuals will be destroyed (vv. 49-50). The Jews will view the Savior's wounds from the crucifixion, hear his testimony of his divinity, recognize him to be their king, and weep and lament their folly.

Notes and Commentary

D&C 45:48 then shall the Lord set his foot upon this mount. Zech. 14:4 reads, "And his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the east." [^19] A latter-day revelation sets forth many of the Lord's divine activities during this period of time: "For behold, he shall stand upon the mount of Olivet [another name for the mount of Olives], and upon the mighty ocean, even the great deep, and upon the islands of the sea, and upon the land of Zion" (D&C 133:20).

it shall cleave in twain. Zech. 14:4 reads, "The mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the east and toward the west, and there shall be a very great valley." [^20]

and the earth shall tremble, and reel to and fro, and the heavens also shall shake. Do these words speak of an earthquake that will occur when the mount splits in two? Interestingly, Zech. 14:5 also refers to an earthquake, one that took place during the reign of Uzziah, king of Judah.

D&C 45:49 the Lord shall utter his voice, and all the ends of the earth shall hear it. A parallel revelation adds further light to this event: "And he shall utter his voice out of Zion, and he shall speak from Jerusalem, and his voice shall be heard among all people; and it shall be a voice as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder, which shall break down the mountains, and the valleys shall not be found" (D&C 133:21-22).

The words which the Lord shall communicate are at present unknown. Perhaps his words will be similar to those he uttered when he descended from heaven and then "stood in the midst" of the Nephites at Bountiful: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world" (3 Ne. 11:8, 10).

and the nations of the earth shall mourn, and they that have laughed shall see their folly. These words reveal that earth's nations will mourn after the events described in D&C 45:47-49. Rev. 1:7 speaks similarly: "Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him: and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him" (see also Matt. 24:30).

Zech. 12:10-14 describes the mourning not of the nations but of the Jews. After they look upon Christ and recognize his wounds, they will "mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn. In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem" (Zech. 12:10-11; see also vv. 12-14). The nations and Jews will mourn because they rejected Christ as their Savior, Messiah, and King.

D&C 45:50 And calamity shall cover the mocker, and the scorner shall be consumed; and they that have watched for iniquity shall be hewn down and cast into the fire. The three types of wicked people identified in this verse—mocker, scorner, and they that have watched for iniquity—represent unrepentant sinners of every kind. The four types of destruction set forth in this verse—calamity, consumed, hewn down, and cast into the fire—depict the manner in which sinners will be destroyed at Christ's second coming. The phrase watched for iniquity probably means that wicked people look for opportunities to commit, participate in, or take part in iniquity. They actively seek chances to be iniquitous, rather than just committing sins of omission.

D&C 45:51 then shall the Jews look upon me and say. Zechariah prophesied of this event with these words: "And they shall look upon me whom they have pierced" (Zech. 12:10). After Christ sets his foot on the Mount of Olives, and after the other events described in D&C 45:47-50, then the Jews will look upon Christ and ask about the wounds they see on his body.

What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet? The Jews will look upon Christ and ask, "What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet?" Zechariah prophesied of this event with, "And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands?" (Zech. 13:6). In the poignant event depicted here, the Jews will begin to see that they have been deceived about the identity of their Lord.

D&C 45:52 Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God. Zechariah's version of these events is abbreviated: "Then he shall answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends" (Zech. 13:6). The latter- day revelation just cited (D&C 45:52) identifies the speaker explicitly as Jesus, the Son of God. In addition, the latter-day revelation identifies Christ as one who was "lifted up" and "crucified." Note Christ's four statements, his testimony that he is the Crucified One, each beginning with the personal pronoun I:

"I was wounded in the house of my friends."

"I am he who was lifted up."

"I am Jesus that was crucified."

"I am the Son of God."

After Christ provides this testimony, and after viewing the marks in his hands and feet, then the Jews will at last understand and "know" that he is "the Lord."

The phrase "the house of my friends," found in both Zech. 13:6 and D&C 45:52, may indicate that perhaps some of Jesus' friends, acquired during his mortal ministry, betrayed him to some extent and favored the crucifixion. More likely, the phrase seems to speak of his own people, the Jewish nation, which sought his crucifixion.

After citing D&C 45:51-52, Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "And thus cometh the day of the conversion of the Jews. It is a millennial day, a day after the destruction of the wicked, a day when those who remain shall seek the Lord and find his gospel." [^21]

D&C 45:53 then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king. On this heartrending occasion, the Jews will be filled with profound grief. They will see that they rejected their very Savior, that they have lived for millennia in a degree of spiritual darkness, that they have lost rich opportunities to know and love and be blessed by their Lord. The evocative words weep and lament suggest heartfelt sorrow and mourning that goes to the deepest core of their being.

The Redemption of Judah and Jerusalem

D&C 109:61-64, 67

61 But thou knowest that thou hast a great love for the children of Jacob, who have been scattered upon the mountains for a long time, in a cloudy and dark day.

62 We therefore ask thee to have mercy upon the children of Jacob, that Jerusalem, from this hour, may begin to be redeemed;

63 And the yoke of bondage may begin to be broken off from the house of David;

64 And the children of Judah may begin to return to the lands which thou didst give to Abraham, their father. . . .

67 And may all the scattered remnants of Israel, who have been driven to the ends of the earth, come to a knowledge of the truth, believe in the Messiah, and be redeemed from oppression, and rejoice before thee.

This passage from the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple, offered on 27 March 1836, provides details regarding the redemption of the Jews and their city, Jerusalem. There is a reciprocal relationship in these verses between God and the Jews, a remnant of the house of Israel. God, on the one hand, will redeem the Jews because of his "great love" for them in his "mercy"; the Jews, on the other hand, will be redeemed as they "come to a knowledge of the truth" and "believe in the Messiah." The word redeemed, then, is used here first in connection with God's mercy upon the Jews and Jerusalem (v. 62), and again with the Jews' (and all the remnants of Israel) coming to the truth and accepting Jesus Christ (v. 67).

Notes and Commentary

D&C 109:61 great love for the children of Jacob. God's perfect love for his children is the reason he keeps his covenants with us and remembers to restore Israel to their homelands and to the truth of the gospel.

scattered upon the mountains for a long time. The phrase "scattered upon the mountains" probably means "scattered throughout the nations." Members of the house of Israel, including Judah, have been scattered throughout the lands of the world for millennia. Perhaps the first great scattering occurred in 722-721 b.c., when the ten tribes were deported from their homeland and taken northward from ancient Palestine by the Assyrians. More than a century later the kingdom of Judah was destroyed by the Babylonians and many of Judah's people were scattered. Subsequent scatterings have occurred, so that Nephi prophesied, "Wherefore, the Jews shall be scattered among all nations; . . . wherefore, the Jews shall be scattered by other nations" (2 Ne. 25:15). Nephi also predicted concerning the Jews that they would be "scattered, and the Lord God [would scourge] them by other nations for the space of many generations, yea, even down from generation to generation until they shall be persuaded to believe in Christ, the Son of God, and the atonement" (2 Ne. 25:16).

a cloudy and dark day. This figure of speech may symbolize a time when the light of the gospel does not shine upon certain groups, or it may symbolize a time of trouble and tribulation.

D&C 109:62 We therefore ask thee to have mercy upon the children of Jacob. The Prophet Joseph Smith spoke for all of us when he used the plural pronoun we in "We therefore ask thee . . ." All of us should plead for God to extend mercy upon other members of the house of Jacob.

Jerusalem, from this hour, may begin to be redeemed. Since this dedicatory prayer, the city of Jerusalem has received tens of thousands of Jews, who have built homes, schools, parks, and businesses in the earliest stages of the redemption of her inhabitants.

D&C 109:63 the yoke of bondage may begin to be broken off. The yoke of bondage may refer to the nations who captured, scattered, persecuted, or enslaved the Jews through the ages to the present time; or it may speak of the great burden of sin or ignorance that accompanies all of us until we are taught and we repent and receive forgiveness (cf. Isa. 58:6).

the house of David. This expression is another name for the Jews, or those descended through the lineage of Judah, of which group King David was a prominent member.

D&C 109:64 the children of Judah may begin to return to the lands. After the time of this dedicatory prayer, history records that great numbers of Jews sought and returned to their homeland, beginning the fulfillment of many prophecies of their return (see, for example, Isa. 11:11-16; Isa. 14:1-3; Jer. 3:14-20; Jer. 50:19-20; Ezek. 11:17-21; Amos 9:11-15; 2 Ne. 25:9-11).

which thou didst give to Abraham, their father. This passage refers to the Abrahamic covenant, in which the Lord promised Abraham that his posterity would receive lands of promise. Abraham recorded: "The Lord appeared unto me, and said unto me: Arise, and take Lot with thee; for I have purposed to take thee away out of Haran, and to make of thee a minister to bear my name in a strange land which I will give unto thy seed after thee for an everlasting possession, when they hearken to my voice" (Abr. 2:6). Also, "I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan" (Gen. 17:8; see also Gen. 12:7; 13:15; 15:18).

D&C 109:67 all the scattered remnants of Israel. The prayer speaks of all the remnants of Israel, including the ten tribes, the Lamanites, and the Jews.

who have been driven to the ends of the earth. All of the remnants or branches of Israel have been scattered throughout the world, as many prophets have explained in plain terms (Jer. 29:18; Ezek. 12:15; 34:6; Amos 9:9; Zech. 7:14; 1 Ne. 10:12). Nephi's words are clear: "The house of Israel, sooner or later, will be scattered upon all the face of the earth, and also among all nations. . . . Yea, the more part of all the tribes have been led away; and they are scattered to and fro upon the isles of the sea; and whither they are none of us knoweth, save that we know that they have been led away. . . . Wherefore, they shall be scattered among all nations" (1 Ne. 22:3-5).

come to a knowledge of the truth, believe in the Messiah, and be redeemed from oppression, and rejoice before thee. Note the apparent cause-and-effect relationship that exists in these four clauses (which are separated by the three commas): the scattered remnants of Israel who seek and receive the truth and believe that Jesus Christ is the Messiah (the cause) will receive the blessings of redemption and joy (the effect). Note also the chronological order of the four clauses; they represent sequential acts of the investigator of religious truth: one must first receive the truth, which brings one to faith or a belief in Jesus Christ, which is followed by redemption, and after redemption comes true joy in knowing that one has come unto Christ.

---
Notas:
[^1] The New Jerusalem is built in Independence, Missouri. 2. Zion is redeemed after she fulfills certain conditions. 3. Zion flourishes and blossoms like a beautiful flower before Christ's coming. 4. Zion is a place of safety for the Saints. 5. Zion and her stakes serve as a refuge from the world's wickedness and God's judgments on sinners. 6. God blesses Zion with great blessings; she shall never be destroyed. 7. The Lord blesses Zion with his glory and light. 8. Zion, or the New Jerusalem, prepares the Saints for Christ's coming. 9. A great temple is built in Independence, Missouri. 10. The Lord appears in glory to Zion. 11. The Lord loves Zion and its inhabitants: it is his city, and its inhabitants are his people. History of the Church, 4:609-10.
[^2] History of the Church, 2:381.
[^3] History of the Church, 4:610.
[^4] Conference Report, Oct. 1968, 61-62.
[^5] Ensign, May 1986, 30. Elder Bruce R. McConkie also defined Zion in Millennial Messiah, 282-84.
[^6] History of the Church, 1:189.
[^7] See Dahl and Cannon, Teachings of Joseph Smith, 277; Dyer, Refiner's Fire, 17-18.
[^8] In Smith and Sjodahl, Commentary, 147.
[^9] Doctrines of Salvation, 3:72.
[^10] Millennial Messiah, 294.
[^11] History of the Church, 6:318-19.
[^12] Refiner's Fire, 22.
[^13] Ensign, May 1978, 81.
[^14] Journal of Discourses, 16:276.
[^15] History of the Church, 5:423.
[^16] For a discussion of Zion's Camp, which marched in 1834, see Roberts, Missouri Persecutions, 128-51.
[^17] Conference Report, Oct. 1955, 14-15.
[^18] Ensign, Nov. 1991, 59.
[^19] History of the Church, 2:128.
[^20] See the commentary on this phrase, page 86.
[^21] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 149-51.
