Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Signs of the Times ( 1999)

Chapter 4

Zion and the New Jerusalem

Signs of the Times

Joseph Smith declared that the building of Zion in the latter days "is a cause that has interested the people of God in every age; it is a theme upon which prophets, priests and kings have dwelt with peculiar delight; they have looked forward with joyful anticipation to the day in which we live; and fired with heavenly and joyful anticipations they have sung and written and prophesied of this our day; but they died without the sight; we are the favored people that God has made choice of to bring about the Latter-day glory." [^1]

The prophets have used numerous expressions to characterize Zion that are both prophetic and descriptive: peace, refuge, safety, rejoice, flourish, glory, ensign, Mount Zion, beauty, holiness, prosper, glorious, very great, very terrible, honor, the pure in heart, multiplicity of blessings, songs of everlasting joy, kingdom of our God and his Christ, strength, power, light, standard for the nations, defense, Holy City, and New Jerusalem (D&C 45:66; 49:25; 64:41; 82:14; 84:2; 97:18, 21, 28; 101:18; 105:32; 113:8; 115:5; Moses 7:62). These and other expressions create feelings of wonderment, joy, and great anticipation in the hearts of the Saints.

The nations of the world will in a future day also stand in awe because of Zion. They shall say, "Surely Zion is the city of our God" and "surely Zion cannot fall" (D&C 97:19) they "shall tremble because of her, and shall fear because of her terrible ones" (D&C 64:43) they will hold in high esteem those who are privileged to have been born in her (Ps. 87:5). The time will come when Zion will be called "the perfection of beauty" (Ps. 50:2) and "the joy of the whole earth" (Ps. 48:2) she will be known as the "city of God" (87:3), the "city of the great King" (Ps. 48:2), and the "city of our God" (D&C 97:19).

Joseph Smith, who saw in vision "the armies of heaven protecting the Saints in their return to Zion," [^2] summarized that the building of Zion is a "work that God and angels have contemplated with delight for generations past; that fired the souls of the ancient patriarchs and prophets." [^3]

Other prophets and apostles have also defined Zion. Elder Harold B. Lee explained that "there are several meanings of the word Zion.

"It may have reference to the hill named Mt. Zion or by extension in the land of Jerusalem. [See Micah 4:2.

"It has sometimes been used, as by the prophet Micah, to refer to the location of 'the mountain of the house of the Lord'—as some place apart from Jerusalem.

"Zion was so called by Enoch in reference to the 'City of Holiness,' or the 'City of Enoch.' [See Moses 7:18-19. The Land of Zion has been used to refer, in some connotations, to the Western Hemisphere.

"But there is another most significant use of the term by which the Church of God is called Zion, comprising, according to the Lord's own definition, 'the pure in heart.' (D&C 97:21.)" [^4]

Elder Robert D. Hales provided many specific statements that explain what Zion means to each of us. "Zion is characterized in scripture as a city in which the people 'were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them.' (Moses 7:18.) Zion is 'every man seeking the interest of his neighbor, and doing all things with an eye single to the glory of God.' (D&C 82:19.) This promised Zion always seems to be a little beyond our reach. We need to understand that as much virtue can be gained in progressing toward Zion as in dwelling there. It is a process as well as a destination. We approach or withdraw from Zion through the manner in which we conduct our daily dealings, live within our families, whether we pay an honest tithe and generous fast offering, how we seize opportunities to serve and do so diligently. Many are perfected upon the road to Zion who will never see the city in mortality." [^5]

Independence, the Center Place

D&C 57:1-3

1 Hearken, O ye elders of my church, saith the Lord your God, who have assembled yourselves together, according to my commandments, in this land, which is the land of Missouri, which is the land which I have appointed and consecrated for the gathering of saints.

2 Wherefore, this is the land of promise, and the place for the city of Zion.

3 And thus saith the Lord your God, if you will receive wisdom here is wisdom. Behold, the place which is now called Independence is the center place; and a spot for the temple is lying westward, upon a lot which is not far from the courthouse.

Truths regarding the New Jerusalem have been revealed line upon line through Joseph Smith. In 1829 the Prophet learned as he translated the Book of Mormon that America is the place for the New Jerusalem (Ether 13:2-10), which would be built by the house of Israel (3 Ne. 21:23). In September 1830, the Lord promised to reveal the location of the city Zion (D&C 28:9) on 9 February 1831 he promised, "Thou shalt ask, and it shall be revealed unto you in mine own due time where the New Jerusalem shall be built" (D&C 42:62). D&C 45:66-75 defines the New Jerusalem as a place of refuge, peace, and safety; D&C 57 sets forth Independence as the place of the New Jerusalem and its temple (D&C 57:1-3). This section was revealed after the Prophet inquired, "When will the wilderness blossom as the rose? When will Zion be built up in her glory, and where will Thy temple stand, unto which all nations shall come in the last days?" [^6] The same revelation explains that the land should be purchased for "an everlasting inheritance" (D&C 57:4-6) and provides instructions for settling the land (D&C 57:7-16).

D&C 57:1-3 speaks of an actual physical gathering of Saints, for geographical terms are used: land is mentioned four times, place three times, city once, and the proper names Missouri and Independence are identified. The revelation specifically identifies the location of the temple: a lot not far from the courthouse. The ground where the temple will be built in Independence, Missouri, is sacred space and consecrated land (D&C 57:1): "The Garden of Eden was in Jackson County—the Center Place of Zion where a great temple will be reared." [^7]

Many Saints will someday return to Jackson County to build the temple. The Lord comforted his people by revealing, "Zion shall not be moved out of her place, notwithstanding her children are scattered" (D&C 101:17). Elder Orson F. Whitney wrote: "Will our mission end here [in Utah]? Is the State of Utah the proper monument to the 'Mormon' people? No. . . . The monument to 'Mormonism' will stand in Jackson County, [Missouri]. There the great City will be built: There Zion will arise and shine, 'the joy of the whole Earth,' and there the Lord will come to His temple in His own time, when His people shall have made the required preparation." [^8] President Joseph Fielding Smith declared that "the center place, where the City New Jerusalem is to be built, is in Jackson County, Missouri. It was never the intention to substitute Utah or any other place for Jackson County." [^9] Elder Bruce R. McConkie commented in 1982: "There is no present call for the saints to purchase land or to live in Jackson Couny or in any place connected therewith. The revealed word relative to the gathering to Independence and its environs will come through the prophet of God on earth. When it does come . . . that call will not be for the saints in general to assemble there. The return to Jackson County will be by delegates, as it were. Those whose services are needed there will assemble as appointed. The rest of Israel will remain in their appointed places." [^10]

Notes and Commentary

D&C 57:1 Hearken. Pay strict heed.

D&C 57:1-2 land of Missouri. Four expressions here define Missouri's important future role in the building of Zion and its temple: Missouri is the appointed land, the consecrated land, the land of promise, and the place for the city of Zion. Other revelations explain that the land of Zion is God's "goodly land" (D&C 103:24), the land of inheritance for the faithful (D&C 52:42), "a choice land above all other lands, a chosen land of the Lord" (Ether 13:2), the place for the Lord's "holy sanctuary" (Ether 13:3). Article of Faith 10 affirms that "Zion (the New Jerusalem) will be built upon the American continent."

the land which I have appointed. The land of Missouri was appointed for the Saints' gathering long ago, and that appointment has not changed. Many Saints will yet gather there. D&C 101:20 states, "There is none other place appointed than that which I have appointed; neither shall there be any other place appointed than that which I have appointed, for the work of the gathering of my saints."

consecrated. To be consecrated is to be hallowed and set apart. The Lord himself consecrated the land of Zion (D&C 52:2; 103:24).

land of promise. The Jaredites (Ether 2:7-15), Nephites (1 Ne. 2:20; 5:5), Jews (2 Ne. 9:2), and others possessed or will yet possess lands of promise. The land of promise for the Latter-day Saints is "a land flowing with milk and honey," a land "upon which there shall be no curse when the Lord cometh," a land of "inheritance" both "while the earth shall stand" and "again in eternity, no more to pass away" (D&C 38:18-20).

D&C 57:3 here is wisdom. The Lord explains that what follows is his will.

Independence is the center place. Elsewhere Joseph Smith spoke regarding Zion and the "center" with these words: "You know there has been great discussion in relation to Zion—where it is, and where the gathering of the dispensation is, and which I am now going to tell you. The prophets have spoken and written upon it; but I will make a proclamation that will cover a broader ground. The whole of America is Zion itself from north to south, and is described by the Prophets, who declare that it is the Zion where the mountain of the Lord should be, and that it should be in the center of the land. When Elders shall take up and examine the old prophecies in the Bible, they will see it." [^11]

the temple. The temple is again mentioned in D&C 84:3-5, where the Lord explains that it will "be built unto the Lord, and a cloud shall rest upon it, which cloud shall be even the glory of the Lord, which shall fill the house" (see also D&C 84:31; 97:10).

a lot which is not far from the courthouse. According to Elder Alvin R. Dyer, "the courthouse [in Independence] was built in 1827.Â½ . . . It was first erected at Lexington Avenue and Lynn Street, just a little northeast of its present location. It remained there until 1916 when it was moved and restored at its present location, on West Kansas just west of Main Street.

"In its former location it was almost directly east of the spot of ground (River Street, just south of Lexington Avenue), where the Prophet Joseph Smith stood, on August 3, 1831, and pronounced a dedication for the erection of a temple on this consecrated land." [^12]

When Will Zion Be Redeemed?

D&C 105:9-19, 23, 27-41

9 Therefore, in consequence of the transgressions of my people, it is expedient in me that mine elders should wait for a little season for the redemption of Zion—

10 That they themselves may be prepared, and that my people may be taught more perfectly, and have experience, and know more perfectly concerning their duty, and the things which I require at their hands.

11 And this cannot be brought to pass until mine elders are endowed with power from on high.

12 For behold, I have prepared a great endowment and blessing to be poured out upon them, inasmuch as they are faithful and continue in humility before me.

13 Therefore it is expedient in me that mine elders should wait for a little season, for the redemption of Zion.

14 For behold, I do not require at their hands to fight the battles of Zion; for, as I said in a former commandment, even so will I fulfil—I will fight your battles.

15 Behold, the destroyer I have sent forth to destroy and lay waste mine enemies; and not many years hence they shall not be left to pollute mine heritage, and to blaspheme my name upon the lands which I have consecrated for the gathering together of my saints.

16 Behold, I have commanded my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., to say unto the strength of my house, even my warriors, my young men, and middle-aged, to gather together for the redemption of my people, and throw down the towers of mine enemies, and scatter their watchmen;

17 But the strength of mine house have not hearkened unto my words.

18 But inasmuch as there are those who have hearkened unto my words, I have prepared a blessing and an endowment for them, if they continue faithful.

19 I have heard their prayers, and will accept their offering; and it is expedient in me that they should be brought thus far for a trial of their faith. . . .

23 And let all my people who dwell in the regions round about be very faithful, and prayerful, and humble before me, and reveal not the things which I have revealed unto them, until it is wisdom in me that they should be revealed. . . .

27 And I will soften the hearts of the people, as I did the heart of Pharaoh, from time to time, until my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and mine elders, whom I have appointed, shall have time to gather up the strength of my house,

28 And to have sent wise men, to fulfil that which I have commanded concerning the purchasing of all the lands in Jackson county that can be purchased, and in the adjoining counties round about.

29 For it is my will that these lands should be purchased; and after they are purchased that my saints should possess them according to the laws of consecration which I have given.

30 And after these lands are purchased, I will hold the armies of Israel guiltless in taking possession of their own lands, which they have previously purchased with their moneys, and of throwing down the towers of mine enemies that may be upon them, and scattering their watchmen, and avenging me of mine enemies unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me.

31 But first let my army become very great, and let it be sanctified before me, that it may become fair as the sun, and clear as the moon, and that her banners may be terrible unto all nations;

32 That the kingdoms of this world may be constrained to acknowledge that the kingdom of Zion is in very deed the kingdom of our God and his Christ; therefore, let us become subject unto her laws.

33 Verily I say unto you, it is expedient in me that the first elders of my church should receive their endowment from on high in my house, which I have commanded to be built unto my name in the land of Kirtland.

34 And let those commandments which I have given concerning Zion and her law be executed and fulfilled, after her redemption.

35 There has been a day of calling, but the time has come for a day of choosing; and let those be chosen that are worthy.

36 And it shall be manifest unto my servant, by the voice of the Spirit, those that are chosen; and they shall be sanctified;

37 And inasmuch as they follow the counsel which they receive, they shall have power after many days to accomplish all things pertaining to Zion.

38 And again I say unto you, sue for peace, not only to the people that have smitten you, but also to all people;

39 And lift up an ensign of peace, and make a proclamation of peace unto the ends of the earth;

40 And make proposals for peace unto those who have smitten you, according to the voice of the Spirit which is in you, and all things shall work together for your good.

41 Therefore, be faithful; and behold, and lo, I am with you even unto the end. Even so. Amen.

On 16 December 1833 the Lord revealed why Zion would not be redeemed at that time by explaining that among Church members "there were jarrings, and contentions, and envyings, and strifes, and lustful and covetous desires." Also, they "were slow to hearken unto the voice of the Lord their God," and "they esteemed lightly [his] counsel." It was "in consequence of their transgressions" that the Saints were "afflicted, and persecuted, and cast out from the land of their inheritance" (D&C 101:6-8, 1-2). In the same revelation the Lord provided hope and comfort to his people by promising a future redemption of Zion (especially vv. 9-19, 43-62). Seven months later, on 22 June 1834, the Lord told his Church to "wait for a little season for the redemption of Zion" (D&C 105:9, 13). He also set forth specific events that must take place or circumstances that must occur before Zion would be established, thus providing a general time frame for Zion's redemption. Some events and circumstances are explicitly named, and others are implicitly referenced in this revelation, now known as D&C 105, including the following duties of Church members:

Become "prepared" (v. 10).

"Be taught more perfectly" (v. 10).

"Have experience" (v. 10).

"Know more perfectly concerning their duty" (v. 10).

Receive the ordinances of the temple (vv. 11-12, 33).

Be faithful, prayerful, and humble (v. 23).

In addition, the Lord's servants are required to "gather up the strength of my house" (v. 27) and to purchase certain "lands in Jackson county" (vv. 28-30).

God's army must "become very great" and sanctified (v. 31).

Zion must "sue for peace," "lift up an ensign of peace, and make a proclamation of peace unto the ends of the earth; and make proposals for peace" (vv. 38-40).

President Spencer W. Kimball explained "three fundamental things we must do if we are to 'bring again Zion,' three things for which we who labor in Zion must commit ourselves.

"First, we must eliminate the individual tendency to selfishness that snares the soul, shrinks the heart, and darkens the mind. . . .

"Second, we must cooperate completely and work in harmony one with the other. There must be unanimity in our decisions and unity in our actions. . . .

"Third, we must lay on the altar and sacrifice whatever is required by the Lord. We begin by offering a 'broken heart and a contrite spirit.'" [^13]

In the last days, a great battle will take place between the Saints of God and the powers of evil. D&C 105 contains many terms concerning this battle: Zion, power, fight, battles, warriors, army, banners, enemies, towers, watchmen, armies, strength, destroyer, destroy, peace.

Notes and Commentary

D&C 105:9 in consequence of the transgressions of my people. This passage repeats what was stated in an earlier revelation: "I, the Lord, have suffered the affliction to come upon them, wherewith they have been afflicted, in consequence of their transgressions" (D&C 101:2; see also 103:4). President Lorenzo Snow taught that the specific transgression of the Saints was a failure to obey the law of consecration. [^14]

wait for a little season for the redemption of Zion. Perhaps for emphasis, this phrase is repeated in D&C 105:13. A little season is a period of time that began in the Prophet's lifetime and will continue until the Church fulfills the conditions listed in D&C 105.

D&C 105:10 be prepared. In 1834, the Church was a young organization, and its members were inexperienced in many aspects of building Zion in the last days. For example, Church members had not received the full temple ordinances as they exist in our temples today. Nor did the Saints at this time fully understand the role, power, and organization of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles; in fact, this quorum was not established until the following year. This verse sets forth four specific requirements that must be met before the redemption of Zion: the Saints need to become "prepared"; they need to "be taught more perfectly"; they need to "have experience"; and they need to "know more perfectly concerning their duty."

D&C 105:11 endowed with power from on high. This phrase, used elsewhere in the scriptures (D&C 38:32; 95:8), speaks about the temple endowment. Perhaps one cannot overemphasize the import of temples and temple ordinances in the building of Zion in the last days, for the temple serves as the very "foundation of Zion" (D&C 124:39), and the Lord's people gather for the purpose of enjoying the great blessings that come from the temple. [^15] Before the full and glorious redemption of Zion, Church members must receive the power, gifts, and blessings of the temple. Such endowments and blessings will be "poured out" in great abundance upon the heads of "thousands and tens of thousands" of souls (D&C 110:9).

D&C 105:14 I will fight your battles. On occasion the Lord assisted ancient Israel in defeating its enemies by fighting its battles. "The Lord shall fight for you" (Ex. 14:14; Deut. 1:30; Josh. 10:14, 42; 23:10; Judg. 20:35) was the promise; Jehovah himself marched ahead of the army (Judg. 4:14; Deut. 20:4; 2 Sam. 5:24) and many battles were called "the Lord's battles" (1 Sam. 18:17; 25:28; Num. 21:14). Perhaps God's involvement in battles of ancient Israel serves as a type of Zion in the last days, when he will again fight Israel'sÂ½ battles. In an earlier revelation, the Lord promised, "And their arm shall be my arm, and I will be their shield and their buckler; and I will gird up their loins, and they shall fight manfully for me; and their enemies shall be under their feet; and I will let fall the sword in their behalf, and by the fire of mine indignation will I preserve them" (D&C 35:14). Again, in D&C 98:37, the Lord pledged, "And I, the Lord, would fight their battles, and their children's battles, and their children's children's, until they had avenged themselves on all their enemies, to the third and fourth generation." These two passages fulfill words revealed to Isaiah: "For I [the Lord] will contend with him that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy children" (Isa. 49:25).

D&C 105:16 my warriors. These are the Lord's faithful servants, called here the "strength of [the Lord's] house" (see also D&C 101:55; 103:22, 30). Elsewhere we learn that the Lord's warriors wear the armor of God (Eph. 6) they battle against evil and the enemies of Zion through the power of the Atonement and by bearing pure testimony (Rev. 12:7-11). They may also go to battle in a more literal sense, wielding the power of God as Enoch did (Moses 7:13).

D&C 105:17 But the strength of mine house have not hearkened unto my words. This sentence summarizes the reason why Zion was not "redeemed" during the first decades after the restoration of the gospel: Only a few of the Lord's servants had responded to the call to join Zion's Camp, the "army" of brethren the Lord commanded to rescue the Saints in Missouri. [^16]

D&C 105:18 I have prepared a blessing and an endowment for them. This phrase was stated in D&C 105:12 and is repeated here for emphasis. The blessing and the endowment may be that which is bestowed on us in the temple and which we receive more fully as we keep our temple covenants and apply the principles of godliness in our lives.

D&C 105:23 faithful/prayerful/humble. These attributes are essential ones to Saints; those who embody these characteristics are thereby prepared to become a part of the Lord's people in Zion.

D&C 105:27 as I did the heart of Pharaoh. This reference likely refers to the time in history when Pharaoh of Egypt finally permitted Moses and the Israelites to depart from the land (Ex. 12:30-33). The scriptures cite numerous times when Pharaoh hardened his heart against Moses and his people, but finally Pharaoh permitted Israel to depart.

the strength of my house. This expression may refer to those the Lord calls "my warriors." See the commentary on D&C 105:16, page 163.

D&C 105:28 purchasing of all the lands in Jackson county. See the commentary on D&C 57:1-3, page 155.

D&C 105:29 laws of consecration. Elder Delbert L. Stapley taught in 1955: "The welfare program in operation since 1936 is a continuing plan for the people of the Church until a more perfect and higher plan is revealed. When we demonstrate our faith, worthiness, willingness, and unity to live fully the principles of the welfare plan, it will lead and prepare us for the higher law of the celestial kingdom. The Lord has affirmed in this dispensation: 'And Zion cannot be built up unless it is by the principles of the law of the celestial kingdom; otherwise I cannot receive her unto myself' (D&C 105:5)." [^17] President Gordon B. Hinckley taught another aspect of this law when he said, "If we are to build that Zion of which the prophets have spoken and of which the Lord has given mighty promise, we must set aside our consuming selfishness." [^18]

D&C 105:31 let my army become very great, . . . that it may become fair as the sun, and clear as the moon, and that her banners may be terrible unto all nations. The original scriptural source for this phrase is at present unknown, but the phrase is ancient, for King Solomon cited it when he wrote the Song of Solomon (Song. 6:10). The phrase here speaks of the Church after it comes out of the "wilderness of darkness" and["shine[s] forth" with greatness and power in the last days, even as the sun shines in its greatness and as the full moon lights up the night (D&C 109:73; 5:14). One can almost imagine mighty men gathered around a standard, bearing weapons, prepared for war, waiting for the command to battle. Such is the Church in the last days, prepared for battle against Satan and his troops of evil.

The army of the Lord in Zion appears also to be powerful in a mortal sense, as was Enoch's army, "the people of God" (Moses 7:13; see also D&C 45:20).

D&C 105:32 kingdoms of this world may be constrained to acknowledge that the kingdom of Zion is in very deed the kingdom of our God and his Christ. The day will come when earth's inhabitants will acknowledge that Zion is God's kingdom, established upon the earth. This event may find fulfillment in John's words, "And the seventh angel sounded; and there were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever" (Rev. 11:15).

D&C 105:33 receive their endowment from on high in my house. The heightened temple building program of the Church seems to indicate, at least in part, an urgency to prepare Zion for the last days.

D&C 105:34 her law be executed and fulfilled, after her redemption. The law of consecration will be in full effect after the redemption of Zion.

D&C 105:37 they shall have power . . . to accomplish all things pertaining to Zion. God has always given his people power to fulfill his commandments, as Nephi taught so beautifully (1 Ne. 3:7).

D&C 105:38-40 sue for peace. The leading Church elders formally sued for peace in July 1834 when they created and delivered a document that read, in part: "We, the undersigned, do make this solemn appeal to the people and constitutional authorities of this nation, and to the ends of the earth, for peace." [^19] The four imperatives in verses 38-40—sue for peace, lift up an ensign of peace, make a proclamation of peace, and make proposals for peace—also pertain to the preaching of Christ's gospel, which is the gospel of peace and which brings inner peace unto all who accept it.

D&C 105:41 I am with you even unto the end. Christ's Spirit will accompany the righteous even until the "end of the world" (Matt. 28:20), which signifies the end of wickedness. This is a promise of protection, of support, of guidance, and of comfort.

Zion Will Flourish Before Christ Comes

D&C 49:24-28

24 But before the great day of the Lord shall come, Jacob shall flourish in the wilderness, and the Lamanites shall blossom as the rose.

25 Zion shall flourish upon the hills and rejoice upon the mountains, and shall be assembled together unto the place which I have appointed.

26 Behold, I say unto you, go forth as I have commanded you; repent of all your sins; ask and ye shall receive; knock and it shall be opened unto you.

27 Behold, I will go before you and be your rearward; and I will be in your midst, and you shall not be confounded.

28 Behold, I am Jesus Christ, and I come quickly. Even so. Amen.

These verses may speak of a restoration of deserts, as Latter-day Saint communities cultivate and irrigate acres of land in Utah and elsewhere, bringing forth great crops and forests. More significantly, however, the verses refer metaphorically to the way that Jacob and the Lamanites will flourish spiritually, as they "repent of all [their] sins" and communicate with God in prayer by "asking" and "knocking" (D&C 49:26). The verbs flourish (used twice) and blossom liken Jacob and the Lamanites to plants. As they receive the light of Christ and the gifts of the Spirit, they will flourish spiritually, as plants flower after receiving water and sunlight. Zion shall rejoice upon the hills and flourish is found three times in the Doctrine and Covenants, underscoring its import (see D&C 35:24; 39:13; 49:25).

Isaiah used similar imagery:

The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them; and the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose. It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing: the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon. (Isa. 35:1-2)

Israel shall "blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit" (Isa. 27:6). For Isaiah's prophetic world, the words desert and wilderness relate not only to a barren and desolate land but to a people or a nation (Isa. 1:30) who lack the living waters of Jesus Christ. When Isaiah prophesies that the desert shall blossom as the rose, he refers to the restoration of the gospel. At the time of the Great Apostasy the Church was driven "into the wilderness" (D&C 86:3), but when the gospel was restored through Joseph Smith, the Church came forth from the wilderness (D&C 5:14).

Notes and Commentary

D&C 49:24 the great day of the Lord. This phrase refers to the Second Coming (cf. Isa. 2:10-22).

Jacob shall flourish in the wilderness. This passage speaks of Jacob, Lamanites, and Zion, which shall flourish (repeated twice) in the wilderness and on the hills. Other scriptures use similar metaphors (Isa. 27:6; 35:1; D&C 35:24; 39:13). Of note is the word rejoice, also used in these passages: "and the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose" (Isa. 35:1) "it shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing" (Isa. 35:2) "Zion shall rejoice upon the hills and flourish" (D&C 35:24) "bring forth Zion, that it may rejoice upon the hills and flourish" (D&C 39:13) "Zion shall flourish upon the hills and rejoice upon the mountains" (D&C 49:25). As soon as the gospel was restored to the earth in this dispensation, Jacob or the house of Israel began to flourish as a flower in the wilderness germinates and grows. This rejoicing and flourishing come to Israel from Christ and his power to bring light, nourishment, and living water to all who draw unto him.

the Lamanites shall blossom as the rose. The Lamanites, a remnant of the house of Israel, shall flourish and blossom (see also 2 Ne. 30:6; 3 Ne. 5:22; D&C 3:20; 28:8; 30:6) as a rose blossoms when receiving light and water. [^20]

D&C 49:25 the place which I have appointed. See the commentary on D&C 57:1-3, page 154.

D&C 49:26 Behold. The word means "pay attention." It is repeated three times in the final three verses of D&C 49.

repent of all your sins. Zion flourishes when she repents of her sins, individually and collectively.

ask and ye shall receive; knock and it shall be opened unto you. Note the two parties involved in prayer; one asks and knocks; the other, God, answers and opens (see also D&C 88:63).

D&C 49:27 I will go before you and be your rearward. The Lord's promise parallels the words of Isaiah: "The Lord will go before you; and the God of Israel will be your rereward" (Isa. 52:12). Like the captain of an army, God will go before his people, leading them and protecting them; and similar to a military rear guard, the Lord will safeguard his people from behind. In this, as in all things, he is "the first and the last," our "Alpha and Omega." (Rev. 1:11; D&C 19:1).

I will be in your midst. This phrase, also found in 3 Ne. 21:24-25 with a discussion of the New Jerusalem, may speak of the Lord's Spirit that is ever-present among the righteous who are building Zion. The phrase may also refer to the Second Comforter, or Jesus Christ, who visits select souls. [^21]

you shall not be confounded. Other revelations promise that those who trust in the Lord "shall not be confounded" (D&C 84:116; Ps. 22:5; cf. 1 Pet. 2:6), meaning disgraced, confused, or destroyed (see also Ether 13:8).

D&C 49:28 I am Jesus Christ. The Lord identifies himself as the source of this revelation.

I come quickly. Later the Lord revealed, "And again, be patient in tribulation until I come; and, behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me, and they who have sought me early shall find rest to their souls" (D&C 54:10). [^22]

Zion, a Place of Refuge for the Saints

D&C 45:62-71

62 . . . verily I say unto you, that great things await you;

63 Ye hear of wars in foreign lands; but, behold, I say unto you, they are nigh, even at your doors, and not many years hence ye shall hear of wars in your own lands.

64 Wherefore I, the Lord, have said, gather ye out from the eastern lands, assemble ye yourselves together ye elders of my church; go ye forth into the western countries, call upon the inhabitants to repent, and inasmuch as they do repent, build up churches unto me.

65 And with one heart and with one mind, gather up your riches that ye may purchase an inheritance which shall hereafter be appointed unto you.

66 And it shall be called the New Jerusalem, a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God;

67 And the glory of the Lord shall be there, and the terror of the Lord also shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it, and it shall be called Zion.

68 And it shall come to pass among the wicked, that every man that will not take his sword against his neighbor must needs flee unto Zion for safety.

69 And there shall be gathered unto it out of every nation under heaven; and it shall be the only people that shall not be at war one with another.

70 And it shall be said among the wicked: Let us not go up to battle against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible; wherefore we cannot stand.

71 And it shall come to pass that the righteous shall be gathered out from among all nations, and shall come to Zion, singing with songs of everlasting joy.

Two reasons for Zion's existence are to prepare a people for the Lord's coming and to protect the Saints during the wars and desolations of the last days. D&C 45:62-71 promises shelter for those who gather to Zion, or the New Jerusalem, while wars rage among peoples far and near. The revelation describes geographical aspects of the New Jerusalem with the terms land, city, and place, while the words peace, refuge, safety, and Zion set forth her protective nature. The New Jerusalem will be a place of great safety for the following reasons:

"The glory of the Lord shall be there" (D&C 45:67).

"The terror of the Lord also shall be there" (D&C 45:67; see also vv. 74-75).

"The wicked will not come unto it" (D&C 45:67).

Zion's inhabitants will lack the desire to battle (D&C 45:68).

Zion "shall be the only people that shall not be at war one with another" (D&C 45:69).

The wicked will say, "Let us not go up to battle against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible; wherefore we cannot stand" (D&C 45:70).

Joseph Smith explained the importance of Zion as a place of safety: "Without Zion, and a place of deliverance, we must fall; because the time is near when the sun will be darkened, and the moon turn to blood, and the stars fall from heaven, and the earth reel to and fro. . . . God will gather out his Saints from the Gentiles, and then comes desolation and destruction, and none can escape except the pure in heart who are gathered." [^23] On another occasion he remarked, "We ought to have the building up of Zion as our greatest object. When wars come, we shall have to flee to Zion. The cry is to make haste." [^24]

Notes and Commentary

D&C 45:62 great things await you. "Great things" may refer to the wars mentioned in D&C 45:63, 68-70; or more likely the expression speaks of the blessing of the New Jerusalem, a wonderful place of peace, refuge, and safety for the Lord's Saints, where both the glory and the terror of the Lord will be found.

D&C 45:63 Ye hear of wars. Many wars will occur before Christ's second coming, both in "foreign lands" and on the American continent ("your own lands"). The phrase "not many years hence ye shall hear of wars in your own lands" may speak particularly of the American Civil War (see also D&C 38:29; 87:1; 130:12).

D&C 45:64-65 gather/assemble/go ye forth/call upon the inhabitants/build up churches/purchase an inheritance. These imperatives summarize the work of building Zion.

D&C 45:65 with one heart and with one mind. The building of Zion must be accomplished with unity of purpose; the people of Enoch's Zion similarly were of a single heart and mind: "And the Lord called his people ZION, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them" (Moses 7:18). In direct connection with these words is the inspired instruction of Elder Henry B. Eyring, who related: "Not long ago a man asked me, 'Does your church still believe that when Christ comes you will be living as one, the way they did in the city of Enoch?' He put a spin on the word still, as if we might not believe such a thing anymore. I said, 'Yes, we do.' And then he said, 'You are the people who could do it.'" [^25]

D&C 45:66-67 it shall be called Zion. These verses define Zion. It is a place where God's Saints shall be. It has many names, including New Jerusalem and Zion. Geographically, it is a land, a city, and a place. And five nouns emphasize it as a place of protection: Jerusalem (Hebrew, "city of peace"), peace, refuge, safety, and Zion (in the Hebrew, Zion denotes a stronghold, as in "citadel," "castle," or "crest of a hill"). [^26] Verse 67 declares that Zion will be a place of peace and safety for the following three reasons: "the glory of the Lord shall be there," "the terror of the Lord also shall be there," and "the wicked will not come into it."

D&C 45:67 glory of the Lord shall be there. Isaiah prophesied that "the glory of the Lord" would come upon the New Jerusalem: "Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. . . . The Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee" (Isa. 60:1-2; D&C 64:41).

terror of the Lord also shall be there. The phrase terror of the Lord is repeated in D&C 45:75. The wicked will not come into Zion because both the glory and the terror of the Lord will be there. Webster's 1828 American Dictionary of the English Language (the edition contemporaneous with this revelation) defines terror as "that which may excite dread; the cause of extreme fear" or "awful majesty." The Lord's awful majesty will excite dread in the hearts of the wicked, causing them to "stand afar off and tremble" (D&C 45:74).

the wicked will not come unto it. It is difficult (but wonderful) to imagine a place where there is no wickedness—no immorality, no criminals, liars, robbers, perjurers, adulterers, murderers, rapists, and so forth—but such is the description of Zion.

D&C 45:68 every man that will not take his sword against his neighbor. Those who do not wish to conduct war or be a part of the wars of the world will "flee unto Zion for safety" (D&C 45:68). D&C 45:68-71 contrasts the wicked with the righteous. The wicked are associated with the "sword," "war," and "battle"; the words "songs of everlasting joy" characterize the righteous.

D&C 45:69 there shall be gathered unto it out of every nation under heaven. This phrase is repeated twice (D&C 45:69, 71). The gathering in the last days will be universal, for people from all nations shall gather to Zion. The gathering is finding partial fulfillment now as missionaries labor in many countries of the world. In due time the gospel will be preached to all the world (Matt. 28:19-20), and converts "out of every nation" will become part of Zion. [^27]

the only people that shall not be at war one with another. While the nations contend and war against one another, Zion will be a fortress of peace for her inhabitants (D&C 45:66-67).

D&C 45:70 And it shall be said among the wicked: Let us not go up to battle against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible; wherefore we cannot stand. Other scriptural statements testify that Zion and her inhabitants will be terrible because the power of the Lord will be there. D&C 64:43 promises that "the day shall come when the nations of the earth shall tremble because of her, and shall fear because of her terrible ones." Isaiah wrote that people will "be afraid of the ensign" that belongs to Zion because the Lord's "fire is in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem" (Isa. 31:9). D&C 97:18-19 predicts that Zion "shall prosper, and spread herself and become very glorious, very great, and very terrible. And the nations of the earth shall honor her, and shall say: Surely Zion is the city of our God, and surely Zion cannot fall, neither be moved out of her place, for God is there, and the hand of the Lord is there." Zion and her inhabitants will require such respect and honor because God himself has "sworn by the power of his might to be her salvation and her high tower" (D&C 97:20). The phrase uttered by the wicked, "we cannot stand," corresponds to an earlier prophecy that "the nations of the earth shall bow to it; and, if not of themselves, they shall come down, for that which is now exalted of itself shall be laid low of power" (D&C 49:10; see also Isa. 60:14).

D&C 45:71 songs of everlasting joy. This expression (see also D&C 66:11) characterizes Zion and her people. It speaks of the Saints singing in worship, reverence, and devotion to their God and in joy at the many transcendent blessings God has poured out upon them. Isaiah foresaw the day when "the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away" (Isa. 35:10).

Zion and Her Stakes Are a Refuge from the Storm

D&C 115:4-6

4 For thus shall my church be called in the last days, even The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

5 Verily I say unto you all: Arise and shine forth, that thy light may be a standard for the nations;

6 And that the gathering together upon the land of Zion, and upon her stakes, may be for a defense, and for a refuge from the storm, and from wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth.

The revealed name of the Lord's Church (D&C 115:4) is set in context with the following terms, each of which bears on the Church in one way or another: light, standard for the nations, Zion, stakes, defense, and refuge. The last four terms pertain to the security that Church members will find against the great trials and tribulations of the last days. Zion, which speaks of a stronghold or citadel, [^28] together with her stakes, will serve as a temporal and spiritual defense and refuge to those who gather there (see also D&C 45:62-71). That meaning accords with two statements of Joseph Smith, uttered on different occasions: "The time is soon coming, when no man will have any peace but in Zion and her stakes"; [^29] "Without Zion, and a place of deliverance, we must fall." [^30]

Notes and Commentary

D&C 115:4 For thus shall my church be called. The Church, which bears the name of the Savior, was named by him. The Church's name accentuates the last days with the term Latter-day Saints.

D&C 115:5 Verily I say unto you all. Christ's revelation is directed to all, not just to the Church's prophet or the leading elders.

Arise and shine forth. These two commands are directed to all Church members. The command to arise encourages us to become spiritually active or to get to work and recalls similar words recorded in Isaiah, where Zion is commanded to "awake, awake . . . arise" (Isa. 52:1-2). The second command instructs us to let our light shine forth (forth denotes "outward" or "forward," that is, letting our light shine actively for all to see). A similar command was uttered in the Sermon on the Mount (Matt. 5:14-16) and in the Sermon at the Temple (3 Ne. 12:14-16). Our light, when it shines forth, is like a lighthouse that guides ships to safety, or as a banner set on a hill for all nations to see, fulfilling the Lord's injunction in this verse "that thy light may be a standard for the nations."

Isaiah, in beautiful chiastic poetry, similarly spoke of Zion in the last days when she would "arise, shine, for thy light is come":

AÂ½ Arise, Â½ BÂ½ shine; Â½Â½Â½ CÂ½ for thy light is come, Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ DÂ½ and the glory Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ EÂ½ of the Lord is risen upon thee. Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½aÂ½Â½Â½ FÂ½ For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½aÂ½ Â½ and gross darkness the people: Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ EÂ½ but the Lord shall arise upon thee, Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ DÂ½ and his glory shall be seen upon thee. Â½Â½Â½ CÂ½ And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, Â½ BÂ½ and kings to the brightness AÂ½ of thy rising. (Isa. 60:1-3)

D&C 115:6 land of Zion, and upon her stakes. The city of Independence is the center place in Missouri, which was called the "land of Zion" in an earlier revelation (D&C 57:1-3). Zion has expanded its borders, according to subsequent revelations, so that now its stakes are found in numerous countries of the world. D&C 82:14 reads, "For Zion must increase in beauty, and in holiness; her borders must be enlarged; her stakes must be strengthened." President Harold B. Lee referred to this verse when he taught: "The borders of Zion, where the righteous and pure in heart may dwell, must now begin to be enlarged. The stakes of Zion must be strengthened. All this so that Zion may arise and shine by becoming increasingly diligent in carrying out the plan of salvation throughout the world." [^31]

D&C 101:21 also speaks of Zion's stakes: "Until the day cometh when there is found no more room for them; and then I have other places which I will appoint unto them, and they shall be called stakes, for the curtains or the strength of Zion" (see also D&C 115:18).

for a defense, and for a refuge from the storm (see also D&C 124:36). Two words serve to define Zion: defense and refuge. A defense is a fortification or protective covering designed to protect an individual or an entire community. The defense in this verse seems to pertain to physical protection as well as to spiritual fortification against the forces of evil. A refuge, quite different from a defense, denotes a haven, shelter, or sanctuary. The storm here refers not to blizzards or hurricanes but to spiritual tempests that now rage upon the earth in many forms and of various kinds.

from wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth. This phrase recalls Rev. 14:10, which says of those who worship the beast, "The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation; and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb." While the righteous in Zion are enjoying the sweet blessings associated with the sacrament, the wicked will be experiencing God's judgments, drinking "the wine of the wrath of God."

God Will Multiply Blessings on Zion

D&C 97:18-28

18 And, now, behold, if Zion do these things she shall prosper, and spread herself and become very glorious, very great, and very terrible.

19 And the nations of the earth shall honor her, and shall say: Surely Zion is the city of our God, and surely Zion cannot fall, neither be moved out of her place, for God is there, and the hand of the Lord is there;

20 And he hath sworn by the power of his might to be her salvation and her high tower.

21 Therefore, verily, thus saith the Lord, let Zion rejoice, for this is Zion—THE PURE IN HEART; therefore, let Zion rejoice, while all the wicked shall mourn.

22 For behold, and lo, vengeance cometh speedily upon the ungodly as the whirlwind; and who shall escape it?

23 The Lord's scourge shall pass over by night and by day, and the report thereof shall vex all people; yea, it shall not be stayed until the Lord come;

24 For the indignation of the Lord is kindled against their abominations and all their wicked works.

25 Nevertheless, Zion shall escape if she observe to do all things whatsoever I have commanded her.

26 But if she observe not to do whatsoever I have commanded her, I will visit her according to all her works, with sore affliction, with pestilence, with plague, with sword, with vengeance, with devouring fire.

27 Nevertheless, let it be read this once to her ears, that I, the Lord, have accepted of her offering; and if she sin no more none of these things shall come upon her;

28 And I will bless her with blessings, and multiply a multiplicity of blessings upon her, and upon her generations forever and ever, saith the Lord your God. Amen.

These few verses set forth the wonderful blessings that await Zion in the last days. The terms prosper, glorious, great, terrible, honor, salvation, pure in heart, rejoice, and blessings all describe that which the Lord will make of Zion. The Lord promises us that Zion will "spread herself and become very glorious, very great, and very terrible" (D&C 97:18). This promise is being fulfilled as individuals throughout the world become part of Zion and become purified through the ordinances and Christ's atonement. The day is approaching when the nations will honor Zion, and they will say, "Surely Zion is the city of our God, and surely Zion cannot fall . . . for God is there, and the hand of the Lord is there" (v. 19).

Twice God tells Zion to rejoice ("let Zion rejoice"). She is to rejoice because she is in the hand of the Lord and because God himself "is there" (vv. 19-20), is "pure in heart" (v. 21), and her purity will protect her from the Lord's judgments (v. 25). If she is not pure and does not obey God's commands, however, Zion will suffer God's vengeance (vv. 25-26). At the same time that Zion (if obedient) rejoices and escapes God's judgments, "the wicked shall mourn" and experience the whirlwind and the scourge of the Lord (vv. 21-24).

Zion is God's city. By his power God will make certain that she will not fall or be moved, for he is her salvation and high tower: he will watch over Zion and defend her as a faithful watchman stands in his high tower to protect a city.

In verse 28 God emphasizes the numerous blessings that will be Zion's with the words bless and blessings. In fact, the revelation says that he will "multiply a multiplicity of blessings upon her."

Notes and Commentary

D&C 97:18 if Zion do these things. The previous verses of D&C 97 tell Zion what she must do to prosper: build a house unto the Lord "in the land of Zion" (v. 10); "let it be built speedily, by the tithing of my people" (v. 11); "do not suffer any unclean thing to come into it, that it be not defiled" (v. 15); and so on.

she shall prosper. Prosper, in this context, speaks of the spiritual prosperity that is found in Zion, including the gifts of the Spirit (healing, tongues, interpretation of tongues, knowledge, working of miracles, prophecy, discerning of spirits; 1 Cor. 12:9-10) and the fruits of the Spirit ("love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, self-control"; Gal. 5:22-23).

spread herself. Zion will become great in numbers and will "spread herself" throughout the world. The spreading of Zion is an important way to prepare people to receive Jesus Christ, as Elder Ezra Taft Benson taught: "Only a Zion people can bring in a Zion society. And as the Zion people increase, so we will be able to incorporate more of the principles of Zion until we have a people prepared to receive the Lord." [^32]

become very glorious, very great, and very terrible. Each of the three nouns—glorious, great, and terrible—is preceded by the term very, which accentuates Zion's prominence in the last days. [^33]

D&C 97:19 the nations of the earth shall honor her. An earlier revelation confirms that "the nations of the earth shall bow to it; and if not of themselves, they shall come down, for that which is now exalted of itself shall be laid low of power" (D&C 49:10). Isaiah prophesied similarly: "The sons also of them that afflicted thee shall come bending unto thee; and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee, The city of the Lord, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel" (Isa. 60:14).

Surely Zion is the city of our God. Note the emphatic beginning to this statement. The word surely means "certainly" or "assuredly." Zion is God's city because his power and presence are there and because the pure in heart dwell within her walls.

surely Zion cannot fall, neither be moved out of her place, for God is there, and the hand of the Lord is there. Zion cannot fall or be moved out of her place because God himself is there with his power and might (symbolized in the word hand).

D&C 97:20 he hath sworn by the power of his might to be her salvation and her high tower. God himself promises Zion's inhabitants that he will be as a great protective tower for this fortified city; the city of Zion represents the Saints' fortress, and their God is the watchtower of that fortress. 2 Sam. 22:3 speaks similarly: "The God of my rock; in him will I trust: he is my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high tower, and my refuge, my saviour; thou savest me from violence."

D&C 97:21 thus saith the Lord. The Lord is the speaker in this revelation.

let Zion rejoice. This command form is stated and then repeated for emphasis. The Lord explains why Zion will rejoice: because he is with her, protecting and blessing her.

for this is Zion—THE PURE IN HEART. This expression defines Zion. The pure in heart are those who have repented of their sins and made the Atonement effective in their lives.

"What do we mean when we use the word 'Zion'?" Elder Harold B. Lee asked. His response is important to our understanding of the meaning of Zion. "In some Biblical references, and in modern scripture, Zion is referred to as a place—a city. In other places it is referred to as a continent; but in another sense, the Lord has spoken of Zion in these words:

"'Therefore, verily, thus saith the Lord, let Zion rejoice, for this is Zion—THE PURE IN HEART; therefore, let Zion rejoice, while all the wicked shall mourn.' (D&C 97:21.)

"In other words, he is saying again what the Master said: 'The kingdom of God is within you.' Here, within the righteous heart of every member of the Church might be said to be the seed-corn of the growth of the Church. The pure in heart is the beginning of the growth of Zion. When the Lord therefore said: 'Zion must increase in beauty, and in[holiness'[ D&C 82:14], he was saying in effect, every individual member of the Church must strive to improve himself therein, within his own station, becoming greater in order to strengthen the place where he lives." [^34]

President Spencer W. Kimball also spoke of "purity of heart" with regard to Zion: "Zion is a name given by the Lord to his covenant people, who are characterized by purity of heart and faithfulness in caring for the poor, the needy, and the distressed." [^35]

while all the wicked shall mourn. As the pure in heart experience joy and the presence of God, the wicked mourn because of vengeance and the whirlwind of judgments they will experience.

D&C 97:22 vengeance cometh speedily upon the ungodly as the whirlwind. In the last days, the wicked will be destroyed by God's judgments as easily as the mighty whirlwind destroys all things in its path. Prov. 10:25 declares, "As the whirlwind passeth, so is the wicked no more: but the righteous is an everlasting foundation" (Prov. 10:25). Similarly, Jeremiah wrote, "Behold, a whirlwind of the Lord is gone forth in fury, even a grievous whirlwind: it shall fall grievously upon the head of the wicked" (Jer. 23:19).

D&C 97:23 The Lord's scourge shall pass over by night and by day. This scourge may be the same "overflowing scourge" or "desolating sickness" identified in D&C 45:31 (cf. Isa. 28:15). The scourge is one of God's judgments upon the wicked. It will be of such magnitude that "all people" will hear of it and will be vexed or tormented by it. Apparently the scourge will continue until the Lord's second coming: the revelation states that "it shall not be stayed until the Lord come."

D&C 97:24 For the indignation of the Lord is kindled against their abominations. The Lord will send forth his scourge because of the great evils that are committed by earth's inhabitants.

D&C 97:25-26 Zion shall escape if she observe to do all things whatsoever I have commanded her. If Zion obeys God's commandments, she will escape his vengeance and judgments, which are described as a scourge, sore affliction, pestilence, plague, sword, and devouring fire (see also D&C 84:58). President Joseph F. Smith referred to this verse with these words: "We firmly believe that Zion—which is the pure in heart—shall escape, if she observe to do all things whatsoever God has commanded; but, in the opposite event, even Zion shall be visited 'with sore affliction, with pestilence, with plague, with sword, with vengeance, and with devouring fire.' (D&C 97:26.) All this that her people may be taught to walk in the light of truth, and in the way of the God of their salvation." [^36]

D&C 97:28 And I will bless her with blessings. God promises that Zion will receive great blessings, multiplied many times. Note the emphatic pledge, "I will . . . multiply a multiplicity of blessings upon her."

The Glory of the Lord Will Be upon Zion in the Last Days

D&C 64:41-43

41 For, behold, I say unto you that Zion shall flourish, and the glory of the Lord shall be upon her;

42 And she shall be an ensign unto the people, and there shall come unto her out of every nation under heaven.

43 And the day shall come when the nations of the earth shall tremble because of her, and shall fear because of her terrible ones. The Lord hath spoken it. Amen.

These three verses refer to Zion as a woman, using the pronouns her four times and she once. Elsewhere the scriptures speak of Zion as the bride (Isa. 54:1-6; D&C 109:73-74) and the Lord as the bridegroom (Matt. 9:15; Rev. 21:9; D&C 33:17-18; 65:3). This metaphor between the Lord and his Church indicates the special and unique relationship that exists between them: the Lord is ever faithful and honorable to his bride, and the bride or the Church must remain pure and holy before the Lord.

The revelation teaches the following concepts about Zion:

She shall flourish (D&C 64:41).

The Lord's glory shall be upon her (D&C 64:41).

She shall be an ensign to the world (D&C 64:42).

People from all nations shall join her (D&C 64:42).

Nations shall tremble and fear because of her and her inhabitants (D&C 64:43).

Notes and Commentary

D&C 64:41 Zion shall flourish. Zion will prosper and grow like a flowering rose in the desert. [^37]

glory of the Lord shall be upon her. The glory of the Lord will also rest upon his holy temple, if those who worship therein are clean (D&C 97:15-17). [^38]

D&C 64:42 she shall be an ensign unto the people. Earth's inhabitants will notice Zion's light and glory; Zion will be like a flag or banner on the hill, and people will gather around the banner.

come unto her out of every nation. Zion will consist of people from all lands, nations, and tongues, who are united in their love of God and his truths and who desire to obey his commands.

D&C 64:43 nations of the earth shall tremble because of her. The Lord spoke similarly to ancient Israel through Moses: "This day will I begin to put the dread of thee and the fear of thee upon the nations that are under the whole heaven, who shall hear report of thee, and shall tremble, and be in anguish because of thee" (Deut. 2:25).

Latter-day scripture contains many great promises concerning Zion and the nations: earth's nations "shall honor [Zion]," in part because of their knowledge that "Zion cannot fall" and because "God is there" (D&C 97:19). Isaiah promised that the children of those who afflicted and despised Zion will someday call her "The city of the Lord, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel" (Isa. 60:14) and Jeremiah prophesied that nations will hear of the goodness and prosperity that the Lord imparts to Zion and will tremble and fear: "And it shall be to me a name of joy, a praise and an honour before all the nations of the earth, which shall hear all the good that I do unto them: and they shall fear and tremble for all the goodness and for all the prosperity that I procure unto it" (Jer. 33:9).

Zion, the New Jerusalem

Moses 7:62-64

62 And righteousness will I send down out of heaven; and truth will I send forth out of the earth, to bear testimony of mine Only Begotten; his resurrection from the dead; yea, and also the resurrection of all men; and righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out mine elect from the four quarters of the earth, unto a place which I shall prepare, an Holy City, that my people may gird up their loins, and be looking forth for the time of my coming; for there shall be my tabernacle, and it shall be called Zion, a New Jerusalem.

63 And the Lord said unto Enoch: Then shalt thou and all thy city meet them there, and we will receive them into our bosom, and they shall see us; and we will fall upon their necks, and they shall fall upon our necks, and we will kiss each other;

64 And there shall be mine abode, and it shall be Zion, which shall come forth out of all the creations which I have made; and for the space of a thousand years the earth shall rest.

In this remarkable revelation to Enoch, the Lord reveals much regarding the latter-day Zion. He designates this city by four names: Zion, New Jerusalem, Holy City, and mine abode. The first name attests that the city will be a place of safety: the Hebrew word Zion means "stronghold" or "citadel." [^39] New Jerusalem, the second name, relates Zion to Jerusalem of ancient Palestine but is marked New to differentiate it from Old Jerusalem; the third name, Holy City, shows Zion to be consecrated and set apart from other places; and the fourth, mine abode, indicates that Zion will be the Lord's home, where he will reign for a thousand years.

The Lord refers to Zion's inhabitants as "mine elect" and "my people," referring to his Saints. He affirms that his holy temple will be a part of the city. He provides a central purpose for Zion's existence: to prepare the people ("gird up their loins") for the Second Coming ("and be looking forth for the time of my coming"). The Lord informs Enoch that Enoch's own ancient city of Zion will one day join with the latter-day Zion; then "we [the Lord, Enoch, and the inhabitants of his ancient city] will receive them [the inhabitants of the New Jerusalem] into our bosom" (Moses 7:63).

Notes and Commentary

Moses 7:62 righteousness will I send down out of heaven; and truth will I send forth out of the earth. President Ezra Taft Benson gave this interpretation for these words: "The Lord promised, therefore, that righteousness would come from heaven and truth out of the earth. We have seen the marvelous fulfillment of that prophecy in our generation. The Book of Mormon has come forth out of the earth, filled with truth, serving as the very 'keystone of our religion' (see "Introduction to the Book of Mormon" Introduction to the Book of Mormon). God has also sent down righteousness from heaven. The Father Himself appeared with His Son to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The angel Moroni, John the Baptist, Peter, James, and numerous other angels were directed by heaven to restore the necessary powers to the kingdom. Further, the Prophet Joseph Smith received revelation after revelation from the heavens during those first critical years of the Church's growth." [^40]

to bear testimony of mine Only Begotten. The chief purpose of all scripture is to bear record of Jesus Christ; hence the Book of Mormon came forth out of the earth to convince "Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations" (Book of Mormon title page).

his resurrection from the dead. Scripture bears testimony that the Only Begotten was resurrected from the dead. Luke testified that the resurrected Jesus appeared unto many, declaring, "Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. And when he had thus spoken, he shewed them his hands and his feet" (Luke 24:39-40). Other scriptures also so testify (for example, 3 Ne. 11).

the resurrection of all men. Scripture bears record that all humankind will be resurrected.

righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the earth as with a flood. The Prophet Joseph Smith spoke of angels and men as being "co-workers" in bringing righteousness and truth to the earth in the last days. "Righteousness and truth are to sweep the earth as with a flood. And now, I ask, how righteousness and truth are going to sweep the earth as with a flood? I will answer. Men and angels are to be co- workers in bringing to pass this great work, and Zion is to be prepared, even a new Jerusalem, for the elect that are to be gathered from the four quarters of the earth, and to be established an holy city, for the tabernacle of the Lord shall be with them." [^41]

to gather out mine elect. Over and over, the Book of Mormon teaches that it will help gather the Saints by bringing them to Christ.

unto a place which I shall prepare, an Holy City. Ps. 102:16 teaches a similar truth: "The Lord shall build up Zion." The holy city of New Jerusalem will be the center point, or capital city, of Zion.

that my people may gird up their loins, and be looking forth for the time of my coming. This passage sets forth a fundamental purpose of the Holy City of Zion: Zion will assist the Saints in preparing for Christ's coming. The phrase "gird up their loins" indicates that they will become prepared, probably for spiritual battle. In a revelation set forth in the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord promises that he will protect and preserve the people by girding up their loins: "And their arm shall be my arm, and I will be their shield and their buckler; and I will gird up their loins, and they shall fight manfully for me; and their enemies shall be under their feet; and I will let fall the sword in their behalf, and by the fire of mine indignation will I preserve them" (D&C 35:14).

for there shall be my tabernacle. The term tabernacle in this verse refers to the holy temple, which protects the Saints physically and spiritually. Isaiah taught, "There shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the daytime from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain" (Isa. 4:6).

Moses 7:63 Then shalt thou and all thy city meet them there. Enoch and his people will descend from their heavenly abode to meet the mortal Saints who are citizens of the New Jerusalem.

we will receive them into our bosom, . . . and we will fall upon their necks. We will rejoice to be united with these noble fellow- citizens in the kingdom. To "fall on one's neck" suggests an eager greeting and enthusiastic embrace (Gen. 33:4; Luke 15:20). President John Taylor taught that eventually many from Zion would be translated: "And then when the time comes that these calamities we read of, shall overtake the earth, those that are prepared will have the power of translation, as they had in former times, and the city will be translated. And Zion that is on the earth will rise, and the Zion above will descend, as we are told, and we will meet and fall on each other's necks and embrace and kiss each other." [^42] (JST Gen. 9:17-25 provides additional details regarding Enoch and his city.)

Moses 7:64 there shall be mine abode. Zion is the Lord's home because it is a city of the pure in heart. Zion is commanded to "sing and rejoice" because the Lord will "dwell in the midst of [her]" (Zech. 2:10; see also Moses 7:21).

for the space of a thousand years the earth shall rest. Moses 7:48 records that Enoch heard a voice from the earth's bowels, saying: "Wo, wo is me, the mother of men; I am pained, I am weary, because of the wickedness of my children. When shall I rest, and be cleansed from the filthiness which is gone forth out of me? When will my Creator sanctify me, that I may rest, and righteousness for a season abide upon my face?" The earth will finally rest during the Millennium.

New Jerusalem and Its Temple

D&C 84:2-5

2 Yea, the word of the Lord concerning his church, established in the last days for the restoration of his people, as he has spoken by the mouth of his prophets, and for the gathering of his saints to stand upon Mount Zion, which shall be the city of New Jerusalem.

3 Which city shall be built, beginning at the temple lot, which is appointed by the finger of the Lord, in the western boundaries of the State of Missouri, and dedicated by the hand of Joseph Smith, Jun., and others with whom the Lord was well pleased.

4 Verily this is the word of the Lord, that the city New Jerusalem shall be built by the gathering of the saints, beginning at this place, even the place of the temple, which temple shall be reared in this generation.

5 For verily this generation shall not all pass away until an house shall be built unto the Lord, and a cloud shall rest upon it, which cloud shall be even the glory of the Lord, which shall fill the house.

Before the Second Coming, the great temple in the New Jerusalem will be built "unto the Lord," and, like the tabernacle of Moses, "a cloud shall rest upon it, which cloud shall be even the glory of the Lord, which shall fill the house" (D&C 84:5). The Prophet spoke of the glories and beauties of the temple: "The glory of Lebanon is to come upon her; the fir tree, the pine tree, and the box tree together, to beautify the place of His sanctuary, that He may make the place of His feet glorious. Where for brass, He will bring gold; and for iron, He will bring silver; and for wood, brass; and for stones, iron; and where the feast of fat things will be given to the just; yea, when the splendor of the Lord is brought to our consideration for the good of His people, the calculations of men and the vain glory of the world vanish, and we exclaim, 'Out of Zion the perfection of beauty, God hath shined.'" [^43]

Notes and Commentary

D&C 84:2 his church, established in the last days. This revelation explains that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was established for two reasons: "for the restoration of his people" and "for the gathering of his saints to stand upon Mount Zion, which shall be the city of New Jerusalem." Of course, these two purposes lead to other reasons for the establishment of the Church, including bringing to the covenant the pure in heart among the dead and "the perfecting of the saints" (Eph. 4:12) once they have been restored to the covenant and gathered to the temple.

as he has spoken by the mouth of his prophets. Many of the ancient prophets have spoken concerning the establishment of the Church and the restoration of the people in the last days. President Gordon B. Hinckley explained: "I need not remind you that this cause in which we are engaged is not an ordinary cause. It is the cause of Christ. It is the kingdom of God our Eternal Father. It is the building of Zion on the earth, the fulfillment of prophecy given of old and of a vision revealed in this dispensation." [^44]

to stand upon Mount Zion. "To stand" here denotes victory and conquest—victory over the powers of evil and over God's enemies. The Saints of the last days (D&C 84:2) will stand on Mount Zion; so will resurrected Saints, who will "stand on the right hand of the Lamb, when he shall stand upon Mount Zion" (D&C 133:56) and God's word attests that 144,000 will also stand with the Lamb on Mount Zion (Rev. 14:1; D&C 133:18). The timing of these wonderful events has not yet been revealed.

Here Mount Zion is equated with the New Jerusalem. Why Mount? Because the gospel banner, or ensign, [^45] must be erected upon a high mountain for all nations to see. Mountains signify temples, and the temple in New Jerusalem will be one of the great religious symbols of the holy city.

Many prophets of old envisioned and prophesied of Mount Zion, or the New Jerusalem. They foresaw that it would be a place of deliverance for those who call upon God (Joel 2:32). It would be the place where the Lord would reign, whose reign would be so glorious and full of light and truth that even the moon will be confounded and the sun ashamed (Isa. 24:23). It would be the place where the very "powers of heaven" or Christ himself will be found in the midst of the Saints of the New Jerusalem (3 Ne. 20:22).

the city of New Jerusalem. For a description of the New Jerusalem, see the commentary on D&C 45:62-71, page 169.

D&C 84:3 Which city shall be built. Although the early Saints experienced much tribulation and were eventually prevented from building the city of New Jerusalem, the Lord comforted his Saints with a revelation, dated 16 December 1833, in which he promised that this city would yet be built: "Therefore, let your hearts be comforted concerning Zion; for all flesh is in mine hands; be still and know that I am God. Zion shall not be moved out of her place, notwithstanding her children are scattered. They that remain, and are pure in heart, shall return, and come to their inheritances, they and their children, with songs of everlasting joy, to build up the waste places of Zion—and all these things that the prophets might be fulfilled" (D&C 101:16-19). After the Saints' expulsion from Jackson County, Missouri, Joseph Smith wrote to Edward Partridge, "We have nothing to fear if we are faithful, God will strike through kings, in the days of His wrath but what He will deliver His people where ere long in Jackson County He will set His feet, when earth and heaven shall tremble." [^46]

in the western boundaries of the State of Missouri. An earlier revelation, D&C 57:1-3, revealed that the city would be built in what is now called Independence, Missouri. [^47]

D&C 84:4 which temple shall be reared in this generation. The temple lot was dedicated 3 August 1831 by Joseph Smith, in the presence of Joseph Coe, Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris, Edward Partridge, W. W. Phelps, and Sidney Rigdon. The scene was described as "solemn and impressive." [^48]

The enemies of the Church hindered the Saints from building the New Jerusalem and its temple, and the Saints were temporarily excused from these sacred assignments. The Lord explained: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, that when I give a commandment to any of the sons of men to do a work unto my name, and those sons of men go with all their might and with all they have to perform that work, and cease not their diligence, and their enemies come upon them and hinder them from performing that work, behold, it behooveth me to require that work no more at the hands of those sons of men, but to accept of their offerings. . . . Therefore, for this cause have I accepted the offerings of those whom I commanded to build up a city and a house unto my name, in Jackson county, Missouri, and were hindered by their enemies, saith the Lord your God" (D&C 124:49, 51). The Lord, notwithstanding that the New Jerusalem was not built, accepted the Saints' righteous intent and offerings and promised to "save all those . . . who have been pure of heart, and have been slain in the land of Missouri" (D&C 124:54). In due time the city of New Jerusalem and its temple will be built by the Saints (3 Ne. 20:22; 21:23; Ether 13:3-4, 6-8).

D&C 84:5 a cloud shall rest upon it, . . . which shall fill the house. During the era of the Israelite wanderings, a cloud oftimes covered the Mosaic tabernacle (Ex. 33:9) or accompanied it as it was transported through the wilderness (Num. 14:14). Later, a "cloud filled the house of the Lord" when Solomon dedicated it unto God (1 Kgs. 8:10; 2 Chr. 5:13-14; 7:1). Such a cloud, which represents "the glory of the Lord" (D&C 84:5; cf. Ex. 40:34; 2 Chr. 5:14), accompanied Christ's glorious ascension after his ministry in the Old World (Acts 1:9-11) and in the New World (3 Ne. 18:38). Clouds will yet again accompany Christ at his second coming (Mark 13:26; Rev. 1:7; cf. Acts 1:9-11).

The Lord Builds Zion and Appears in Glory

Ps. 102:13-22

13 Thou shalt arise, and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to favour her, yea, the set time, is come.

14 For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favour the dust thereof.

15 So the heathen shall fear the name of the Lord, and all the kings of the earth thy glory.

16 When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory.

17 He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer.

18 This shall be written for the generation to come: and the people which shall be created shall praise the Lord.

19 For he hath looked down from the height of his sanctuary; from heaven did the Lord behold the earth;

20 To hear the groaning of the prisoner; to loose those that are appointed to death;

21 To declare the name of the Lord in Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem;

22 When the people are gathered together, and the kingdoms, to serve the Lord.

Ps. 102 speaks of the latter-day Zion, which will be built upon the American continent. Joseph Smith taught, "The city of Zion spoken of by David, in the one hundred and second Psalm, will be built upon the land of America, 'And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads' (Isaiah xxxv:10); and then they will be delivered from the overflowing scourge that shall pass through the land." [^49] Many specific signs of the last days given in this Psalm include the following: the Lord will have great mercy and favor on Zion and her inhabitants (v. 13); the heathen and kings will fear the Lord because of the glory that will attend Zion (v. 15); Zion will be built under the direction of the Lord (v. 16); the Saints will declare and praise Jehovah's name in Zion and in Jerusalem (v. 21); and peoples and kingdoms will gather together "to serve the Lord" (v. 22).

Notes and Commentary

Ps. 102:13 arise, and have mercy. This verse is prophetic; it anticipates the last days when the Lord will take action ("arise") and once again "have mercy upon Zion." Isaiah also prophesied concerning the Lord's mercy on Israel at the time when he will gather them to their land of promise: "For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land" (Isa. 14:1).

the set time, is come. The time of Zion's "favour," her "set time," may be the time of the restoration of the gospel, with all of its glories, blessings, and privileges.

Ps. 102:14 stones/dust. Zion is so remarkable to the servants of God that they cherish even the stones scattered throughout her fields and the dust of her streets.

Ps. 102:15 heathen/kings. The "heathen" (unbelievers) and "kings" (those who rule the earth) will fear the Lord because of the favor, mercy, and glory he extends to Zion and her inhabitants. This same "fear of the Lord was upon all nations" at the time of Enoch's Zion because "so great was the glory of the Lord, which was upon his people" (Moses 7:17). A modern revelation foretells that "the glory of the Lord shall be [upon Zion], and the terror of the Lord also shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it" (D&C 45:67; see also vv. 74-75).

Ps. 102:16 he shall appear in his glory. This verse has at least three possible meanings, all of which may be correct. One is that the Lord will appear in glory to his servants at the establishment of Zion; such occurred when the Lord's glory was upon Enoch, who recorded, "I beheld the heavens open, and I was clothed upon with glory; and I saw the Lord; and he talked with me, even as a man talketh one with another, face to face" (Moses 7:3-4). Joseph Smith wrote: "I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun.Â½Â½ . . . When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description" (JS-H 1:16-17). Another meaning is that the Lord will appear in glory at his second coming, after Zion is built and her inhabitants are ready to receive him. Still another meaning is that the Lord will appear in glory in his temple in New Jerusalem.

Ps. 102:17 prayer of the destitute. The spiritually impoverished, as well as those destitute of temporal things and blessings, will receive answer to their prayers.

Ps. 102:18 written for the generation to come. The rising generations, those yet to be born to parents in Zion, will praise the Lord and read the "written" account of the Lord's mighty acts on behalf of Zion. These mighty acts include the following: He answers the prayers of the destitute (v. 17); from heaven he beholds and acknowledges his children (v. 19); and he hearkens to the prisoner's cry of distress (v. 20). Further, these rising generations will testify of the Lord, or "declare the name of the Lord in Zion" and sing songs of him in "Jerusalem" (v. 21).

Ps. 102:19 he hath looked down from the height of his sanctuary. From heaven, the Lord constantly watches over his children who dwell on the earth; he knows their deeds and hears their cries. The expression "the height of his sanctuary" refers to the temple in heaven, or the celestial kingdom. [^50]

Ps. 102:20 hear the groaning of the prisoner. The Hebrew word for hear denotes action. God does not simply "hear" the prisoner's groaning; he acknowledges his childrens' needs and then sends divine help in the form of caring Church members, priesthood leaders, and the Holy Ghost. On occasion heavenly attendants are sent to assist those in need. Prisoner may refer to those who are in the bondage of sin, to those in the spirit prison, or both.

Ps. 102:21 To declare the name of the Lord in Zion. To bear testimony or witness of the Lord; to preach the gospel to the heathen and to kings, identified in verse 15, and to the people and kingdoms mentioned in verse 22.

The Lord Loves Zion

Ps. 87:1-7

1 His foundation is in the holy mountains.

2 The Lord loveth the [cities] [^51] of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob.

3 Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. . . . Selah.

4 I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon to them that know me: behold Philistia, and Tyre, with Ethiopia; this man was born there.

5 And of Zion it shall be said, This and that man was born in her: and the highest himself shall establish her.

6 The Lord shall count, when he writeth up the people, that this man was born there. . . . Selah.

7 As well the singers as the players on instruments shall be there: all my springs are in thee.

This beautiful psalm was read at the dedication of the site of the future temple in New Jerusalem. Joseph Smith recorded: "On the third day of August [1831], I proceeded to dedicate the spot for the Temple, a little west of Independence, and there was also present Sidney Rigdon, Edward Partridge, W. W. Phelps, Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris and Joseph Coe.

"The 87th Psalm was read. . . ."

"The scene was solemn and impressive." [^52]

Perhaps this psalm was read on that historic occasion because its central message pertains to Zion and the Lord's love of her.

Notes and Commentary

Ps. 87:1 holy mountains. This expression refers to the Lord's temples (Isa. 2:1-4), which are an essential part of the building of Zion.

Ps. 87:2 The Lord loveth the [cities] of Zion. This verse seems to be contrasting true Zion with those who are only nominally part of the covenant. The Lord loves Zion, the place of the pure in heart, more than all the other dwellings of those who may be of the covenant but who are not valiant therein.

Ps. 87:3-4 Glorious things/born there. Certainly many "glorious things" will be spoken of Zion, such as that she is a "a land of peace," "a city of refuge," and "a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God" (D&C 45:66). This psalm adds another glorious thing that will be said of Zion: This man or woman was privileged to have been born in Zion. This idea is repeated three times in the psalm, emphasizing its import: "this man was born there" (v. 4); "this and that man was born in her" (v. 5); and "this man was born there" (v. 6). In fact, the Lord himself will announce this to the nations outside of the city of God, including Babylon, Philistia, and Ethiopia, that "this and that man was born" there (v. 5). Further, the Lord himself will take a census of the number of people in Zion and will then write the individual names of those who were "born there" (v. 6). This reference may be to the privilege of being born physically in Zion; but it may also refer to those souls who attained to a spiritual rebirth, being born again, in Zion.

city of God. Zion is God's city; it belongs to him.

Ps. 87:5 the highest himself shall establish her. God takes a personal role in the creation of his city. Ps. 102:16 accords with this expression: "The Lord shall build up Zion."

Ps. 87:6 The Lord shall count, when he writeth up the people. The Lord "registers" the people, indicating their right to be citizens of God's city. This phrase also alludes to the Lord's Book of Life, wherein are recorded the names of the righteous. Zion is composed of righteous souls who long to be in his presence.

Ps. 87:7 singers as the players on instruments. This expression brings to mind Church hymns sung by individuals, congregations, and choirs. Zion's chapels and temples are filled with sacred music. "Singers" are accompanied by those who play musical "instruments." When the Saints gather it is commonly said that they will "come to Zion, singing with songs of everlasting joy" (D&C 45:71; Isa. 35:10).

all my springs are in thee. This passage may refer to springs of living waters, which are centered in Zion. Or, as the footnote to this passage in the LDS edition of the Bible suggests, the springs may be "sources . . . of joy, happiness, etc."

---
Notas:
[^1] The New Jerusalem is built in Independence, Missouri. 2. Zion is redeemed after she fulfills certain conditions. 3. Zion flourishes and blossoms like a beautiful flower before Christ's coming. 4. Zion is a place of safety for the Saints. 5. Zion and her stakes serve as a refuge from the world's wickedness and God's judgments on sinners. 6. God blesses Zion with great blessings; she shall never be destroyed. 7. The Lord blesses Zion with his glory and light. 8. Zion, or the New Jerusalem, prepares the Saints for Christ's coming. 9. A great temple is built in Independence, Missouri. 10. The Lord appears in glory to Zion. 11. The Lord loves Zion and its inhabitants: it is his city, and its inhabitants are his people. History of the Church, 4:609-10.
[^2] History of the Church, 2:381.
[^3] History of the Church, 4:610.
[^4] Conference Report, Oct. 1968, 61-62.
[^5] Ensign, May 1986, 30. Elder Bruce R. McConkie also defined Zion in Millennial Messiah, 282-84.
[^6] History of the Church, 1:189.
[^7] See Dahl and Cannon, Teachings of Joseph Smith, 277; Dyer, Refiner's Fire, 17-18.
[^8] In Smith and Sjodahl, Commentary, 147.
[^9] Doctrines of Salvation, 3:72.
[^10] Millennial Messiah, 294.
[^11] History of the Church, 6:318-19.
[^12] Refiner's Fire, 22.
[^13] Ensign, May 1978, 81.
[^14] Journal of Discourses, 16:276.
[^15] History of the Church, 5:423.
[^16] For a discussion of Zion's Camp, which marched in 1834, see Roberts, Missouri Persecutions, 128-51.
[^17] Conference Report, Oct. 1955, 14-15.
[^18] Ensign, Nov. 1991, 59.
[^19] History of the Church, 2:128.
[^20] See the commentary on this phrase, page 86.
[^21] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 149-51.
[^22] See the commentary on this concept, page 239.
[^23] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 71.
[^24] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 160.
[^25] Ensign, Nov. 1989, 13.
[^26] Koehler and Baumgartner, Hebrew and Aramaic Lexicon of the Old Testament, 3:1022.
[^27] See the commentary on the different forms of the gathering, page 48.
[^28] Koehler and Baumgartner, Hebrew and Aramaic Lexicon of the Old Testament, 3:1022.
[^29] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 161.
[^30] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 71.
[^31] Ensign, July 1973, 3.
[^32] "Jesus Christ—Gifts and Expectations," 305.
[^33] On Zion as "terrible," see the commentary on D&C 45:70, page 173.
[^34] "Stake Is Born," 189-90.
[^35] Ensign, Nov. 1977, 78.
[^36] "Lesson in Natural Calamities," 653.
[^37] See the commentary on D&C 49:24, page 168.
[^38] See the commentary on D&C 45:67, page 172.
[^39] Koehler and Baumgartner, Hebrew and Aramaic Lexicon of the Old Testament, 3:1022, reads "citadel," "castle," or "crest of a hill."
[^40] Ensign, Nov. 1986, 79-80.
[^41] History of the Church, 2:260.
[^42] Journal of Discourses, 21:253.
[^43] History of the Church, 1:198.
[^44] Ensign, Nov. 1989, 53.
[^45] The ensign symbolizes the gospel of Jesus Christ (D&C 45:9; 105:39) and its accompanying light (D&C 115:4-5) also the Book of Mormon is an ensign (2 Ne. 29:2-3; Moro. 10:27-28).
[^46] In Dyer, Refiner's Fire, 5.
[^47] See the commentary on D&C 57:1-3, page 156.
[^48] History of the Church, 1:199.
[^49] History of the Church, 1:315.
[^50] See Parry and Parry, "Temple in Heaven," in Temples of the Ancient World, 515-32.
[^51] This change is made in note a to Ps. 87:2 in the LDS edition of the KJV.
[^52] History of the Church, 1:199.
