Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Signs of the Times ( 1999)

Satan's Work Prospers in the Last Days

Chapter 5

Conditions on the Earth before Christ's Coming

Signs of the Times

In what must have been a searing vision, Moroni saw our day, the day when the Book of Mormon would come forth, and saw that it was a time when the adversary would rule the world. "I speak unto you as if ye were present," Moroni wrote, "and yet ye are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing."

Moroni saw the following:

a day of "secret combinations and the works of darkness";

a day "when the power of God shall be denied";

a day when churches would "become defiled and be lifted up in the pride of their hearts";

a day when "there shall be murders, and robbing, and lying, and deceivings, and whoredoms, and all manner of abominations";

a day when people would "walk in the pride of [their] hearts";

a day of "envying, and strifes, and malice, and persecutions, and all manner of iniquities";

a day when people would "love money, and . . . substance";

a day when people would "build up . . . secret abominations to get gain" (see also Morm. 8:27-41).

"For behold," Nephi wrote, "at that day shall he [Satan] rage in the hearts of the children of men, and stir them up to anger against that which is good. And others will he pacify, and lull them away into carnal security, . . . and thus the devil cheateth their souls, and leadeth them away carefully down to hell. And behold, others he flattereth away, . . . and thus he whispereth in their ears, until he grasps them with his awful chains, from whence there is no deliverance" (2 Ne. 28:20-22).

Surely these are troublesome times. These are days of sin and evil, as was prophesied by the Lord and his servants. "Considering conditions in the world generally," President Hugh B. Brown said, "there never was a time more cut off from Christ than ours, or one that needed him more." [^1] Satan, the "prince of this world" (John 12:31; 14:30; 16:11), the "god of this world" (2 Cor. 4:4), the "prince of the power of the air" (Eph. 2:2), is in the great day of his power—and he is doing all he can to conquer as many souls as will hearken to him.

"We are meeting the adversary every day," President Ezra Taft Benson said. "The challenges of this era will rival any of the past, and these challenges will increase both spiritually and temporally." [^2]

Yet through it all the Lord ever reaches out in mercy and blessing to help the people of the world turn from Satan and his works to Christ and his righteousness.

"Wo be unto the Gentiles, saith the Lord God of Hosts!" Nephi recorded. "For notwithstanding I shall lengthen out mine arm unto them from day to day, they will deny me; nevertheless, I will be merciful unto them, saith the Lord God, if they will repent and come unto me; for mine arm is lengthened out all the day long, saith the Lord God of Hosts" (2 Ne. 28:32).

A Time of Apostasy

Isa. 24:5-6

5 The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant.

6 Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left.

Isaiah saw a day when the people of the earth would violate God's laws, change his divinely given ordinances to a form that was more pleasing to the carnal mind, and break the covenant God had given them. This condition of apostasy would be universal, for it would devour the earth and leave desolate earth's inhabitants. He described the depths of this apostasy in another way: "Darkness shall cover the earth," he said, "and gross darkness the people" (Isa. 60:2). This is not a partial or limited apostasy: it would cover the earth. And it is not an insignificant departure from truth: Isaiah calls it "gross darkness." Enoch heard the voice of the Lord proclaim the same truth. Before the millennial day, the Lord said, "the heavens shall be darkened, and a veil of darkness shall cover the earth" (Moses 7:61). In 1837, the Lord declared that this prophecy had come to pass: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, darkness covereth the earth, and gross darkness the minds of the people, and all flesh has become corrupt before my face" (D&C 112:23; see also 1:15-16; 33:4; 38:11; JS-H 1:19). Other prophets also foresaw a great apostasy:

"Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord: And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it" (Amos 8:11-12).

"Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils; speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their conscience seared with a hot iron" (1 Tim. 4:1-2).

"For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears" (2 Tim. 4:3).

"Because of the many plain and precious things which have been taken out of the book [the Bible], which were plain unto the understanding of the children of men, according to the plainness which is in the Lamb of God—because of these things which are taken away out of the gospel of the Lamb, an exceedingly great many do stumble, yea, insomuch that Satan hath great power over them" (1 Ne. 13:29).

This apostasy is one of the signs of the times, one of the conditions that will prevail on the earth before the Lord returns in his glory: "Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition" (2 Thes. 2:3). [^3]

Notes and Commentary

Isa. 24:5 earth also is defiled under the inhabitants. To defile (Hebrew chanap) means "to pollute, profane or make godless." [^4] Earth's inhabitants have polluted her by transgressing laws, changing ordinances, and breaking the everlasting covenant.

transgressed the laws. People have disregarded the revealed word of God by transgressing the laws given to them by the prophets. Law (Hebrew torah), used here in a rare plural form (Gen. 26:5; Ex. 16:28; Ps. 105:45), indicates that all God's laws have been transgressed; that by itself is enough to bring a curse upon the people (Dan. 9:10-11).

changed the ordinance. Ordinance (Hebrew choq) [^5] comes from the root word chaqaq, which means "to carve or engrave." God's ordinances were essentially "carved" in stone and were not meant to be changed; rather, they were to be engraved on the hearts of the children of God. When the ordinances, such as baptism (JST Gen. 17:3-6; Moro. 8:14, 16), are changed, their power to save is lost.

broken the everlasting covenant. The everlasting covenant is the gospel with its covenants and ordinances. Because the ordinances had been perverted or lost, the Lord revealed for the last time through the Prophet Joseph Smith the everlasting covenant for the earthÂ½ (D&C 1:12-16, 22; 29:8), "lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse" (D&C 138:48).

24:6 curse devoured the earth. The Lord pronounces blessings for faithfulness (Mosiah 2:41) and cursings for rebellion (Deut. 28:15-68). War, slavery, pestilence, plague, disease, famine, poverty, and death are all curses sent from God for failing to keep the commandments (Deut. 27-30). All these curses will be poured out on the earth in the last days (D&C 112:23-24).

they that dwell therein are desolate. The word desolate here comes from the Hebrew 'asham, [^6] which could more correctly be translated guilty. The term guilty refers to the guilt that requires restitution and cleansing ordinances before it can be removed. Those who continue to be held guilty (do not repent) must bear the punishment of their sins.

the inhabitants of the earth are burned. See the commentary on the burning of the earth, page 427.

The Establishment of False Churches

2 Ne. 28:11-14

11 [Their churches] have all gone out of the way; they have become corrupted.

12 Because of pride, and because of false teachers, and false doctrine, their churches have become corrupted, and their churches are lifted up; because of pride they are puffed up.

13 They rob the poor because of their fine sanctuaries; they rob the poor because of their fine clothing; and they persecute the meek and the poor in heart, because in their pride they are puffed up.

14 They wear stiff necks and high heads; yea, and because of pride, and wickedness, and abominations, and whoredoms, they have all gone astray save it be a few, who are the humble followers of Christ; nevertheless, they are led, that in many instances they do err because they are taught by the precepts of men.

Nephi minces no words in his description of the false churches in the last days: they all are following the wrong path, he says. They are corrupt, prideful, oppressive to the poor, wicked (see also 2 Ne. 26:20). Only a few on the earth truly follow Christ, and even they are often misled by the precepts of men.

Moroni was equally condemning of the churches in the last days. The Book of Mormon would come forth "in a day when the power of God shall be denied, and churches become defiled and be lifted up in the pride of their hearts," he wrote. These churches would be corrupt, established to get gain for their leaders. "Come unto me," these leaders would say, "and for your money you shall be forgiven of your sins." Moroni also accused the false latter-day churches of pride: "I know that ye do walk in the pride of your hearts; . . . and your churches, yea, even every one, have become polluted because of the pride of your hearts. For behold, ye do love money, and your substance, and your fine apparel, and the adorning of your churches, more than ye love the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted." Then he pleaded with them from the depths of his heart: "O ye pollutions, ye hypocrites, ye teachers, who sell yourselves for that which will canker, why have ye polluted the holy church of God? Why are ye ashamed to take upon you the name of Christ? Why do ye not think that greater is the value of an endless happiness than that misery which never dies—because of the praise of the world? Why do ye adorn yourselves with that which hath no life, and yet suffer the hungry, and the needy, and the naked, and the sick and the afflicted to pass by you, and notice them not? . . . Behold, the sword of vengeance hangeth over you" (Morm. 8:28, 32, 36-39, 41).

Notes and Commentary

2 Ne. 28:11 gone out of the way. Surely this way refers to the strait and narrow way of the true gospel of Jesus Christ (Hel. 6:31; 3 Ne. 27:32). "The anger of God kindleth against the inhabitants of the earth; and none doeth good, for all have gone out of the way" (D&C 82:6). Paul uttered the same lament about those who were typical of his day: "There is none righteous, no, not one: There is none that understandeth, there is none that seeketh after God. They are all gone out of the way, they are together become unprofitable; there is none that doeth good, no, not one" (Rom. 3:10-12). Jesus said the same thing of the scribes, Pharisees, priests, and Levites of his day: "They teach in their synagogues, but do not observe the law, nor the commandments; and all have gone out of the way, and are under sin" (JST Matt. 7:6).

corrupted. When something becomes corrupted, it loses its purity. In the days of Noah, "God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth" (Gen. 6:12). When Moses was on the mount for forty days and nights receiving the stone tables, the Lord said to him, "Arise, get thee down quickly from hence; for thy people which thou hast brought forth out of Egypt have corrupted themselves; they are quickly turned aside out of the way which I commanded them; they have made them a molten image" (Deut. 9:12). So will it be in the last days: the people of the earth will turn from the right way of God unto corruption.

2 Ne. 28:12 churches are lifted up. This expression is a metaphor for pride, in which someone feels lifted up in status or importance above another. When a church begins to be lifted up, it can lead its members to abandon all that is good and turn to increasing iniquity (Alma 5:37, 53; Hel. 4:11-12). Earlier in this same discourse, Nephi prophesied of the last days: "The Gentiles are lifted up in the pride of their eyes, and have stumbled, . . . that they have built up many churches; nevertheless, they put down the power and miracles of God, and preach up unto themselves their own wisdom and their own learning, that they may get gain and grind upon the face of the poor" (2 Ne. 26:20).

2 Ne. 28:14 stiff necks and high heads. These expressions also are metaphors for pride. A stiff neck suggests stubbornness, and a neck stretched to hold a "high head" suggests a person trying to elevate himself above his fellows (Jacob 2:13).

precepts of men. The precepts of men are the philosophies and doctrines they teach when they are not inspired by the Holy Ghost. "Wo be unto him that hearkeneth unto the precepts of men, and denieth the power of God, and the gift of the Holy Ghost! . . . Cursed is he that putteth his trust in man, or maketh flesh his arm, or shall hearken unto the precepts of men, save their precepts shall be given by the power of the Holy Ghost" (2 Ne. 28:26, 31).

A Time of False Christs and False Prophets

JS-M 1:21-26

21 If any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there, believe him not;

22 For in those days there shall also arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch, that, if possible, they shall deceive the very elect, who are the elect according to the covenant.

23 Behold, I speak these things unto you for the elect's sake; . . .

24 Behold, I have told you before;

25 Wherefore, if they shall say unto you: Behold, he is in the desert; go not forth: Behold, he is in the secret chambers; believe it not;

26 For as the light of the morning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west, and covereth the whole earth, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be.

This prophecy began to be fulfilled in the generation of Christ's original apostles. Both Peter and John noted that there were false prophets in their day—John even said there were "many" such (2 Pet. 2:1-2; 1 Jn. 4:1). Paul added a warning against "false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ" (2 Cor. 11:13). As we learn from Christ's prophecy above, false prophets are one of the signs of the times (see also Rev. 16:13; D&C 50:2).

False prophets can make themselves appear to be true. "And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light. Therefore it is no great thing if his ministers also be transformed as the ministers of righteousness" (2 Cor. 11:14-15). "Beware of false prophets," the Lord said, "which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves." He then gave us the way to judge false prophets from true: "Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them" (Matt. 7:15-20).

False prophets and false Christs can come not only as individuals but as doctrines, philosophies, and false views of who Jesus Christ is. Elder Bruce R. McConkie shared this valuable insight:["[With few exceptions] a false Christ is not a person. It is a false system of worship, a false church, a false cult that says: 'Lo, here is salvation; here is the doctrine of Christ. Come and believe thus and so, and ye shall be saved.' It is any concept or philosophy that says that redemption, salvation, sanctification, justification, and all of the promised rewards can be gained in any way except that set forth by the apostles and prophets." [^7]

Joseph Fielding McConkie added: "Clearly the prophetic warnings against false Christs embrace more than the strange assortment of souls who periodically come on the scene professing to be the hope of the world. In most instances the false Christs we face will take the form of false systems of salvation which inevitably embrace false notions about the true nature of the Son of God. The preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, given in 1831, describes an apostate world in which people walk after the image of gods of their own making. The authors of these gods, we are told, do not seek the Lord nor do they care to establish his righteousness (D&C 1:16). They have their own agendas. . . . Everybody, it appears, wants to assimilate Jesus into the spirit of one's own ambitions." [^8]

Notes and Commentary

JS-M 1:22 great signs and wonders. When Moses and Aaron went before Pharaoh to seek the deliverance of the Israelite people, they performed great miracles by the power of God: they turned a rod into a serpent, changed water to blood, and caused countless frogs to come up out of the river to torment the Egyptians. In each case, acting by the power of the devil, [^9] Pharaoh's false prophets, his priests, duplicated these first few miracles (Ex. 7:10-8:7 In the latter days, Satan's false prophets and false Christs will again "show great signs and wonders" to deceive the people. For instance, in the book of Revelation we read of one who "doeth great wonders, so that he maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men, and deceiveth them that dwell on the earth by the means of those miracles which he had power to do" (Rev. 13:13-14). Later we read of "the spirits of devils, working miracles," by which they cause the people of earth to be gathered "to the battle of that great day of God Almighty" (Rev. 16:14).

if possible . . . deceive the very elect. The "signs and wonders" displayed by certain false Christs, false prophets, and false churches will be so impressive that even the "elect according to the covenant"—meaning those who have received the gospel covenant and have truly lived according to its precepts—must take care not to be deceived. "There is a possibility that man may fall from grace and depart from the living God" (D&C 20:32). To avoid deception, Latter-day Saints must be faithful in following the living prophet, and they must live worthy of and follow the directions of the Holy Ghost as they are spoken to their hearts. The elect are those who "hear my voice and harden not their hearts" (D&C 29:7).

A time of apostasy, false churches, false prophets, and false Christs is a time of deception indeed. In fact, Satan's ongoing efforts to deceive are among the signs of the times. Our Church leaders have repeatedly and emphatically warned us to be on our guard against deception. Elder Harold B. Lee said: "This is a day of deception of which the Master warned. He said one of the signs of His second coming would be that we would be in danger of being deceived. And then He said to His disciples, 'Take heed that no man deceive you, for in those days, if it were possible, the very elect according to the covenant would be deceived' (see JS-M 1:5, 22). And, of course, 'according to the covenant' means members of the Church of Jesus Christ." [^10]

A few years later, as president of the Church, President Lee issued a strong and lengthy warning in the priesthood session of general conference: "There are some as wolves among us. . . . Among our own membership, men are arising speaking perverse things. Now perverse means diverting from the right or correct, and being obstinate in the wrong, willfully, in order to draw the weak and unwary members of the Church away after them. . . . [I]t never ceases to amaze me how gullible some of our Church members are in broadcasting these sensational stories, or dreams, or visions, some alleged to have been given to Church leaders, past or present, supposedly from some person's private diary, without first verifying the report with proper Church authorities." [^11]

Then President Lee gave us the keys to avoiding deception: "If our people want to be safely guided during these troublous times of deceit and false rumors, they must follow their leaders and seek for the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord in order to avoid falling prey to clever manipulators who, with cunning sophistry, seek to draw attention and gain a following to serve their own notions and sometimes sinister motives.

"The Lord has very plainly set forth a test by which anyone may challenge any and all who may come claiming, clandestinely, to have received some kind of priesthood authority. Now this is what the Lord said in the 42nd section of the Doctrine and Covenants, verse 11:

"'Again, I say unto you, that it shall not be given to any one to go forth to preach my gospel, or to build up my church, except he be ordained by someone who has authority, and it is known to the church that he has authority and has been regularly ordained by the heads of the church.'

"Now, if one comes claiming that he has authority, ask him, 'Where do you get your authority? Have you been ordained by someone who has authority, who is known to the Church, that you have authority and have been regularly ordained by the heads of the Church?' If the answer is no, you may know that he is an imposter. This is the test that our people should always apply when some imposter comes trying to lead them astray." [^12]

Twenty years later, Elder Boyd K. Packer warned: "There are some among us now who have not been regularly ordained by the heads of the Church and who tell of impending political and economic chaos, the end of the world—something of the 'sky is falling, chicken licken' of the fables. They are misleading members to gather to colonies or cults." [^13]

"You may not be aware of it," Elder M. Russell Ballard said, "but there are 'false prophets' rising within and without the Church. They believe they have had revelations, that they know something the First Presidency and the Twelve Apostles don't know. You need to be very careful of such people. If you are ever approached by anyone who claims special authority or revelation from God outside the sustained priesthood authority, turn and run from them as fast as you can. The Savior said that in the last days even the very elect could be pulled away from the truth by such false prophets." [^14]

JS-M 1:25 in the desert/in the secret chambers. Whether the Lord is purported to be out in the wilderness or hiding in some secret place, do not believe it. Jesus will not return in that manner. As the next verse explains, he will come in a way that will be obvious to all.

JS-M 1:26 as the light of the morning cometh out of the east. After Joseph Smith saw the Father and the Son, he said their "brightness and glory defy all description" (JS-H 1:17). In the Kirtland Temple, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery saw the Lord and said that "his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun" (D&C 110:3). Thus, when the Lord comes in his glory, he will shine with a brightness that cannot be missed. It will be as bright and as noticeable as the rising of the sun.

The Coming of the Antichrist

1 Jn. 2:18-22

18 Little children, it is the last time: and as ye have heard that antichrist shall come, even now are there many antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last time.

19 They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us: but they went out, that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us.

20 But ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things.

21 I have not written unto you because ye know not the truth, but because ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth.

22 Who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? He is antichrist, that denieth the Father and the Son.

Antichrist is "a word used by John to describe one who would assume the guise of Christ, but in reality would be opposed to Christ. . . . In a broader sense it is anyone or anything that counterfeits the true gospel or plan of salvation and that openly or secretly is set up in opposition to Christ. The great antichrist is Lucifer, but he has many assistants both as spirit beings and as mortals." [^15] Thus, there appear to be three kinds of antichrist: those who are opposed to and deny Christ; those who are counterfeit Christs; and any organization or philosophy that seeks to supplant the true gospel and its author, Jesus Christ.

There are many antichrists in every age, as John noted there were in his day. Antichrists are people who deny the Father and the Son or who deny that Jesus has come in the flesh (1 Jn. 4:3-6; 2 Jn. 1:7). The Book of Mormon gives us several examples of men who were antichrists, each of which stands as a warning for our day:

Sherem taught the people "that there should be no Christ . . . and this he did that he might overthrow the doctrine of Christ" (Jac. 7:1-2). Later, Sherem admitted that "he had been deceived by the power of the devil" (Jacob 7:18).

Nehor "testified unto the people that all mankind should be saved at the last day, and that they need not fear nor tremble, . . . and, in the end, all men should have eternal life" (Alma 1:4), thus effectively denying the need for Christ as our Savior. Before he died he "did acknowledge, between the heavens and the earth, that what he had taught to the people was contrary to the word of God" (Alma 1:15).

Korihor "was antichrist, for he began to preach unto the people against the prophecies which had been spoken by the prophets, concerning the coming of Christ. . . . And this antichrist . . . began to preach unto the people that there should be no Christ" (Alma 30:6, 12). Korihor confessed in the end that "the devil hath deceived me;Â½Â½Â½Â½ . . . and he taught me that which I should say" (Alma 30:53).

Zoram taught his people to cry aloud in prayer, "Holy God, we believe that . . . thou hast made it known unto us that there shall be no Christ" (Alma 31:16).

All these are different but very similar manifestations of the spirit of antichrist, and we have seen (and shall see) all these and many more in our lifetimes. Also partaking of that same spirit are false prophets and false Christs. [^16] But the scriptures warn in particular of latter-day antichrists. Paul wrote: "Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day [the Second Coming] shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition; who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God. . . .

"For the mystery of iniquity doth already work: only he who now letteth will let, until he be taken out of the way. And then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming: Even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish; because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved" (2 Thes. 2:3).

Who is the "man of sin" that shall be revealed, who is also called "the son of perdition"? He is none other than Satan himself. [^17] He opposes God; he seeks to elevate himself above all that is of God; he is worshipped by others; he sits "in the temple of God," pretending to be God himself. He is "Wicked"; he uses his power to display "signs and lying wonders." Those who do not love the truth will be deceived. Those who follow Satan in opposing Christ are themselves antichrists. Paul called this frightful circumstance "the mystery of iniquity," which brings to mind a description of Babylon as "MYSTERY, . . . THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH" (Rev. 17:5). Certainly Satan, as the ultimate antichrist, and the Babylon of the last days are closely connected.

John the Revelator gave us another description of a latter-day antichrist, calling him a beast. He has an appearance "like a lamb," a counterfeit of the true Lamb. He exercises great power and perpetuates a false worship of his mentor, another beast. "And he doeth great wonders, so that he maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men, and deceiveth them that dwell on the earth by the means of those miracles which he had power to do" (Rev. 13:11-14). Joseph Smith, in his translation of the Bible, noted that the first beast was "in the likeness of the kingdoms of the earth" (JST Rev. 13:1), and the second beast probably also is in such a likeness. Thus, in this sense, the beasts are not individuals but earthly kingdoms, cultures, or philosophies that follow Satan, that stand opposed to Christ, and that seek to supplant Him in the hearts and minds of the people of the earth (Rev. 13). Thus, both the beasts and the antichrist are individuals, nations, and philosophies. And thus we understand that Satan has set up his kingdoms and has raised up his followers to oppose Christ, and the followers of our great enemy will not slacken in their efforts to establish the cause of their master until they are conquered and cast out in the end (Rev. 19:19-21).

Notes and Commentary

1 Jn. 2:18 even now are there many antichrists. Even in John's day there were many antichrists, meaning those who denied the reality or divinity of Christ.

1 Jn. 2:19 They went out from us, but they were not of us. The antichrists in John's day apparently had been members of the Church, but they were not truly converted in their hearts. Perhaps some of those who will rise up as antichrists in our day will likewise be apostates from the true Church.

1 Jn. 2:20 ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things. The Holy One is the Holy One of Israel, or Jehovah (Isa. 60:9; 2 Ne. 9:15, 26; Omni 1:25). The word unction means anointing, perhaps referring to an anointing received in the temple. Because the Saints have received this anointing from God, they "know all things," including how to discern the true followers of Christ. As Moroni taught concerning those who received the Holy Ghost, "by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things" (Moro. 10:5).

Iniquity Will Abound

2 Tim. 3:1-7

1 This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come.

2 For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy,

3 Without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good,

4 Traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God;

5 Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away.

6 For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away with divers lusts,

7 Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.

When the apostles asked Jesus about his second coming, he detailed many signs of the times. Included in his list: "iniquity shall abound" (Matt. 24:12).

Moroni wrote that the Book of Mormon would come forth "in a day when there shall be great pollutions upon the face of the earth;Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ . . . and all manner of abominations. . . . But wo unto such, for they are in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity" (Morm. 8:31). The pollutions Moroni saw may well be spiritual pollutions, things that defile and canker the spirit. These conditions will continue, and even worsen, until the Lord returns. So wicked are the people of the last days that Moroni called them "wicked and perverse and stiffnecked" (Morm. 8:33). When the Lord comes, Jude declared, he will "execute judgment upon all, and . . . convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts" (Jude 1:15-16). "All flesh is corrupted before me," the Lord said in 1831, "and the powers of darkness prevail upon the earth, among the children of men, in the presence of all the hosts of heaven—which causeth silence to reign, and all eternity is pained, and the angels are waiting the great command to reap down the earth, to gather the tares that they may be burned; and, behold, the enemy is combined" (D&C 38:11-12).

In our time, Elder Spencer W. Kimball compiled a "lengthy list" of "modern transgressions," each of which is all too prevalent in our society: "Murder, adultery, theft, cursing, unholiness in masters, disobedience in servants, unfaithfulness, improvidence, hatred of God, disobedience to husbands, lack of natural affection, high-mindedness, flattery, lustfulness, infidelity, indiscretion, backbiting, whispering, lack of truth, striking, brawling, quarrelsomeness, unthankfulness, inhospitality, deceitfulness, irreverence, boasting, arrogance, pride, double-tongued talk, profanity, slander, corruptness, thievery, embezzlement, despoiling, covenant breaking, incontinence, filthiness, ignobleness, filthy communications, impurity, foolishness, slothfulness, impatience, lack of understanding, unmercifulness,Â½ idolatry, blasphemy, denial of the Holy Ghost, Sabbath breaking, envy, jealousy, malice, maligning, vengefulness, implacability, bitterness, clamor, spite, defiling, reviling, evil speaking, provoking, greediness for filthy lucre, disobedience to parents, anger, hate, covetousness, bearing false witness, inventing evil things, fleshliness, heresy, presumptuousness, abomination, insatiable appetite, instability, ignorance, self-will, speaking evil of dignitaries, becoming a stumbling block; and in our modern language, masturbation, petting, fornication, adultery, homosexuality; and every sex perversion, every hidden and secret sin and all unholy and impure practices.

"These are transgressions the Lord has condemned through his servants. Let no one rationalize his sins on the excuse that a particular sin of his is not mentioned nor forbidden in scripture." [^18]

On another occasion President Kimball lamented, "Perhaps never before has the world accepted sin so completely as a way of life." [^19]

Other latter-day prophets have spoken plainly concerning the sins of our day. Their combined voices are stunning in their clarity and sobering in their message. Following is a sampling:

Joseph Smith: "We behold that darkness covers the earth, and gross darkness the minds of the inhabitants thereof—that crimes of every description are increasing among men—vices of great enormity are practiced—the rising generation growing up in the fullness of pride and arrogance—the aged losing every sense of conviction, and seemingly banishing every thought of a day of retribution—intemperance, immorality, extravagance, pride, blindness of heart, idolatry, the loss of natural affection; the love of this world, and indifference toward the things of eternity increasing among those who profess a belief in the religion of heaven, and infidelity spreading itself in consequence of the same—men giving themselves up to commit acts of the foulest kind, and deeds of the blackest dye, blaspheming, defrauding, blasting the reputation of neighbors, stealing, robbing, murdering; advocating error and opposing the truth, forsaking the covenant of heaven, and denying the faith of Jesus—and in the midst of all this, the day of the Lord fast approaching when none except those who have won the wedding garment will be permitted to eat and drink in the presence of the Bridegroom, the Prince of Peace!" [^20]

Marion G. Romney: "The world in which we live today is sick nigh to death. The disease of which it suffers is not a new one. It is as old as history. Its name is unrighteousness. The cure for it is repentance." [^21]

Gordon B. Hinckley: "One need not . . . read statistics to recognize a moral decay that seems to be going on all about us. It is evident in the easy breakup of marriages, in widespread infidelity, in the growth of youth gangs, in the increased use of drugs and the epidemic spread of AIDS, and in a growing disregard for the lives and property of others. It is seen in the defacement of private and public property with graffiti, which destroys beauty and is an insult to art. It is expressed in the language of the gutter, which is brought into our homes.

"The endless sex and violence on network TV, the trash of so many motion pictures, the magnified sensuality found in much of modern literature, the emphasis on sex education, a widespread breakdown of law and order—all are manifestations of this decay." [^22]

Thomas S. Monson: "We observe business without morality; science without humanity; knowledge without character; worship without sacrifice; pleasure without conscience; politics without principle; and wealth without works." [^23]

Bruce R. McConkie: "Even now the generality of men love Satan more than God; even now sodomic practices—immorality, homosexuality, and all manner of perversions—are found among great segments of our society; even now the righteous are leaving the world and finding place in the stakes of Zion. And as the residue of men go forward in their normal activities, reveling in their wickedness as did they of old, the day of burning, coming, as it were, from the midst of eternity, shall come upon them. And should any of the saints look back as did Lot's wife, they will be burned with the wicked." [^24]

David B. Haight: "In [a] brief period . . . , this country and most of the free world have been converted into a space-age Sodom and Gomorrah, aided by some publishers, movie producers, and even some so-called educators. Moral principles have been eclipsed by the blind, ungodly pursuit of pleasure—pleasure at any price." [^25]

Even without such prophetic testimony, one does not have to look far to see that ours is a day when iniquity does indeed abound. Those with just a moderate awareness of our world can readily see the iniquity of our age in the high incidence of divorce, sexual relations outside the sacred bonds of marriage, the high crime rate, the continuing proliferation of wars around the world, pornography on the Internet and elsewhere, profanity and the emphasis on sexual situations on television and in movies, the lamented loss of civility in our discourse and our dealings with others, drug abuse, abortion, assisted suicide, and on and on. [^26]

Notes and Commentary

2 Tim. 3:1 perilous times. Certainly the last days will be perilous in terms of judgments and disasters, for there will be unprecedented famines, pestilences, and earthquakes. [^27] But Paul is referring here to perilous times spiritually; when men turn themselves over to the kinds of sin mentioned in this passage, both society and individuals are imperiled.

2 Tim. 3:2 lovers of their own selves. Men will be so selfish that they will care first and foremost for themselves, making their own pleasure and desires and goals their highest priority.

unholy. That which is holy is that which is worthy to receive God's presence, such as a temple or a pure and righteous person (Ps. 11:4; 1 Cor. 3:16-17). When a person becomes unholy, he or she becomes separated from God and his Spirit, and is no longer able to receive that divine presence (Mosiah 2:37; Alma 7:21).

2 Tim. 3:3 without natural affection. Paul here implies that it is in our nature to have affection or regard for others, but in the last days, that natural affection will be lost as people turn themselves over to sin. In the book of Moses the Lord said, "Unto thy brethren have I said, and also given commandment, that they should love one another, and that they should choose me, their Father; but behold, they are without affection, and they hate their own blood" (Moses 7:33; see also Rom. 1:31). There may be a second meaning to this phrase: perhaps it also refers to affection that is not natural, such as homosexuality.

incontinent. This word in the original Greek may be translated as "without self-control." [^28]

2 Tim. 3:4 heady. The original Greek word used by Paul may also be translated as "rash." [^29]

highminded. The original Greek word used by Paul may also be translated as "lifted up with pride." [^30]

2 Tim. 3:5 Having a form of godliness. "A form of godliness" may refer to having the ordinances of the priesthood or the outward trappings of the gospel. It may also refer to hypocrisy, in which people have the appearance of godliness without really being godly. During the First Vision, the Lord indicated that this prophecy had come to pass and seemed to suggest that this phrase referred to both of these concepts: "The Personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors were all corrupt; that: 'they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof'" (JS-H 1:19).

but denying the power thereof. Even though the people being described here have a form of godliness, they are not able to appreciate or even give place to the true power of godliness. In fact, they go beyond lack of recognition of that power to the point of denial (3 Ne. 29:6; Morm. 9:26).

2 Tim. 3:6 silly women laden with sins. The New International Version of the Bible refers to these women as "weak-willed women, who are loaded down with sins and are swayed by all kinds of evil desires."

2 Tim. 3:7 ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. Such people increase in worldly knowledge but never come to the richer knowledge of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Those who hope to learn the things of eternal significance must cast away "their learning, and their wisdom, and their riches . . . and consider themselves fools before God, and come down in the depths of humility" (2 Ne. 9:42; see also Alma 17:2-3).

The Love of Many Shall Wax Cold

Matt. 24:12

12 And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold.

Latter-day scripture changes this passage to "the love of men shall wax cold" (D&C 45:27; see also JS-M 1:30). The cause of the lack of love is the iniquity. "Because iniquity shall abound," the Lord said, love will "wax cold." The New International Version of the Bible renders it this way: "Because of the increase of wickedness, the love of most will grow cold."

Iniquity and loss of love are intimately and inextricably connected; each leads to the other in an unhappy cycle. Love grows cold when people love their sins more than goodness or the Lord; when they are selfish, caring more about themselves than about others; when other people become tools or objects to be used, rather than souls to care about; when they are filled with pride. Manifestations in our time of love growing cold are crime rates, divorce rates, desertions, abuse, pornography, abortion, and sin in general. Elder Neal A. Maxwell wrote: "Indifference, insensitivity, and cruelty will extend beyond obvious manifestations, such as abortion, to other things as well. Previous societies in deep decay and deterioration were characterized by the words past feeling, without order, and without mercy. (See Moro. 9:18.)" [^31]

To illustrate how love has waxed cold in our day, Elder M. Russell Ballard quoted the following statistics: "During the . . . 30-year period [1960-1990] there has been more than a 500 percent increase in violent crime; more than a 400 percent increase in illegitimate births; a tripling of the percentage of children living in single-parent homes; a tripling in the teenage suicide rate; a doubling in the divorce rate. . . . By 2000, according to some projections, 40 percent of all American births . . . will occur out of wedlock." Elder Ballard further noted that "in the United States the birthrate of children to unwed mothers is at an all-time high, as is the divorce rate." [^32]

The prophet Mormon has given us a disturbing view of the depths to which man can sink when his love waxes cold. Speaking of the Nephites, whose story is given to provide lessons for our day, he said: "So exceedingly do they anger that it seemeth me that they have no fear of death; and they have lost their love, one towards another; and they thirst after blood and revenge continually.

"And notwithstanding [the] great abomination of the Lamanites, it doth not exceed that of our people in Moriantum. For behold, many of the daughters of the Lamanites have they taken prisoners; and after depriving them of that which was most dear and precious above all things, which is chastity and virtue—and after they had done this thing, they did murder them in a most cruel manner, torturing their bodies even unto death. . . .

"Behold, my heart cries: Wo unto this people. Come out in judgment, O God, and hide their sins, and wickedness, and abominations from before thy face!

"O the depravity of my people! They are without order and without mercy. . . . And they have become strong in their perversion; and they are alike brutal, sparing none, neither old nor young; and they delight in everything save that which is good; and the suffering of our women and our children upon all the face of this land doth exceed everything; yea, tongue cannot tell, neither can it be written.

"And now, my son, I dwell no longer upon this horrible scene. Behold, thou knowest the wickedness of this people; thou knowest that they are without principle, and past feeling; and their wickedness doth exceed that of the Lamanites. . . . And if they perish it will be like unto the Jaredites, because of the wilfulness of their hearts, seeking for blood and revenge" (Moro. 9:5, 9-10, 15, 18-20, 23).

Notes and Commentary

Matt. 24:12 wax cold. Love can grow warm or cold. In the last days, because of sin, many men and women will lose their natural love for others. This loss of love will be marked enough that those who are watching can see it as one of the signs of the times.

The Persecution of the Saints

1 Ne. 14:13

13 And it came to pass that I beheld that the great mother of abominations did gather together multitudes upon the face of all the earth, among all the nations of the Gentiles, to fight against the Lamb of God.

Persecution is the lot of the Saints in all ages, and the last days are no exception. Sometimes persecution stems from simple prejudice in the minds of individuals; sometimes it is orchestrated, as stated in this verse: "the great mother of abominations did gather together multitudes . . . to fight against the Lamb of God" (1 Ne.14:13). But, the Lord said, "Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you" (Matt. 5:10-12). Again, he said, "They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service" (John 16:2; see also Dan. 7:21; Rev. 13:6-8; D&C 88:94). Paul added this sobering observation: "All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution" (2 Tim. 3:12).

The persecution of the latter-day church of Christ is a dominant element of our history, beginning with Joseph Smith ("I was hated and persecuted"; JS-H 1:25) and continuing in some geographical areas to the present. Our latter-day prophets give us some idea of what we may expect:

Joseph Smith said, "This one thing is sure, that they who will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution; . . . they will pass through great tribulation." [^33] "The enemies of this people will never get weary of their persecution against the Church, until they are overcome. . . . He that will war the true Christian warfare against the corruptions of these last days will have wicked men and angels of devils, and all the infernal powers of darkness continually arrayed against him. . . . But it will be but a little season, and all these afflictions will be turned away from us, inasmuch as we are faithful, and are not overcome by these evils." [^34]

And Elder Gordon B. Hinckley taught: "Our history is one of being driven, of being winnowed and peeled, of being persecuted and hounded. . . . I go back to these words of Paul: 'We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed' (2 Cor. 4:8-9)." [^35]

Notes and Commentary

1 Ne. 14:13 great mother of abominations. This expression is a reference to the great and abominable church of the devil. [^36]

multitudes upon the face of all the earth, among all the nations of the Gentiles. The persecution of the Saints of God will be found in all nations.

fight against the Lamb of God. When the people of the earth fight against the Lamb of God, who is Christ, they of course will do so by fighting against his Church, his people, and the truth of his gospel.

Secret Combinations Will Be Built Up

Morm. 8:27

27 And it shall come in a day when the blood of saints shall cry unto the Lord, because of secret combinations and the works of darkness.

The Book of Mormon will come in a day when there are secret combinations and works of darkness on the earth. That day, or time in the earth's history, continues to our present generation—only it grows worse. In the time of Joseph Smith, the Lord warned those who "shall be converted to flee to the west, and this in consequence of that which is coming on the earth, and of secret combinations" (D&C 42:64). When he served as president of the Church, Ezra Taft Benson repeatedly warned us against secret combinations. For example, he taught: "Pride results in secret combinations which are built up to get power, gain, and glory of the world (see Hel. 7:5; Ether 8:9, 16, 22-23; Moses 5:31). This fruit of the sin of pride, namely secret combinations, brought down both the Jaredite and the Nephite civilizations and has been and will yet be the cause of the fall of many nations (see Ether 8:18-25)." [^37] On another occasion he said: "I testify that wickedness is rapidly expanding in every segment of our society (see D&C 1:14-16; 84:49). It is more highly organized, more cleverly disguised, and more powerfully promoted than ever before. Secret combinations lusting for power, gain, and glory are flourishing." [^38]

What are the characteristics of secret combinations?

"What are these secret combinations which have such powers that whole civilizations are destroyed by them? They wear many guises and appear in many forms. They were the Gadianton robbers among the Nephites, and the perpetrators of the Spanish inquisition in the dark ages. Among us they include some secret and oath-bound societies and such Mafia-like groups as engage in organized crime. They include some political parties, some revolutionists who rise up against their governments, and those evil and anarchist groups which steal and kidnap and murder in the name of this or that political objective. They are always groups that seek money and power and freedom from the penalties that should attend their crimes. . . .

"Next Moroni turns the key so that all who have ears to hear can understand what the secret combination is and can identify those who build it up. 'For it cometh to pass,' he says, 'that whoso buildeth it up seeketh to overthrow the freedom of all lands, nations, and countries.' This is a worldwide conspiracy. It is now entrenched in many nations, and it seeks dominion over all nations. It is Godless, atheistic, and operates by compulsion. It is communism." [^39]

Related to secret combinations is Babylon, the mother of abominations on the earth. [^40]

Notes and Commentary

Morm. 8:27 blood of saints. This expression indicates that those who were martyred require justice against those who killed them; it is as though their very blood cries unto the Lord for vengeance against those who, as part of secret combinations, have slain them. Killing the Saints and prophets is also a key characteristic of Babylon, the whore of all the earth (Rev. 16:6; 17:6; 18:24; Ether 8:22; D&C 87:7).

works of darkness. It is characteristic of Satan to seek to do his evil works in darkness, and he teaches his followers to do the same. Thus, "works of darkness" refers to works inspired by the devil.

The Constitution of the United States Will Hang by a Thread

Joseph Smith

Even this Nation will be on the very verge of crumbling to pieces and tumbling to the ground and when the constitution is upon the brink of ruin this people will be the Staff[up[on] which the Nation shall lean and they shall bear the constitution away from the very verge of destruction. . . . I know these things by the visions of the Almighty. [^41]

One of the conditions of the last days is that the Constitution of the United States will be in jeopardy and will seem to hang as though upon a single thread. Our source of this prophecy is not the scriptures but Joseph Smith. Brigham Young recalled the prophecy in this way: "Will the Constitution be destroyed? No; it will be held inviolate by this people; and, as Joseph Smith said, 'The time will come when the destiny of the nation will hang upon a single thread. At this critical juncture, this people will step forth and save it from the threatened destruction.' It will be so." [^42]

Joseph Smith said we would see the time when the nation was on the "verge of crumbling to pieces" and "the constitution is upon the brink of ruin." President Wilford Woodruff said "the time will come when the country will be distracted and general lawlessness prevail. Then the Mormon people will step forward and take an active part in rescuing the nation from ruin." [^43] Speaking of this prophecy, Elder Ezra Taft Benson said: "I have heard our present Prophet leader [President David O. McKay] say we are very near to that time. It is my solemn conviction we are near the time which the Prophet saw. What are we going to do about it? Will we, as Latter-day Saints, favored of the Lord, 'arise and shine forth,' as the Lord has commanded, 'that thy light may be a standard for the nations' (D&C 115:5)?" [^44]

How will "this people step forward" to save the Constitution? Elder Benson suggested that "it is entirely possible that that may come about in a rather natural way. Our young people—as they mature and develop and take their positions in industry, in the professions, and in agriculture clear across this land—might represent the balance of power in a time of crisis, when they will stand up and defend those eternal principles upon which this Constitution has been established." [^45] On another occasion he said: "I have faith that the Constitution will be saved as prophesied by Joseph Smith. But it will not be saved in Washington. It will be saved by the citizens of this nation who love and cherish freedom. It will be saved by enlightened members of this Church—men and women who will subscribe to and abide by the principles of the Constitution." [^46] Elder Mark E. Petersen offered another possibility of how this prophecy would come to pass: "You will remember that there have been prophecies made that the Constitution sometime will hang by a thread and that the elders of Israel will save it. I don't believe that that is through some political means particularly. I believe that the way this Church may save our country is by being the leaven in the lump which will be so recognized by the Almighty that he will spare the country for the Church. The country, our nation, was made by act of God to bring about the purposes related to the restoration of the gospel and to the final fulfillment of his work which will lead to the second coming of Jesus Christ." [^47]

Men's Hearts Shall Fail Them

D&C 88:91

91 And all things shall be in commotion; and surely, men's hearts shall fail them; for fear shall come upon all people.

The commotion on the earth in the last days will be so great that it will bring a terrifying fear into the hearts of all people, a fear that causes men's hearts to fail them. D&C 88:90-91 say: "And also cometh the testimony of the voice of thunderings, and the voice of lightnings, and the voice of tempests, and the voice of the waves of the sea heaving themselves beyond their bounds. And all things shall be in commotion; and surely, men's hearts shall fail them; for fear shall come upon all people."

Wars are a corollary source of terrible fear: "I have sworn in my wrath, and decreed wars upon the face of the earth," the Lord said, "and the wicked shall slay the wicked, and fear shall come upon every man" (D&C 63:33).

Enoch, in seeing our day, saw another source of great fear. He "saw great tribulations among the wicked; and he also saw the sea, that it was troubled, and men's hearts failing them, looking forth with fear for the judgments of the Almighty God, which should come upon the wicked" (Moses 7:66).

Fear from the unprecedented commotion on the earth, fear from wars and death, fear from the judgments of God—surely these will be great indeed to cause men's hearts to fail. The fear, of course, stems from lack of faith coupled with wickedness. As the people of the world turn from God, they lose confidence before him, resulting in a fear of him and his judgments. A loss of love is a related cause of fear, for "perfect love casteth out fear" (1 Jn. 4:18; Moro. 8:16), and those who lack that love are filled with fear. This prophecy seems to tell us that people's courage will fail, they will lose hope, they will be more utterly terrified than they have ever before been in their lives.

Notes and Commentary

D&C 88:91 all things shall be in commotion. The elements will be in commotion (D&C 88:90) the nations will be in commotion (D&C 63:33) the wicked will be engaged in the commotion of great tribulations (Moses 7:66)—all of these will likely reach unprecedented levels in the last days.

Men Will Refuse to Believe and Repent

Rev. 9:20-21

20 And the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood: which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk:

21 Neither repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts.

This is an astounding prophecy. John has just seen a vision of many frightening plagues and other judgments:

After all these judgments, the surviving wicked "yet repented not" (Rev. 9:20; see also 16:11, 21).

This prophecy calls to mind the Jaredites and Nephites, who were so deep in iniquity that they refused to repent even when facing the extinction of their people. Mormon recorded his frustrating and heartrending experience:

"And it came to pass that the Lord did say unto me: Cry unto this people—Repent ye, and come unto me, and be ye baptized, and build up again my church, and ye shall be spared. And I did cry unto this people, but it was in vain; and . . . they did harden their hearts against the Lord their God.

"And when they had sworn by all that had been forbidden them by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that they would go up unto their enemies to battle, and avenge themselves of the blood of their brethren, behold the voice of the Lord came unto me, saying: Vengeance is mine, and I will repay; and because this people repented not after I had delivered them, behold, they shall be cut off from the face of the earth.

"And it came to pass that the three hundred and sixty and sixth year had passed away, and the Lamanites came again upon the Nephites to battle; and yet the Nephites repented not of the evil they had done, but persisted in their wickedness continually. And it is impossible for the tongue to describe, or for man to write a perfect description of the horrible scene of the blood and carnage which was among the people, both of the Nephites and of the Lamanites; and every heart was hardened, so that they delighted in the shedding of blood continually. And there never had been so great wickedness among all the children of Lehi, nor even among all the house of Israel, according to the words of the Lord, as was among this people.

"And now behold, this I speak unto their seed, and also to the Gentiles who have care for the house of Israel, that realize and know from whence their blessings come. For I know that such will sorrow for the calamity of the house of Israel; yea, they will sorrow for the destruction of this people; they will sorrow that this people had not repented that they might have been clasped in the arms of Jesus" (Morm. 3:2-3, 14-15; 4:10; 5:10; see also Ether 15:2, 6, 15- 19; Moro. 9:3).

After the Nephites were destroyed, Mormon wrote in deep grief: "My soul was rent with anguish, because of the slain of my people, and I cried:

"O ye fair ones, how could ye have departed from the ways of the Lord! O ye fair ones, how could ye have rejected that Jesus, who stood with open arms to receive you! Behold, if ye had not done this, ye would not have fallen. But behold, ye are fallen, and I mourn your loss.

"O ye fair sons and daughters, ye fathers and mothers, ye husbands and wives, ye fair ones, how is it that ye could have fallen! But behold, ye are gone, and my sorrows cannot bring your return.

"O that ye had repented before this great destruction had come upon you. But behold, ye are gone, and the Father, yea, the Eternal Father of heaven, knoweth your state; and he doeth with you according to his justice and mercy" (Morm. 6:16-20, 22).

The righteous may yet experience such sorrow themselves, as the world ripens in iniquity and refuses to repent. As those days approach, the Lord gives us the prophecy: "My disciples shall stand in holy places, and shall not be moved; but among the wicked, men shall lift up their voices and curse God and die" (D&C 45:32).

Notes and Commentary

Rev. 9:20 works of their hands. In the scriptures, this expression often refers to idols, which people created to worship (Jer. 1:16; Acts 7:41). The context of this passage seems to carry the same meaning.

worship devils, and idols. We worship devils or idols when we turn from the true God and let other things replace him in our hearts. Arthur Henry King has spoken of "the idols of prosperity: the car, the camper, the boat (bane of bishops), the color TV, the football game, two weeks of hunting." He added, "These become idols when more enthusiasm and time are given to them than to the worship of God." [^48]

Elder Spencer W. Kimball had a similar view. "Today we worship the gods of wood and stone and metal. Not always are they in the form of a golden calf, but equally real as objects of protection and worship. They are houses, lands, bank accounts, leisure. They are boats, cars, and luxuries. They are bombs and ships and armaments. We bow down to the god of mammon, the god of luxuries, the god of dissipation." [^49] Years later, as president of the Church, he said, "Whatever thing a man sets his heart and his trust in most is his god; and if his god doesn't also happen to be the true and living God of Israel, that man is laboring in idolatry." [^50]

In 1930, Elder James E. Talmage gave a conference address in which he identified idolatry as one of the signs of the times: "This is an idolatrous generation. . . . Do you wonder that wickedness and crime have increased to terrifying proportions under those conditions? The prophets of old foresaw it. They spoke of the days of wickedness and vengeance immediately precedent to the second coming of the Lord. . . .

"Where do we stand . . . ? Are we worshipping the true and living God, or are we going idolatrously after the gods of gold and silver, of iron and wood, and brass, diamonds and other idols of wealth? Are we worshipping our farms, our cattle and sheep? Who is our God? To whom are we yielding homage, allegiance and worship? Not worship by means of words only, in ritualistic form, but worship in action, devotion, and sacrificial service?" [^51]

Scoffers Will Mock at the Signs of the Times

2 Pet. 3:3-4

3 Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts,

4 And saying, Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation.

Even though the signs of the times may be obvious to those who are watching for them and who have faith in the prophecies in the scriptures, there will be many who will scoff at them and deny them. "What you claim as signs are natural events," they will say. "What do they have to do with a return of Jesus Christ?" Or: "There have always been earthquakes and wars. We just know about more of them now because of modern means of communication." Or: "What do you mean Christ is coming again? There is no Second Coming, and there are no signs." As Jude put it, echoing Peter's words, "The apostles . . . told you there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts" (Jude 1:18). Rather than believe and repent, they will deny, mock, sneer, scoff, and rationalize, thereby justifying themselves in their sinfulness and their "ungodly lusts."

A corollary to these attitudes is that there is still time to "eat, drink, and be merry" before the Lord comes. "As it was in the days of Noah, so it shall be also at the coming of the Son of Man," the Lord said. "For it shall be with them, as it was in the days which were before the flood; for until the day that Noah entered into the ark they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage; and knew not until the flood came, and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be" (JS-M 1:41-43).

We know that the last days will be fully ripened in iniquity, as were the days of Noah, but this prophecy is not necessarily referring to sinfulness. Instead, the Lord speaks of the people participating in the normal activities of life—eating, drinking, getting married—Â½ simply unmindful and unbelieving that the Flood would really come. So it will be in the last days. The people will continue with their normal lives, despite the signs of the times, not believing what the signs portend. The result will be that they will be unprepared for the Lord's return. They will not have put their houses in order. They will not have repented of their sins, whether gross or minor; they will not have turned their hearts and their minds and their lives to Christ.

The first group, then, consists of those who do not believe in the signs. The second group consists of those who "shall say that Christ delayeth his coming" (D&C 45:26). They believe in Christ, but they do not think he's going to come in the immediate future, giving them time to continue in sin or their self-centered activities.

To illustrate this truth, the Lord gave us a parable, comparing the people of the world to two kinds of servants: "Be . . . ready, for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son of Man cometh. Who, then, is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season? Blessed is that servant whom his lord, when he cometh, shall find so doing; and verily I say unto you, he shall make him ruler over all his goods. But if that evil servant shall say in his heart: My lord delayeth his coming, and shall begin to smite his fellow-servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken, the lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder, and shall appoint him his portion with the hypocrites; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth" (JS-M 1:48-54).

Notes and Commentary

2 Pet. 3:3 walking after their own lusts. Rather than walking along the strait and narrow path, being guided by the iron rod, these people walk according to their own base desires, letting their lusts be their guide.

2 Pet. 3:4 since the fathers fell asleep. The fathers seems to be the ancient patriarchal fathers of the covenant people: Adam, Noah, Abraham, and so forth (see John 7:22 and Rom. 15:8, where "the fathers" has reference to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob). Or this expression may have the more general meaning of "previous generations" (Mal. 4:6). "Fell asleep" refers to the death of those fathers (Deut. 31:16; 2 Sam. 7:12; Acts 7:60).

all things continue as they were. Those who reject the signs of the times will say in essence, "The prophecies have not come to pass; nothing has changed. Everything is the same as it was from the beginning."

The Lord's Spirit Will Cease Striving with Man

D&C 1:32-35

32 Nevertheless, he that repents and does the commandments of the Lord shall be forgiven;

33 And he that repents not, from him shall be taken even the light which he has received; for my Spirit shall not always strive with man, saith the Lord of Hosts.

34 And again, verily I say unto you, O inhabitants of the earth: I the Lord am willing to make these things known unto all flesh;

35 For I am no respecter of persons, and will that all men shall know that the day speedily cometh; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion.

This is not a prophecy that deals only with the last days; it is true in any age that the Lord's Spirit will not always strive with the unrepentant. But we also know that because of the iniquity of earth's inhabitants in the last days, combined with their unwillingness to repent, the time will come when they are "ripened in iniquity" (Ether 2:9; 9:20) and the Spirit will no longer strive to bring them to repentance. The final result will be a world war that will destroy a third of mankind (Rev. 9:16-18), followed by a number of devastating plagues (Rev. 16), and culminating in the destruction of the wicked at the Lord's coming (Mal. 4:1; Rev. 18:8).

"I prophesy, in the name of the Lord God of Israel," said Joseph Smith, "anguish and wrath and tribulation and the withdrawing of the Spirit of God from the earth await this generation, until they are visited with utter desolation. This generation is as corrupt as the generation of the Jews that crucified Christ; and if He were here to-day, and should preach the same doctrine He did then, they would put Him to death." [^52]

The scriptural history of the world gives a number of sad precedents for the loss of the Spirit and the destruction that eventually results. In Noah's time, "God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually" (Gen. 6:5). "And the Lord said unto Noah: My Spirit shall not always strive with man, for he shall know that all flesh shall die; yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years; and if men do not repent, I will send in the floods upon them" (Moses 8:17). We know, of course, that men did not repent, and the floods of mass destruction were sent forth.

The Jews in the time of Lehi were warned that Jerusalem would be destroyed because of their wickedness. "For behold, the Spirit of the Lord ceaseth soon to strive with them," Nephi testified, "for behold, they have rejected the prophets, and Jeremiah have they cast into prison. And they have sought to take away the life of my father, insomuch that they have driven him out of the land" (1 Ne. 7:14).

Later, looking into the future, Nephi said that four generations after the Lord's ministry among the Nephites, "a speedy destruction cometh unto my people; for, notwithstanding the pains of my soul, I have seen it; wherefore, I know that it shall come to pass; and they sell themselves for naught; for, for the reward of their pride and their foolishness they shall reap destruction; for because they yield unto the devil and choose works of darkness rather than light, therefore they must go down to hell. For the Spirit of the Lord will not always strive with man. And when the Spirit ceaseth to strive with man then cometh speedy destruction, and this grieveth my soul" (2 Ne. 26:10-11).

That vision was fulfilled even as Nephi foresaw. Mormon wrote: "Behold, my son, . . . the pride of this nation, or the people of the Nephites, hath proven their destruction except they should repent. Pray for them, my son, that repentance may come unto them. But behold, I fear lest the Spirit hath ceased striving with them; and in this part of the land they are also seeking to put down all power and authority which cometh from God; and they are denying the Holy Ghost. And after rejecting so great a knowledge, my son, they must perish soon, unto the fulfilling of the prophecies which were spoken by the prophets, as well as the words of our Savior himself.

"And now behold, my son, I fear lest the Lamanites shall destroy this people; for they do not repent, and Satan stirreth them up continually to anger one with another. Behold, I am laboring with them continually; and when I speak the word of God with sharpness they tremble and anger against me; and when I use no sharpness they harden their hearts against it; wherefore, I fear lest the Spirit of the Lord hath ceased striving with them. For so exceedingly do they anger that it seemeth me that they have no fear of death; and they have lost their love, one towards another; and they thirst after blood and revenge continually" (Moro. 8:27-29; 9:3).

The Jaredites suffered a similar fate, as recorded by the prophet Ether: "The Spirit of the Lord had ceased striving with them," he wrote, "and Satan had full power over the hearts of the people; for they were given up unto the hardness of their hearts, and the blindness of their minds that they might be destroyed" (Ether 15:19).

Mormon taught us the awful consequences of this loss of the Lord's Spirit: "This people shall be scattered, and shall become a dark, a filthy, and a loathsome people, beyond the description of that which ever hath been amongst us, . . . and this because of their unbelief and idolatry. For behold, the Spirit of the Lord hath already ceased to strive with their fathers; and they are without Christ and God in the world; and they are driven about as chaff before the wind.

"They were once a delightsome people, and they had Christ for their shepherd; yea, they were led even by God the Father. But now, behold, they are led about by Satan, even as chaff is driven before the wind, or as a vessel is tossed about upon the waves, without sail or anchor, or without anything wherewith to steer her; and even as she is, so are they" (Morm. 5:15-18; see also Ether 2:14-15).

This dreadful condition has now returned to the earth, only this time it has become worldwide. "I, the Lord, am angry with the wicked," the Lord proclaimed in Joseph Smith's day. "I am holding my Spirit from the inhabitants of the earth" (D&C 63:32).

President Joseph Fielding Smith has given an interpretation of that scripture: "The present turmoil and contentions in the world are due to the fact that the leaders of nations are getting their inspiration from Satan, not from the Lord. His Spirit is withdrawn from them, according to his promise, in spiritual things. The Lord would be glad to direct them, but they seek not his counsel. The spirit of the evil one is placing in their minds vain and fantastic notions and leading mankind farther away from the truth as they boast in their own strength. . . .

"The Spirit of the Lord has not been taken away from those who are willing to keep his commandments." [^53]

Even though it appears that the die is cast, that mankind will continue in increasing iniquity until the end, we must not give in to fatalism, comfortable in the knowledge that we have the gospel and will be ready to meet the Lord. As long as time lasts and as long as the Lord allows it, we are to continue to share the gospel message, seeking to build up our neighbors, our communities, and our nations, seeking to somehow stem the tide of evil that surges around us. The perspective of Mormon is valuable for each of us: "And now, my beloved son, notwithstanding their hardness, let us labor diligently; for if we should cease to labor, we should be brought under condemnation; for we have a labor to perform whilst in this tabernacle of clay, that we may conquer the enemy of all righteousness, and rest our souls in the kingdom of God" (Moro. 9:6).

Notes and Commentary

D&C 1:33 from him shall be taken even the light which he has received. This passage appears to be a description of an eternal principle, as expressed in the parable of the talents. After the owner of the talents received an accounting from his stewards, he said regarding the one who had buried his talent, "Take . . . the talent from him, and give it unto him which hath ten talents. For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath" (Matt. 25:28-29; see also D&C 60:2-3). Alma applied this principle directly to spiritual things: "It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God. . . . And . . . he that will harden his heart, the same receiveth the lesser portion of the word; and he that will not harden his heart, to him is given the greater portion of the word, until it is given unto him to know the mysteries of God until he know them in full. And they that will harden their hearts, to them is given the lesser portion of the word until they know nothing concerning his mysteries; and then they are taken captive by the devil, and led by his will down to destruction" (Alma 12:9-11).

D&C 1:34 I the Lord am willing to make these things known unto all flesh. The Lord repeats this idea in the next verse: "I . . . will that all men shall know." The Lord does not do his work "in a corner" (Acts 26:25), hidden from the view of the people. He is willing for us to know "the calamity which should come upon the inhabitants of the earth" (v. 17) and the way in which repentance can deliver us (vv. 31- 32). To accomplish that, "the voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape; . . . the voice of warning shall be unto all people" (v. 2, 4).

D&C 1:35 I am no respecter of persons. "The Lord is no respecter of persons," wrote Elder Joseph Fielding Smith. "However, let us not misinterpret this saying. It does not mean that the Lord does not respect those who obey him in all things more than he does the ungodly. Without question the Lord does respect those who love him and keep his commandments more than he does those who rebel against him. The proper interpretation of this passage is that the Lord is not partial and grants to each man, if he will repent, the same privileges and opportunities of salvation and exaltation. He is just to every man, both the righteous and the wicked. He will receive any soul who will turn from iniquity to righteousness, and will love him with a just love and bless him with all that the Father has to give; but let it not be thought that he will grant the same blessings to those who will not obey him and keep his law. If the Lord did bless the rebellious as he does the righteous, without their repentance, then he would be a respecter of persons. His justice and his mercy are perfect." [^54] (See also Deut. 10:17-18; Acts 10:9-35; 2 Ne. 26:33; Alma 1:29-30; 16:13; D&C 38:16.)

the day speedily cometh. In 1831, the Lord told us that the time had not then arrived ("the hour is not yet") but it would soon come ("is nigh at hand"), when peace would be taken from the earth (D&C 1:35). In scriptural terminology, speedily does not necessarily mean soon. For instance, Nephi quotes Isaiah as teaching that "the time cometh speedily that Satan shall have no more power over the hearts of the children of men; for the day soon cometh that all the proud and they who do wickedly shall be as stubble" (1 Ne. 22:15). Nephi lived and taught about six hundred years before Christ, and Isaiah ministered more than a hundred years before that. Yet those things that they said would come "speedily" have not yet occurred (for other examples of the scriptural use of "speedily," see Moro. 10:27; D&C 112:24-26; 124:10).

If speedily does not mean in the scriptures what we commonly suppose, what does it mean? Latter-day Saint scholar Daniel Ludlow gives this helpful perspective about a similar expression: "The term 'I come quickly' refers to the nearness of the second coming of Jesus Christ and is found in at least 13 sections of the Doctrine and Covenants. Although nearly 150 years have passed since some of these revelations were given, yet that is a relatively short period of time when compared to the nearly 6,000 years that the earth has existed in a telestial condition. The recent fulfillment of many of the prophecies pertaining to the second coming indicate that event is indeed near." [^55]

Elder Joseph Fielding Smith cast further light on this phrase: "'I come quickly.' This is a scriptural expression that occurs frequently, especially in the book of Revelation. This is 'speaking after the manner of the Lord.' (D&C 63:53.) This does not mean that immediately the Lord will make his appearance, but when he does come he will come suddenly, when he is least expected. . . . For this reason we should watch and pray. . . . There is no excuse for any of us, then, not to be prepared, for we have been fully and frequently warned." [^56]

Elder Neal A. Maxwell said: "The Lord's 'soon' may be our century. If I were to say to you at 11:35 p.m., 'When will it be midnight?' you would say 'soon' or 'right away.'" [^57]

peace shall be taken from the earth. See the commentary on wars, page 242.

the devil shall have power over his own dominion. The devil's dominion is the wicked world, where those who have yielded their hearts to him yield also their obedience. The Lord said to Moses that Satan, "even the devil, the father of all lies," sought "to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice" (Moses 4:4). But the Lord gives us the comfort to know that at the same time Satan would increase in power in his dominion, "the Lord shall have power over his saints, and shall reign in their midst" (D&C 1:35-36).

---
Notas:
[^1] War is poured out on all nations. 2. Slaves rise up against their masters. 3. The "remnants of the land" vex the Gentiles. 4. A five-month war torments mankind. 5. A war with two hundred million soldiers kills one-third of mankind (may be the same war as Armageddon). 6. All nations gather to battle against Israel in the valley of Armageddon. 7. The Saints receive a degree of protection. 8. All nations come to an end. South Carolina will enter into rebellion, as one of the southern states against the northern states. This event happened in 1861, beginning the American Civil War. Armageddon will occur in the latter days (Ezek. 38:8), during the seventh seal, or the seventh thousand-year period of the earth's history (Rev. 8:1; 16:16). World Almanac and Book of Facts, 509, 512.
[^2] The southern states will call on Great Britain for help. The southern states made formal overtures to Great Britain as early as 1861. [^5] Satan will move among men to bring them to the destruction of Armageddon: "For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty. . . . And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon" (Rev. 16:14, 16). "Preventing Deadly Conflict: Final Report," 1, prologue.
[^3] Great Britain, in turn, will call on other nations to defend itself in war. This prophecy may have begun to be fulfilled in 1909, when Great Britain instigated a defensive alliance called the Allied and Associated Powers, which was formed in opposition to the Central Powers, an alliance including Germany, Austria, Hungary, Bulgaria, and Turkey. [^6] Historian Sidney Bradshaw Fay calls the formation of these alliances "the greatest single underlying cause" of World War I. [^7] Though Satan brings the war, the Lord will turn it to his purposes; he will exercise his power to bring the armies to the circumstances he requires: "Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Drink ye, and be drunken, and spue, and fall, and rise no more, because of the sword which I will send among you. . . . For, lo, I begin to bring evil on the city which is called by my name. . . . I will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth, saith the Lord of hosts" (Jer. 25:27, 29; see also Isa. 13:4; Ezek. 38:16-17, 21; Jer. 51:20). Our latter-day prophets have repeatedly testified that the prophesied day "when peace shall be taken from the earth" has come. See, for example, Brigham Young and his counselors in the First Presidency, "Ninth General Epistle," 437; Smith, Progress of Man, 398, 478; Lee, Decisions for Successful Living, 221-22; and Benson, So Shall Ye Reap, 98.
[^4] "Then war shall be poured out upon all nations." Armageddon is a great fulfillment of God's judgment against a world steeped in wickedness: "For the indignation of the Lord is upon all nations, and his fury upon all their armies: he hath utterly destroyed them, he hath delivered them to the slaughter. . . . For my sword shall be bathed in heaven: behold, it shall come down upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse, to judgment. The sword of the Lord is filled with blood, it is made fat with fatness, and with the blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the kidneys of rams: for the Lord hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the land of Idumea. . . . For it is the day of the Lord's vengeance, and the year of recompences for the controversy of Zion" (Isa. 34:2, 5-6, 8; see also Lev. 26:25; Isa. 13:5-6, 9, 11; 66:14; Jer. 25:31, 37; Ezek. 38:18-19; Joel 3:13-14; Rev. 14:15, 19-20). Lest We Forget, 3.
[^5] All nations will come to battle at Armageddon (Jer. 25:17-20, 22-23, 26; Joel 3:2; Zech. 12:3; 14:2; Rev. 16:14). Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, 1:297-98.
[^6] Nations will come from "a far country" to gather to the battle (Isa. 13:5). Andrus, Doctrinal Themes of the Doctrine and Covenants, 96.
[^7] The enemy will come speedily: "Behold, he shall come up as clouds, and his chariots shall be as a whirlwind: his horses are swifter than eagles" (Jer. 4:13). Origins of the World War, 34-35.
[^8] The enemy army will come in great numbers and will be very powerful: "The noise of a multitude in the mountains, like as of a great people; a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered together: the Lord of hosts mustereth the host of the battle" (Isa. 13:4; see also Ezek. 38:9, 15; Joel 1:6; 2:2, 11; 3:9, 14). Alexander H. Stephens, History of the United States, as cited in Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, 1:299-300.
[^9] The gathering of all nations is specifically directed against Israel: "Behold, in those days, and in that time, when I shall bring again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, I will also gather all nations, and will bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat, and will plead with them there for my people and for my heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations, and parted my land" (Joel 3:1-2; see also Zech. 12:2-3). Comprehensive History of the Church, 1:299.
[^10] Those in Israel will suffer great fear and consternation: "Howl ye; for the day of the Lord is at hand; it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty. Therefore shall all hands be faint, and every man's heart shall melt: And they shall be afraid: pangs and sorrows shall take hold of them; they shall be in pain as a woman that travaileth: they shall be amazed one at another; their faces shall be as flames" (Isa. 13:6, 8; see also Jer. 4:13; 25:34; Joel 2:6; Zech. 11:2; 12:11). When compared to the total war effort, the involvement of blacks in the war was quite limited. In 1861, there were 4 million blacks in the United States. The 200,000 of these who fought in the Civil War represented only 5 percent of the total. To look at it another way, 2.2 million soldiers fought on the Union side during the Civil War; 9 percent of those were blacks. A number of them, of course, were free men before the war (Time Almanac 1999, 393, 795-96).
[^11] The righteous will respond with faith and many pleadings for protection: "Sanctify ye a fast, call a solemn assembly, gather the elders and all the inhabitants of the land into the house of the Lord your God, and cry unto the Lord. . . . Therefore also now, saith the Lord, turn ye even to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning: And rend your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God: for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repenteth him of the evil" (Joel 1:14; 2:12; see also 1:13; 2:1, 15-17). Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, 536.
[^12] The war will last many years (Ezek. 38:17). Ibid., 537.
[^13] It may well be during this war that the Lord's two witnesses in Jerusalem will testify of Christ and help to protect the city for the allotted 1,260 days (JST Isa. 51:18-20; Rev. 11:2-3, 5-12). [^36] New Witnesses for God, 1:332.
[^14] The land of Israel will be laid waste, and the city Jerusalem will be taken, bringing desolation and death: "For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city" (Zech. 14:2; see also Isa. 13:5, 9; Joel 2:3; Zech. 12:11-12; 13:8; Rev. 11:2). Prophecies and Prophetic Promises, 197.
[^15] When Jerusalem is taken, the city will be spoiled (Jer. 4:13; Zech. 14:1). Doctrine and Covenants and the Future, 40. Others who have thought that this part of the prophecy about the slaves may have seen only partial fulfillment include Smith (Church History and Modern Revelation, 2:127), Whitney (Saturday Night Thoughts, 50), and Otten and Caldwell (Sacred Truths of the Doctrine and Covenants, 2:95).
[^16] The taking of Jerusalem may fulfill the prophecies about the abomination of desolation. These prophecies refer, historically and prophetically, to the abominable desecration of the temple and the terrible desolation of the city. JS-M 1:12-21 records one example of the abomination of desolation that happened when the Romans destroyed Jerusalem in about a.d. 70. The events on that occasion are types of that which will happen in the future, when the abomination of desolation occurs again (see JS-M 1:32-35). These things may occur as part of the battle of Armageddon. [^37] Doctrinal Themes of the Doctrine and Covenants, 97-98.
[^17] The hostility among the combatants who are attacking Jerusalem will degenerate into a civil war: "It shall come to pass in that day, that a great tumult from the Lord shall be among them; and they shall lay hold every one on the hand of his neighbour, and his hand shall rise up against the hand of his neighbour" (Zech. 14:13; see also Isa. 9:19; Ezek. 38:21; Zech. 11:6). A number of authorities have identified the "remnants" as the American Indians. See, for example, Richards, Compendium of the Doctrines of the Gospel, 116; Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, 1:293, 303; Whitney, Saturday Night Thoughts, 49-50; and Wells, "Editorial," 186-87. Some, including Joseph Fielding Smith, have been careful to expand the concept to include the Indians of both North and South America.
[^18] The enemy of Israel (and of God) will suffer many desolations and much death to the extent that only one-sixth of them will survive the battle (Ezek. 39:2): "Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate: and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it. . . . Every one that is found shall be thrust through; and every one that is joined unto them shall fall by the sword. Their children also shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes; their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished. . . . Their bows also shall dash the young men to pieces; and they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eye shall not spare children. . . . Their slain also shall be cast out, and their stink shall come up out of their carcases, and the mountains shall be melted with their blood" (Isa. 13:9, 15-18; 34:3; see also Isa. 9:19; 34:6; 66:16, 24; Jer. 51:21-26, 29, 37, 43, 47, 49, 54, 58, 62; Ezek. 39:2-5; Joel 3:19; Rev. 14:15-20). Church History and Modern Revelation, 2:127.
[^19] When the tide turns against them, there will be fear among those who attack Israel: "The mighty men of Babylon have forborn to fight, they have remained in their holds: their might hath failed; they became as women: they have burned her dwellingplaces; her bars are broken. . . . The men of war are affrighted" (Jer. 51:30, 32). In his vision, John sees a series of seven angels blow their trumpets; with the sounding of each trumpet, a new plague begins.
[^20] When Israel's enemy is conquered, they shall be spoiled (Jer. 51:48, 53, 55-56; Ezek. 39:10). Theological Dictionary of the New Testament, 1:9, s.v. "abyss."
[^21] Associated with Armageddon are such plagues as hailstones, fire, and brimstone. [^38] These may be scriptural descriptions of atomic warfare, [^39] or they may have a meaning we do not yet understand. "I will plead against him with pestilence and with blood; and I will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that are with him, an overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire, and brimstone. And I will send a fire on Magog, and among them that dwell carelessly in the isles: and they shall know that I am the Lord" (Ezek. 38:22; 39:6; see also Isa. 34:9; Joel 1:19; 2:3, 30; Zech. 12:6; Rev. 11:5; 16:21; D&C 29:14, 16-17, 21). History of the Church, 3:390-91.
[^22] A great earthquake is associated with Armageddon: "It shall come to pass at the same time when Gog shall come against the land of Israel, saith the Lord God, that my fury shall come up in my face. For in my jealousy and in the fire of my wrath have I spoken, Surely in that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of Israel; so that the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the field, and all creeping things that creep upon the earth, and all the men that are upon the face of the earth, shall shake at my presence, and the mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall fall to the ground" (Ezek. 38:18-20; see also Isa. 13:4-5, 13-14; Joel 2:2-5, 10; Rev. 16:16-18). McConkie and Parry, Guide to Scriptural Symbols, 36.
[^23] The darkening of the sun, moon, and stars is associated with Armageddon. These events may be related to tremendous dust in the atmosphere caused by the great earthquake, smoke, and other effects of atomic warfare, or some other cause entirely. [^40] "The noise of a multitude in the mountains, like as of a great people; a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered together: the Lord of hosts mustereth the host of the battle. They come from a far country, from the end of heaven, even the Lord, and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole land. For the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall not give their light: the sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine" (Isa. 13:4-5, 10; see also Joel 2:2, 5, 10, 31; 3:15; D&C 29:14). Opening the Seven Seals, 101.
[^24] God will provide deliverance for his people, Israel: "In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and he that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David; and the house of David shall be as God, as the angel of the Lord before them. And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will seek to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem. Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations, as when he fought in the day of battle" (Zech. 12:8-9; 14:3; see also Isa. 13:19-20; Jer. 51:40-41; Joel 2:20-21, 32; Zech. 13:8-9). History of the Church, 5:530.
[^25] The Lord will make his power manifest through the outcome of Armageddon: "I will plead against him with pestilence and with blood; and I will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that are with him, an overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire, and brimstone. Thus will I magnify myself, and sanctify myself; and I will be known in the eyes of many nations, and they shall know that I am the Lord. So will I make my holy name known in the midst of my people Israel; and I will not let them pollute my holy name any more: and the heathen shall know that I am the Lord, the Holy One in Israel" (Ezek. 38:22-23; 39:7; see also 38:18, 21; 39:6, 21-22). Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:502.
[^26] The battle of Armageddon is associated with plagues of flies, maggots, and decaying flesh. These things could be connected to the decay of dead bodies after the battles, or to the quicker destruction of bodies through atomic warfare or other means: [^41] "This shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will smite all the people that have fought against Jerusalem; their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their tongue shall consume away in their mouth" (Zech. 14:12; see also D&C 29:18-19). Doctrines of Salvation, 1:146.
[^27] After the battle of Armageddon, the Lord will invite birds of carrion and ravenous beasts to feast on the bodies of the dead. This is called "the supper of the great God": "Thus saith the Lord God; Speak unto every feathered fowl, and to every beast of the field, Assemble yourselves, and come; gather yourselves on every side to my sacrifice that I do sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh, and drink blood. Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of the princes of the earth. . . . And ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and drink blood till ye be drunken, of my sacrifice which I have sacrificed for you. Thus ye shall be filled at my table with horses and chariots, with mighty men, and with all men of war, saith the Lord God" (Ezek. 39:17-20; see also Rev. 19:17-21; D&C 29:20). See the commentary on Rev. 9:13-19, page 260.
[^28] After the war is over it will take Israel seven years to burn the weapons of war: "They that dwell in the cities of Israel shall go forth, and shall set on fire and burn the weapons, both the shields and the bucklers, the bows and the arrows, and the handstaves, and the spears, and they shall burn them with fire seven years: So that they shall take no wood out of the field, neither cut down any out of the forests; for they shall burn the weapons with fire: and they shall spoil those that spoiled them, and rob those that robbed them, saith the Lord God" (Ezek. 39:9-10). This passage is probably symbolic because it does not seem likely that the armies attacking Israel will use bows and arrows and bucklers and spears instead of guns and tanks. Perhaps the point here is that the battle is so enormous, with the enemy so vast, it will take many years to clean up the weapons they leave behind. This change is from JST Rev. 9:14.
[^29] After the war is over, it will take Israel seven months to bury the dead of their enemy. The number seven here and in the previous passage may be symbolic. In the scriptures, seven often symbolizes perfection or completion. Perhaps by using the number seven the Lord is underscoring the fact that the destruction of the wicked is complete: The last vestiges of their weapons and their dead bodies are now gone. "It shall come to pass in that day, that I will give unto Gog a place there of graves in Israel, the valley of the passengers on the east of the sea: and it shall stop the noses of the passengers: and there shall they bury Gog and all his multitude. . . . And seven months shall the house of Israel be burying of them, that they may cleanse the land. Yea, all the people of the land shall bury them. . . . And they shall sever out men of continual employment, passing through the land to bury with the passengers those that remain upon the face of the earth, to cleanse it: after the end of seven months shall they search. And the passengers that pass through the land, when any seeth a man's bone, then shall he set up a sign by it, till the buriers have buried it in the valley of Hamon-gog. . . . Thus shall they cleanse the land" (Ezek. 39:11-16). See, for example, Lund, "Things Which Must Shortly Come to Pass," 274.
[^30] See, for example, Draper, Opening the Seven Seals, 172-73, 251; Mounce, Book of Revelation, 291-92.
[^31] Principles and Practices, 615.
[^32] Draper, Opening the Seven Seals, 108.
[^33] Mounce, Book of Revelation, 197.
[^34] Millennial Messiah, 448, 449, 458-59, 468, 476, 477, 479, 490.
[^35] As we have noted, some prophecies that seem to apply to the last days may have been long since fulfilled, whereas others may have more than one fulfillment. The specific application of a particular prophecy can be challenging, especially where modern prophets have not given an interpretation. In this case, Elder Bruce R. McConkie of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles applied to Armageddon virtually all of the scriptures we use in this section (see Millennial Messiah, 448-94). If we have erred, and if in any specific instance an ancient prophet may have been speaking exclusively of ancient battles rather than the last great battle of the world, it is nevertheless true that the descriptions given here may legitimately be said to serve as types and shadows of the battle of Armageddon, revealed to heighten our understanding.
[^36] See the commentary on the two witnesses in Jerusalem, page 135. See also Parry, Parry, and Peterson, Understanding Isaiah, 456-60; Parry and Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation, 132-43.
[^37] For a discussion of the relationship of the abomination of desolation to Armageddon, as well as the possible destruction of the temple, see McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 471-74.
[^38] See the commentary on natural phenomena serving as judgments in the last days, page 229.
[^39] See McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 63, 382.
[^40] See the commentary on earthquakes in the last days, page 344.
[^41] See the commentary on these plagues, page 347.
[^42] History of the Church, 5:356.
[^43] Voice of Warning, 38-42.
[^44] Harrington, Revelation, 166.
[^45] Schick, Revelation of St. John, 2:51.
[^46] Interpreter's Bible, 12:485.
[^47] Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon, no. 5, 66.
[^48] Mounce, Book of Revelation, 301.
[^49] Mounce, Book of Revelation, 302.
[^50] Millennial Messiah, 397.
[^51] See McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 476-85.
[^52] See the commentary on the safety of the latter-day Zion, page 357.
[^53] William Clayton, "Come, Come, Ye Saints," Hymns, no. 30.
[^54] Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "It is our firm conviction as a people that the stars and stripes will be waving triumphantly in the breeze, as a symbol of the greatness and stability of the United States of America, when the Lord comes" (Millennial Messiah, 491).
[^55] Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, 2:223.
[^56] Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:145.
[^57] Deposition of a Disciple, 61.
