Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Signs of the Times ( 1999)

Chapter 6

Wars and Rumors of Wars

Signs of the Times

The Lord warned his disciples that the last days would be a time of "wars and rumors of wars . . . for nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom" (Matt. 24:6-7). D&C 45, which gives us a more complete account of the Lord's words to his disciples, says: "And in that day shall be heard of wars and rumors of wars, and the whole earth shall be in commotion, and men's hearts shall fail them. . . . And there shall be earthquakes also in divers places, and many desolations; yet men will harden their hearts against me, and they will take up the sword, one against another, and they will kill one another." The Lord added for our dispensation, "Ye hear of wars in foreign lands; but, behold, I say unto you, they are nigh, even at your doors, and not many years hence ye shall hear of wars in your own lands" (D&C 45:26, 33, 63; see also 38:29).

With vision that saw our day clearly, Jeremiah proclaimed, "The Lord hath a controversy with the nations, he will plead with all flesh; he will give them that are wicked to the sword" (Jer. 25:31). "I have sworn in my wrath," the Lord said to Joseph Smith, "and decreed wars upon the face of the earth, and the wicked shall slay the wicked, and fear shall come upon every man" (D&C 63:33).

The unfolding fulfillment of these prophecies is clear for all to see. During this century, advances in transportation, communications, and weapons technology have given nations of the world an ever- greater capacity for mass destruction of an enemy. While man has developed newer and more effective ways of destroying an enemy, there has not been corresponding progress in character, love of God, or love of one's neighbor—in fact, love in many men has dwindled. Thus, World War I was so deadly it was called "The Great War" and "The War to End All Wars": it claimed the lives of more than ten million soldiers. Less than a generation later, World War II erupted, involving far larger armies and killing far more people than World War I had done—a total of forty-five million. [^1]

A commission investigating violence in society declared: "The twentieth century proved to be the most violent and destructive in all human history, with armed conflict taking the lives of over 100 million people and political violence responsible for 170 million more deaths. . . . At the time of this writing, there is conflict in over two dozen locations around the world in which, over the years, tens of thousands have been killed and millions of persons displaced.

"For many governments and their publics, the mounting losses from war have ceased to shock, as the rhythm of daily existence has settled into a routine of attack and counterattack. Yet wars have become ever more brutal. In some wars today, 90 percent of those killed in conflict are noncombatants, compared with less than 15 percent when the century began. In Rwanda alone, approximately 40 percent of the population has been killed or displaced since 1994. . . .

"Since the fall of the Berlin Wall [Nov. 1989], over four million people have been killed in violent conflicts. In January 1997, there were over 35 million refugees and internally displaced persons around the world. The violence that generated this trauma has been in some cases chronic. In others, there have been tremendous spasms of destruction. For example, the 1990s have witnessed protracted violent confrontation in Bosnia and Chechnya and a massive genocide in Rwanda. . . . With well over one-half million people killed in three months, this has been one of the most horrifying chapters in human history." [^2]

Tragically, wars have become so prevalent that the Lord's prophecy has now come to pass: "the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion" (D&C 1:35). [^3] These wars are not a new tool of the devil. He has used warfare as a means of accomplishing his ends—and of corrupting the souls of men—since the beginning, when he instigated the war in heaven. When he tempted Cain to kill Abel for jealousy and to get gain, Satan brought this technique to the earth, where it has remained ever since. As men increase in wickedness on the earth, it only stands to reason that they will also be more inclined to use organized methods of causing death and destruction (which is what war is) to obtain their goals.

Truly, then, this is a day of "wars and rumors of wars," giving us a sign of the times that is clearly discernible. As the wars of our time proceed, the Saints feel to cry out with President Gordon B. Hinckley: "War I hate with all its mocking panoply. It is a grim and living testimony that Satan, the father of lies, the enemy of God, lives. War is earth's greatest cause of human misery. It is the destroyer of life, the promoter of hate, the waster of treasure. It is man's costliest folly, his most tragic misadventure." [^4]

War Will Be Poured Out on All Nations

D&C 87:1-3

1 Verily, thus saith the Lord concerning the wars that will shortly come to pass, beginning at the rebellion of South Carolina, which will eventually terminate in the death and misery of many souls;

2 And the time will come that war will be poured out upon all nations, beginning at this place.

3 For behold, the Southern States shall be divided against the Northern States, and the Southern States will call on other nations, even the nation of Great Britain, as it is called, and they shall also call upon other nations, in order to defend themselves against other nations; and then war shall be poured out upon all nations.

Most Latter-day Saints are familiar with Joseph Smith's prophecy of the American Civil War, but all may not have noticed that Joseph Smith gave the Civil War as a sign that marks the beginning of the latter-day wars. This concept is repeated twice: "thus saith the Lord concerning the wars that will shortly come to pass, beginning at the rebellion of South Carolina" (D&C 87:1), and "war will be poured out upon all nations, beginning at this place" (v. 2).

Elsewhere Joseph Smith gave the prophecy in a slightly different way but with the same meaning: "I prophesy, in the name of the Lord God, that the commencement of the difficulties which will cause much bloodshed previous to the coming of the Son of Man will be in South Carolina. It may probably arise through the slave question. This a voice declared to me, while I was praying earnestly on the subject, December 25, 1832" (D&C 130:12-13).

Beginning in South Carolina, then, the world will move into an era of war that "will eventually terminate in the death and misery of many souls" (D&C 87:1) because of "much bloodshed" (D&C 130:12). "Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom" (Matt. 24:6). "The whole earth shall be in commotion" (D&C 45:26). "War will be poured out upon all nations" (D&C 87:2, 3). it shall come to pass among the wicked, that every man that will not take his sword against his neighbor must needs flee unto Zion for safety. And there shall be gathered unto it out of every nation under heaven; and it shall be the only people that shall not be at war one with another" (D&C 45:68-69).

World War I was essentially a European war, with Turkey and the United States of America joining in. Japan had only limited participation. World War II clearly was much more of a world war. It involved most of the nations that fought in World War I, plus Australia, Brazil (limited involvement), Canada, China, India, Japan, New Zealand, and South Africa. Still, neither war involved most of Asia, Africa, South America, or Central America.

When the Lord tells us, therefore, that the time will come when all nations will be at war, he is foretelling a time of horror such as we have never seen. This will come not because the Lord has decreed it but because the wicked people of the world will choose it. We can, however, take some comfort in knowing that the Saints will receive a degree of protection. Following is the sequence the Lord has given us:

It appears that we have seen the first three conditions occur in the recent past, and the fourth condition has seen a deeply sobering and partial fulfillment in the two world wars of this century with an even greater fulfillment yet to come. The way in which these prophecies have come to pass indicates that the Lord views these wars as different phases of one great, continuing struggle: the battle between good and evil, God and Satan, on the earth.

Notes and Commentary

D&C 87:1 will eventually terminate in the death and misery of many souls. It is not possible to tell from the context whether this phrase refers to death and misery from "the rebellion at South Carolina" or from "the wars that will shortly come to pass." Certainly the expression applies to both.

One historian wrote of the American Civil War: "The Federal records show that they had, from first to last, 2,600,000 men in the service; while the Confederates all told, and in like manner, had but little over 600,000. . . . Of Federal prisoners during the war, the Confederates took in round Num. 270,000 while the whole number of Confederates captured and held in prisons by the Federals was in like round Num. 220,000 . . . Of these 270,000 Federal prisoners taken, 22,576 died in Confederate hands; and of the 220,000 Confederates taken by Federals, 26,436 died in their hands. . . . The entire loss on both sides, including those who were permanently disabled, as well as those killed in battle, and who died from wounds received and diseases contracted in the service, amounted, upon a reasonable estimate, to the stupendous aggregate of 1,000,000 of men!

" . . . Both sides during the struggle relied for means to support it upon the issue of paper money, and upon loans secured by bonds. An enormous public debt was thus created by each, and the aggregate of money thus expended on both sides, including the loss and sacrifice of property, could not have been less than 8,000,000,000 of dollars— a sum fully equal to three-fourths of the assessed valuation of the taxable property of all the states together when it commenced." [^8]

Of course, the cost in dead and wounded, monies, and other property for the many succeeding wars worldwide has been astronomically greater. And what B. H. Roberts said of the American Civil War could be said of all wars: "To the terrible loss of life and property let there be added the consideration of the suffering of the wounded and the sick who languished in loathsome prisons; the sorrow of widows and orphans who looked in vain for the return of husbands and fathers, who marched in the fulness of manly strength to the war; the anguish of parents, whose dim eyes looked in vain for sons thrown into unknown graves; and the gentler yet equally tender sorrows of sisters which in the fierce war lost the companions of their childhood. Let all this, I say, be taken into account, as resulting from this war and the 'misery of many souls,' no less than the death of many others will be apparent." [^9]

Slaves Shall Rise Up against Their Masters

D&C 87:4

4 And it shall come to pass, after many days, slaves shall rise up against their masters, who shall be marshaled and disciplined for war.

This prophecy may have had a partial fulfillment during the American Civil War, even though the Civil War was primarily a war not of slaves against masters but of free men from the South fighting free men from the North. It is true, however, that African-American slaves had at least some involvement in the war; in fact, some two hundred thousand African-Americans fought in the Civil War. [^10]

But a number of Church authorities and scholars suggest that the American Civil War was not the final fulfillment of this part of the prophecy. For example, in discussing Joseph Smith's prophecy on war, Elder Hyrum M. Smith of the Council of the Twelve wrote: "We have lived to see war poured out upon every continent and every ocean. And it is a great question whether this war will not be followed by a race war, still more destructive." [^11] Later he said, "There are other parts [of the prophecy on war] which yet remain unfulfilled, but they, too, will come to pass, in time." His first example: "Slaves shall rise up against their masters" (v. 4). [^12]

Elder B. H. Roberts, in speaking of parts of the prophecy on war that "are still in the future," wrote of "a great race war in America— slaves are to rise up against their masters." [^13]

Doctrine and Covenants scholar Roy Doxey commented: "Some Latter-day Saints have considered that this part of the prophecy pertains to the Civil War because nearly 200,000 [blacks] were marshalled by the North against the South. . . . The future fulfillment concerning slaves may arise out of the agitation of the civil rights movement in the United States, but if a person thinks of a world-wide fulfillment it might be the struggle of people in communist nations seeking their freedom." [^14] Elsewhere Brother Doxey wrote: "In preserving the order of events given in the remainder of this prophecy, one might well believe that the events are yet future. This would, however, allow for the partial fulfillment of some of these events in the past, as for example, 'slaves shall rise up against their masters who shall be marshaled and disciplined for war,' as [black] soldiers were during the Civil War. But are there not slaves in the world today (people in bondage without the freedom to act because of unrighteous leaders) who may yet rise up against their masters?" [^15]

Latter-day Saint scholar Hyrum Andrus gives this interesting commentary: "Let me go back in history and show you a background picture that I feel helps to explain the true meaning of this statement about slaves. . . . In the latter part of the nineteenth century we had a movement on the international scene to carve up the various unenlightened areas of the world and bring them under the subjection of one industrialized nation or another. . . . So it was that the whole African continent was divided off into areas that came under the direct influence of one European nation or another.

"This was also true with Asia to a large extent. Thus, there was a period of time when the dominant nations of the earth exerted a tyrannical force over the unenlightened peoples of the world. Since that day we have had a revolt against it. The whole nation of India, for example, revolted against British rule. We now have a revolt in the Middle East and Africa where slaves are arising against their masters. What is going on in Algeria today with regard to France? Slaves are rising against their masters. What is going on throughout the whole of Africa? Has not the British Commonwealth greatly diminished in its influence throughout the world? Why has it? Because of the revolt against the British rule of one group of unenlightened people after another to the point that they have revolted against their masters who, during this era of international conflict, are marshaled and disciplined for war. This type of revolt has been one of the greatest causes of conflict on the international scene today. It gives strength to the communist attack against the West and causes disunion among western countries themselves." [^16]

Another possible fulfillment of this prophecy has to do with the countries held captive by communism. In a sense, the people of these countries have been slaves: their freedom of expression, of movement, of worship, of speech, of economic choice were all strictly circumscribed by the government. But in the late 1980s and the 1990s, the people of several of these nations rose up against their masters. Other such peoples may yet rise up.

The "Remnants of the Land" Will Vex the Gentiles

D&C 87:5

5 And it shall come to pass also that the remnants who are left of the land will marshal themselves, and shall become exceedingly angry, and shall vex the Gentiles with a sore vexation.

As with the previous verse, this passage in the Doctrine and Covenants may have been misunderstood, as some readers may suppose it refers only to the Indian wars in the United States in the last half of the nineteenth century. The native American peoples do indeed seem to be "the remnants" referred to here, [^17] and the Indian wars may have been a partial fulfillment of the prophecy, but there may be a greater fulfillment yet to come. Elder Joseph Fielding Smith taught: "The history of this American continent . . . gives evidence that the Lamanites have risen up in their anger and vexed the Gentiles. This warfare may not be over. It has been the fault of people in the United States to think that this prophetic saying has reference to the Indians in the United States, but we must remember that there are millions of the 'remnant' in Mexico, Central and South America. . . . The independence of Mexico and other nations to the south has been accomplished by the uprising of the 'remnant' upon the land. However, let us not think that this prophecy has completely been fulfilled." [^18]

On three different occasions the resurrected Lord prophesied of these things to the righteous descendants of Lehi. Speaking to the Israelite people in America he said: "If the Gentiles do not repent after the blessing which they shall receive [the Book of Mormon and the gospel], after they have scattered my people—then shall ye, who are a remnant of the house of Jacob, go forth among them; and ye shall be in the midst of them who shall be many; and ye shall be among them as a lion among the beasts of the forest, and as a young lion among the flocks of sheep, who, if he goeth through both treadeth down and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver. Thy hand shall be lifted up upon thine adversaries, and all thine enemies shall be cut off. For I will make my people with whom the Father hath covenanted, yea, I will make thy horn iron, and I will make thy hoofs brass. And thou shalt beat in pieces many people; and I will consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto the Lord of the whole earth. And behold, I am he who doeth it. And it shall come to pass, saith the Father, that the sword of my justice shall hang over them at that day; and except they repent it shall fall upon them, saith the Father, yea, even upon all the nations of the Gentiles" (3 Ne. 20:15-17, 19-20; see also 3 Ne. 16:12-15; 21:12, 18, 21-22).

John the Revelator's Vision of a Five-Month War

Rev. 9:1-11

1 And the fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star fall from heaven unto the earth: and to him was given the key of the bottomless pit.

2 And he opened the bottomless pit; and there arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace; and the sun and the air were darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit.

3 And there came out of the smoke locusts upon the earth: and unto them was given power, as the scorpions of the earth have power.

4 And it was commanded them that they should not hurt the grass of the earth, neither any green thing, neither any tree; but only those men which have not the seal of God in their foreheads.

5 And to them it was given that they should not kill them, but that they should be tormented five months: and their torment was as the torment of a scorpion, when he striketh a man.

6 And in those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it; and shall desire to die, and death shall flee from them.

7 And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared unto battle; and on their heads were as it were crowns like gold, and their faces were as the faces of men.

8 And they had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were as the teeth of lions.

9 And they had breastplates, as it were breastplates of iron; and the sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots of many horses running to battle.

10 And they had tails like unto scorpions, and there were stings in their tails: and their power was to hurt men five months.

11 And they had a king over them, which is the angel of the bottomless pit, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue hath his name Apollyon.

The events described in this passage will "be accomplished after the opening of the seventh seal, before the coming of Christ" (D&C 77:13). When the fifth angel [^19] blows his trumpet, John sees the complete unleashing of hell upon the earth, as the great abyss is opened and smoke billows forth onto the earth, darkening the world with great evil. This certainly is part of the fulfillment of the prophecy that "peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion" (D&C 1:35). Armies, perhaps unknowingly, will be influenced and led by the devil into battle. As locusts ravage green plants and trees, the armies will scourge the men and women of the earth, save those who are citizens of Zion and who possess the seal of the living God on their foreheads (Rev. 7:3-4; 9:4). The Saints, we are told in a modern-day revelation, will dwell safely in Zion (D&C 45:66-70). These events are designed to encourage people to repent of their sins and to acknowledge God as their Lord and King (Rev. 9:20-21).

Notes and Commentary

Rev. 9:1 star fall from heaven. This metaphor refers to Lucifer, who is "fallen from heaven" (Isa. 14:12). Jesus said, "I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven" (Luke 10:18; Rev. 12:9).

key of the bottomless pit. According to his divine schedule, God permits the inhabitants of hell to come forth with Satan as their king (Rev. 9:11) and unleash their torment on earth's inhabitants. Later, an angel will come out of heaven with a key and a chain which he will use to bind Satan for a thousand years (Rev. 20:1-3).

bottomless pit. The pit is the abyss, or the "place of imprisonment for disobedient spirits." [^20] This pit is identified in Joseph Smith's translation of Isa. 14:15, 19. The king of the abyss is Lucifer, who is also called Abaddon and Apollyon (Rev. 9:11). God, of course, has complete control over this prison (Rev. 20:1-3).

Rev. 9:2 he opened the bottomless pit. The angel uses the key to open the pit so that wicked spirits will unleash, perhaps as never before, their evil forces upon humanity. Joseph Smith taught: "Some may have cried peace, but the Saints and the world will have little peace from henceforth. . . . The time is soon coming, when no man will have any peace but in Zion and her stakes." [^21]

there arose a smoke out of the pit . . . the sun and the air were darkened. Hell is opened and evil arises "as the smoke of a great furnace," blackening the air and hiding the sun's light. John seems to be describing darkness that "pertains to Satan, his kingdom, his disciples, and their works. The devil is the perpetuator of dark and evil things (2 Ne. 9:9; Hel. 6:28-29)." [^22] The darkening of the air with evil is the result of Satan's work, for he is called "the prince of the power of the air" (Eph. 2:2).

New Testament scholar Richard Draper has written: "As the pit is opened, smoke billows forth and obscures the light of the sun. Darkness reigns. Through this powerful symbol, John reveals the nature of the first thrust against mankind: a blow against the light." [^23] The smoke, like the "mists of darkness" in Lehi's dream, represents evil, darkness, and "the temptations of the devil, which blindeth the eyes, and hardeneth the hearts of the children of men, and leadeth them away into broad roads, that they perish and are lost" (1 Ne. 12:17).

Rev. 9:3 there came out of the smoke locusts upon the earth. These creatures are not actual insects (grasshoppers; see Prov. 30:27), for they sting like scorpions, strike out at mankind, have a king, and are commanded not to eat vegetation (Rev. 9:3-5, 11). These are actually wicked men and armies with power to torment all of humanity except those who have God's seal in their foreheads (Rev. 9:4). John's imagery of locusts is similar to Joel's description of the locust-like armies that will "come up upon my land, strong, and without number. . . . He hath laid my vine waste, and barked my fig tree: he hath made it clean bare, and cast it away; the branches thereof are made white" (Joel 1:4-7; 2:25). The locusts that plagued ancient Egypt and "covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land was darkened" (Ex. 10:15) are types of this great army of wicked people.

unto them was given power. God gives agency to humankind, and he permits the wicked to destroy one another, but he sets boundaries for them. Compare Rev. 6:4, 8, in which power is given through the red and pale horses.

as the scorpions of the earth. Here and in Rev. 9:5 the locusts are likened to scorpions, which torment humans, often without killing them.

Rev. 9:4 it was commanded them. God controls the destiny of this army of locusts and commands them to harm only those who do not have God's seal on their foreheads. This seal was first mentioned in Rev. 7:3. It is a figurative mark placed by God and indicates those who have had their calling and election made sure. Joseph Smith explained: "Four destroying angels holding power over the four quarters of the earth until the servants of God are sealed in their foreheads, which signifies sealing the blessing upon their heads, meaning the everlasting covenant, thereby making their calling and election sure. When a seal is put upon the father and mother, it secures their posterity, so that they cannot be lost, but will be saved by virtue of the covenant of their father and mother." [^24]

not hurt the grass/green thing/tree. These objects are those locusts feed on in their developmental stages (cankerworm, palmerworm, caterpillar, locust; see Joel 1:4). The creatures of Rev. 9 are not like the locusts that plagued the Egyptians and "did eat every herb of the land, and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left: and there remained not any green thing in the trees, or in the herbs of the field, through all the land of Egypt" (Ex. 10:15). These creatures are soldiers who seek to destroy humans.

men which have not the seal of God in their foreheads. Only the inhabitants of Zion, many of whom will have the seal of God (Rev. 9:4) can have confidence that they will be preserved during this time. Many of them will dwell in the New Jerusalem, which is called "a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God. And there shall be gathered unto it out of every nation under heaven; and it shall be the only people that shall not be at war one with another. And it shall be said among the wicked: Let us not go up to battle against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible; wherefore we cannot stand" (D&C 45:66, 69-70). The righteous in the stakes of Zion will also have safety (D&C 115:5-6; 124:36).

Rev. 9:5 to them it was given that they should not kill them. The armies of locusts will not kill humans; instead they will harm and torment them. Elder Bruce R. McConkie suggested that "perhaps John is seeing such things as the effects of poisonous gas, or bacteriological warfare, or atomic fallout, which disable but do not kill." [^25]

tormented five months. Five months is the life cycle of the locust. Five months may represent a short period and not exactly five months.

torment of a scorpion. The scorpion's sting rarely results in death, but it causes great pain and discomfort. Torment in this context pertains to more than war and warfare. Torment is also associated with "guilt and abominations, which doth cause [the wicked] to shrink from the presence of the Lord into a state of misery and endless torment" (Mosiah 3:25). Alma spoke of both the abyss and torment when he declared: "My soul hath been redeemed from the gall of bitterness and bonds of iniquity. I was in the darkest abyss. . . . My soul was racked with eternal torment" (Mosiah 27:29).

Rev. 9:6 shall men seek death. It seems that the torment brought about by the locusts will cause such pain that people will want to die to end their pain. In another context the Lord said, "And death shall be chosen rather than life by all the residue of them that remain of this evil family" (Jer. 8:3). Also, Job spoke of the wicked "which long for death, but it cometh not; and dig for it more than for hid treasures" (Job 3:21).

Rev. 9:7 shapes of the locusts. John seems to be describing soldiers that are trained and equipped to fight on land, sea, or in the air, with their various types of uniforms and protective gear, including helmets, body armor, and protective masks; their war vehicles, including aircraft, helicopters, tanks, and dozens of other military machines; and their weaponry and artillery of many types and kinds, each designed to harm, maim, or kill humans. He may be describing that which belongs to military units of our era, or he may be seeing that which belongs to our own future.

President Joseph Fielding Smith, citing Isa. 5:26-30, Nahum 2:2-5, and Rev. 9:6-10, suggested that the ancient prophets saw "our automobiles, our railroad trains; . . . the airplanes flying in the midst of the heavens, because we can read in the prophecies of these ancient scriptures many things that indicate that these things were revealed unto those ancient prophets." [^26]

John described the things that he envisioned by using objects or creatures that were known to him in the first century after Christ: locusts, horses, crowns, hair, lions, breastplates, chariots, and scorpions. These images create a symbolic picture for his audience.

like unto horses prepared unto battle. This phrase recalls Joel 2:4, which reads, "The appearance of them is as the appearance of horses; and as horsemen, so shall they run." The image of locusts depicts an army of tens of thousands of warriors, an army so great that its soldiers darken the land and cannot be numbered. The phrase "horses prepared unto battle" portrays warriors wearing body armor similar to the protective body and headgear worn by warhorses of John's day.

on their heads were as it were crowns like gold. This expression may refer to the soldier's helmet, in all of its shapes and varieties; or it may be symbolic of kings' headgear ("crowns of gold"). If the passage does pertain to kings' headgear, it may mean that governments are banding together for war.

their faces were as the faces of men. This expression seems to indicate that the locusts represent men.

Rev. 9:8 they had hair as the hair of women. We don't know what this expression means, but there is precedent in scripture for long hair on men being seen as a sign of strength (Judg. 16:17).

their teeth were as the teeth of lions. This expression describes the warriors' ability to ravage and destroy. It also recalls Joel's description of warriors: "For a nation is come up upon my land, strong, and without number, whose teeth are the teeth of a lion, and he hath the cheek teeth of a great lion" (Joel 1:6). Satan himself has been called a "roaring lion, [who] walketh about, seeking whom he may devour" (1 Pet. 5:8).

Rev. 9:9 they had breastplates. Modern soldiers' armor and protective gear covers vital organs. It may also refer to the armor of war vehicles.

sound of chariots of many horses. Natural locusts in flight make a fearful noise, and the reference here may be to the mingled sound of chariot wheels and the hooves of the horses (Joel 2:5). Anciently the chariot and its horses were used for war, and in prophetic language they may be a metaphor for modern war vehicles (Ezek. 39:20; Dan. 11:40; Joel 2:5).

Rev. 9:10 they had tails like unto scorpions. This expression could refer to any of a variety of weapons.

power was to hurt men five months. This particular battle, or war, will have a limited duration. It may serve as a precursor to the great war that will accompany the blasting of the sixth trumpet, when two hundred million soldiers will fight and kill one-third of humanity. [^27]

Rev. 9:11 they had a king over them. Actual locusts have no king; the locusts described in Rev. 9:6-10 are warriors, and they and their leaders hearken unto Satan, who is their king.

angel of the bottomless pit. Satan.

Abaddon/Apollyon. John gives a Hebrew name followed by the Greek equivalent, as was his custom (John 1:38, 42; 4:25; 9:7; 11:16), perhaps so that his audience would understand his words. The angel is named Abaddon, meaning "destruction" or "ruin"; he is also called Apollyon, meaning "destruction" or "destroyer." Such names relate to Satan's evil mission and goals.

John the Revelator's Vision of the Army of Horsemen

Rev. 9:13-21

13 And the sixth angel sounded, and I heard a voice from the four horns of the golden altar which is before God,

14 Saying to the sixth angel which had the trumpet, Loose the four angels which are bound in the [bottomless pit]. [^28]

15 And the four angels were loosed, which were prepared for an hour, and a day, and a month, and a year, for to slay the third part of men.

16 And the number of the army of the horsemen were two hundred thousand thousand: and I heard the number of them.

17 And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and them that sat on them, having breastplates of fire, and of jacinth, and brimstone: and the heads of the horses were as the heads of lions; and out of their mouths issued fire and smoke and brimstone.

18 By these three was the third part of men killed, by the fire, and by the smoke, and by the brimstone, which issued out of their mouths.

19 For their power is in their mouth, and in their tails: for their tails were like unto serpents, and had heads, and with them they do hurt.

20 And the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood: which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk:

21 Neither repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts.

Some scriptural scholars believe that this passage is a description of the war of Armageddon, [^29] and they may well be correct: the army described here is so huge and the number of dead so astounding that one wonders how it could be anything other than Armageddon. Their reasoning is based in part on the belief that the seven trumpets of judgment in Rev. 8, 9, and 11 (which includes the war) and the seven vials of judgment poured out in Rev. 16 (which includes Armageddon) are different descriptions of the same events. [^30] The similarities are indeed striking. Yet the differences seem to argue that the war described in Rev. 9:13-21 is not the same as that described in Rev. 16:12-16. The following outlines both the similarities and the differences:

TrumpetÂ½Â½Â½Â½ Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ Judgment

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½1Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ hail, fire mixed with blood burn one-third

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ of trees and all grass

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½2Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ one-third of sea turns to blood, one-third of

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ all sea creatures die, one-third of ships sink

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½3Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ one-third of rivers turn poisonous, killing many

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½4Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ one-third of sun, moon, stars darkened

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½5Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ five-month war in which men will suffer much

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ pain but not death; plants not harmed

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½6 Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ army of 200 million kills one-third of mankind

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½7Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ voices proclaim the reign of Christ; voices,

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ lightnings, thunderings, great earthquake, great hail;

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ one-tenth of city falls

Â½Â½ Vial Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ Judgment

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½1Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ a grievous sore on those who worship beast

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½2Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ sea becomes as blood, all sea creatures die

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½3Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ rivers become blood

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½4Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ sun scorches men with great heat

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½5Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ kingdom of the beast is darkened; men filled

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ with pain

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½6Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ spirits of devils gather kings to Armageddon

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½7Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ voice proclaims: "It is done"; voices, thunders,

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ lightnings, great earthquake, great hail; city divided

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ Â½into three parts; cities of nations fall

The similarities in these two lists are impressive. So also are the differences. In most cases the two lists differ only in the degree of their effect. In fact, in every case except two (Num. 1 and 4), the judgment accompanying the vial simply seems to complete that which was begun with the trumpet, but the degree of difference seems important. Nevertheless, despite our attempts at reasoning through this question, the ultimate truth will remain obscure until the Lord's prophet speaks clearly on the matter or until the actual events make the truth known. Whether there are two great wars or whether the two are one, the fact remains that all nations will be engaged in terrible warfare, killing many millions of people, until the Lord returns and ushers in the millennium of peace.

The events identified in this section, called the "second woe" (Rev. 9:12; 11:14), will "be accomplished after the opening of the seventh seal, before the coming of Christ" (D&C 77:13). This second woe brings great anguish upon humankind, for two hundred million warriors battle in war and bring great destruction, ultimately causing the death of one-third of humanity. John uses descriptive and symbolic terms in describing this great conflagration, including fire (three times), brimstone (three times), smoke (twice), lions, and serpents. The sixth trump announces these events, but Satan and his angels set them in motion through their evil influence and guidance. The events recall numerous other historical time periods when "Satan had great dominion among men, and raged in their hearts; and from thenceforth came wars and bloodshed" (JST Gen. 6:13).

The Lord's purpose during these events is to encourage humankind to repent of their many grievous sins, which John lists as idolatry, murders, sorceries, fornication, and thefts. Sadly, they do not repent of their wickedness.

Notes and Commentary

Rev. 9:14 Loose the four angels which are bound in the [bottomless pit]. The "bound" angels may belong to that group of "angels that sinned" and thus who God "cast . . . down to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness" (2 Pet. 2:4; see also Jude 1:6). They will be set loose to prompt and persuade the wicked to kill one-third of humankind during the great war described in Rev. 9:15-19.

Rev. 9:15 prepared for an hour/day/month/year. The time mentioned here does not indicate how long the four angels will be loosed, but it does say they will be loosed at a specific, divinely appointed time. The Jerusalem Bible reads, "These four angels had been put there ready for this hour of this day of this month of this year."

slay the third part of men. The army of two hundred million individuals with their modern weapons of destruction will kill one-third of the earth's inhabitants. It is unclear whether the figure "one-third" is to be taken as literal or symbolic.

Rev. 9:16 number of the army . . . were two hundred thousand thousand. The number of fighting men that John "saw" was two hundred million, twice the number of the angels who were worshipping God in the celestial kingdom (Rev. 5:11). The numerical figure is likely symbolic, intended to represent great hosts of warriors. Latter- day Saint scholar Victor Ludlow wrote: "The sixth woe also separates the righteous from the wicked, as a great army of 'two legions of legions' of cavalry gather for battle while bringing much destruction and death to the world. (See Rev. 9:13-21; 16:14) Since a full Roman legion contained ten thousand soldiers, the King James translators interpreted the phrase as 'two ten-thousand ten thousand,' or, keeping the same total number, 'two hundred thousand thousand.' Since actual numbers are not a part of John's record, the phrase 'two legions of legions' should probably be translated as 'two armies of armies' instead of being seen as representing a specific number, such as two hundred million soldiers." [^31]

Rev. 9:17 I saw the horses in the vision, and them that sat on them. John describes this scene of horses using various images and symbols; he makes threefold repetition of fire and brimstone (the Jerusalem Bible says fire and sulfur) and twofold repetition of smoke and horses in Rev. 9:17-18. Fire, smoke, and brimstone may describe the bombs and destructive devices associated with present- day or future warfare. Horses often represent war vehicles.

Rev. 9:18 by these three was the third part of men killed. Fire, smoke, and brimstone are the weapons of this mighty army that will destroy one-third of humanity. The third part is probably symbolic, indicating a huge number of people but fewer than half.

Rev. 9:19 power is in their mouth, and in their tails. The fire- breathing capacity of these lion-headed horses symbolizes "the torment of hell and [underscores their] diabolical nature." [^32] Like the scorpions in Rev. 9:10, there is destructive power in the horses' tails. In fact, the tails are snakes with heads, another evidence that they are sent from the devil. [^33]

Rev. 9:20 rest of the men . . . repented not. The "rest of the men" speaks of those who are not sealed (Rev. 9:4) and who survive the warfare. The purpose for the blowing of the sixth trumpet is manifest here: to encourage the wicked to repent, for they are idolaters, devil worshippers, murderers, fornicators, thieves, and sorcerers (Rev. 9:21). The great war, however, during which one-third of humankind is destroyed, does not succeed in bringing the wicked to repentance: they "repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and idols," wrote John.

works of their hands. This expression seems to refer to idol worship (Ps. 115:4-7; Isa. 2:8; Jer. 1:16), which consists both of images and statues created by human hands, and of all the evil deeds and actions of humanity that replace one's righteous desire to serve the true and living God.

that they should not worship devils. Humanity continues to worship devils, even after the great war that destroys so many. Devil worship has long been a gross evil conducted upon the earth (Deut. 32:17; Ps. 106:37; 1 Cor. 10:20-21).

idols of gold. Nephi warned, "Yea, wo unto those that worship idols, for the devil of all devils delighteth in them" (2 Ne. 9:37). In our dispensation we are told of those who "have strayed from [God's] ordinances, and have broken [God's] everlasting covenant; they seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own god, whose image is in the likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol, which waxeth old and shall perish in Babylon, even Babylon the great, which shall fall" (D&C 1:15-16).

Rev. 9:21 neither repented they of their murders/sorceries/fornication/ thefts. In Rev. 9:20 John identified idolatry as a chief sin belonging to humanity in the last days; now he lists other iniquities—murder, sorcery, fornication, and thievery—that represent all of the wickedness that will prevail upon the earth during this time.

The Battle of Armageddon

Rev. 16:13-14, 16

13 And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet.

14 For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty. . . .

16 And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon.

With his characteristic mixture of boldness and eloquence, Elder Bruce R. McConkie described the final great war at Armageddon: It is "the greatest war of the ages," he said, " . . . the final great war that will usher in the Millennium, . . . the war of wars. . . . Armageddon is the final great battle in a war that covers the earth and involves all nations. . . . It will exceed in horror, intensity, and scope all prior wars. . . . The final war will be long and perilous, with many battles and much bloodshed and continuing horrors. . . .

"The battles will be fought by the warriors of earth, but the Lord's hand will be in it. . . . The Lord will fight for Israel as he fought times without number for them during the long years of their sorrow and travail. . . .

"This war will be a religious war, a war in which the servants of Satan assail the servants of the Lord and those allied with them. . . . It is a holy war. . . . Clearly the great issues at Armageddon are God and religion and a way of worship. Satan will have done his work well; by then billions of earth's inhabitants (even more so then than now) will be in open rebellion against the gospel and every principle of truth and virtue found therein. . . .

"There are three great things that will grow out of and come because of Armageddon. They are:

"1. In the course of this final great conflict the Lord himself shall return, the vineyard shall be burned, and the millennial day will dawn.

"2. Out of the defeat of Gog and Magog comes the end of all the nations of the earth and the final triumph of Israel as a people and as a nation.

"3. Out of Armageddon comes the destruction of the political kingdom on earth of Lucifer and the fall of the great and abominable church." [^34]

The scriptures cover the great battle of Armageddon in surprising detail. The multitude of prophetic witnesses tells us that this event must have special importance in the last days. Particularly enlightening are Isa. 13, Ezek. 38 and 39, Jer. 25 and 51, Joel 1 through 3, and Zech. 12 through 14. From the various sources that deal with Armageddon, we gain the following insights: [^35]

The horror of this war or series of wars, which culminates in the battle at Armageddon, is reminiscent of the final great conflicts among the Jaredites and Nephites. In fact, Mormon and Moroni may have included those wars for the express purpose of warning us of things to come. In the final Book of Mormon wars we see that which will come in the last days: wars with astounding levels of bloodshed, wars in which hearts are hard and emotions are cold, wars conducted under the motivating whisperings of Satan and his evil followers, wars that persist to the point of the utter destruction of a people (Morm. 2-6; Ether 14-15).

Nephi witnessed in vision a great war that may well have been the battle of Armageddon, seen from a spiritual perspective. He saw the "whore of all the earth" (the devil's church) and saw that "she had dominion over all the earth, among all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people." In contrast, when he saw "the church of the Lamb of God, . . . its numbers were few," but it also had a presence "upon all the face of the earth."

"And it came to pass that I beheld that the great mother of abominations did gather together multitudes upon the face of all the earth, among all the nations of the Gentiles, to fight against the Lamb of God. And . . . I, Nephi, beheld the power of the Lamb of God, that it descended upon the saints of the church of the Lamb, and upon the covenant people of the Lord, who were scattered upon all the face of the earth; and they were armed with righteousness and with the power of God in great glory.

"And . . . I beheld that the wrath of God was poured out upon that great and abominable church, insomuch that there were wars and rumors of wars among all the nations and kindreds of the earth."

Nephi then saw John the Revelator, and was told by his angel guide, "Behold, he shall see and write the remainder of these things; yea, and also many things which have been. And he shall also write concerning the end of the world" (1 Ne. 14:11-15, 21-22).

We learn from Nephi's vision that there will be a world war instigated by the great and abominable church of the devil; that it will be a holy war, because the devil's church will be fighting against "the church of the Lamb"; that the Lord will pour out his wrath upon the great and abominable church; and that the Lord will arm his Saints "with the power of God in great glory" to assist them in their battles. It appears from the angel's comments that this war is related in time to the end of the world, as seen by John the Revelator.

If this passage does indeed describe the final great battles of earth, culminating in the battle of Armageddon, we learn that this war truly is a continuation of the battle in heaven, which is a battle between light and darkness, good and evil, God and Satan. We learn that Satan will rage in his continuing attempts to destroy "the covenant people of the Lord." And we learn that God will protect them by his power and help them to come to the last and lasting victory. Joseph Smith said, speaking perhaps of these same events, "In the former days God sent His servants to fight; but in the last days, He has promised to fight the battle Himself." [^42]

In his classic work A Voice of Warning, Elder Parley P. Pratt gave us a helpful summary of the events of the battle of Armageddon: "Chapters 38 and 39 [of Ezekiel] present us with a view of many nations united under one great head, whom the Lord is pleased to call Gog; and being mounted on horseback, and armed with all sorts of armor, they come up against the mountains of Israel, as a cloud to cover the land; their object is to take a prey, to take away silver and gold, and cattle, and goods in great abundance.

"This is an event which is to transpire after the return of the Jews and the rebuilding of Jerusalem; while the towns and the land of Judea are without walls, having neither bars nor gates. But while they are at the point to swallow up the Jews, and lay waste their country, behold, the Lord's fury comes up in His face, a mighty earthquake is the result, insomuch that the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the air, and all the creeping things, and all men upon the face of the earth shall shake at His presence, and every wall shall fall to the ground, and every man's sword shall be turned against his neighbor in this army, and the Lord shall rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that are with him an overflowing rain, great hailstones, fire and brimstone.

"And thus He will magnify Himself and sanctify Himself, in the eyes of many nations, and they shall know that He is the Lord; thus they shall fall upon the open field, upon the mountains of Israel, even Gog and all his army, horses and horsemen; and the Jews shall go forth and gather the weapons of war such as hand staves, spears, shields, bows and arrows; and these weapons shall last the cities of Israel seven years for fuel, so that they shall cut no wood out of the forest, for they shall burn the weapons with the fire; and they shall spoil those that spoiled them; and rob those that robbed them, and they shall gather gold and silver, and apparel, in great abundance.

"At this time the fowls of the air and the beasts of the field shall have a great feast; yea, they are to eat fat until they be full, and drink blood until they be drunken. They are to eat the flesh of captains, and kings, and mighty men, and all men of war.

"But the Jews will have a very serious duty to perform, which will take no less than seven months; namely, the burying of their enemies. They will select a place on the east side of the sea, called the Valley of the Passengers, and there shall they bury Gog and all his multitude, and they shall call it the valley of Hamon Gog. And the scent shall go forth, insomuch that it shall stop the noses of the passengers; thus shall they cleanse the land. . . .

"Zechariah in his 14th [chapter] has told us much concerning the great battle and overthrow of the nations who fight against Jerusalem, and he has said, in plain words, that the Lord shall come at the very time of the overthrow of that army, yes, in fact, even while they are in the act of taking Jerusalem, and have already succeeded in taking one-half the city, and spoiling their houses, and ravishing their women. Then, behold their long-expected Messiah, suddenly appearing, shall stand upon the Mount of Olives, a little east of Jerusalem, to fight against those nations and deliver the Jews. . . .

"John, in his 11th chapter of Revelation, gives us many more particulars concerning this same event. He informs us that, after the city and temple are rebuilt by the Jews, the Gentiles will tread it under foot forty and two months, during which time there will be two Prophets continually prophesying and working mighty miracles. And it seems that the Gentile army shall be hindered from utterly destroying and overthrowing the city, while these two Prophets continue. But, after a struggle of three years and a half, they at length succeed in destroying these two Prophets, and then overrunning much of the city; they send gifts to each other because of the death of the two Prophets; and in the meantime will not allow their dead bodies to be put in graves; but suffer them to lie in the streets of Jerusalem three days and a half, during which the armies of the Gentiles, consisting of many kindreds, tongues and nations, passing through the city, plundering the Jews see their dead bodies lying in the street. But, after three days and a half, on a sudden, the spirit of life from God enters them, and they will arise and stand upon their feet, and great fear will fall upon them that see them. And then they shall hear a voice from heaven saying, 'Come up hither,' and they will ascend up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beholding them. And having described all these things, then comes the shaking, spoken of by Ezekiel, and the rending of the Mount of Olives, spoken of by Zechariah. John says, 'The same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the city fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand.' And then one of the next scenes that follow is the sound of voices, saying, 'The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdom of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign forever and ever.'" [^43]

Notes and Commentary

Rev. 16:13 I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon/beast/false prophet. The symbolic "satanic trinity" [^44] of the dragon, the beast, and the false prophet send forth evil spirits, or devils, to do their work. Their emergence from the mouths of the devil and his helpers suggests that these evil spirits are symbolic of false communications, lies, and propaganda designed to deceive the people of the world. Similarly, in Rev. 12:15, a river that may represent lies comes from the mouth of the dragon; in Rev. 13:5, blasphemies come from the mouth of the beast; and in Rev. 13:14, the false prophet, or second beast, seems to speak threats and ungodly commands.

Frogs, to which the spirits are compared, are unclean animals under the law of Moses (Lev. 11:10). One of the plagues that Moses and Aaron brought on Egypt was a plague of frogs (Ex. 8:2-6). Interestingly, Pharaoh's magicians, using Satan's power, duplicated this plague (Ex. 8:7). In nearby Persia, which was east of the Euphrates (Rev. 16:12), frogs were "considered to be the instrument of Ahriman, the god of darkness." [^45] Further, Ahriman had power to change his shape, and the animal form that fit him most naturally was that of a frog. [^46]

The fact that three unclean spirits come forth from three different evil beings suggests that those beings (the dragon, the beast, and the false prophet) may each send forth one of the spirits. These evil spirits are the agents and representatives of those who send them forth. As righteous men on earth can stand for God by virtue of the priesthood they hold, so can these unclean spirits stand for Satan through the evil power he bestows on them.

Rev. 16:14 For they are the spirits of devils. Here we learn definitively that the three unclean spirits of Rev. 16:13 are the spirits of devils. Devils, of course, are not body and spirit combined but are only spirits. Perhaps a better translation would be "spirits that are devils." The Lord has told us: "Hearken, O ye elders of my church, and give ear to the voice of the living God; and attend to the words of wisdom which shall be given unto you, according as ye have asked and are agreed as touching the church, and the spirits which have gone abroad in the earth. Behold, verily I say unto you, that there are many spirits which are false spirits, which have gone forth in the earth, deceiving the world. And also Satan hath sought to deceive you, that he might overthrow you" (D&C 50:1-3).

working miracles. Jesus Christ prophesied that "there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect" (Matt. 24:24; see also Rev. 13:14). These evil spirits are part of the fulfillment of that prophecy. The miracles of Satan and the miracles of God may often be indistinguishable from one another to the outward senses. Only through the discernment given by the Spirit of God can we know the difference. Elder Orson Pratt wrote, "The reason the Lord will suffer the devil to work miracles to deceive 'the kings of the earth and of the whole world,' is because they will previously have rejected 'the everlasting gospel'; therefore the devil will deceive them, and lead them on to destruction, as he did the Egyptians." [^47]

go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world. The deceiving spirits sent forth by Satan will have worldwide influence, including with the rulers of the nations of the earth. The spirits will cause the gathering of the kings and their armies together to battle.

to gather them to the battle. This battle is the great final battle at Armageddon, which will be fought by the armies of the earth (Rev. 16:16). That battle, perhaps when it reaches its crisis point, will be interrupted by the coming of the Lord (Zech. 14:1-4), "the great day of God Almighty."

Rev. 16:16 he gathered them together . . . Armageddon. Armageddon is the site of the last great battle before the coming of the Lord. The person gathering the armies together is not identified, but it is likely Satan, working through the evil spirits he sends to the earth (Rev. 16:14). Armageddon is the New Testament name for Megiddo, an ancient city some sixty miles north of Jerusalem. Megiddo lay "on the north side of the Carmel ridge and[command[ed] the strategic pass between the coastal plain and the valley of Esdraelon." The area "is one of history's famous battlefields, having witnessed major conflicts all the way 'from one fought by Tuthmosis III in 1468 b.c. to that of Lord Allenby of Megiddo in 1917.' 'By the waters of Megiddo' Barak and Deborah defeated the chariots of Sisera (Judg. 4-5; cf. 5:19)." [^48] In that same area, Gideon and his three hundred soldiers defeated the Midianites (Judg. 7), and Saul and Jonathan were killed in battle (1 Sam. 31:1-6), as was King Josiah (2 Kgs. 23:29-30). "The kings of the whole world will be destroyed in final conflict outside the city of Jerusalem. . . . Armageddon is symbolic of the final overthrow of all the forces of evil by the might and power of God." [^49]

The great battle of Armageddon will be not a localized conflict but the center of a worldwide war. Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained, "The center of the battle will be on the mount and in the valley of Megiddo and on the plains of Esdraelon, though, since all nations are involved, it cannot be other than a worldwide conflict." [^50] Ultimately, the objective of Satan and his armies is not merely the conquest of northern Israel or Jerusalem but the destruction of the Lord's temple and the Lord's work. [^51]

The Saints Will Receive a Degree of Protection

D&C 63:32-34

32 I, the Lord, am angry with the wicked; I am holding my Spirit from the inhabitants of the earth.

33 I have sworn in my wrath, and decreed wars upon the face of the earth, and the wicked shall slay the wicked, and fear shall come upon every man;

34 And the saints also shall hardly escape; nevertheless, I, the Lord, am with them, and will come down in heaven from the presence of my Father and consume the wicked with unquenchable fire.

Because of the wickedness of the people of the world, the Lord has become angry and has "sworn in [his] wrath" that they will suffer wars. Through these wars, "the wicked shall slay the wicked" until the wars (along with other judgments) bring the end of this world. Unfortunately, the righteous have no guarantee that they will escape the wars of the latter days. Some will be killed, for death is the lot of all mankind, and even the righteous sometimes are killed when the wicked choose to exercise their agency in destructive ways.

But the Lord offers us a measure of comfort. Though the Saints will "hardly escape," as a body they will nevertheless escape (Matt. 24:22), and they can know that the Lord is with them. As we read in the Doctrine and Covenants: "The day speedily cometh . . . when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion. And also the Lord shall have power over his saints, and shall reign in their midst" (D&C 1:35-36). Before the final great judgments on the earth, including Armageddon, the Lord will "gather his wheat into the garner"—meaning that he will bring the Saints to a place of protection—and then "he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire" (Matt. 3:12).

Those who will receive the Lord's protection are the "wise virgins" who "have received the truth, and have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived." Of these wise virgins the Lord says, "Verily I say unto you, they shall not be hewn down and cast into the fire, but shall abide the day" (D&C 45:57). Those who follow the Holy Spirit will be gathered to the safety of Zion: [^52] "And it shall come to pass among the wicked, that every man that will not take his sword against his neighbor must needs flee unto Zion for safety. And there shall be gathered unto it out of every nation under heaven; and it shall be the only people that shall not be at war one with another. And it shall be said among the wicked: Let us not go up to battle against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible; wherefore we cannot stand" (D&C 45:68-70).

The key to the Lord's protection, then, is faithfulness. As the Lord said to his disciples, "Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man when he shall come clothed in the glory of his Father" (JST Luke 21:36).

Notes and Commentary

D&C 63:32 I, the Lord, am angry with the wicked. The Lord is not an unfeeling, impersonal God. He feels all things perfectly, and much more deeply than we do. Thus, he can feel anger at those who choose wickedness—anger at the pain it brings to others, as well as anger at the way it leads others into sin (Deut. 9:8; 1 Kgs. 11:9; 2 Kgs. 17:18; Alma 33:16; D&C 61:20; Moses 6:27).

I am holding my Spirit from the inhabitants of the earth. It is not a right but a privilege to receive the Spirit and its blessings. When people in general choose wickedness, then the people in general will not receive the Spirit, but those who qualify will, of course, still receive the blessing.

D&C 63:33 I have sworn in my wrath. Wrath is a deep-seated anger. When the Lord swears in his wrath, he does so to bring righteous ends from that which aroused the anger in the first place (Heb. 4:3; Ether 2:8).

decreed wars upon the face of the earth. The purpose for this decree may be explained in the next phrase: "The wicked shall slay the wicked"—through wars, the wicked will exercise their agency to kill others who are wicked, thus helping to cleanse the earth.

fear shall come upon every man. The cause of the fear is the wars themselves, as well as the other violent acts of the wicked upon the earth.

D&C 63:34 the saints also shall hardly escape. So great will be the unrest and violence on the earth that no one will be completely protected from it. Yet the Lord offers us hope when he implies here that the Saints (meaning many, or most, of the Saints) will escape, even if it is only barely so.

I, the Lord, am with them. This sweet promise is often repeated in the scriptures:

"Be not afraid of the king of Babylon, of whom ye are afraid; be not afraid of him, saith the Lord: for I am with you to save you, and to deliver you from his hand" (Jer. 42:11; see also Hag. 1:13; 2:4).

"Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world" (Matt. 28:20).

"Wherefore, be of good cheer, and do not fear, for I the Lord am with you, and will stand by you" (D&C 68:6; see also 30:11; 31:13; 105:41).

In this context, the Lord is saying that he will protect us in the times of great trouble, and in the end he will deliver us. "And should we die before our journey's through," nevertheless, "all is well," [^53] for the Lord will be with us in life or in death, to bless us and to keep us.

All Nations Will Come to an End

D&C 87:6

6 And thus, with the sword and by bloodshed the inhabitants of the earth shall mourn; and with famine, and plague, and earthquake, and the thunder of heaven, and the fierce and vivid lightning also, shall the inhabitants of the earth be made to feel the wrath, and indignation, and chastening hand of an Almighty God, until the consumption decreed hath made a full end of all nations.

The Lord has decreed that when he reigns on the earth in the Millennium, the world will no longer have any nations that were created by man. "It shall come to pass in that day," the Lord announced, "that I will seek to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem" (Zech. 12:9). "The consumption decreed [shall make] a full end of all nations," he said (D&C 87:6).

If "all nations" have been destroyed, what remains is that which the Lord has established and created. As he said through Jeremiah, speaking to Israel: "I am with thee, saith the Lord, to save thee: though I make a full end of all nations whither I have scattered thee, yet will I not make a full end of thee: but I will correct thee in measure, and will not leave thee altogether unpunished" (Jer. 30:11; see also Jer. 47). Thus, all the nations of man will come to a full and complete end through the judgments of the last days, including the wars that precede the Lord's coming. But the nation that is bound to the Lord by covenant will continue. This nation is repentant Israel and, perhaps, a constitutional America. [^54] Thus, in the Millennium, the Lord will rule mankind from his two capital cities of Jerusalem and New Jerusalem: "Out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem" (Isa. 2:3).

Notes and Commentary

D&C 87:6 the consumption decreed. The Lord has decreed that all evil, all things temporal, all things of the earth shall be destroyed, or consumed, to make way for the new world of the Millennium. He said to Joseph Smith: "Everything that is in the world, whether it be ordained of men, by thrones, or principalities, or powers, or things of name, whatsoever they may be, that are not by me or by my word, saith the Lord, shall be thrown down, and shall not remain after men are dead, neither in nor after the resurrection, saith the Lord your God. For whatsoever things remain are by me; and whatsoever things are not by me shall be shaken and destroyed" (D&C 132:13-14).

---
Notas:
[^1] Babylon, the mother of harlots, or the wicked world, gains great power on earth. 2. The Saints must flee Babylon and go to Zion. 3. Babylon falls by the power of God; the wicked world is destroyed. The fall of Babylon comes as God stretches out his arm in wrath and judgment against Babylon's wickedness: For further commentary on the great and abominable church of the devil, see Robinson, "Early Christianity and 1 Ne. 13-14," 177-90; and Parsons, "Great and Abominable Church," 44- 59.
[^2] Those in Babylon will experience intense fear and mourning as they see God's judgments coming forth: Millennial Messiah, 54-55.
[^3] Babylon will fall amidst much slaughter and bloodshed: For a discussion of the beasts in Revelation, see Parry and Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation, 162-77.
[^4] Babylon's destruction will be total, resulting in complete desolation: Edersheim, Temple, 312.
[^8] See the commentary on Rev. 17:1, page 288.
[^9] See the commentary on Armageddon, page 264.
[^10] Parts of this passage are also discussed in relation to fleeing Babylon as part of the gathering of Israel, page 93.
[^11] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 42.
[^12] See the commentary on the gathering of Israel, page 48.
[^13] Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:559.
[^14] A paradox in this account is that the kings, merchants, and shippers lament the destruction of Babylon; but in reality, when Babylon is destroyed, all those who aligned themselves with her will also be destroyed: none of her adherents will remain to lament her loss.
[^15] Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon, no. 6, 84-85.
[^16] Chaldea was a district, or province, in Babylon.
[^17] On the fall of Babylon, see Isa. 13; 14; 34; 47; Rev. 14:15-20; see also the commentary on Armageddon, page 264.
[^18] See note a to Rev. 18:7 in the LDS edition of the KJV.
[^19] See RSV, GNB, JB, and NEB.
[^20] See the commentary on spiritual fornication, page 308.
[^21] McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 445.
[^22] "It is estimated that there were as many as 60,000,000 slaves in the Roman Empire [alone]" (Mounce, Book of Revelation, 334).
[^23] Nibley, Approaching Zion, 165-67.
[^24] God will provide deliverance for his people, Israel: "In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and he that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David; and the house of David shall be as God, as the angel of the Lord before them. And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will seek to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem. Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations, as when he fought in the day of battle" (Zech. 12:8-9; 14:3; see also Isa. 13:19-20; Jer. 51:40-41; Joel 2:20-21, 32; Zech. 13:8-9). History of the Church, 5:530.
[^25] The Lord will make his power manifest through the outcome of Armageddon: "I will plead against him with pestilence and with blood; and I will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that are with him, an overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire, and brimstone. Thus will I magnify myself, and sanctify myself; and I will be known in the eyes of many nations, and they shall know that I am the Lord. So will I make my holy name known in the midst of my people Israel; and I will not let them pollute my holy name any more: and the heathen shall know that I am the Lord, the Holy One in Israel" (Ezek. 38:22-23; 39:7; see also 38:18, 21; 39:6, 21-22). Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:502.
[^26] The battle of Armageddon is associated with plagues of flies, maggots, and decaying flesh. These things could be connected to the decay of dead bodies after the battles, or to the quicker destruction of bodies through atomic warfare or other means: [^41] "This shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will smite all the people that have fought against Jerusalem; their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their tongue shall consume away in their mouth" (Zech. 14:12; see also D&C 29:18-19). Doctrines of Salvation, 1:146.
[^27] After the battle of Armageddon, the Lord will invite birds of carrion and ravenous beasts to feast on the bodies of the dead. This is called "the supper of the great God": "Thus saith the Lord God; Speak unto every feathered fowl, and to every beast of the field, Assemble yourselves, and come; gather yourselves on every side to my sacrifice that I do sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh, and drink blood. Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of the princes of the earth. . . . And ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and drink blood till ye be drunken, of my sacrifice which I have sacrificed for you. Thus ye shall be filled at my table with horses and chariots, with mighty men, and with all men of war, saith the Lord God" (Ezek. 39:17-20; see also Rev. 19:17-21; D&C 29:20). See the commentary on Rev. 9:13-19, page 260.
[^28] After the war is over it will take Israel seven years to burn the weapons of war: "They that dwell in the cities of Israel shall go forth, and shall set on fire and burn the weapons, both the shields and the bucklers, the bows and the arrows, and the handstaves, and the spears, and they shall burn them with fire seven years: So that they shall take no wood out of the field, neither cut down any out of the forests; for they shall burn the weapons with fire: and they shall spoil those that spoiled them, and rob those that robbed them, saith the Lord God" (Ezek. 39:9-10). This passage is probably symbolic because it does not seem likely that the armies attacking Israel will use bows and arrows and bucklers and spears instead of guns and tanks. Perhaps the point here is that the battle is so enormous, with the enemy so vast, it will take many years to clean up the weapons they leave behind. This change is from JST Rev. 9:14.
[^29] After the war is over, it will take Israel seven months to bury the dead of their enemy. The number seven here and in the previous passage may be symbolic. In the scriptures, seven often symbolizes perfection or completion. Perhaps by using the number seven the Lord is underscoring the fact that the destruction of the wicked is complete: The last vestiges of their weapons and their dead bodies are now gone. "It shall come to pass in that day, that I will give unto Gog a place there of graves in Israel, the valley of the passengers on the east of the sea: and it shall stop the noses of the passengers: and there shall they bury Gog and all his multitude. . . . And seven months shall the house of Israel be burying of them, that they may cleanse the land. Yea, all the people of the land shall bury them. . . . And they shall sever out men of continual employment, passing through the land to bury with the passengers those that remain upon the face of the earth, to cleanse it: after the end of seven months shall they search. And the passengers that pass through the land, when any seeth a man's bone, then shall he set up a sign by it, till the buriers have buried it in the valley of Hamon-gog. . . . Thus shall they cleanse the land" (Ezek. 39:11-16). See, for example, Lund, "Things Which Must Shortly Come to Pass," 274.
[^30] See, for example, Draper, Opening the Seven Seals, 172-73, 251; Mounce, Book of Revelation, 291-92.
[^31] Principles and Practices, 615.
[^32] Draper, Opening the Seven Seals, 108.
[^33] Mounce, Book of Revelation, 197.
[^34] Millennial Messiah, 448, 449, 458-59, 468, 476, 477, 479, 490.
[^35] As we have noted, some prophecies that seem to apply to the last days may have been long since fulfilled, whereas others may have more than one fulfillment. The specific application of a particular prophecy can be challenging, especially where modern prophets have not given an interpretation. In this case, Elder Bruce R. McConkie of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles applied to Armageddon virtually all of the scriptures we use in this section (see Millennial Messiah, 448-94). If we have erred, and if in any specific instance an ancient prophet may have been speaking exclusively of ancient battles rather than the last great battle of the world, it is nevertheless true that the descriptions given here may legitimately be said to serve as types and shadows of the battle of Armageddon, revealed to heighten our understanding.
[^42] History of the Church, 5:356.
[^43] Voice of Warning, 38-42.
[^44] Harrington, Revelation, 166.
[^45] Schick, Revelation of St. John, 2:51.
[^46] Interpreter's Bible, 12:485.
[^47] Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon, no. 5, 66.
[^48] Mounce, Book of Revelation, 301.
[^49] Mounce, Book of Revelation, 302.
[^50] Millennial Messiah, 397.
[^51] See McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 476-85.
[^52] See the commentary on the safety of the latter-day Zion, page 357.
[^53] William Clayton, "Come, Come, Ye Saints," Hymns, no. 30.
[^54] Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "It is our firm conviction as a people that the stars and stripes will be waving triumphantly in the breeze, as a symbol of the greatness and stability of the United States of America, when the Lord comes" (Millennial Messiah, 491).
