Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Signs of the Times ( 1999)

Chapter 7

The Babylon of the Last Days

Signs of the Times

Babylon is the recurring scriptural symbol for Satan's kingdom on the earth. Babylon represents the wicked world, the world of sin, the world of immorality and idolatry. It is the world of false philosophy, false religion, coercive government. At various times the world of sin has been called the kingdom of the devil, the great and abominable church, the church of the devil, secret combinations—or Egypt, Sodom, Nineveh, wicked Jerusalem, or Rome. She is antichrist. She is the antithesis of Zion.

The symbol of Babylon as the great evil is drawn from the history of ancient Israel: Babylon was the epitome of wickedness in the ancient world. In addition, Babylon was a dire enemy of the Lord's covenant people. King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon first attacked Judah in 597 b.c., eventually overrunning the nation and destroying the city of Jerusalem. He took the people captive and transported them to live in bondage in Babylon. In time, the Lord delivered the people of Judah and blessed them to return to their homeland. Later, the Lord utterly destroyed Babylon.

These ancient events all clearly parallel events that have been prophesied for the last days. Babylon, the wicked world, is taking "captive" many of the Lord's people. As they turn to the ways of Babylon, they sell themselves into bondage to sin. But in time the Lord will gather back to his kingdom those who will hear him. And, in the end, the Lord will utterly destroy spiritual Babylon.

The Babylon presented by John (Rev. 17) seems disgusting, foreign, obviously undesirable. That is the way the prophets typically see her—she is all glitz and glitter; she is grossly overdressed; she has no refinement or sensitivity. She is not the type of person we want to associate with. That is Babylon with the deceptive veils ripped off; it is Babylon seen truly. But she is often painted in a different light by Satan and those who follow him. She is painted as attractive and beautiful and most desirable. Satan seeks to make the world of sin enticing. The evidence of his success is that so many people on earth follow him and join in his worldly ways. If Satan can appear as an angel of light, certainly Babylon can appear as a beautiful and desirable woman.

It is often difficult in reading the Old Testament to discern whether a prophet is speaking of the literal, ancient Babylon or the symbolic, latter-day Babylon. Ultimately, however, it usually does not matter. Such prophecies seem to have a dual fulfillment; and what was true of ancient Babylon seems also to be true of the Babylon of the last days, both in her characteristics and her ultimate destiny, for the Babylon of wickedness is not just a phenomenon of the last days. She is as old as Cain and continues to the end of the world. Thus, the existence of Babylon is not one of the signs of the times, but her growing power and dominion is one of those signs, and her great fall will occur even as the Lord comes in glory.

In the following discussions of Babylon, we must constantly look past the symbol to the reality: Babylon represents all the false beliefs, sinful actions, and ungodly associations found on the earth. By extension, Babylon also represents all the people who hold those beliefs, perform those actions, and join with those associations. The fall of Babylon is nothing less than the obliteration of those beliefs and sins and associations from the face of the earth—and the destruction of the people who cast their lot with such things.

Babylon, the Mother of Harlots

Rev. 17:1-6

1 And there came one of the seven angels which had the seven vials, and talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither; I will shew unto thee the judgment of the great whore that sitteth upon many waters:

2 With whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication.

3 So he carried me away in the spirit into the wilderness: and I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet coloured beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns.

4 And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet colour, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of her fornication;

5 And upon her forehead was a name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.

6 And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration.

As Rev. 17 begins, John is invited to see the "judgment" of "the whore," but first he sees her arrayed in her power. The angel bears witness that the whore has power over all the earth ("many waters") and that she has influence over the kings and people of the world. Through the power of the Spirit, John actually sees the whore, though he is seeing a symbol surrounded by other symbolic layers of meaning. He sees her excesses in her lust for wealth and pleasure, as shown by her clothing and jewelry. He sees her pride, as shown by the name on her forehead. He sees her wickedness by that name and by her murder of the righteous.

Centuries earlier, Nephi saw a similar vision, which helps us understand what John saw and recorded in Revelation. Nephi saw the "whore of all the earth" "many generations" after the time of peace that followed the coming of Christ to the Americas (1 Ne. 12:21; 13:4; 14:10). This part of his vision clearly concerns the time of the Great Apostasy and the last days. As 1 Ne. 13 opens, Nephi sees "the nations and kingdoms of the Gentiles" (v. 3). Among those nations, he sees "the formation of a church which is most abominable above all other churches, which slayeth the saints of God, yea, and tortureth them and bindeth them down, and yoketh them with a yoke of iron, and bringeth them down into captivity" (v. 5). The founder of "this great and abominable church" is the devil himself (v. 6). "And I also saw gold, and silver, and silks, and scarlets, and fine-twined linen, and all manner of precious clothing; and I saw many harlots," which, the scripture explains, "are the desires of this great and abominable church" (vv. 7-8).

Next, Nephi sees Columbus discovering America (v. 12), followed by the Revolutionary War (vv. 17-19), which further helps to place the prophecies in the time of the Great Apostasy. Nephi learns that the "great and abominable church, which is most abominable above all other churches" was formed after the Bible went forth "from the Jews unto the Gentiles" (v. 26). Further, he sees that the great and abominable church takes "away from the gospel of the Lamb many parts which are plain and most precious; and also many covenants of the Lord" (v. 26). Their motive is malicious: "And all this have they done that they might pervert the right ways of the Lord, that they might blind the eyes and harden the hearts of the children of men" (v. 27). "Because of these things which are taken away out of the gospel of the Lamb, an exceedingly great many do stumble, yea, insomuch that Satan hath great power over them" (v. 29).

In the verses that follow, Nephi learns that the "abominable church . . . is the mother of harlots" (v. 34), that that church had dug a "great pit . . . for the destruction of men" (1 Ne. 14:3), and that "that great and abominable church . . . is the mother of abominations" (v. 9). Nephi learns that there are finally only two churches on the earth: "The one is the church of the Lamb of God, and the other is the church of the devil; wherefore, whoso belongeth not to the church of the Lamb of God belongeth to that great church, which is the mother of abominations; and she is the whore of all the earth" (v. 10). This whore "sat upon many waters; and she had dominion over all the earth, among all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people" (v. 11). Because of that dominion, and "because of the wickedness and abominations of the whore," the numbers of the church of the Lamb of God "were few" (v. 12).

"And it came to pass," Nephi wrote, "that I beheld that the great mother of abominations did gather together multitudes upon the face of all the earth, among all the nations of the Gentiles, to fight against the Lamb of God. And it came to pass that I beheld that the wrath of God was poured out upon that great and abominable church, insomuch that there were wars and rumors of wars among all the nations and kindreds of the earth. And when the day cometh that the wrath of God is poured out upon the mother of harlots, which is the great and abominable church of all the earth, whose founder is the devil, then, at that day, the work of the Father shall commence, in preparing the way for the fulfilling of his covenants, which he hath made to his people who are of the house of Israel" (vv. 13, 15, 17). In sum, then, this great and abominable church is the church of the devil. [^1] It is the "mother of abominations." It is the "whore of all the earth." It is Babylon.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie gave a powerful description of that church: "The church of the devil is every evil and worldly organization on earth. It is all of the systems, both Christian and non-Christian, that have perverted the pure and perfect gospel; it is all of the governments and powers that run counter to the divine will; it is the societies and political parties and labor unions that sow strife and reap contention. It is communism; it is Islam; it is Buddhism; it is modern Christianity in all its parts. It is Germany under Hitler, Russia under Stalin, and Italy under Mussolini. It is the man of sin speaking in churches, orating in legislative halls, and commanding the armies of men. And its headquarters are everywhere—in Rome and Moscow, in Paris and London, in Teheran and Washington—everywhere that evil forces, either of church or state or society, can be influenced. The immanent and all-pervading presence of evil in high places is one of the signs of the times." [^2]

Notes and Commentary

Rev. 17:1 the judgment of the great whore. The image of prostitution was commonly used in the Old Testament to depict extreme apostasy from all that is godly and good (Isa. 1:21; 23:16; Jer. 2:20-31; 13:27; Ezek. 16:15, 28-29; Hosea 2:5; Nahum 3:4). Nephi defines who the great whore is: "He that fighteth against Zion, both Jew and Gentile, both bond and free, both male and female, shall perish; for they are they who are the whore of all the earth; for they who are not for me are against me, saith our God" (2 Ne. 10:16). The "judgment of the great whore" means, simply, the punishment of the world of wickedness. The judgment is described in detail in Rev. 17 and 18.

sitteth upon many waters. The interpretation of the expression "many waters" is given in Rev. 17:15: "The waters which thou sawest, where the whore sitteth, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues." Nephi saw that["[the whore] had dominion over all the earth, among all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people" (1 Ne. 14:11).

Rev. 17:2 With whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication. The rulers of the earth, who ought to lead in righteousness, instead lead the people into sin. They "commit fornication" with the whore by selling that which is good and right and true, even their very souls, for the pleasure and power the whore will give them. They commit fornication by turning from their true husband, or at least him to whom they are betrothed—God himself—to Babylon.

the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication. Drunkenness here is a symbol of apostasy, in which the people lose the power of good judgment because of their unwise choices. "They are drunken, but not with wine," Isaiah prophesied, "they stagger, but not with strong drink" (Isa. 29:9; see Jer. 51:6-9). The wine that makes them drunk is not the fornication of sexuality but that of unfaithfulness to God.

Rev. 17:3 So he carried me away in the spirit. Nephi (son of Lehi) received the same blessing when he experienced his vision of the last days (1 Ne. 14:30; 15:1; 2 Ne. 4:25), as did Jesus in the days of his temptation (JST Matt. 4:8). It appears that in these instances the Spirit, or the Holy Ghost, may carry a person to another location, while at the same time enabling him to transcend his physical limitations to rend the veil between mortality and the world of the Spirit. In the years before the coming of Christ to the Americas, the prophet Nephi (son of Helaman) was cast into prison, but by "the power of God . . . he was taken by the Spirit and conveyed away out of the midst of them" (Hel. 10:16). Others in the scriptures who received this blessing include Adam (Moses 6:64), Lehi (1 Ne. 1:8), Ezekiel (Ezek. 37:1), and Mary, the mother of Jesus (1 Ne. 11:19).

into the wilderness. In Rev. 12 we see the woman, who represented the church of God, the bride of Christ, go into the wilderness for safety. Here we see her counterfeit, the woman who represents the church of the devil, dwelling in the wilderness. In the first instance, the wilderness symbolized a place of refuge; here it symbolizes the dryness and desolation of sin.

I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet coloured beast. This beast is most likely the same as that found in Rev. 13:1, for both have seven heads and ten horns. [^3] The woman is the whore spoken of in Rev. 17:1. The scarlet color of the beast is the same color as the ribbon that was tied around the neck of the scapegoat on the Day of Atonement; the ribbon represented the sins of Israel. [^4] In the same way, the scarlet of the beast seems to represent sin (Isa. 1:18).

Rev. 17:4 And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet colour. Purple clothing symbolizes royalty (Judg. 8:26), and scarlet clothing symbolizes wealth and nobility (2 Sam. 1:24; Prov. 31:21; Lam. 4:5; Dan. 5:7; Matt. 27:28-29) the scarlet color, of course, also symbolizes sin. The woman's clothing indicates her position of wealth and power in the world, but there is a deeper significance. In the Old Testament, purple and scarlet appear together only in Exodus (occurring twenty-six times), and in every instance the colors are used, together with blue and white linen, to describe the tabernacle of the Lord and the clothing of the high priest (see, for example, Ex. 26:1, 31, 36). Purple and scarlet were used in the curtains of the tabernacle, the hanging for the door, the hanging for the gate of the court, and the veil itself. They were used for the ephod (linen apron) of the high priest, as well as for his girdle, the hems of his robe, the breastplate, and the cloths used in the temple rituals.

Thus, the woman is standing as counterfeit for the most sacred elements of the true religion—the temple and the high priest who presided over all the people. She is trying to supplant the religion of God with a false religion, one that points the people to sin and excess and ultimately to a worship of Satan himself (Rev. 13:4). Thus, the woman who is Babylon is not only wickedness and political power, but also religious systems that entice all men to turn their hearts away from the true God. She seems to combine elements of the first and second beasts and the false prophet (described in Rev. 13).

Even with all her worldly trappings, the glory of this woman pales when compared to the "woman clothed with the sun" in Rev. 12:1 and the simple beauty of the bride of the Lamb in Rev. 19:7-8.

decked with gold and precious stones and pearls. These items are symbols of wealth. The word decked indicates that the woman wears an excessive amount of jewelry. In fact, everything about the woman speaks of pride, worldliness, and excess.

having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of her fornication. A golden cup indicates wealth, and a person seeing such a cup would expect to find in it something pleasurable to drink. Instead, the woman's cup is filled with "abominations and filthiness," which stem from the woman's "fornication" in turning her heart from God to Satan (Jer. 7-8; D&C 10:20-22). Abominations are offenses against God that are particularly vile and disgusting.

Rev. 17:5 And upon her forehead was a name written. The book of Revelation speaks of a mark on the forehead seven times. We read in Rev. 13:16, 14:9, and 20:4 of the mark of the beast on the forehead or in the hands of those who follow him. In Rev. 7:3, 9:4, 14:1, and 22:4 we read of the righteous receiving the name or seal of God on their foreheads. But here the woman has her own name written on her forehead. Some authorities believe it was common in ancient Rome for prostitutes to write their names on their foreheads, probably on a headband. [^5]

mystery. The righteous know the hidden things of God, called the "mysteries." The greatest mysteries are reserved for those who receive the keys to such mysteries in the temple, who keep their temple covenants, and who hunger and thirst after the things of godliness. The woman here is the embodiment of the mysteries of Satan, the counterfeit of the mysteries of God. These mysteries are found in false religious creeds, in "the secret works of darkness" (2 Ne. 10:15; 9:9; 26:22; 28:9), and in secret combinations, "which . . . is most abominable and wicked above all, in the sight of God" (Ether 8:18; Hel. 6:22-23; Moses 5:51).

Babylon the Great. "Babylon the great is the church of the devil; it is the world with all its evil and carnality; it is every organization of every kind, sort and form—whether religious, civic, political, fraternal, or otherwise—which espouses a philosophy or promotes a cause which leads men away from salvation and toward the kingdoms of lesser glory in the eternal world." [^6] As the Lord says in latter-day revelation, Babylon is "the midst of wickedness" (D&C 133:14).

mother of harlots and abominations. Babylon not only is a prostitute herself but is the mother of other prostitutes, other harlots on the earth. Not only does the woman embody one form of great wickedness on the earth but she fosters organizations, religions, governments, philosophies, and attitudes that embrace the devil and his world. The abominations here include those spoken of in Daniel, where the temple and other sacred things are desecrated and corrupted (Dan. 11:31; Matt. 24:15). And they include the evil practice of combining harlotry with idolatry (Hosea 4:12-14). In the scriptures the Lord calls the following things abominations—all are engendered by Babylon, the mother of abominations:

incest (Lev. 18:6-16, 26-27)

homosexuality (Lev. 18:22)

idolatry (Deut. 7:25; 12:29; Mal. 2:11)

impure sacrifices to God (Deut. 17:1)

human sacrifice (Deut. 18:10, 12)

using practitioners of divination, enchantments, witchcraft

Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ (Deut. 18:10, 12)

transvestism (Deut. 22:5)

dishonesty in financial dealings (Deut. 25:13-16; Prov. 11:1)

pride (Prov. 6:17; 16:5; Jacob 2:13, 16; Hel. 4:11-12)

lying (Prov. 6:17, 19; 12:22)

murder (Prov. 6:17)

contentiousness (Prov. 6:19)

justifying the wicked and condemning the just (Prov. 17:15)

adultery (Ezek. 18:11; 22:11)

oppressing the poor and needy (Ezek. 18:12; Hel. 4:11-12)

whoredoms (Jacob 2:28)

fornication (Alma 39:3-5)

secret combinations (Hel. 7:25)

rape (Moro. 9:9)

apostate creeds (JS-H 1:18-19).

Rev. 17:6 drunken with the blood of the saints/martyrs. Babylon is the name of the spirit that comes over those who kill the prophets. That spirit has infected much of the world (Rev. 16:6; 18:24; Matt. 23:34-35; Heb. 9:16). The word drunken suggests that through the ages the righteous have been victims of a great slaughter, a slaughter that was intoxicating to the perpetrators.

when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration. John does not feel "admiration" for this embodiment of great wickedness. A better translation of the Greek word here would be "astonishment." [^7] John feels amazement, or astonishment, at the extreme level of Babylon's wickedness.

Babylon Has Great Power in the World

1 Ne. 14:11-14

11 And it came to pass that I looked and beheld the whore of all the earth, and she sat upon many waters; and she had dominion over all the earth, among all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people.

12 And it came to pass that I beheld the church of the Lamb of God, and its numbers were few, because of the wickedness and abominations of the whore who sat upon many waters; nevertheless, I beheld that the church of the Lamb, who were the saints of God, were also upon all the face of the earth; and their dominions upon the face of the earth were small, because of the wickedness of the great whore whom I saw.

13 And it came to pass that I beheld that the great mother of abominations did gather together multitudes upon the face of all the earth, among all the nations of the Gentiles, to fight against the Lamb of God.

14 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, beheld the power of the Lamb of God, that it descended upon the saints of the church of the Lamb, and upon the covenant people of the Lord, who were scattered upon all the face of the earth; and they were armed with righteousness and with the power of God in great glory.

Babylon, the "whore of all the earth," has "dominion over all the earth." She rules "all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people." Because of her deep and widespread wickedness, she is able to hinder the "church of the Lamb of God" in its growth. The whore has such strength and audacity, combined with an intrinsically evil nature, that she thinks to gather "multitudes upon the face of all the earth, among all the nations of the Gentiles, to fight against the Lamb of God" (see also D&C 88:94). This is a world war—but not one for temporal wealth or power. It is a war fought to destroy the people of the Lord, with their faith, their gospel, and their holy way of life. Despite the power of Babylon, though, despite the countless multitudes who gather to fight with and for her, the Saints will prevail. "The power of the Lamb of God" will descend upon the Saints, arming them "with righteousness and with the power of God in great glory."

Other passages confirm the power and dominion of wicked Babylon. John saw a beast with ten horns and ten crowns, symbolizing kings with great power (Rev. 13:1; 17:12). Many additional kings lend their power and strength to this beast (Rev. 17:13). The beast has power over "all kindreds, and tongues, and nations" (Rev. 13:7). This powerful beast, in turn, supports the whore. The kings of the earth, who have power over all, give power to the whore of all the earth. And the whore responds by ruling over the kings (Rev. 17:18). In other words, the kings promote the works of evil on the earth, and the works of evil control the lives and actions of the kings.

John also saw a second beast, another kind of kingdom on the earth (Rev. 13:11-18). This beast turns people's hearts to the first beast, and thus to the whore, by performing wondrous signs and miracles (Rev. 13:13). This beast (or kingdom) also controls the economy of the earth (buying and selling) and requires people to associate themselves with the beast if they wish to have part in that economy (Rev. 13:16-17). Thus, through the power of the second beast, the whore gains control of the world economy and rules over all those who wish to partake of her wealth and many comforts.

These two beasts do not represent specific political kingdoms on the earth but rather symbolize many kingdoms who serve Satan and support Babylon. And they go beyond political power to influence and have power over people's philosophies, religious beliefs and practices, economies, and so forth. In concert with the two beasts, the whore makes all nations "drink of the wine" of her wickedness (D&C 88:94). She leads them in "fornication," following passions that lead them away from God rather than righteous passions that guide them to him.

Thus, Babylon seems to control the political kingdoms of the world, all of which seem to use some form of coercion or violence to attain their ends. She controls the economy of the world, in which money is more important than love, mercy, compassion, service, or the things of God. She controls the hearts of men, causing them to follow her into the abyss of selfishness, lust, and all kinds of abominations.

Truly this Babylon is a symbol of power. She is so powerful in the world, following her master, Satan, that no power on earth can conquer her. But God's power from on high has no equal, and he will prevail mightily.

Notes and Commentary

1 Ne. 14:11 she sat upon many waters. John used this same description of Babylon. [^8]

1 Ne. 14:12 the church of the Lamb . . . were also upon all the face of the earth. Nephi sees a worldwide church. Nevertheless, even though Church members are to be found in all nations, they do not have broad or powerful dominions; the church of the devil prevented that through its wickedness.

1 Ne. 14:13 great mother of abominations. See the commentary on Rev. 17:5, page 290.

fight against the Lamb of God. The Lamb, of course, is Jesus Christ. The whore and all those who align themselves with her will not simply be fighting against Christ, but they will be fighting against the followers of Christ and his gospel. The war is part of the war that began in heaven (Rev. 12:7) and continues as the beast and his followers try to destroy the true believers in Christ (Rev. 13:7). This war will come to a bloody conclusion at Armageddon. [^9] We also read about this war in Rev. 17:14, which says "the Lamb shall overcome them."

1 Ne. 14:14 armed with righteousness and with the power of God in great glory. This passage is reminiscent of the power held by Enoch as he built Zion in ancient days: "And so great was the faith of Enoch that he led the people of God, and their enemies came to battle against them; and he spake the word of the Lord, and the earth trembled, and the mountains fled, even according to his command; and the rivers of water were turned out of their course; and the roar of the lions was heard out of the wilderness; and all nations feared greatly, so powerful was the word of Enoch, and so great was the power of the language which God had given him. . . . And there went forth a curse upon all people that fought against God; and from that time forth there were wars and bloodshed among them; but the Lord came and dwelt with his people, and they dwelt in righteousness. The fear of the Lord was upon all nations, so great was the glory of the Lord, which was upon his people" (Moses 7:13, 15-17; see also D&C 45:63-70).

The Saints Are Commanded to Flee Babylon

D&C 133:1-7, 12-15

1 Hearken, O ye people of my church, saith the Lord your God, and hear the word of the Lord concerning you—

2 The Lord who shall suddenly come to his temple; the Lord who shall come down upon the world with a curse to judgment; yea, upon all the nations that forget God, and upon all the ungodly among you.

3 For he shall make bare his holy arm in the eyes of all nations, and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of their God.

4 Wherefore, prepare ye, prepare ye, O my people; sanctify yourselves; gather ye together, O ye people of my church, upon the land of Zion, all you that have not been commanded to tarry.

5 Go ye out from Babylon. Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord.

6 Call your solemn assemblies, and speak often one to another. And let every man call upon the name of the Lord.

7 Yea, verily I say unto you again, the time has come when the voice of the Lord is unto you: Go ye out of Babylon; gather ye out from among the nations, from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other. . . .

12 Let them, therefore, who are among the Gentiles flee unto Zion.

13 And let them who be of Judah flee unto Jerusalem, unto the mountains of the Lord's house.

14 Go ye out from among the nations, even from Babylon, from the midst of wickedness, which is spiritual Babylon.

15 But verily, thus saith the Lord, let not your flight be in haste, but let all things be prepared before you; and he that goeth, let him not look back lest sudden destruction shall come upon him. [^10]

Because the Lord is coming, the revelation says, members of the Church are to leave Babylon and go to Zion. Nonmembers as well are invited to do the same, as are the Jews. But they are warned, "Do not leave so hastily that you leave unprepared, but do not hesitate, and once you begin, do not look back."

The call to flee from Babylon comes from ancient prophets as well. Isaiah said, "Go ye forth of Babylon" (Isa. 48:20), speaking both literally and symbolically. Jeremiah echoed the command: "Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul: be not cut off in her iniquity; for this is the time of the Lord's vengeance; he will render unto her a recompence. My people, go ye out of the midst of her, and deliver ye every man his soul from the fierce anger of the Lord" (Jer. 51:6, 45). John said, "Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the world passeth away, and the lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever" (1 Jn. 2:15-17).

The Lord will bless us greatly in our flight from Babylon. As he did for Moses and the children of Israel as they fled the bondage of Egypt (Num. 20:7-11; Deut. 8:15; Ps. 78:15-20; 2 Ne. 25:20), so will he do for us as we flee the bondage of Babylon: "And they thirsted not when he led them through the deserts: he caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them: he clave the rock also, and the waters gushed out" (Isa. 48:21). Thus will he lead us through spiritual deserts and give us living waters to drink (Isa. 41:18; 43:19; 44:3). The rock symbolizes Christ, the source of our living water (see also Isa. 51:1; John 4:10-11; 7:38).

We must leave Babylon, meaning the world of sin, with her philosophies, attitudes, desires, iniquities, and associations, for three reasons: so that we can become clean of her influence, so that we can build a Zion of holiness, and so that we will not be destroyed when she is destroyed. Said the Lord to Joseph Smith: "After today cometh the burning—this is speaking after the manner of the Lord—for verily I say, tomorrow all the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, for I am the Lord of Hosts; and I will not spare any that remain in Babylon" (D&C 64:24). To those who choose not to go, the Lord gives this warning through Isaiah: "There is no peace, saith the Lord, unto the wicked" (Isa. 48:22; see also Isa. 57:21; 1 Ne. 20:22; Alma 41:10).

Notes and Commentary

D&C 133:1 Hearken, O ye people of my church. Even though Church members have made covenants to follow the Lord and have ostensibly left the world behind, many have not done so. Here the Lord invites them to listen to his plea to leave Babylon once and for all.

D&C 133:2 The Lord shall come to his temple/come down upon the world. See the commentary on the second coming of Christ, page 381.

D&C 133:3 he shall make bare his holy arm. In ancient times, men prepared for battle by throwing their cloak away from the shoulder of their fighting arm ( Ps. 74:11). At the second coming of Christ, God will "make bare" his arm when he shows forth his power for all to see ( D&C 133:2-3). This phrase and the remainder of the verse is a quotation from Isa. 52:10.

eyes of all the nations. All the world will know of the deliverance of God ( D&C 40:5).

ends of the earth shall see the salvation of their God. Every part of the earth will see and know the power of the Lord; all will see how he delivers those who turn to him. Joseph Smith promised the suffering Saints: "The days of tribulation are fast approaching, and the time to test the fidelity of the Saints has come. . . . [But] in these times of sore trial, let the Saints be patient and see the salvation of God. Those who cannot endure persecution, and stand in the day of affliction, cannot stand in the day when the Son of God shall burst the veil, and appear in all the glory of His Father, with all the holy angels." [^11]

D&C 133:4 prepare ye, prepare ye. How do we prepare for the great and dreadful day of the Lord, when he shall return in power and great glory? We prepare, first, by listening to the prophets and to the voice of the Lord as he speaks directly to us to give us guidance in all aspects of our lives; and second, by obeying with all our hearts that which we are told to do. If we listen and obey in this manner, we will be fully prepared for his coming.

sanctify yourselves. Noah Webster's An American Dictionary of the English Language (1828) gives this definition of sanctify that fits with the command to flee Babylon: "To cleanse from corruption; to purify from sin; to make holy by detaching the affections from the world and its defilements, and exalting them to a supreme love of God."

gather ye together. The Saints gain strength against temptation (the inner enemy) and against attacks (the outer enemy) by gathering and forming a righteous union, even Zion. [^12]

D&C 133:5 Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord. Here the Lord is referring to the sacred vessels of the temple (Ezra 1:7-11), which could be borne only by those who held the priesthood. Thus the Lord here is commanding priesthood holders to be clean (D&C 38:41-42; 133:5). The sacred vessels directly contrast with "that which is unclean" (Isa. 52:11).

D&C 133:6 Call your solemn assemblies. Solemn assemblies are sacred meetings held to sustain a Church president, to dedicate a temple, or to give special instructions.

speak often one to another . . . call upon the name of the Lord. Only by strengthening one another and by relying on the Lord will we be able to escape Babylon and come to Zion.

D&C 133:12 Gentiles flee unto Zion. See the commentary on the gathering of the Gentiles, page 48.

D&C 133:13 the mountains of the Lord's house. This term refers to the temple of God (Isa. 2:2; 56:7; Ex. 15:17), one of the principal features of Zion.

D&C 133:14 the midst of wickedness, which is spiritual Babylon. The Lord makes very plain what he is talking about here, lest we make any mistake about it. He is speaking not only of cities and nations of sin but also of the sinful state that can be found anywhere, of wickedness without and within, a corruption of the spirit. Not only must we leave places where sin predominates but we must leave behind an inner state of sin in a "flight" to righteousness.

D&C 133:15 let not your flight be in haste. When Israel left Egypt, she did so in haste and in flight (Ex. 12:39; Deut. 16:3). When her people now go forth in the gathering to Zion, leaving Babylon, they are to do so with neither haste nor flight but with calm and confidence, knowing that the Lord is with them (Isa. 52:12).

let him not look back. One potential disciple said to Jesus, "Lord, I will follow thee; but let me first go bid them farewell, which are at home at my house. And Jesus said unto him, No man, having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God" (Luke 9:61-62). If we look back, longing for the comforts of Babylon or thinking we will partake just one more time, we are not fit disciples, and we are at risk of "sudden destruction."

Babylon Shall Fall

Rev. 18:1-24

1 And after these things I saw another angel come down from heaven, having great power; and the earth was lightened with his glory.

2 And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird.

3 For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies.

4 And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

5 For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembered her iniquities.

6 Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double according to her works: in the cup which she hath filled fill to her double.

7 How much she hath glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her: for she saith in her heart, I sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow.

8 Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall be utterly burned with fire: for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her.

9 And the kings of the earth, who have committed fornication and lived deliciously with her, shall bewail her, and lament for her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning,

10 Standing afar off for the fear of her torment, saying, Alas, alas, that great city Babylon, that mighty city! for in one hour is thy judgment come.

11 And the merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over her; for no man buyeth their merchandise any more;

12 The merchandise of gold, and silver, and precious stones, and of pearls, and fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet, and all thyine wood, and all manner vessels of ivory, and all manner vessels of most precious wood, and of brass, and iron, and marble,

13 And cinnamon, and odours, and ointments, and frankincense, and wine, and oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and chariots, and slaves, and souls of men.

14 And the fruits that thy soul lusted after are departed from thee, and all things which were dainty and goodly are departed from thee, and thou shalt find them no more at all.

15 The merchants of these things, which were made rich by her, shall stand afar off for the fear of her torment, weeping and wailing,

16 And saying, Alas, alas, that great city, that was clothed in fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls!

17 For in one hour so great riches is come to nought. And every shipmaster, and all the company in ships, and sailors, and as many as trade by sea, stood afar off,

18 And cried when they saw the smoke of her burning, saying, What city is like unto this great city!

19 And they cast dust on their heads, and cried, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas, that great city, wherein were made rich all that had ships in the sea by reason of her costliness! for in one hour is she made desolate.

20 Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; for God hath avenged you on her.

21 And a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all.

22 And the voice of harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee; and no craftsman, of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more in thee; and the sound of a millstone shall be heard no more at all in thee;

23 And the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee; and the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more at all in thee: for thy merchants were the great men of the earth; for by thy sorceries were all nations deceived.

24 And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth.

The Babylonian captivity is perhaps the lowest point of Israel's history. Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "Both Isaiah and Jeremiah spoke at length of the devastations of that day and of the cursings and destruction that would come upon Babylon as a result. (Isa. 13 and 21; Jer. 50 and 51.) Babylon was truly the great enemy of the Lord's people anciently, and her overthrow and the destruction of her worldliness and wickedness was one of the things of greatest interest and concern to them. What was more natural, then, than for John and all the prophets to use Babylon as the symbol of sin, and her destruction as the overthrow of wickedness on earth." [^13]

The fall of Babylon was foreseen by John in Rev. 14:8: "And there followed another angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great city, because she made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication." That destruction is not actually described until Rev. 18, which is an extended lament, or a funeral dirge, over the loss of the great city of Babylon.

Babylon was convinced that in her strength she would never fall: "I sit a queen," she said, "and shall see no sorrow." But she will fall indeed and become a "habitation of devils." Her destruction shall be complete: "She shall be utterly burned with fire," the prophecy says. Because the world has given herself over to Babylon's enticements, the world will lament her demise. Joining in the lament are earth's kings, merchants, and shippers. [^14] But the righteous will have cause to rejoice over her downfall (Isa. 14:7-8; Rev. 19:1-5).

Latter-day revelation tells us: "And the great and abominable church, which is the whore of all the earth, shall be cast down by devouring fire, according as it is spoken by the mouth of Ezekiel the prophet, who spoke of these things, which have not come to pass but surely must, as I live, for abominations shall not reign" (D&C 29:21; see also Ezek. 39:6). "For the time speedily shall come that all churches which are built up to get gain, and all those who are built up to get power over the flesh, and those who are built up to become popular in the eyes of the world, and those who seek the lusts of the flesh and the things of the world, and to do all manner of iniquity; yea, in fine, all those who belong to the kingdom of the devil are they who need fear, and tremble, and quake; they are those who must be brought low in the dust; they are those who must be consumed as stubble; and this is according to the words of the prophet" (1 Ne. 22:23).

Elder Orson Pratt added his testimony: "John predicts another great event to take place immediately after the proclamation of the everlasting gospel, namely, the downfall of great Babylon. . . . [S]he must fall, after she has been warned with the sound of 'the everlasting gospel.' Her overthrow will be by a series of the most terrible judgments which will quickly succeed each other, and sweep over the nations where she has her dominion, and at last she will be utterly burned by fire, for thus hath the Lord spoken. Great, and fearful, and most terrible judgments are decreed upon these corrupt powers—the nations of modern Christendom; for strong is the Lord God who shall execute his fierce wrath upon them, and he will not cease until he has made a full end, and until their names be blotted out from under heaven." [^15]

The fall of Babylon is also called the end of the world. It is the time when the world as we know it will be overthrown, utterly destroyed, along with its philosophies, false belief systems, governments of man, sinfulness, and everything else that is not of God. And when those things are destroyed, the people who clung to them will be destroyed as well (D&C 64:24). The fall of Babylon will be complete the moment the Lord comes in his glory. At the same moment, Satan will be deposed from his high position and cast down into the bottomless pit (Isa. 14:4-23; Rev. 20:1-3).

The prophet Jeremiah left a detailed record of his vision of the fall of Babylon the great. The vision emphasized five things:

"I will punish the king of Babylon and his land" (Jer. 50:18).

"The Lord hath . . . brought forth the weapons of his indignation: for this is the work of the Lord of hosts" (Jer. 50:25).

"Recompense her according to her work" (Jer. 50:29).

"I will raise up against Babylon" (Jer. 51:1).

"His device is against Babylon, to destroy it; because it is the vengeance of the Lord" (Jer. 51:11).

"Behold, I am against thee, . . . and I will stretch out mine hand upon thee, and roll thee down from the rocks" (Jer. 51:25).

"The daughter of Babylon is like a threshingfloor, it is time to thresh her" (Jer. 51:33).

"The Lord hath spoiled Babylon" (Jer. 51:55).

"The land shall tremble and sorrow" (Jer. 51:29).

"The mighty men of Babylon . . . became as women. . . . The men of war are affrighted" (Jer. 51:30, 32).

"All her men of war shall be cut off" (Jer. 50:30).

"Spare ye not her young men; destroy ye utterly all her host. Thus the slain shall fall in the land . . . , and they that are thrust through in her streets" (Jer. 51:4).

"With thee [Israel] also will I break in pieces man and woman; and with thee will I break in pieces old and young; and with thee will I break in pieces the young man and the maid; I will also break in pieces with thee the shepherd and his flock; and with thee will I break in pieces the husbandman and his yoke of oxen; and with thee will I break in pieces captains and rulers" (Jer. 51:22-23).

"I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter" (Jer. 51:40).

"Through all her land the wounded shall groan" (Jer. 51:52).

"The nation shall be a wilderness, a dry land, and a desert" (Jer. 50:12).

"Her foundations are fallen, her walls are thrown down" (Jer. 50:15).

"Waste and utterly destroy after them" (Jer. 50:21).

"A sound of battle is in the land, and of great destruction" (Jer. 50:22).

"Cast her up as heaps, and destroy her utterly: let nothing of her be left" (Jer. 50:26).

"Let none thereof escape" (Jer. 50:29).

"I will kindle a fire in his cities, and it shall devour all round about him" (Jer. 50:32).

"A sword is upon the Chaldeans, [^16] saith the Lord, and upon the inhabitants of Babylon, and upon her princes, and upon her wise men. A sword is upon the liars; and they shall dote: a sword is upon her mighty men; and they shall be dismayed. A sword is upon their horses, and upon their chariots, and upon all the mingled people that are in the midst of her; and they shall become as women: a sword is upon her treasures; and they shall be robbed" (Jer. 50:35-37).

"He shall make their habitation desolate with them" (Jer. 50:45).

"Empty her land" (Jer. 51:2).

"Make the land of Babylon a desolation without an inhabitant" (Jer. 51:29).

"As Babylon hath caused the slain of Israel to fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slain of all the earth" (Jer. 51:49).

"Make her land desolate, and none shall dwell therein" (Jer. 50:3).

"It shall not be inhabited, but it shall be wholly desolate" (Jer. 50:13).

"The wild beasts of the desert . . . shall dwell there, and the owls shall dwell therein: and it shall be no more inhabited forever; never shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation. As God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbour cities thereof, saith the Lord; so shall no man abide there, neither shall any son of man dwell therein" (Jer. 50:39-40).

"Thou shalt be desolate forever, saith the Lord" (Jer. 51:26).

"Babylon shall become heaps, . . . without an inhabitant" (Jer. 51:37).

"Her cities are a desolation, a dry land, and a wilderness, a land wherein no man dwelleth, neither doth any son of man pass thereby" (Jer. 51:43).

"O, Lord, thou hast spoken against this place, to cut it off, that none shall remain in it, neither man nor beast, but that it shall be desolate forever" (Jer. 51:62).

Jeremiah's descriptions seem to have a threefold application: First, they apply to the fall of Babylon anciently. Second, they apply to the destruction of the physical world of sin at the last days, of which the fall of ancient Babylon is a type and symbol. Third, they apply to the destruction of the spiritual world of wickedness at the last day, of which the fall of ancient Babylon is also a symbol. [^17]

As Babylon falls, the Saints can take heart that they will be in the hands of the Lord. If they live, they shall live in the Lord; and if they die, they will die in the Lord. "Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and their works do follow them" (Rev. 14:13).

Notes and Commentary

Rev. 18:1 the earth was lightened with his glory. This angel is so brilliant that the very earth is illuminated by his presence. In fact, this angel's glory is like that of Christ, who will yet return: "And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the east: and his voice was like a noise of many waters: and the earth shined with his glory" (Ezek. 43:2). "For as the[light[e]ning [of the sun] cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be" (Matt. 24:27).

Rev. 18:2 Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen. The angel's words are almost a direct quotation from a passage in Isaiah: "Babylon is fallen, is fallen; and all the graven images of her gods he hath broken unto the ground" (Isa. 21:9; Jer. 51:8). This same expression is found in latter-day scripture: "And again, another angel shall sound his trump, which is the sixth angel, saying: She is fallen who made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication; she is fallen, is fallen!" (D&C 88:105).

the habitation of devils/foul spirit/hateful bird. Where once Babylon boasted of being the great and powerful city that controlled kings (Rev. 17:18) and was the site of opulence and wealth (Rev. 17:4), it now is not fit for human habitation. Rather than being a city or kingdom with a place of prominence and power in the world, it now is the home for devils, foul spirits, and unclean birds.

Old Testament prophets saw the fallen city of Babylon as a wasteland, good only for foul and unclean creatures: "From generation to generation it shall lie waste; none shall pass through it for ever and ever. But the cormorant and the bittern shall possess it; the owl also and the raven shall dwell in it: and he shall stretch out upon it the line of confusion, and the stones of emptiness. They shall call the nobles thereof to the kingdom, but none shall be there, and all her princes shall be nothing. And thorns shall come up in her palaces, nettles and brambles in the fortresses thereof: and it shall be an habitation of dragons, and a court for owls. The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet with the wild beasts of the island, and the satyr shall cry to his fellow; the screech owl also shall rest there, and find for herself a place of rest. There shall the great owl make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and gather under her shadow: there shall the vultures also be gathered, every one with her mate" (Isa. 34:10-16; see also Isa. 13:19-22; Jer. 50:35-36, 40; Zeph. 2:13-15).

This symbolic description emphasizes that the mighty Babylon will be brought to the lowest possible point. As it was with the ancient city of Babylon, so shall it be with the spiritual Babylon that spreads itself across the world in our time.

Rev. 18:3 For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication. The expression wine of the wrath of her fornication combines two phrases that are found elsewhere in Revelation: "the wine of the wrath of God" (Rev. 14:10) and "the wine of her fornication" (Rev. 17:2). Fornication here refers to the evil practice of spiritual adultery—leaving the true Bridegroom and going after other gods—as both the world and the Lord's people too often do (Rev. 2:20). Fornication may also refer to sexual immorality, which often accompanies gross wickedness on the earth. The underlying meaning is that Babylon (the wicked element of the world) has enticed the nations to become intoxicated with sin and that both Babylon and the nations of the world will be punished by God in his wrath. In bringing others to this fornication, Babylon is nothing less than a harlot (Rev. 17:1-6).

Drunkenness here is a symbol of apostasy, in which the people lose the power of good judgment because of their unwise choices. "They are drunken, but not with wine," Isaiah prophesied, "they stagger, but not with strong drink" (Isa. 29:9; see Jer. 51:6-9). The wine that makes them drunk is not the fornication of sexuality but that of unfaithfulness to God.

the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies. The world's merchants have partaken of the wealth and luxury of Babylon, and they thereby have become part of her. This verse points out the worldwide power of Babylon (the wicked world, the church of the devil), as well as her involvement and influence in economic affairs.

Rev. 18:4 Come out of her, my people. This is the recurring cry of the prophets: Leave the world and its wickedness, and bind yourself to God (Isa. 52:11; Jer. 51:6; D&C 133:7, 14). This counsel has particular application to the Saints in our day. There is much in our world that partakes of the pride, the lust, the materialism, and the sins of Babylon. There is much that seeks to replace God in our hearts—the endless quest for wealth, the near-worship of sports and entertainment "stars," the deep desire of most people to seek and reach their own goals rather than God's. Babylon is alive and well in our times; nevertheless, as prophesied, Babylon will fall.

that ye be not partakers of her sins. The Saints are called to leave Babylon so that they can be fortified against the temptation to partake of her sins. What are those sins? Certainly the people of Babylon are guilty of all the typical sins of mankind at their worst: murder, adultery, abortion, theft, pornography, lying, and on and on. But in addition, as Revelation records, Babylon is also guilty of persecuting and killing the Saints (Rev. 17:6), leading the nations of the world into idolatry and gross wickedness (Rev. 17:2-4), and fostering all manner of abominations (Rev. 17:5).

that ye receive not of her plagues. By leaving Babylon and refusing to partake of her sins, the righteous are also protected from her plagues, enumerated in Rev. 8, 9, and 16.

Rev. 18:5 For her sins have reached unto heaven/God hath remembered her iniquities. God is fully aware of the grossness and the extent of the sins of Babylon: not one escapes his notice. Even if he does not act immediately to judge and to punish in a given instance, he will remember until the time of retribution.

Rev. 18:6 Reward her even as she rewarded you. Babylon will receive according to the law of the harvest: that which she has sown, so shall she reap. As she has given out, so shall it come back to her in punishment (Job 4:8; D&C 6:33). "Wherefore, fear and tremble, O ye people, for what I the Lord have decreed . . . shall be fulfilled. And verily I say unto you, that they who go forth, bearing these tidings unto the inhabitants of the earth, to them is power given to seal both on earth and in heaven, the unbelieving and rebellious; yea, verily, to seal them up unto the day when the wrath of God shall be poured out upon the wicked without measure—unto the day when the Lord shall come to recompense unto every man according to his work, and measure to every man according to the measure which he has measured to his fellow man" (D&C 1:7-10; see also Jer. 50:15, 29).

double unto her double according to her works. Babylon will receive not only a full portion of punishment for her iniquities but a double portion. Under the law of Moses, a thief was to pay double for that which he had taken (Ex. 22:4, 7). A double punishment is a common consequence in the scriptures (Isa. 40:2; Jer. 16:18).

the cup which she hath filled. Babylon has filled a cup of iniquity and caused the nations of the world to drink of it (Rev. 14:8). That same cup will now be filled with the wrath of God for Babylon to drink in double portions.

Rev. 18:7 How much she hath glorified herself/lived deliciously. Babylon, which is the wicked world, has exalted herself and lived in

great pride and luxury. Deliciously can also be rendered wantonly or riotously. [^18]

so much torment and sorrow give her. The Lord says that as Babylon has exalted herself in pride and given herself to riotous living, to that same degree Babylon will suffer torment and sorrow. This punishment will come immediately before the second coming of Christ.

I sit a queen, and am no widow. Babylon gives herself so thoroughly to pride and sin that she sees herself as invincible. She rules over the people of the world, a great queen over many kings. She fears nothing, not even death. This arrogant claim repeats a prophecy found in Isaiah: "And thou saidst, I shall be a lady for ever: so that thou didst not lay these things to thy heart, neither didst remember the latter end of it. Therefore hear now this, thou that art given to pleasures, that dwellest carelessly, that sayest in thine heart, I am, and none else beside me; I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the loss of children" (Isa. 47:7-8). The prophecy in Isaiah continues, foreseeing that which John also saw next: "But these two things shall come to thee in a moment in one day, the loss of children, and widowhood: they shall come upon thee in their perfection for the multitude of thy sorceries, and for the great abundance of thine enchantments. For thou hast trusted in thy wickedness: thou hast said, None seeth me. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it hath perverted thee; and thou hast said in thine heart, I am, and none else beside me. Therefore . . . desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou shalt not know" (Isa. 47:9-11).

Rev. 18:8 Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine. Some translations replace the word death with disease or pestilence. [^19] In one day indicates that these things will come suddenly on the wicked.

In Deuteronomy Moses prophesied the horror of plagues and calamities to come upon the wicked: "The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke, in all that thou settest thine hand unto for to do, until thou be destroyed, and until thou perish quickly; because of the wickedness of thy doings, whereby thou hast forsaken me. Then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, even great plagues, and of long continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of long continuance. Moreover he will bring upon thee all the diseases of Egypt, which thou wast afraid of; and they shall cleave unto thee. Also every sickness, and every plague, which is not written in the book of this law, them will the Lord bring upon thee, until thou be destroyed" (Deut. 28:20, 59-61; see also 2 Ne. 6:15; 10:6).

she shall be utterly burned with fire: for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her. After the plagues comes the burning. When the Lord returns, the wicked will be destroyed by burning, and the earth itself will be cleansed by fire. "For after today cometh the burning—this is speaking after the manner of the Lord—for verily I say, tomorrow all the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, for I am the Lord of Hosts; and I will not spare any that remain in Babylon" (D&C 64:24; 3 Ne. 26:3). Certainly a God who has power to bring such a judgment is a strong and powerful God.

This scene is also depicted in latter-day scripture: "And another angel shall sound his trump, saying: That great church, the mother of abominations, that made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, that persecuteth the saints of God, that shed their blood—she who sitteth upon many waters, and upon the islands of the sea—behold, she is the tares of the earth; she is bound in bundles; her bands are made strong, no man can loose them; therefore, she is ready to be burned" (D&C 88:94).

Rev. 18:9 the kings of the earth, who have committed fornication and lived deliciously with her. The kings represent the people of the earth, who also have joined in the "fornication." [^20] The kings and the people have joined together in celebrating the idolatry, immorality, and lust of the world. They have "lived deliciously" in luxury, excess, and wantonness, loving the pleasures of the world more than the treasures of God.

bewail her, and lament for her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning. When the kings of the earth see the utter destruction of Babylon, meaning the lifestyle of lust and wealth to which they have given themselves, they will weep and mourn for her loss (Jer. 51:8).

Rev. 18:10 Standing afar off for the fear of her torment. Though they regret her loss, kings try to separate themselves from Babylon for fear that they will share in her fate.

Alas, alas, that great city Babylon, that mighty city! The cry of lament for the destruction of wicked Babylon is repeated three times in this chapter: once by the kings, once by the merchants, and once by the sea traders. "The city is Babylon; she is the similitude. The city is Rome; but she too is only a type and a figure. The city is all the cities of the world—San Francisco, Chicago, and New York City; London, Paris, and Berlin; Moscow, Tokyo, and SÃ£o Paulo—all of which are subject to the rule and dominion of evil and carnality." [^21]

for in one hour is thy judgment come. This expression suggests that the punishments and disasters that will overtake Babylon (symbolizing the wicked world) will come suddenly. Variations of this expression are repeated in Rev. 18:17, 19.

Rev. 18:11-13 And the merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over her. The merchants, symbolizing all those who seek to increase their wealth by association and dealings with a godless culture, will mourn for the loss of that culture, that society, that way of life. Their mourning will be particularly poignant because of their personal loss: they will likely grieve for themselves more than for Babylon.

The long list of items bought and sold in Babylon is impressive, showing the broad variety that is available there. Most of the items listed fall into the category of luxuries. In Babylon, it is not enough to wear simple clothing: one must wear "fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet." It is not enough to eat bread: one must have "wine, and oil, and fine flour."

Ezekiel received a vision similar to that depicted in this chapter: "The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying, Now, thou son of man, . . . say unto Tyrus, . . . [Many merchants] traded in thy fairs . . . with horses and horsemen and mules . . . ivory and ebony . . . emeralds, purple, and broidered work, and fine linen, and coral, and agateÂ½ . . . and honey, and oil, and balm . . . [and] wine . . . and white wool . . . lambs, and rams, and goats . . . [and] all spices, and with all precious stones, and gold . . . [and] blue clothes, and broidered work, and in chests of rich apparel. . . . [T]hy merchandise, thy mariners, . . . and all thy men of war, that are in thee . . . shall fall into the midst of the seas in the day of thy ruin. . . . [They] shall come down from their ships, they shall stand upon the land; and shall cause their voice to be heard against thee, and shall cry bitterly, and shall cast up dust upon their heads, they shall wallow themselves in the ashes. . . . And in their wailing they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and lament over thee, saying, What city is like Tyrus, like the destroyed in the midst of the sea? . . . The merchants among the people shall hiss at thee; thou shalt be a terror, and never shalt be any more" (Ezek. 27:1-3, 12-24, 27, 29-32, 36).

Rev. 18:13 slaves, and souls of men. This passage represents the worst of the merchandising that takes place in Babylon: the merchants are trading in the souls and bodies of human beings. Throughout history, millions upon millions of men, women, and children have been kidnapped from their homes, during war or otherwise, and taken to distant places where they have been forced to labor for another. [^22] In return for their labors, which were often excessive and accompanied by force and violence, the slave received, at best, only food, some clothing, shelter, and the opportunity to continue to live. Certainly such traffic in human beings is reprehensible to God.

Another form of trading and merchandising that occurs in Babylon is in what John calls the "souls of men." This expression may refer to false religions that buy and sell men's souls, as Moroni recorded: "There shall be churches built up that shall say: Come unto me, and for your money you shall be forgiven of your sins" (Morm. 8:32). Or John's vision may refer to what Hugh Nibley called the "Mahan Principle." Here is Nibley's description of how Babylon trades in the souls of men: "The story begins . . . with Satan seeking to promote himself even in the premortal existence, and being cast out of heaven in his pride, and dedicating himself upon his fall to the destruction of this earth, 'for he knew not the mind of God' (Moses 4:6). [On earth] he . . . will control the world economy by claiming possession of the earth's resources; and by manipulation of its currency—gold and silver—he will buy up the political, military, and ecclesiastical complex and run everything his way. . . . He not only offers employment but a course of instruction in how the whole thing works, teaching the ultimate secret: 'That great secret' (Moses 5:49-50) of converting life into property. Cain got the degree of Master Mahan, tried the system out on his brother, and gloried in its brilliant success, declaring that at last he could be free, as only property makes free, and that Abel had been a loser in a free competition.

"The discipline was handed down through Lamech and finally became the pattern of the world's economy (Moses 5:55-56). . . . One may see Mahan at work all around, from the Mafia, whose adherence to the principle needs no argument, down to the drug pusher, the arms dealer, the manufacturer and seller of defective products, or those who poison the air and water as a shortcut to gain and thus shorten and sicken the lives of all their fellow creatures." [^23]

Rev. 18:14 the fruits that thy soul lusted after/all things . . . dainty and goodly . . . thou shalt find them no more at all. The sweet and exotic foods that the world has enjoyed will be destroyed with Babylon itself. These foods may symbolize the excesses and extravagances of the world.

Rev. 18:15 The merchants of these things . . . stand afar off . . . weeping and wailing. Greed and luxury are powerful motivators. Those who have become rich by trafficking in the things of the world feel great grief at the loss of their source of wealth, but even in their mourning they remove themselves from Babylon at the end, standing "afar off" for fear of partaking of her torment.

Rev. 18:16 Alas, alas, that great city. The cry of the merchants, the sea traders, and the kings in mourning the loss of Babylon is one of self-interest: they feel deeply the loss of her wealth, symbolized by the linen, the royal clothing made of purple and scarlet, and the precious metals and gems.

Rev. 18:17 For in one hour so great riches is come to nought/as many as trade by sea, stood afar off. See the commentary on Rev. 18:10, page 313.

Rev. 18:18 What city is like unto this great city! When the sea traders see the destruction of Babylon, they are amazed. Babylon was so powerful and so rich—how could it be destroyed? In the same way, those who embrace the philosophies and lifestyle of a world without the true God, which world seems uniquely powerful and important, will be amazed at its destruction.

Rev. 18:19 And they cast dust on their heads. In Middle Eastern culture, this gesture is traditionally a sign of humiliation and deep mourning (Ezek. 27:30).

Rev. 18:20 Rejoice over her, thou heaven/holy apostles and prophets. While the wicked kings, merchants, and sea traders mourn the loss of Babylon, heaven and the righteous have cause to rejoice. Their great nemesis, the unholy antagonist of all that is good and right, has been destroyed.

God hath avenged you on her. Babylon orchestrated war against the righteous and has become "drunken with the blood of the saints" (Rev. 17:6). But God will come down in vengeance and bring judgments upon her according to all her wickedness. This vengeance fulfills a promise made in Rev. 6:9-11.

Rev. 18:21 a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea. Of those who abuse or offend the Lord's "little ones," the Lord said, "It were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea" (Matt. 18:6). This is the very fate destined for Babylon, the wicked culture, philosophy, governments, religion, and lifestyle of the world. As an object lesson, "a mighty angel" will lift up a huge stone and throw it into the sea, illustrating how "with violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all." This passage may also depict some otherwise undefined natural disaster.

The destruction of Babylon was foreseen by Jeremiah (Jer. 51:37), Nephi (1 1 Ne. 14:15-16; 22:14), and Joseph Smith (D&C 1:16), among others. We read in Jeremiah of this impressive prophecy: "So Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil that should come upon Babylon. . . . And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, When . . . thou hast made an end of reading this book, . . . thou shalt bind a stone to it, and cast it into the midst of Euphrates: And thou shalt say, Thus shall Babylon sink, and shall not rise from the evil that I will bring upon her" (Jer. 51:60-64). Just as a weighty stone has no power to rise again from the depths of the sea, in the same way Babylon will have no power to rise again from the destruction a just God brings upon her.

Rev. 18:22 harpers/musicians/pipers/trumpeters . . . heard no more at all in thee. The sounds of people seeking worldly pleasure and entertainment will be lost when Babylon is destroyed (Isa. 24:8; Ezek. 26:13). Contrast that with the promise in Rev. 15:2, which says that those who resist the beast, gaining a personal victory over him, will have "the harps of God," making music of true joy and praise.

no craftsman . . . shall be found any more in thee. Daily labor for pay in the city will cease. The economy of Babylon will be destroyed along with the city.

the sound of a millstone shall be heard no more at all in thee. The grinding of wheat and other such daily tasks will no longer be heard in Babylon, because Babylon will be no more. This prophecy has an ominous undertone: when the millstone ceases to grind, food soon ceases to be available.

Rev. 18:23 And the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee. The city will be plunged into darkness. It will no longer have any light at all.

the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more at all in thee. Of an earlier and parallel event the Lord said, "Then will I cause to cease from the cities of Judah, and from the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride: for the land shall be desolate" (Jer. 7:34). The loss of such sounds indicates that normal life has stopped, or that all life in that place has ceased to be.

This verse (Rev. 18:23) is also reminiscent of Jer. 25:9-12, a description of the long exile of Israel. In that passage, the Lord says he will allow Babylon to conquer his people, but Babylon will be destroyed in the end. During the exile, the Lord says, "I will take from them the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the sound of the millstones, and the light of the candle" (Jer. 25:10).

thy merchants were the great men of the earth. Those who traded in and with Babylon were great, rich, and powerful, but they do not have power to save her.

by thy sorceries were all nations deceived. The Lord abhors sorcery, the use of witchcraft and evil powers to deceive others. We read in Rev. 13 of the miracles of the beast, which deceived the people of the earth and caused them to worship the beast rather than God (Rev. 13:12-15). Though the sorceries of Babylon enabled her to deceive the nations and thus to rule the world, those dark, satanic powers are unable to save her in the end: "Stand now with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of thy sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth; if so be thou shalt be able to profit, if so be thou mayest prevail. . . . Let now the astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee. Behold, they shall be as stubble; the fire shall burn them; they shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame: there shall not be a coal to warm at, nor fire to sit before it" (Isa. 47:12-14).

Rev. 18:24 in her was found the blood of prophets/saints/all that were slain upon the earth. Ultimately, Babylon, or the wicked world, is responsible for the martyrdom of all the prophets and Saints who have ever been killed for their faith, as well as all who have been killed by murder and war. This persecution of the righteous is probably Babylon's greatest sin. That these things were "found" in Babylon at the end suggests that all her wickedness will be uncovered.

---
Notas:
[^1] Babylon, the mother of harlots, or the wicked world, gains great power on earth. 2. The Saints must flee Babylon and go to Zion. 3. Babylon falls by the power of God; the wicked world is destroyed. The fall of Babylon comes as God stretches out his arm in wrath and judgment against Babylon's wickedness: For further commentary on the great and abominable church of the devil, see Robinson, "Early Christianity and 1 Ne. 13-14," 177-90; and Parsons, "Great and Abominable Church," 44- 59.
[^2] Those in Babylon will experience intense fear and mourning as they see God's judgments coming forth: Millennial Messiah, 54-55.
[^3] Babylon will fall amidst much slaughter and bloodshed: For a discussion of the beasts in Revelation, see Parry and Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation, 162-77.
[^4] Babylon's destruction will be total, resulting in complete desolation: Edersheim, Temple, 312.
[^5] Babylon will remain desolate throughout all generations: See, for example, Mounce, Book of Revelation, 311.
[^6] McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:558.
[^7] See note c to Rev. 17:6 in the LDS edition of the KJV.
[^8] See the commentary on Rev. 17:1, page 288.
[^9] See the commentary on Armageddon, page 264.
[^10] Parts of this passage are also discussed in relation to fleeing Babylon as part of the gathering of Israel, page 93.
[^11] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 42.
[^12] See the commentary on the gathering of Israel, page 48.
[^13] Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:559.
[^14] A paradox in this account is that the kings, merchants, and shippers lament the destruction of Babylon; but in reality, when Babylon is destroyed, all those who aligned themselves with her will also be destroyed: none of her adherents will remain to lament her loss.
[^15] Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon, no. 6, 84-85.
[^16] Chaldea was a district, or province, in Babylon.
[^17] On the fall of Babylon, see Isa. 13; 14; 34; 47; Rev. 14:15-20; see also the commentary on Armageddon, page 264.
[^18] See note a to Rev. 18:7 in the LDS edition of the KJV.
[^19] See RSV, GNB, JB, and NEB.
[^20] See the commentary on spiritual fornication, page 308.
[^21] McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 445.
[^22] "It is estimated that there were as many as 60,000,000 slaves in the Roman Empire [alone]" (Mounce, Book of Revelation, 334).
[^23] Nibley, Approaching Zion, 165-67.
