Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Signs of the Times ( 1999)

The Lord Sends Signs and Judgments

Chapter 8

God's Judgments upon Satan's Followers on Earth

Signs of the Times

Our God is a God of righteous judgment. He generously grants gifts and blessings to all who will seek them, obeying his laws. In fact, as King Benjamin explained, "If ye should serve him with all your whole souls yet ye would be unprofitable servants" (Mosiah 2:21), because he has given us so much to start with, and if we seek to repay him through praise and service and obedience, he gives us much, much more (Mosiah 2:20-24). On the other hand, those who turn from him, disobeying his word and his will, receive only what they truly deserve in punishment. No one can ever be correct in accusing God of being unfair.

Yet even God's punishments are designed to bless, as they help turn some of the wicked from their sins and as they cleanse the unrepentant from the earth for the sake of the righteous who remain. Elder John Taylor said of God's works in the last days, "Concerning events yet to transpire, we must trust them in the hands of God, and feel that 'whatever is is right,' and that God will control all things for our best good and the interest of his Church and kingdom on the earth. . . . By- and-by, when we come to gaze on the fitness of things that are now obscure to us, we shall find that . . . , although he has moved in a mysterious way to accomplish his purposes on the earth . . . , all things are governed by that wisdom which flows from God, and all things are right and calculated to promote every person's eternal welfare before God." [^1] In the last days the Lord's judgments will be plainly manifest to all who have eyes to see. The righteous will receive a rich outpouring of blessings, and the wicked will receive a full portion of punishment according to that which they have earned through their evil deeds.

On 21 September 1823, the angel Moroni revealed himself to Joseph Smith and "informed [him] of great judgments which were coming upon the earth, with great desolations by famine, sword, and pestilence; and that these grievous judgments would come on the earth in this generation" (JS-H 1:45; see also D&C 1:36). Later, Joseph Smith declared that "the scripture is ready to be fulfilled when great wars, famines, pestilence, great distress, judgments, &c., are ready to be poured out on the inhabitants of the earth." [^2] On yet another occasion, the Prophet taught that "the coming of the Son of Man never will be—never can be till the judgments spoken of for this hour are poured out: which judgments are commenced." [^3]

These judgments will be of many forms, as the prophets have clearly and abundantly testified, and they will include earthquakes, famine, and pestilences (D&C 5:19-20; 29:16; 45:26). Significantly, Elder M. Russell Ballard spoke of the "ever-increasing regularity" and the "accelerating pattern" of many judgments upon the earth. After citing Matt. 24:5-7, which speaks of "wars and rumours of wars," nations rising against nations, famines, pestilences, and earthquakes, Elder Ballard observed: "Some of these things seem to be occurring with ever-increasing regularity. If you measured the natural disasters that have occurred in the world during the last ten years and plotted that year by year, you would see an acceleration." [^4]

There is a pattern set forth in the scriptures that pertains to God's sending judgments upon the ungodly, which pattern is summarized in Ether 11:20: "And in the days of Coriantor there also came many prophets, and prophesied of great and marvelous things, and cried repentance unto the people, and except they should repent the Lord God would execute judgment against them to their utter destruction." This pattern of warning and judgment consists of the following:

prophets come among the people; [^5]

the prophets prophesy great things;

they cry repentance;

they warn the wicked that if they do not repent God will send his judgments (such as earthquakes, sword, famine);

many of the unrepentant are destroyed by God's judgments. [^6]

This pattern is repeated scores of times in the scriptures. A celebrated example is recorded in Gen. 6-7, in which Noah is sent to declare repentance and prophesy many great things to his contemporaries. He warns them of a great flood that will destroy the iniquitous. Much of Gen. 6 describes the destruction caused by the Flood, showing that God fulfilled his promise to destroy the unrepentant.

First 1 Ne. 1 provides another example of the pattern of warning and judgment. Nephi recorded that during the first year of King Zedekiah's reign, many prophets came among the people and prophesied, declared repentance, and warned the people that Jerusalem would be destroyed unless its inhabitants repented (1 Ne. 1:4, 13, 18). These prophets included Lehi, Micah, Urijah, and Jeremiah (Jer. 26:18-24; 1 Ne. 1:18). Later, Nephi testified to his family that he had seen in vision the destruction of Jerusalem and comforted them by saying, "Had we remained in Jerusalem we should also have perished" (2 Ne. 1:4).

Moses, Isaiah, Ezekiel, Joel, Amos, Nephi, Alma, Moroni, Joseph Smith, and perhaps all of God's prophets have followed this pattern by prophesying, crying repentance, and warning of great judgments that would afflict and destroy the ungodly. Recipients of God's judgments in history have included Sodom and Gomorrah, Nineveh, Moab, Edom, Egypt, Philistia, Assyria, Babylon, the Jaredite and Nephite nations, and the kingdoms of Israel and Judah. Each of these cities, kingdoms, and nations are types of the great judgments that will come upon the world, or modern-day Edom or Babylon (D&C 1:16, 36), in the last days.

God's judgments cleanse the earth of wickedness and corruptible things and render justice to Satan's followers on earth. God is called Righteous because of his judgments. After three of seven angels pour their bowls of God's wrath (representing God's judgments) upon the earth, an angel exclaims, "Thou art righteous, O Lord . . . because thou hast judged thus"; another angel declares, "Even so, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments" (Rev. 16:1-7).

God, because of his great mercy, will uphold his Saints of the last days during the judgments (D&C 109:38). In the past he offered a way for the obedient to escape. Noah and his family survived the Flood by finding refuge in an ark. Lot and his two daughters escaped from Sodom by following God's specific instructions: "Escape for thy life; look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed" (Gen. 19:17). Lehi and his family fled Jerusalem to safety, according to the Lord's word. And Jesus instructed the Saints of his generation to "flee into the mountains" (Matt. 24:16) to escape the abomination of desolation.

In our day, God will likewise protect us according to his will, although "it is a false idea that the Saints will escape all the judgments," taught Joseph Smith. [^7] We may not be required to flee from our homes or cities, as some were in the past. Perhaps instead we may be required to shut ourselves in our homes, as did the Israelites the night of Passover, when the destroying angel moved through the community and smote the firstborn within those households that did not have the blood of the lamb marked on their doorposts. Or perhaps the Lord will provide a way of deliverance that has no precedent in scripture.

Whatever the case may be with regard to God's judgments, we should always remember, as Elder James E. Faust testified, that "our spirits are special spirits and were reserved until this generation to stand strong against the evil winds that blow, and to stand straight and upright with the heavy burdens that will be placed on us." [^8]

A Catalog of Judgments

D&C 88:87-92

87 For not many days hence and the earth shall tremble and reel to and fro as a drunken man; and the sun shall hide his face, and shall refuse to give light; and the moon shall be bathed in blood; and the stars shall become exceedingly angry, and shall cast themselves down as a fig that falleth from off a fig-tree.

88 And after your testimony cometh wrath and indignation upon the people.

89 For after your testimony cometh the testimony of earthquakes, that shall cause groanings in the midst of her, and men shall fall upon the ground and shall not be able to stand.

90 And also cometh the testimony of the voice of thunderings, and the voice of lightnings, and the voice of tempests, and the voice of the waves of the sea heaving themselves beyond their bounds.

91 And all things shall be in commotion; and surely, men's hearts shall fail them; for fear shall come upon all people.

92 And angels shall fly through the midst of heaven, crying with a loud voice, sounding the trump of God, saying: Prepare ye, prepare ye, O inhabitants of the earth; for the judgment of our God is come. Behold, and lo, the Bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him.

Four things—God's own voice, God's servants, God's angels, and earth's elements—work together to warn earth's inhabitants to repent and prepare for the coming of the Lord (D&C 43:25; 88:87). God's servants, or the elders of the Church (D&C 88:72, 85), are sent "to testify and warn the people" because "it becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor" (D&C 88:81). At present a great number of Church authorities, full-time missionaries, and other Church members are bearing testimony to the world, inviting individuals and families to come unto Christ. In a real sense, all of these servants of God are preparing the earth's inhabitants for the coming judgments and ultimately for Christ's coming.

But after their testimony, God explains (D&C 88:88-89), will come the testimony from the natural world in the form of earthquakes, thunderings, tempests, and others. God will send multiple judgments to prepare the world for his coming. D&C 88 catalogs at least eight separate judgments: signs in the heavens, earthquakes, thunderings, lightnings, tempests, ocean waves moving beyond their normal bounds, commotions, and the failure of human hearts. D&C 43:25 adds great hailstones, famines, and pestilences.

Perhaps concurrently with the testimony of God's servants and the natural world, heavenly messengers warn earth's inhabitants to prepare for God's judgments and the Bridegroom's coming. They proclaim: "Prepare ye, prepare ye, O inhabitants of the earth; for the judgment of our God is come. Behold, and lo, the Bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him" (D&C 88:92). Rev. 8 and 9 describes more fully the role of angels in the preparation of the world for the Second Coming. [^9]

The Saints should find comfort in knowing that while God is sending judgments upon the earth, they can "look calmly" on them while waiting for Christ's coming. Brigham Young and his counselors in the First Presidency, Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards, comforted us with these words: "While the wicked fear and tremble at surrounding judgments, the Saints will watch and pray; and waiting the final event in patience, will look calmly on the passing scenery of a corrupted world, and view transpiring events as confirmation of their faith in the holy gospel which they profess and rejoice more and more, as multiplied signs shall confirm the approach of the millennial day." [^10]

In 1979, Elder Gordon B. Hinckley compared the reactions of the wicked and the righteous to God's judgments in the last days. He said that this period "will be a time of great and terrible fears, of cataclysmic upheavals of nature, of weeping and wailing, of repentance too late, and of crying out unto the Lord for mercy" to the wicked, but to the righteous this will "be a day for thanksgiving." [^11]

Notes and Commentary

D&C 88:87 the earth shall tremble and reel to and fro as a drunken man. This poetic expression seems to describe an earthquake or earthquakes (D&C 45:33). In an earlier revelation, the Lord associated this expression with the valleys being exalted, the mountains being made low, and the rough places becoming smooth, all of which also suggests one or more great earthquakes (D&C 49:23).

the sun shall hide his face, and shall refuse to give light; and the moon shall be bathed in blood. See the commentary on Rev. 6:12, page 370.

D&C 88:88 after your testimony. After the testimony of the elders of the Church.

cometh wrath and indignation upon the people. The wrath and indignation of God will come upon those who do not hearken to the testimony of the elders. Isaiah prophesied of the last days, using the terms wrath and fierce anger: "Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate; and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it" (Isa. 13:9; see also v. 13). Similarly, because of the Lord's indignation and anger Noah's wicked contemporaries were destroyed by the Flood: "And the fire of mine indignation is kindled against them; . . . for my fierce anger is kindled against them" (Moses 7:34). The judgments listed in verses 89 through 91 are the result of God's wrath.

cometh the testimony of earthquakes. Although earthquakes have existed upon the earth for millennia, those of the latter days serve as one of the signs of the times. "There shall be earthquakes also in divers places" (D&C 45:33), the Lord promised his disciples during his mortality (D&C 45:16). Note especially the "great earthquake" associated with the opening of the sixth seal (Rev. 6:12) and the "great earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so great," associated with the seventh seal (Rev. 16:18).

D&C 88:90 also cometh the testimony. Earthquakes, thunderings, lightnings, tempests, tidal waves, and other natural phenomena which cause anxiety and even hysteria in many are voices that warn the wicked to repent. These, along with the testimony of the Lord's servants, serve as a second witness for the ungodly to prepare for God's judgments. The Lord asks the wicked: "What will ye say when the day cometh when the thunders shall utter their voices from the ends of the earth, speaking to the ears of all that live, saying—Repent, and prepare for the great day of the Lord? Yea, and again, when the lightnings shall streak forth from the east unto the west, and shall utter forth their voices unto all that live, and make the ears of all tingle that hear, saying these words—Repent ye, for the great day of the Lord is come?" (D&C 43:21-22).

In the same context Jesus explains that he has called upon the nations to repent with four voices: the voice of his servants, the voice of the ministering of angels, his own voice, and the voice of nature— "by the voice of thunderings, and by the voice of lightnings, and by the voice of tempests, and by the voice of earthquakes, and great hailstorms, and by the voice of famines and pestilences of every kind" (D&C 43:25).

D&C 88:91 all things shall be in commotion. An earlier revelation also promises, "The whole earth shall be in commotion" (D&C 45:26). That commotion seems to refer to things mentioned in verses 87 through 90: signs in the heavens, earthquakes, tempests, lightnings, tidal waves, and so on. In a parallel passage, Luke summarized the commotion that would exist in the last days: "And there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars; and upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity; the sea and the waves roaring; men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth" (Luke 21:25-26).

Elder Marion G. Romney may have had the phrase all things shall be in commotion in mind when he said: "Our whole world is in confusion. The wisdom of our wise men has proved inadequate to stay the rising crisis. With the means to unleash universal destruction in the hands of evil men, fear and apprehension ride with every breeze. In the past, situations similar to ours have generally terminated in destruction. It would seem that the judgments of God are about to be once more poured out upon the nations." [^12]

D&C 88:92 angels shall fly through the midst of heaven. Ministering angels serve God in preparing people for his coming (compare D&C 7:6).

sounding the trump of God. The angels of this verse who blow their trumpets are probably the seven angels who are identified in Rev. 8 and 9, of whom it is written that "the sounding of the trumpets of the seven angels are the preparing and finishing of his work, in the beginning of the seventh thousand years—the preparing of the way before the time of his coming" (D&C 77:12). In Rev. 8:1-5 the angels prepare to blow their trumps; then the angels blow their trumps, one after another (Rev. 8:6-9:21 The blast of the trumpets serves a twofold purpose: to herald the calamities identified in D&C 88:89-90 and elsewhere, and to encourage earth's sinners to repent (Rev. 9:20-21; 16:9, 11). Both of these purposes serve to prepare the earth for Christ's coming.

Prepare ye, prepare ye. The phrase is repeated for emphasis. A parallel passage reads, "For behold, the Lord God hath sent forth the angel crying through the midst of heaven, saying: Prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight, for the hour of his coming is nigh" (D&C 133:17).

O inhabitants of the earth. The angels' message is for all, not just select individuals or particular groups.

for the judgment of our God is come. The angels warn all to prepare because God's judgments are coming, including his great, last judgment.

the Bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him. In the parable of the ten virgins, the cry of these words is made at midnight (Matt. 25:6) correspondingly a latter-day revelation adds the words "awake and arise," suggesting that the people are asleep when the cry goes out. "Yea, let the cry go forth among all people: Awake and arise and go forth to meet the Bridegroom; behold and lo, the Bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him. Prepare yourselves for the great day of the Lord" (D&C 133:10).

Go ye is a command, not a suggestion or exhortation. D&C 133:19 includes the same command, repeated twice: "Wherefore, prepare ye for the coming of the Bridegroom; go ye, go ye out to meet him."

Seven Angels with the Seven Last Plagues

Rev. 15:1-8

1 And I saw another sign in heaven, great and marvellous, seven angels having the seven last plagues; for in them is filled up the wrath of God.

2 And I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire: and them that had gotten the victory over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and over the number of his name, stand on the sea of glass, having the harps of God.

3 And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints.

4 Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy; for all nations shall come and worship before thee; for thy judgments are made manifest.

5 And after that I looked, and, behold, the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened:

6 And the seven angels came out of the temple, having the seven plagues, clothed in pure and white linen, and having their breasts girded with golden girdles.

7 And one of the four beasts gave unto the seven angels seven golden [bowls] [^13] full of the wrath of God, who liveth for ever and ever.

8 And the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God, and from his power; and no man was able to enter into the temple, till the seven plagues of the seven angels were fulfilled.

In this scene, John sees a vision of celestial glory. He sees those who have "gotten the victory over the beast" singing a song of praise to God. Paradoxically, many who gain victory over the beast were first slain by that beast (Rev. 13:7, 15) by standing firm in their testimonies, even unto death, they eventually emerge victorious. John also sees seven angels being prepared to pour out seven final judgments on the earth (Rev. 15:1, 7). We do not yet see what those judgments are (that is reserved for the next chapter in Revelation), but they appear to be terrible: "In them is filled up the wrath of God" (Rev. 15:1).

Notes and Commentary

Rev. 15:1 I saw another sign in heaven, great and marvellous. The words another sign give us to understand that the scene in the vision has shifted. As with the other signs in John's vision, what he sees as a sign symbolizes a great truth. In this case, the truth is that God will indeed exact judgment against the wicked, a judgment that will be complete and terrible. The words great and marvellous suggest a sign that is truly impressive.

seven angels having the seven last plagues. These seven last plagues are the Lord's final attempt to cause the hearts of the wicked to be softened and to turn to him. After these plagues will come the actual fall of Babylon and the second coming of Christ. Because seven is a number signifying perfection, seven angels with seven plagues indicates perfect and complete judgment against the wicked of the earth. This prophecy is reminiscent of the curse the Lord gave against the wicked in Lev. 26:21: "If ye walk contrary unto me, and will not hearken unto me; I will bring seven times more plagues upon you according to your sins." These plagues are poured out in Rev. 16.

in them is filled up the wrath of God. The plagues bring a full measure of God's wrath to the world but not the final consummation. That consummation comes in the chapters that follow.

Rev. 15:2 a sea of glass mingled with fire. The sea of glass indicates a celestial sphere (D&C 130:6-7), and the presence of fire indicates the presence of God, who dwells amid everlasting burnings (Isa. 33:14-16).

them that had gotten the victory over the beast . . . stand on the sea of glass. Those who have refused to bow to the beast, either physically or spiritually, inherit a celestial glory. These may be the same Saints who were sealed in Rev. 7:1-8 and were named among the 144,000 in Rev. 14:1-5.

harps of God. The harps symbolize an attitude of worship and giving glory to God (2 Sam. 6:5; Neh. 12:27; Ps. 92:1-3; Rev. 14:2).

Rev. 15:3 And they sing the song of Moses . . . and the song of the Lamb. The song of Moses was sung by that great prophet and his followers after they were delivered from the great "beast" of ancient Egypt (Ex. 15:1-19). The lyrics to the song spoken of in this verse include the words, "Great and marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints." [^14] These words are not found in the song of Moses in Ex. 15, but the common element is that the Lord's people were in bondage and the Lord delivered them from their enemy.

This song is also the song of the Lamb, because he is the great Deliverer. The song of the Lamb will ultimately be sung by all true Saints. On the day of resurrection, the scripture says, "The graves of the saints shall be opened; and they shall come forth and stand on the right hand of the Lamb, when he shall stand upon Mount Zion, and upon the holy city, the New Jerusalem; and they shall sing the song of the Lamb, day and night forever and ever" (D&C 133:56).

Rev. 15:4 Who shall not fear thee/all nations shall come and worship before thee. The Saints cry out their praise and admiration to the Lord. All nations will fear and honor him, for the time will come when "every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess" that the Lord is God (Mosiah 27:31; see also Rom. 14:11; D&C 88:104).

The Saints in our day sing a song that echoes these words:

How wondrous and great Thy works, God of praise! How just, King of Saints, And true are thy ways! Oh, who shall not fear thee And honor thy name? Thou only art holy, Thou only supreme. [^15]

thy judgments are made manifest. The nations will acknowledge the power and supremacy of God as they see them manifest through the judgments he brings on the wicked of the earth.

Rev. 15:5 I looked. Again the vision shifts to a new scene.

the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened. The ancient tabernacle in the days of Moses was called the tabernacle of the testimony, or tabernacle of witness (Num. 17:7) because it contained the two stone "tables of the testimony" on which God had written (Deut. 10:5). The New International Version renders this idea as follows: "I looked and in heaven the temple, that is, the tabernacle of testimony, was opened." The tabernacle of Moses served as a temple until Solomon's day, when a more permanent structure was built (1 Kgs. 8:18-20). When John looked into the heavens again, he saw the temple in heaven open and seven angels came out.

Rev. 15:6 the seven angels came out of the temple, having the seven plagues. Apparently the seven angels received their charge in heaven's temple and then emerged with the seven plagues. The number seven indicates that the judgments are perfect and complete. That the judgments come from the temple is a mark of their godly origin.

clothed in pure and white linen/their breasts girded with golden girdles. The linen dress of the angels, pure and white, indicates that they hold a sacred and holy office (Ezek. 9:2; Dan. 10:5). Linen also suggests the bride of Christ (Rev. 19:7-8) and the armies of heaven (Rev. 19:14). The high rank of the angels is deduced from the golden girdles (or sashes) they wear, which are like that worn by Christ himself (Rev. 1:13).

Rev. 15:7 one of the four beasts. In Rev. 4:6-9 John saw four beasts at the throne of God. In Rev. 5:8 the beasts worship the Lamb. In Rev. 6:1, 3, 5, and 7 the beasts invite John to see the events that occur when the seals on the book are opened. Now one of these same beasts, which are intelligent creatures, gives the angels the bowls that contain the judgments that are to be poured out on the earth.

seven golden [bowls] full of the wrath of God. The seven bowls contain the judgments that represent God's wrath (Rom. 1:18; Heb. 10:30-31) and will soon be poured out on mankind. Golden bowls, or vials, mentioned in Rev. 5:8, symbolize the prayers of the Saints. Perhaps the Saints' pleading for justice and deliverance is answered in the judgments in the seven golden bowls here.

who liveth for ever and ever. This interjection reaffirms the power and dominion of God (Rev. 4:9; 10:6). As one who lives forever, unlike the mortals on the earth, God has full power to accomplish all his will against the wicked of the world.

Rev. 15:8 the temple was filled with smoke. The source of the smoke is "the glory of God, and . . . his power." Smoke or a cloud is a typical sign of the presence of God. When the Lord descended on Mount Sinai "in fire," the mount "was altogether on a smoke, . . . and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly" (Ex. 19:18; see also Isa. 6:4; Ezek. 10:4).

no man was able to enter into the temple. Because God is present in the heavenly temple, filling it with his glory, no one is able to go into it until the seven plagues are completed. This expression evidently indicates that God continues to actively exercise his power in judgment until the wicked are destroyed. No one can approach him, pleading mercy.

We read in the Old Testament of another circumstance in which God's power prevented man from entering his temple: "Then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle. And Moses was not able to enter into the tent of the congregation, because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle" (Ex. 40:34-35; see also 1 Kgs. 8:10-11).

Seven Angels with the Bowls of God's Wrath

Rev. 16:1-21

1 And I heard a great voice out of the temple saying to the seven angels, Go your ways, and pour out the [bowls] of the wrath of God upon the earth.

2 And the first went, and poured out his [bowl] upon the earth; and there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the mark of the beast, and upon them which worshipped his image.

3 And the second angel poured out his [bowl] upon the sea; and it became as the blood of a dead man: and every living soul died in the sea.

4 And the third angel poured out his [bowl] upon the rivers and fountains of waters; and they became blood.

5 And I heard the angel of the waters say, Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shalt be, because thou hast judged thus.

6 For they have shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou hast given them blood to drink; for they are [deserving]. [^16]

7 And I heard another [angel who came out from the altar saying], [^17] Even so, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments.

8 And the fourth angel poured out his [bowl] upon the sun; and power was given unto him to scorch men with fire.

9 And men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the name of God, which hath power over these plagues: and they repented not to give him glory.

10 And the fifth angel poured out his [bowl] upon the seat of the beast; and his kingdom was full of darkness; and they gnawed their tongues for pain,

11 And blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and their sores, and repented not of their deeds.

12 And the sixth angel poured out his [bowl] upon the great river Euphrates; and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the kings of the east might be prepared.

13 And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet.

14 For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty.

15 Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked and they see his shame.

16 And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon.

17 And the seventh angel poured out his [bowl] into the air; and there came a great voice out of the temple of heaven, from the throne, saying, It is done.

18 And there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings; and there was a great earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so great.

19 And the great city was divided into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell: and great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath.

20 And every island fled away, and the mountains were not found.

21 And there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, every stone about the weight of a talent: and men blasphemed God because of the plague of the hail; for the plague thereof was exceeding great.

The day of God's judgment is a day of God's wrath, and that day is fast approaching. "Vengeance cometh speedily," the Lord says, "as a whirlwind it shall come upon all the face of the earth" (D&C 112:24).

The righteous will be blessed with a degree of protection: "Zion shall escape if she observe to do all things whatsoever I have commanded her" (D&C 97:25). But those among the Saints who are hypocrites have no such promise; indeed, they will be the first to be judged: "Upon my house shall it [the day of vengeance] begin, and from my house shall it go forth, saith the Lord; first among those among you, saith the Lord, who have professed to know my name and have not known me, and have blasphemed against me in the midst of my house, saith the Lord" (D&C 112:25-26).

Rev. 16 details the scourges and plagues that will afflict mankind in the day of the final judgments, plagues that will smite the land, the sea, the rivers, the sun, and the kingdoms of spiritual darkness. Through the power of God, the very foundations of the earth are shaken, and Babylon is totally destroyed. These plagues may well fit the description the Lord gave us in modern revelation: "For behold, and lo, vengeance cometh speedily upon the ungodly as the whirlwind; and who shall escape it? The Lord's scourge shall pass over by night and by day, and the report thereof shall vex all people; yea, it shall not be stayed until the Lord come; for the indignation of the Lord is kindled against their abominations and all their wicked works" (D&C 97:22-24). And again: "Their testimony [the elders] shall also go forth unto the condemnation of this generation if they harden their hearts against them; for a desolating scourge shall go forth among the inhabitants of the earth, and shall continue to be poured out from time to time, if they repent not, until the earth is empty, and the inhabitants thereof are consumed away and utterly destroyed by the brightness of my coming" (D&C 5:18-19).

Some commentators believe that the judgments in Rev. 16 are a repetition of the plagues seen in Rev. 8, 9, and 11. [^18] That is one possible reading, and there are remarkable parallels between the two sections. But it seems more likely that Rev. 16 represents a later and more severe occurrence of plagues. In Rev. 8, for instance, a third of the sea becomes blood and a third of the creatures in the sea die (Rev. 8:8-9). But in Rev. 16, all of the sea becomes blood and all creatures therein die (Rev. 16:3). A comparison of the plagues in both sections shows a similar progression: as God continues to plead with and to punish the earth through his judgments, those judgments become more severe.

Notes and Commentary

Rev. 16:1 I heard a great voice out of the temple. In Rev. 15:8 we read that no one could enter the temple until the next seven plagues were completed. This voice might, then, be the voice of God himself, commanding the seven angels to act.

Go your ways. The voice tells the angels to move ahead with their commission to administer plagues to the earth.

pour out the [bowls] of the wrath of God. Under the law of Moses, the priests used a sacred bowl to capture the blood of the sacrifice. As part of the ritual, the priest then sprinkled the blood around the altar (Lev. 1:5; 3:8). Perhaps in this part of the vision John is seeing a reversal of this ritual: rather than blood coming from the bowls to save the people, John sees something come from the bowls that sheds blood and punishes the people. That which is poured from the bowls represents different manifestations of God's wrath.

Rev. 16:2 the first . . . poured out his [bowl] upon the earth; and there fell a noisome and grievous sore. The first plague, which is directed at the wicked, is of "disgusting and virulent sores," according to the Jerusalem Bible. This plague parallels the sixth plague that fell on the Egyptians in the time of Moses (Ex. 9:8-12). The contents of this bowl are poured out on the earth itself, and the affliction falls on those who dwell on the earth. The wicked have earlier worn the mark of the beast; now they will wear the mark of the wrath of God. [^19]

Zechariah prophesies a plague that may be similar: "This shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will smite all the people that have fought against Jerusalem; their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their tongue shall consume away in their mouth" (Zech. 14:12). And we read in latter-day revelation: "Their tongues shall be stayed that they shall not utter against me; and their flesh shall fall from off their bones, and their eyes from their sockets" (D&C 29:19). These descriptions sound very much like some of the effects of nuclear war. [^20]

Rev. 16:3 the second angel poured out his [bowl] upon the sea; and it became as . . . blood/every living soul died in the sea. This plague and that which follows it parallel the first plague the Lord brought on the ancient Egyptians: the waters turned to blood (Ex. 7:19-21). In Rev. 8:8-9, a third of the waters were afflicted; here, the polluted water kills every creature. This may have connection with words of the Lord given in our dispensation: "Behold, there are many dangers upon the waters, and more especially hereafter; for I, the Lord, have decreed in mine anger many destructions upon the waters" (D&C 61:4-5). We can only speculate on the cause of this destruction; it may be related to fallout from nuclear war.

There may be another meaning to sea in this passage. In Rev. 17:15, the waters symbolize "peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues." Perhaps here, as well, the sea represents the wicked people of the world, all of whom are eventually destroyed.

as the blood of a dead man. A person's blood gives life to the body, as water gives life to the world and the creatures on it. But a dead man's blood is corrupted and coagulated, no longer able to help sustain life. So shall it be with the waters of the seas as a result of this plague.

Rev. 16:4 the third angel poured out his [bowl] upon the riversÂ½Â½Â½Â½ . . . they became blood. This plague (like that of Rev. 16:3) parallels the one in Ex. 7:19-21 (see also Ps. 78:44). In Rev. 8:10-11, a burning star turned a third of the rivers and fountains of waters bitter. Here, all the rivers and fountains are polluted, though the result is not given.

Rev. 16:5 the angel of the waters. Anciently, the Jews believed that different angels had charge of different elements of nature. The vision of John seems to draw on this belief. In Rev. 7:1 we see four angels who have power over "the four winds of the earth." In Rev. 14:18 we read of an angel who has "power over fire." Here we have one or more angels who seem to have power over the fate of the waters. Or, if we read this verse more simply, we might understand that it refers only to the angel who, in Rev. 16:4, poured his bowl out upon the rivers.

Thou art righteous, O Lord, . . . because thou hast judged thus. Even though the judgments on the earth are terrible, the angel proclaims that the Lord is righteous and correct to have so judged (Ps. 119:137). Not only have the people chosen lives of sin but they have slain those who desired to follow the Lord. For such great sin, the Lord rightly punishes them with devastating judgments.

Rev. 16:6 For they have shed the blood of saints and prophets/ given them blood to drink. The motif of blood continues as we are reminded that the wicked have slain many of the righteous (Rev. 13:7, 15; 17:6; 18:24) and learn that, in a punishment that fits the crime, the wicked will themselves be forced to drink blood (Isa. 49:26). "To be drunk with blood . . . signifies slaughter by the sword." [^21] The King James Version says the wicked are "worthy" of this punishment; a more accurate translation may be "deserving." [^22]

The scriptures tell of many specific instances of martyrdom (1 Kgs. 18:13; 2 24:20-21; Mark 6:25-28; Chr. Acts 7:57-60; 12:1-2; Rev. 2:13; 11:7; Mosiah 17:20; Alma 25:7). They also record many general statements documenting the rejection and killing of the Lord's prophets (1 Thes. 2:15; Heb. 11:37; Rev. 6:9; 12:11; 16:6; Hel. 13:24; 3 Ne. 10:15). The mortal Jesus prophesied that martyrdom was precisely what many of his followers would suffer (Matt. 23:29-38; 24:9).

Rev. 16:7 I heard another [angel who came out from the altar]. Almost without exception, the altar in Revelation is connected with the judgments of God (Rev. 8:3-5; 9:13; 14:18; the one exception is Rev. 11:1). The angel declares that God's judgments are indeed "true and righteous" (see also Rev. 15:3-5; Ps. 19:9), as is the case with all his works.

Rev. 16:8 the fourth angel poured out his [bowl] upon the sun . . . scorch men with fire. The righteous are promised in Rev. 7:16 that "neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat," meaning that they will not suffer from the heat of the sun. But here the wicked suffer from intense heat, perhaps from the sun. That may result from a breakdown of the ozone layer of the atmosphere, which could be the result of a nuclear blast and which would remove much of our protection from the sun's potentially deadly rays, or it may have a cause that we cannot yet imagine. [^23] The scriptures often connect fire with judgment (Deut. 28:22; 1 Cor. 3:13; 2 Pet. 3:7) this fire prefigures the scorching fire of the last judgment (Mal. 4:1). The fourth angel acts under the direction of God and by "power" that "was given unto him."

Rev. 16:9 men were scorched with great heat . . . blasphemed the name of God . . . repented not to give him glory. The heat of this plague is here described as great, and the idea of scorching is repeated, perhaps for emphasis. But rather than acknowledge their guilt, the wicked appear to blame God for their troubles, speaking evil of him and his righteousness. Blasphemy is a recurring accusation against the wicked in Revelation (Rev. 2:9; 16:11, 21). Even at this late hour in the world's history, men have an opportunity to repent, but still they refuse (Rev. 9:20-21; 16:11; see the contrast in Rev. 11:13). An angel in Rev. 14:7 admonishes the world to "fear God, and give glory to him," but the great body of people on earth choose their sin instead.

Rev. 16:10 the fifth angel poured out his [bowl] upon the seat of the beast . . . his kingdom was full of darkness. In the ninth plague that Moses proclaimed in Egypt, the whole kingdom was stricken with thick darkness (Ex. 10:21-23). Here, darkness fills the kingdom of the beast (Isa. 60:2; D&C 82:5; 84:49; 112:23). The darkness may be literal or spiritual or both. Because the darkness results from an action of an angel of God, who would not likely be the source of spiritual darkness, it is probably a literal darkness that reflects the spiritual darkness in the beast's kingdom. The "seat of the beast" may more accurately be translated the "throne of the beast" (RSV, NEB, JB, NIV). The idea is that the Lord will attack the beast at his very headquarters, striking at his power and authority.

This plague of darkness may be a fulfillment of a curse that the Lord pronounced on the wicked in the times of Moses: "The Lord shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart: and thou shalt grope at noonday, as the blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shalt not prosper in thy ways: and thou shalt be only oppressed and spoiled evermore, and no man shall save thee" (Deut. 28:28-29).

Rev. 16:10-11 they gnawed their tongues for pain . . . blasphemed the God of heaven . . . repented not of their deeds. The terrible pain that men suffer may be a result of the sores described in Rev. 16:2, combined with the lack of clean water spoken of in verse 4 and the scorching heat of the sun recorded in verse 9. The darkness into which they are plunged can only exacerbate their plight. Again they follow their leader, the beast, in blaspheming God (Rev. 13:1, 5-6; 17:3), blaming him for their pains and sores. And still they will not repent. It seems incredible that people will not turn to God with humble spirits after suffering so much, but they follow the pattern of a scriptural type of long ago: Despite all that he and his people suffered, the Egyptian pharaoh in the time of Moses only hardened his heart (JST Ex. 7-10). The plagues of this angel may also be connected with nuclear war.

Rev. 16:12 the sixth angel poured out his [bowl] upon the great river Euphrates . . . the water thereof was dried up. In the days of Moses and Joshua, the Lord divided and dried up a passage through two different bodies of water to enable his people to be delivered from bondage and then to inherit their land of promise (Ex. 14:21; Josh. 3:13-17). But in John's vision, the Lord through his angel will dry up the water of a river to clear the way for destruction and war. The Euphrates formed the eastern and northeastern boundary of the land the Lord gave to Abraham and his descendants (Gen. 15:18; Deut. 1:7-8; Josh. 1:3-4) and served as a natural barrier to the enemies of Israel. When that barrier is removed, the enemies of Israel can begin their march. The Old Testament speaks often of the Lord drying up waters to accomplish his purposes (Ex. 14:21; Josh. 3:13-17; Isa. 11:15-16; 44:27; Jer. 51:36; Zech. 10:11).

that the way of the kings of the east might be prepared. It is uncertain who the kings of the east may be. One commentator notes that there have been more than fifty different interpretations of this expression. [^24] What most agree on is that the kings are enemies of the Lord's people and of the Lord himself and that they are prepared to go forth to war.

Rev. 16:13-16 For commentary on these verses, see page 276.

Rev. 16:17 the seventh angel poured out his [bowl] into the air. Other angels poured their bowls out upon the earth, the sea, the rivers, the sun, the seat of the beast, and the Euphrates. By pouring his bowl out into the air, the angel seems to be affecting all the earth through its all-encompassing atmosphere. The sounding of the last trumpet (Rev. 11:15-19) and the pouring forth of the last bowl are quite similar in their results, both signifying the end of earth's history.

great voice out of the temple of heaven, from the throne, saying, It is done. Because this voice comes from the throne in the temple of heaven, it must belong to God the Father, who is seated on that throne and rules over all. By saying "It is done," he announces that all things have been accomplished and the time has come for the final destruction of Babylon and of the earth.

Rev. 16:18 there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings. The thunders and lightnings may indicate that all nature is in an uproar as a result of the judgments poured forth from the last bowl. The voices may be God's proclamations of judgment and command, as we see in the Doctrine and Covenants, in which he prepares the earth to return to its paradisiacal glory: "And he shall utter his voice out of Zion, and he shall speak from Jerusalem, and his voice shall be heard among all people; and it shall be a voice as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder, which shall break down the mountains, and the valleys shall not be found. He shall command the great deep, and it shall be driven back into the north countries, and the islands shall become one land; and the land of Jerusalem and the land of Zion shall be turned back into their own place, and the earth shall be like as it was in the days before it was divided. And the Lord, even the Savior, shall stand in the midst of his people, and shall reign over all flesh" (D&C 133:21-25).

there was a great earthquake. This earthquake is different from the ones spoken of in Rev. 6:12 and 11:13-14. The earthquake in Rev. 6:12 is so great that the mountains and islands are "moved out of their places" (6:14), but that earthquake occurs in the period of the sixth thousand years (D&C 77:6-7). The earthquake in Rev. 11:13-14 is the first in the seventh thousand years and is of indeterminate size and intensity. The earthquake in Rev. 16:18 is described as the greatest in the history of the world. It is so great, as we read in Rev. 16:20, that it appears to be connected with the flattening of the mountains and the unifying of the continents: "One of the plainest and most-oft-repeated statements about the ushering in of the Millennium is the promise of a great shaking of the earth, of earthquakes that are everywhere at one and the same time, and of mountains and valleys and seas and landmasses that move. 'Yet once, it is a little while,' saith the Lord, 'and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land; and I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come.' (Hag. 2:6-7.) Christ, the Desire of all nations, shall come amid the greatest shaking of the earth and of all things that there has ever been or ever will be in the entire history of this planet. Everything on earth—the historical events then in progress, the beasts and all forms of life, and the inanimate objects that do not act for themselves— everything on earth will be affected by the great shaking." [^25] (See also Ezek. 38:19-20; Joel 3:16; D&C 133:31.)

Rev. 16:19 the great city was divided into three parts. The great city seems to be Babylon, which in this verse is a figurative city, representative of all the wicked societies of the earth. The division into three parts suggests that the city is fully weakened and prepared for the final destructive blow.

the cities of the nations fell. The cities of the nations fall in the earthquake, but this passage also seems to refer to the destruction of governments. The events in these verses bring about the fulfillment of the latter-day prophecy made by Joseph Smith: "With the sword and by bloodshed the inhabitants of the earth shall mourn; and with famine, and plague, and earthquake, and the thunder of heaven, and the fierce and vivid lightning also, shall the inhabitants of the earth be made to feel the wrath, and indignation, and chastening hand of an Almighty God, until the consumption decreed hath made a full end of all nations" (D&C 87:6).

Rev. 16:20 every island fled away/the mountains were not found. This passage describes the great leveling of the earth as the Lord prepares it for the millennial era. This leveling will occur as a result of the tremendous earthquake in Rev. 16:18. As we read in the Doctrine and Covenants, we should "continue in steadfastness, looking forth for the heavens to be shaken, and the earth to tremble and to reel to and fro as a drunken man, and for the valleys to be exalted, and for the mountains to be made low, and for the rough places to become smooth—and all this when the angel shall sound his trumpet" (D&C 49:23; see also 109:74; 133:21-23).

Elder Parley P. Pratt wrote of this event: "From these verses [ Isa. 40:1-5] we learn, first, that the voice of one shall be heard in the wilderness, to prepare the way of the Lord, just at the time when Jerusalem has been trodden down of the Gentiles long enough to have received, at the Lord's hands, double for all her sins, yea, when the warfare of Jerusalem is accomplished, and her iniquities pardoned. Then shall this proclamation be made as it was before by John [the Baptist], yea, a second proclamation, to prepare the way of the Lord, for his second coming; and about that time every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low, and the crooked shall be made straight, and rough places plain, and then the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. . . .

"Having restored the earth to the same glorious state in which it first existed—leveling the mountains, exalting the valleys, smoothing the rough places, making the deserts fruitful, and bringing all the continents and islands together, causing the curse to be taken off, that noxious weeds, and thorns, and thistles shall no longer be produced; the next thing is to regulate and restore the brute creation to their former state of peace and glory, causing enmity to cease from off the earth. But this will never be done until there is a general destruction poured out upon man, which will entirely cleanse the earth, and sweep all wickedness from its face." [^26]

Rev. 16:21 there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven. Deadly hailstones are an element of nature that God periodically uses to assist the righteous in their battles and to punish the wicked (Josh. 10:11; Mosiah 12:6), and hailstorms are often prophesied among the troubles to come (Ezek. 13:13; 38:22; Rev. 11:19; D&C 29:16). A "very grievous hail" was one of the plagues sent upon Egypt in the days of Moses (Ex. 9:18).

every stone about the weight of a talent. Each hailstone weighs between forty-five and ninety pounds (the exact weight of a talent is uncertain). [^27] The point is that these hailstones are tremendous in size and catastrophic in their effect.

men blasphemed God because of the plague of the hail. Not only do the people of the world fail to repent but they speak evil of God for that which he does in perfect justice.

"A Desolating Scourge Shall Go Forth"

D&C 5:19-20

19 For a desolating scourge shall go forth among the inhabitants of the earth, and shall continue to be poured out from time to time, if they repent not, until the earth is empty, and the inhabitants thereof are consumed away and utterly destroyed by the brightness of my coming.

20 Behold, I tell you these things, even as I also told the people of the destruction of Jerusalem; and my word shall be verified at this time as it hath hitherto been verified.

One definition of a scourge is a whip used to flog and inflict great pain upon individuals. From time to time the Lord uses a scourge (meaning, the Lord punishes or afflicts) to whip earth's inhabitants on account of their wickedness. Isaiah prophesied, for instance, that the Lord would send an "overflowing scourge" to the inhabitants of the southern kingdom of Judah because they had made a "covenant with death" and an "agreement with hell" (Isa. 28:18). Hence, Isaiah promised that "the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it. From the time that it goeth forth it shall take you: for morning by morning shall it pass over, by day and by night: and it shall be a vexation only to understand the report" (Isa. 28:18-19).

The scourge that inflicted great pain upon ancient Judah was none other than the cruel Assyrians (see also Isa. 10:26), whom God engaged to scatter and destroy the people who once possessed his name and his religion. Judah's inhabitants were aware of the Assyrians but erroneously believed that their alliances would protect them (Isa. 30:1; 31:1) the "overflowing scourge . . . shall not come unto us," they said (Isa. 28:15).

The Lord has decreed one or more great scourges for the last days, scourges that will cleanse the world. Four separate passages from the Doctrine and Covenants speak of such latter-day scourges (D&C 5:19; 45:30; 84:96; 97:23), named "a desolating scourge" or "an overflowing scourge" (D&C 5:19; 45:31). These passages inform us that the scourge will come because of wicked works. "For I, the Almighty, have laid my hands upon the nations, to scourge them for their wickedness" (D&C 84:96) also "The Lord's scourge shall pass over by night and by day, and the report thereof shall vex all people; . . . For the indignation of the Lord is kindled against their abominations and all their wicked works" (D&C 97:23-24).

Zion's inhabitants, those who "stand in holy places," should be consoled in knowing that they will not fall on account of the scourge of the Lord. Although there will be a scourge that overflows, God instructs, "my disciples shall stand in holy places, and shall not be moved; but among the wicked, men shall lift up their voices and curse God and die" (D&C 45:31-32). Joseph Smith declared the same: "Repent ye, repent ye, and embrace the everlasting covenant, and flee to Zion, before the overflowing scourge overtake you." [^28] Also, "'the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads' [ Isa. 35:10] and then they will be delivered from the overflowing scourge that shall pass through the land." [^29] The Prophet also made this statement:["[In that] city of Zion . . . [the saints] will be delivered from the overflowing scourge that shall pass through the land." [^30]

Notes and Commentary

D&C 5:19 For a desolating scourge shall go forth among the inhabitants of the earth. Perhaps this scourge refers to "a desolating sickness" (D&C 45:31), plagues (D&C 84:96-97), armies causing destruction (Isa. 10:26; 28:18), or to other terrible events.

if they repent not. The prophecy regarding the desolating scourge is conditional and will receive fulfillment only if earth's inhabitants "repent not." But if they refuse to repent, they will be flogged with a desolating scourge as long as they refuse to repent (see also D&C 84:96-97) or "until the earth is empty," meaning empty of wicked people.

utterly destroyed by the brightness of my coming. Sinners who survive thrashings and other forms of punishments that are sent upon the earth in the last days will be destroyed by Christ when he "shall come down in heaven, clothed in the brightness of his glory, to meet the kingdom of God which is set up on the earth" (D&C 65:5). Paul also warned, "The Lord shall consume [sinners] . . . with the brightness of his coming" (2 Thes. 2:8). One reason that the ungodly will be consumed at Christ's coming is that "no sinful man hath at any time, neither shall there be any sinful man at any time, that shall see my face and live" (JST Ex. 33:20; see also D&C 67:12).

D&C 5:20 Behold, I tell you these things. Jesus Christ is the source of the statements made in this revelation.

even as I also told the people of the destruction of Jerusalem. The prophet Lehi warned Jerusalem's inhabitants about their city's impending destruction, but they failed to repent, preferring rather to mock God's prophet (1 Ne. 1:18-19; cf. 2 Ne. 25:9). Nonetheless, the city was destroyed according to God's word. Similarly, God's desolating scourge will go forth in the last days, and God's "word shall be verified" regarding the scourge just "as it hath hitherto been verified" with regard to the destruction of Jerusalem.

God's Judgments Will Begin with the Hypocrites of Zion

D&C 112:24-26

24 Behold, vengeance cometh speedily upon the inhabitants of the earth, a day of wrath, a day of burning, a day of desolation, of weeping, of mourning, and of lamentation; and as a whirlwind it shall come upon all the face of the earth, saith the Lord.

25 And upon my house shall it begin, and from my house shall it go forth, saith the Lord;

26 First among those among you, saith the Lord, who have professed to know my name and have not known me, and have blasphemed against me in the midst of my house, saith the Lord.

The Lord's day of vengeance will come as quickly upon earth's inhabitants as a whirlwind: with great speed and without forewarning. Six words are used to describe this great day: wrath, burning, desolation, weeping, mourning, and lamentation. The prophet Zephaniah similarly describes this day:

The great day of the Lord is near . . .

That day is a day of wrath,

a day of trouble and distress,

a day of wasteness and desolation,

a day of darkness and gloominess,

a day of clouds and thick darkness,

a day of the trumpet and alarm (Zeph. 1:14, 15-16).

So fearsome will this day be to the wicked, says Zephaniah, that "the mighty man shall cry there bitterly" (Zeph. 1:14). Joel also describes the day of the Lord as "a day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds and of thick darkness" (Joel 2:1-2).

The Lord's day of vengeance will not begin with those who are considered to be the darkest and most ungodly of individuals but with those who belong to the Church who are hypocrites and blasphemers. The Lord states: "Upon my house shall it begin," and then explains, "first among those among you . . . who have professed to know my name and have not known me, and have blasphemed against me" (D&C 112:26). Afterward, God's judgments will go forth from these to the sinners of the world: "from my house shall it go forth," says the Lord (v. 25).

Notes and Commentary

D&C 112:24 vengeance cometh speedily. The term speedily and the corresponding expression as a whirlwind describe the swiftness with which God's judgments will come; whirlwind also expresses the idea that the judgments will be as destructive as a sudden burst of wind that destroys all that is in its path. The phrases inhabitants of the earth and all the face of the earth correspond and signify the universality of the destruction: none will escape it. D&C 112:23 explains that vengeance is coming to the inhabitants of the earth because "darkness covereth the earth, and gross darkness the minds of the people, and all flesh has become corrupt before [God's] face."

a day of wrath, a day of burning, a day of desolation, of weeping, of mourning, and of lamentation. The first three expressions—wrath, burning, and desolation—describe the devastation that sinners will experience, while the second three—weeping, mourning, and lamentation—announce the reaction of sinners to God's vengeance.

D&C 112:25-26 upon my house shall it begin, and from my house shall it go forth. God's judgments, described in D&C 112:24, will begin with those in the Church who profess to know God, but do not, and who blaspheme God's name. These judgments will serve to cleanse the Church and to purge her of her dross. Elder Ezra Taft Benson spoke of a cleansing that is coming: "It is well that our people . . . not be misled by those apostates within the Church who have not yet repented or been cut off. But there is a cleansing coming. The Lord says that his vengeance shall be poured out 'upon the inhabitants of the earth. . . . And upon my house shall it begin, and from my house shall it go forth, saith the Lord; First among those among you, saith the Lord, who have professed to know my name and have not known me. . . .' (D&C 112:24-26). I look forward to that cleansing." [^31]

saith the Lord. This phrase, used in D&C 112:25 and 26, declares that Jesus Christ is the source of this revelation.

Zion Will Escape, If Faithful

D&C 97:22-28

22 For behold, and lo, vengeance cometh speedily upon the ungodly as the whirlwind; and who shall escape it?

23 The Lord's scourge shall pass over by night and by day, and the report thereof shall vex all people; yea, it shall not be stayed until the Lord come;

24 For the indignation of the Lord is kindled against their abominations and all their wicked works.

25 Nevertheless, Zion shall escape if she observe to do all things whatsoever I have commanded her.

26 But if she observe not to do whatsoever I have commanded her, I will visit her according to all her works, with sore affliction, with pestilence, with plague, with sword, with vengeance, with devouring fire.

27 Nevertheless, let it be read this once to her ears, that I, the Lord, have accepted of her offering; and if she sin no more none of these things shall come upon her;

28 And I will bless her with blessings, and multiply a multiplicity of blessings upon her, and upon her generations forever and ever, saith the Lord your God. Amen.

Two contrasting themes compete for attention in these verses: vengeance and blessings. The theme of vengeance, or God's punishment of the wicked for their iniquity, controls the first five verses (vv. 22-26) and bears upon the ungodly, whether of the world or of Zion. The words scourge, sore affliction, pestilence, plague, sword, and devouring fire all help to define vengeance (vv. 23, 26).

Certainly one great blessing that will belong to Zion is mentioned in verse 25, which is "Zion shall escape" the Lord's scourge. But note the escape is conditional: she escapes "if she observe to do all things whatsoever I have commanded her." President Joseph F. Smith's remarks concerning Zion's escape are instructive: "We firmly believe that Zion— which is the pure in heart—shall escape, if she observe to do all things whatsoever God has commanded; but in the opposite event, even Zion shall be visited 'with sore affliction, with pestilence, with plague, with sword, with vengeance, and with devouring fire.' (D&C 97:26.) All this that her people may be taught to walk in the light." [^32]

In 1977 Elder Marion G. Romney spoke at general conference and proposed the only way that humans can escape the calamities of the last days: "All the acts of governments, all the armies of the nations, all the learning and the wisdom of man together cannot turn these calamities aside. The only way they can be averted is for men to accept and conform to the way of life revealed by God our Heavenly Father. Calamities will come as a matter of cause and effect." [^33]

The theme of blessings is the subject of two verses (vv. 27-28). God accents the numerous blessings that will belong to those who are obedient in Zion with special language where the following terms are used in repetition: bless, blessings, multiply, multiplicity, her, forever and ever. Hence God promises, "I will bless her with blessings, and multiply a multiplicity of blessings upon her, and upon her generations forever and ever" (v. 28). [^34]

"Seal Up the Law, and Bind Up the Testimony"

D&C 109:38-46

38 Put upon thy servants the testimony of the covenant, that when they go out and proclaim thy word they may seal up the law, and prepare the hearts of thy saints for all those judgments thou art about to send, in thy wrath, upon the inhabitants of the earth, because of their transgressions, that thy people may not faint in the day of trouble.

39 And whatsoever city thy servants shall enter, and the people of that city receive their testimony, let thy peace and thy salvation be upon that city; that they may gather out of that city the righteous, that they may come forth to Zion, or to her stakes, the places of thine appointment, with songs of everlasting joy;

40 And until this be accomplished, let not thy judgments fall upon that city.

41 And whatsoever city thy servants shall enter, and the people of that city receive not the testimony of thy servants, and thy servants warn them to save themselves from this untoward generation, let it be upon that city according to that which thou hast spoken by the mouths of thy prophets.

42 But deliver thou, O Jehovah, we beseech thee, thy servants from their hands, and cleanse them from their blood.

43 O Lord, we delight not in the destruction of our fellow men; their souls are precious before thee;

44 But thy word must be fulfilled. Help thy servants to say, with thy grace assisting them: Thy will be done, O Lord, and not ours.

45 We know that thou hast spoken by the mouth of thy prophets terrible things concerning the wicked, in the last days— that thou wilt pour out thy judgments, without measure;

46 Therefore, O Lord, deliver thy people from the calamity of the wicked; enable thy servants to seal up the law, and bind up the testimony, that they may be prepared against the day of burning.

These verses are a passage from Joseph Smith's dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple, given by revelation and offered 27 March 1836. The verses contain language consistent with prayer, such as "O Jehovah," "O Lord," "we beseech thee," "thy will be done," in addition to the third-person respectful imperatives where the term let is used, such as "let thy peace," "let not thy judgments," "let it be upon that city."

The phrases "seal up the law, and bind up the testimony" (D&C 109:46) are found in other scriptures. Isaiah used this phrase but in reverse order: "Bind up the testimony, seal the law" (Isa. 8:16). Two other revelations from the Doctrine and Covenants transpose the verbs seal and bind to read: "to bind up the law and seal up the testimony" (D&C 88:84; see also 133:72).

According to this passage of scripture, these actions of binding and sealing the testimony and the law fit into a divine sequence: the Saints must first receive their temple endowments, then they warn the world's inhabitants of God's coming judgments; this is followed by the binding up of the testimony and the sealing of the law; finally the judgments of God will come (D&C 88:84; 109:38, 46; 133:72). After the Lord's servants have testified to and warned the nations, they will figuratively "bind," "tie up," "shut up" [^35] or close their testimonies and "affix [a] seal" [^36] to the law of God (the prophetic word). [^37] Joseph Smith explained these things to the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles on 12 November 1835: "But when you are endowed and prepared to preach the Gospel to all nations, kindreds, and tongues, in their own languages, you must faithfully warn all, and bind up the testimony, and seal up the law, and the destroying angel will follow . . . upon the children of disobedience; and destroy the workers of iniquity, while the Saints will be gathered out from among them, and stand in holy places ready to meet the Bridegroom when he comes." [^38] In sum, then, God's judgments follow the Saints' warning voice to the world.

Notes and Commentary

D&C 109:38 Put upon thy servants the testimony of the covenant. The Prophet prays that God's servants, or his Latter-day Saints (D&C 109:1-5), will have a testimony of the gospel.

when they go out and proclaim thy word. This passage pertains to missionary work and proclaiming the gospel to the world.

prepare the hearts of thy saints for all those judgments thou art about to send. Proclaiming the gospel benefits not only nonmembers who receive the truth and accept the gospel but also prepares the Saints themselves for God's judgments. This concept is explained beautifully in D&C 88:81-85.

in thy wrath. D&C 88:85 declares "the wrath of God" to be "the desolation of abomination which awaits the wicked, both in this world and in the world to come."

because of their transgressions. God's judgments, which constitute the "day of trouble" (D&C 109:38) for the ungodly, have always come because of transgression.

D&C 109:39 the people of that city receive their testimony. This verse identifies three things that accompany those who accept and act upon the testimony of the Lord's servants: peace, salvation, and songs of joy (Matt. 10:11-15).

D&C 109:40 until this be accomplished, let not thy judgments fall upon that city. The Lord will hold back his judgments until his servants preach the gospel, testify, and warn the people (compare 2 Ne. 25:9).

D&C 109:42 deliver thou . . . thy servants from their hands, and cleanse them from their blood. The Lord has declared: "I sent you out to testify and warn the people, and it becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor. Therefore, they are left without excuse, and their sins are upon their own heads" (D&C 88:81-82; see also Jacob 1:19).

D&C 109:45 that thou wilt pour out thy judgments, without measure. God will not weigh or measure his judgments when he pours them from the cup of his wrath upon the wicked; meaning, his judgments will be exceedingly great.

Do&C 109:46 O Lord, deliver thy people from the calamity of the wicked. The Prophet prays that the Saints will escape the judgments of God that are poured out upon sinners.

seal up the law, and bind up the testimony. Hugh Nibley wrote, "We seal and bind up things to keep them safe from fire and flood, or, in nautical terms, we 'batten down the hatches' for what is to come, in this case a burning. . . . The words sealing and binding are not vague theological jargon; they actually mean putting things in such a condition as to resist destructive forces." [^39]

the day of burning. The day of burning refers to Christ's second coming, when all corruptible things will be burned.

Those Who Escape the Judgments of God Will Be Cleansed

Isa. 4:2-6

2 In that day shall the branch of the Lord be beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the earth shall be excellent and comely for them that are escaped of Israel [and Judah]. [^40]

3 And it shall come to pass, [they that are] [^41] left in Zion, and [remain] [^42] in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem:

4 When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning.

5 And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory [of Zion] [^43] shall be a defence.

6 And there shall be a [shelter] [^44] for a shadow in the daytime from the heat, and for a place of refuge and for a covert from storm and from rain.

This section of Isa. 4 deals with those who have survived the judgments of God, as listed in Isa. 3:14-26, perhaps in the dawning of the millennial day. The survivors are those who are the "escaped of Israel and Judah" and have been "left in Zion" (JST Isa. 4:2) to be "written among the living in Jerusalem" (Isa. 4:3). The survivors will love to participate in the ordinances of the Lord's temple, for they will be "called holy" (Isa. 4:3; the term holy is generally connected to the temple), their filth and iniquity will be removed, and the same elements (cloud, smoke, fire, glory) that attended and protected the ancient Israelite temples will exist among them in Zion.

The temple theme is also present in the four explicit references to Zion or mount Zion. The temple, always an integral part of Zion, is located at its center. Further, Zion's inhabitants are pure in heart and worthy to enter the temple and participate in its ordinances. [^45] It is significant that the survivors of God's judgments will be a temple- oriented people, for it is their temple orientation that will help them escape his judgments. Isa. 4:6 states that the Lord's true servants will find safety and refuge in Zion, an idea repeated in D&C 45:66-70. The command to us in this dispensation is, "Stand ye in holy places, and be not moved, until the day of the Lord come; for behold, it cometh quickly" (D&C 87:8; see also D&C 45:32).

Notes and Commentary

Isa. 4:2 In that day. The same expression links earlier sections of Isaiah (Isa. 2:12, 17, 20; 3:7, 18; 4:1) and is a continuation of the theme of the "day of the Lord," meaning the time shortly before, during, or after the day of the coming of the Lord.

branch. This word may have a double meaning. First, the Lord is called Branch messianically (Jer. 23:5-6; 33:15; Zech. 3:8-10; 6:12). Second, an offshoot of the house of Israel is often called "a righteous branch" (Jacob 2:25) or "a branch of the house of Israel" (1 Ne. 15:12; see also 2 Ne. 3:5). The context of this section suggests that the branch represents a specific remnant, or branch, of Israel that remains in Israel after God's judgments (identified in Isa. 3).

fruit. Those who "are escaped of Israel and Judah" will be blessed with the bounties and blessings of the earth. The earth will be fruitful once again because of the presence of temples. "The temple," says John Lundquist, "is associated with abundance and prosperity, indeed is perceived as the giver of these." [^46] We are reminded by the promise of Book of Mormon prophets that those who are obedient to God's commands will prosper in the land.

Isa. 4:2-3 escaped of Israel/left in Zion/remain in Jerusalem. These phrases refer to those who will survive the latter-day judgments of God that will destroy many of the people of the earth (Isa. 10:20). The escaped of Israel will consist of both Jews and other members of the house of Israel (D&C 133:11-13).

holy. God is called Holy One (Isa. 41:14; 1 Jn. 2:20). In the last days, those in Zion will be like God in holiness.

written among the living. The primary object of this phrase seems to be those who are counted among the mortal living. Temporally, those who survived the judgments identified in Isa. 3 will be among the living. The phrase may also refer to the book of life, speaking spiritually of those who are written in the Lamb's book of life and who will go to God's kingdom of heaven (Dan. 12:1; Philip. 4:3; Rev. 20:15).

Isa. 4:4 washed/purged. The filth of the children of Israel, which includes us, will be washed away by the ordinance of baptism (1 Ne. 20:1; Alma 7:14) and cleansed by the blood of Jesus (Mal. 3:2-3; Heb. 9:22; Rev. 7:14), a process in which the Holy Ghost plays a prominent role. Joseph Smith taught that "as the Holy Ghost falls upon one of the literal seed of Abraham, it is calm and serene; and his whole soul and body are only exercised by the pure spirit of intelligence; while the effect of the Holy Ghost upon a Gentile, is to purge out the old blood, and make him actually of the seed of Abraham" [^47] (see also 3 Ne. 27:20).

blood/filth. The blood of humanity can represent iniquity (Isa. 59:3; Micah 3:10). Paradoxically, Jesus' blood is able to purge and cleanse our souls from iniquity because of Jesus' innocence, sinlessness, and perfection (Lev. 17:11; John 6:53-54; Moses 6:59-60). In its root sense, the Hebrew word for filth refers to human excrement. [^48] The term filth is used symbolically to emphasize the terrible nature of the sins of Israel and the impurities found in the daughters of Zion.

spirit of judgment/burning. Together, God's judgments and his cleansing fires (speaking symbolically of trials and tribulations) will purge Israel of her sins.

Isa. 4:5 every dwelling place of mount Zion. Isaiah compares the individual homes in Zion to the temple, thus emphasizing the sanctity of Zion and her people in this glorious day.

cloud and smoke/fire. These elements often accompany a theophany or God's presence in the temple. For instance, God appeared at the Sinai sanctuary (Ex. 15:17) and was accompanied by a cloud, smoke, and fire (Ex. 19:9, 18). Similar elements were associated with Solomon's Temple (1 Kgs. 8:10) and the temple in heaven (Isa. 6:4; Rev. 15:8). The cloud symbolizes the Lord's glory (D&C 84:2-5). The people of the latter-day (or perhaps millennial) Zion will be so righteous that they will all enjoy such blessings.

shall be a defence. The word defence should read canopy or protective covering. [^49] Hence Zion and her inhabitants will be protected by God from spiritual harm in the same way that individuals are protected from physical harm by seeking shelter during the heat of the day or in great storms (Isa. 4:6).

Isa. 4:6 shelter/refuge/covert. Similar language is used in a modern-day revelation, in which Zion is called "a city of refuge" and "a place of safety." It will be a "land of peace" and "the terror of the Lord also shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it, . . . and it shall be the only people that shall not be at war one with another. And it shall be said among the wicked: Let us not go up to battle against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible; wherefore we cannot stand" (D&C 45:66-70; see also 115:6). Jesus, of course, is our ultimate refuge and shelter from life's battles (Isa. 25:4). And he will be in Zion, sanctifying it and thus protecting it.

storm/rain. These weather events are symbols for God's judgments on the wicked (Ps. 83:15). The storms remove the wicked from their places as chaff is removed from the wheat (Job 21:18; 27:21), while the righteous, like wheat, are gathered into protected units and preserved in the Lord's temples and other holy places.

John's Vision of Earth's Harvest

Rev. 14:14-20

14 And I looked, and behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud one sat like unto the Son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle.

15 And another angel came out of the temple, crying with a loud voice to him that sat on the cloud, Thrust in thy sickle, and reap: for the time is come for thee to reap; for the harvest of the earth is ripe.

16 And he that sat on the cloud thrust in his sickle on the earth; and the earth was reaped.

17 And another angel came out of the temple which is in heaven, he also having a sharp sickle.

18 And another angel came out from the altar, which had power over fire; and cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth; for her grapes are fully ripe.

19 And the angel thrust in his sickle into the earth, and gathered the vine of the earth, and cast it into the great winepress of the wrath of God.

20 And the winepress was trodden without the city, and blood came out of the winepress, even unto the horse bridles, by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs.

This section of Rev. 14 gives us scenes of the two-phase harvest of the earth. First we see Christ with a sharp sickle, which he uses to select the righteous as if they were wheat to be harvested. This harvest is that which was described by Jesus in his parable of the wheat field (JST Matt. 13:24-30, 37-43; for a modern interpretation, see D&C 86:1-7. [^50]

Next, we see an angel gathering the wicked as if they were clusters of grapes and then casting them into a winepress that represents God's wrath. We see the blood that comes from the winepress as juice flows from crushed grapes, blood so deep it reaches to a horse's bridle. Though this is a horrifying scene in John's vision, it is a scene not of injustice and wrong but of setting things right and fulfilling the law of justice. Whatever God in his wisdom and love decides to do is best for his children, both individually and as a group; whatever God chooses to do is just and merciful and right (Alma 42:15).

Joel saw a similar vision: "Let the heathen be wakened, and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat: for there will I sit to judge all the heathen round about. Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe: come, get you down; for the press is full, the fats overflow; for their wickedness is great" (Joel 3:12-13).

Notes and Commentary

Rev. 14:14 a white cloud. This scene is reminiscent of one beheld by Daniel long before: "I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven. . . . And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom" (Dan. 7:13-14). Elsewhere we read of Christ coming "in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory" (Matt. 24:30; see also D&C 45:16, 44), but this appearance does not seem to be the Second Coming, when Christ returns in great power with his angels. Instead, he sits as a judge and conqueror upon the clouds in heaven. The cloud probably symbolizes Christ's glory (D&C 84:5). The whiteness of the cloud may symbolize victory, purity, and grace.

upon the cloud one sat like unto the Son of man. The Son of man here is Christ (Rev. 1:12-20). After listing events of the last days, Jesus said, "And then shall they see the Son of man coming in the clouds with great power and glory. And then shall he send his angels, and shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from the uttermost part of the earth to the uttermost part of heaven" (Mark 13:26-27).

on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle. The Greek (the original language of the New Testament) tells us that the golden crown is instead a golden wreath (stephanos), such as victors would wear. [^51] Christ comes victorious, with power to gather his Saints unto himself. The sharp sickle, the instrument of the gathering, may symbolize the missionaries, who go forth with his true gospel, bearing the priesthood and conveying ordinances, bringing the righteous, like sheaves, into the Lord's barn (Matt. 13:30).

Rev. 14:15 another angel came out of the temple. This angel comes forth from the place where God is (Rev. 7:15; 11:15), bearing the message that it is time for the final harvest of the righteous on the earth, preparatory to the burning of the wicked.

Thrust in thy sickle, and reap. The reaping in this verse refers to the gathering of the righteous out of the field that is the world (JST Matt. 13:24-30, 36-43; D&C 86:1-7). The time for that gathering has come; it is the last days, and "the harvest of the earth is ripe." Ripe means fully ready; the righteous have proved themselves and are ready to be gathered into the arms of their Lord.

"Behold, the field is white already to harvest," the latter-day revelation says, "therefore, whoso desireth to reap, let him thrust in his sickle with his might, and reap while the day lasts, that he may treasure up for his soul everlasting salvation in the kingdom of God" (D&C 6:3). Gathering the people of the world in harvest—whether for safety in the barn (or bosom) of the Lord, or for punishment and burning—has long been an image used by the Lord and his prophets (Jer. 51:33; Hosea 6:11; Matt. 9:37-38; 13:30, 40-42; Mark 4:29; Luke 10:2; John 4:35-38).

Rev. 14:16 he that sat on the cloud thrust in his sickle on the earth; and the earth was reaped. Through his sickle, the Lord reaches down and gathers his people from every part of the world. This gathering seems to be that of those who will come unto Christ; the gathering of the wicked is depicted in Rev. 14:19-20.

Through the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord described the two parts of the gathering that will occur before the Millennium: the gathering of the righteous unto blessing, and the gathering of the wicked unto burning: "But behold, in the last days, even now while the Lord is beginning to bring forth the word, and the blade is springing up and is yet tender—behold, verily I say unto you, the angels are crying unto the Lord day and night, who are ready and waiting to be sent forth to reap down the fields; but the Lord saith unto them, pluck not up the tares while the blade is yet tender (for verily your faith is weak), lest you destroy the wheat also. Therefore, let the wheat and the tares grow together until the harvest is fully ripe; then ye shall first gather out the wheat from among the tares, and after the gathering of the wheat, behold and lo, the tares are bound in bundles, and the field remaineth to be burned" (D&C 86:4-7).

Rev. 14:17 another angel came out of the temple which is in heaven. That the angel comes out of the temple in heaven, where God is, suggests that he has first received his commission or assignment from God and then goes forth to accomplish it.

he also having a sharp sickle. If the sickle of the Lord (Rev. 14:16) is the Saints going forth to do his work of gathering, this sickle, in the hands of an angel, may also be mortal beings doing the harvesting work of the Lord, but they are harvesting the wicked, preparing them to be crushed in the winepress of God or, as we read elsewhere, preparing them to be burned (Matt. 13:38-40; D&C 86:7). Perhaps this harvesting is done by bearing strong testimony to all people, and those who refuse to repent are then judged worthy to be destroyed.

Rev. 14:18 another angel came out from the altar, which had power over fire. This angel also comes from the temple and specifically from the altar. The passage may refer to the angel in Rev. 8:3-5, who stood at the altar of incense, which incense was offered with the prayers of the Saints: "And the angel took the censer, and filled it with fire of the altar, and cast it into the earth" (Rev. 8:5). This angel, who has authority over the fire of the altar, commands the angel with the sickle to gather the wicked to be destroyed. Ultimately, that destruction will come by fire (Rev. 18:8).

a loud cry to him that had the sharp sickle. The angel from the altar commands the angel with the sickle to thrust the sickle down to earth, to cut down and gather the wicked. The wicked are "the clusters of the vine of the earth"; they are "fully ripe" in their wickedness (contrast with the ripeness of the righteous in Rev. 14:15).

Rev. 14:19 the angel thrust in his sickle into the earth, and gathered the vine of the earth. The wheat that represents the righteous has been gathered and separated unto itself. The ripened grapes of the vine represent the wicked, those who bring forth evil fruit (Matt. 7:16-20), who are now ready to be harvested. The angel is the destroying angel, sent forth by God to perform his work of destruction and judgment. The gathering depicted here, however, is not the end of the world, for much must still transpire.

cast it into the great winepress of the wrath of God. As grapes were harvested, they were placed in a trough and trampled by foot; the juice then flowed through a duct into a lower basin. In symbolic terms, the winepress represents the great press of God's wrath (meaning the execution of his judgments), which, according to justice, exacts the full terrible payment for sin. The grapes, which represent the sinner, are trodden under foot until nothing is left but pulp and wine, the wine being a symbol of the blood of the sinner. In performing the Atonement, Christ suffered that wrath for us, so that we might escape both the wrath and the consequent suffering if we would repent. In the time of judgment, all those who have not truly repented and come unto Christ will suffer the wrath of God themselves; it will be for them as if they themselves were cast into the winepress and trampled. "I have trodden the winepress alone," the Lord said through Isaiah, "I will tread them in mine anger, . . . and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments" (Isa. 63:3).

D&C 19:11-19 describes the suffering of Christ in performing the Atonement and the suffering of unrepentant souls who will be cast into the winepress themselves (see also D&C 133:46-51; Rev. 14:8-11).

Rev. 14:20 the winepress was trodden without the city. Jesus suffered for the sins of the world outside the city of Jerusalem, in the Garden of Gethsemane, and later at Golgotha (Heb. 13:12; Luke 22:39-44; John 19:20). In the same way, the nations will come to their judgment outside the city of Jerusalem, with the destruction centered in the valley of Jehoshaphat (probably the Kidron Valley, which runs between Jerusalem and the Mount of Olives; Joel 3:12-14; Zech. 14:1-4). [^52] Because the wicked refused the blessings of the suffering of Christ, the benefits of the blood that was shed for them, they must now suffer for themselves.

blood came out of the winepress, even unto the horse bridles, . . . a thousand and six hundred furlongs. The language here is very plain: rather than using wine or red grape juice as a symbol for blood, John simply says, "blood came out of the winepress." The slaughter of the wicked in the day of their judgment creates a river of their blood. The depth of the flow of blood reaches up to the bridle of a horse. The length of the river of blood (sixteen hundred furlongs) is about 184 miles, or the approximate length of the land of Palestine. In this verse, the city seems to symbolize the holy places that are protected by God; the land outside the city may represent all the people of the world who are subjected to God's terrible but righteous judgments. [^53]

---
Notas:
[^1] God shows great signs and wonders in the skies. 2. The sun is darkened and the moon becomes "as blood." 3. The absence of the rainbow is a sign that the end is near. 4. The sign of the Son of Man appears in the sky shortly before Christ's second coming. History of the Church, 1:439-40.
[^2] Parley P. Pratt and others with him saw the same amazing scene on the same night; see Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, 110.
[^3] History of the Church, 1:440.
[^4] JST Rev. 6:14 changes heaven departed to heavens opened.
[^5] JST Rev. 6:14 adds is opened.
[^6] McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:486.
[^7] Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:486.
[^8] History of the Church, 2:104.
[^9] McConkie and Parry, Guide to Scriptural Symbols, 98-99.
[^10] History of the Church, 5:402.
[^11] See McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 413-17.
[^12] History of the Church, 6:254.
[^13] See also McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 418-20.
[^14] Joseph Smith also placed the chronology of the sign of the Son of Man after several tribulations (History of the Church, 5:337).
[^15] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 280.
[^16] History of the Church, 4:608.
[^17] McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 419.
[^18] History of the Church, 5:337.
[^19] History of the Church, 5:337.
[^20] McConkie and Parry, Guide to Scriptural Symbols, 44.
[^21] History of the Church, 5:337.
[^22] Ensign, Dec. 1971, 31.
[^23] For a discussion of the effects of nuclear war on the ozone layer, see Schell, Fate of the Earth, 20-21, 79-92.
[^24] Walvoord, Revelation of Jesus Christ, 236.
[^25] McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 620-21.
[^26] Voice of Warning, 159-60, 162.
[^27] New Bible Dictionary, 1324.
[^28] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 18; cf. D&C 45:31.
[^29] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 17.
[^30] History of the Church, 1:315.
[^31] Conference Report, Apr. 1969, 10.
[^32] "Lesson in Natural Calamities," 653.
[^33] Conference Report, Apr. 1977, 76.
[^34] See the commentary on D&C 97, page 177.
[^35] The word bind used in Isa. 8:16 (Hebrew tsor) also means to "tie up" or "shut up"; see Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 864.
[^36] The word seal used in Isa. 8:16 (Hebrew chatim) also means to "affix [a] seal"; see Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 864.
[^37] See Parry, Parry, and Peterson, Understanding Isaiah, 88.
[^38] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 92.
[^39] "House of Glory," 44.
[^40] The Great Isaiah Scroll from the Dead Sea Scrolls inserts the words and Judah, which is consistent with the theme of the section.
[^41] The change is from 2 Ne. 14:3 and JST Isa. 4:2
[^42] 2 Ne. 14:3 changes the KJV words he that remaineth to remain.
[^43] JST Isa. 4:4 and 2 Ne. 14:5 add the words of Zion.
[^44] From the Hebrew word sukah.
[^45] History of the Church, 5:423-24.
[^46] "What Is a Temple?" 97.
[^47] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 149-50.
[^48] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 844.
[^49] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 342.
[^50] See the commentary on the latter-day gathering as a harvest, page 76.
[^51] Harrington, Revelation, 154.
[^52] Mounce, Book of Revelation, 281.
[^53] Mounce, Book of Revelation, 281.
