Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Signs of the Times ( 1999)

Chapter 9

Signs and Wonders in the Heavens and in the Earth

Signs of the Times

Since earth's creation God has used celestial objects and wonders as signs to earth's inhabitants. During the creation of the earth God "organized the lights in the expanse of the heaven" so that they would "be for signs and for seasons, and for days and for years" (Abr. 4:14; see also Gen. 1:14). Correspondingly, the prophet Samuel foretold of several signs that would indicate the time of Christ's birth, including the appearance of a new star, plus "many signs and wonders in heaven." These things produced amazement and wonderment, causing people to "fall to the earth" (Hel. 14:5-7; see also 3 Ne. 1:21; 2:1; Matt. 2:2).

Such signs at Christ's first coming typify the many signs in the sky that will appear in the last days. It is not a coincidence that the phrase "signs and wonders," used to describe the first coming of Christ, is used also to describe the signs that presage Christ's second coming (Hel. 14:5-7; D&C 45:40). In both Christ's first and second comings, celestial objects serve as signs. These signs are universal, and all will behold them regardless of where one is located upon the globe. All of earth's inhabitants will witness the darkening of the sun, all will see the moon turn blood red, and everyone will view the stars as they fall from heaven. These and other grand signs and wonders in the heavens will cause mortals to pause and to consider God's greatness and excellence. For those who are attuned to the Spirit, these signs will be grand revelations and will prepare them for Christ's coming.

Signs and Wonders Will Be Shown in the Last Days

D&C 45:40-42

40 And they shall see signs and wonders, for they shall be shown forth in the heavens above, and in the earth beneath.

41 And they shall behold blood, and fire, and vapors of smoke.

42 And before the day of the Lord shall come, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon be turned to blood, and the stars fall from heaven.

These verses in D&C 45 are nearly identical to a prophecy of Joel, recorded in Joel 2:30-31, but one important difference between the two texts is that the Lord speaks in the first person in Joel: "And I will shew wonders in the heavens and in the earth." The use of the personal pronoun I rather than the third person they (as in D&C 45:40) verifies that the signs and wonders of the heavens and earth, as well as the darkened sun, blood-red moon, and falling stars, are signs given of the Lord. They will not simply be atmospheric phenomena that indifferent observers may easily dismiss but are God's signs and wonders for the last days. The precise meaning of signs and wonders is at present unknown, although the spiritually alert will discern them to be signs of the times when they are revealed in the heavens and in the earth.

Joseph Smith enjoyed a view of God's signs in heaven the night of 13 November 1833, which he described as a "shower of fire" and "fireworks of eternity." He recorded in his journal that he was awakened at 4 a.m. by a "Brother Davis," who invited him to "arise and behold the signs in the heavens. I arose, and to my great joy, beheld the stars fall from heaven like a shower of hailstones; a literal fulfilment of the word of God, as recorded in the holy Scriptures, and a sure sign that the coming of Christ is close at hand. In the midst of this shower of fire, I was led to exclaim, 'How marvelous are Thy works, O Lord! I thank Thee for Thy mercy unto Thy servant; save me in Thy kingdom for Christ's sake. Amen.'"

The Prophet's journal continues: "The appearance of these signs varied in different sections of the country: in Zion, all heaven seemed enwrapped in splendid fireworks, as if every star in the broad expanse had been suddenly hurled from its course, and sent lawless through the wilds of ether. Some at times appeared like bright shooting meteors, with long trains of light following in their course, and in numbers resembled large drops of rain in sunshine. . . . The appearance was beautiful, grand, and sublime beyond description; and it seemed as if the artillery and fireworks of eternity were set in motion to enchant and entertain the Saints, and terrify and awe the sinners of the earth. Beautiful and terrific as was the scenery, it will not fully compare with the time when the sun shall become black like sack-cloth of hair, the moon like blood, and the stars fall to the earth— Rev. vi:13." [^1] This appearance in the sky, grand as it was, is but a preview of the signs and wonders that will yet appear in the heavens. [^2]

Notes and Commentary

D&C 45:40 they shall see signs and wonders. Luke similarly recorded: "And there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars" (Luke 21:25). Signs and wonders accompanied the first coming of Christ (Hel. 14:5-7; 3 Ne. 1:21) and will be shown (or heard; see 3 Ne. 2:1) in both the heavens and in the earth in the last days. They will "enchant and entertain the Saints" but "terrify and awe the sinners of the earth." [^3] What the signs and wonders are and when they shall appear have not been revealed.

D&C 45:41 they shall behold blood, and fire, and vapors of smoke. The blood, fire, and smoke refer to wars and bloody battles, but because this verse appears in the context of heavenly and earthly signs and wonders, perhaps the three refer to other events. For instance, earthquakes, volcanoes, and other natural catastrophes may cause injuries and death (hence blood), fire, and smoke; or the fire may come down from heaven as it did by the word of Elijah when two groups of fifty-one souls were destroyed (2 Kgs. 1:9-14). Yet another possibility is that the raining of brimstone and fire from heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah, causing a great smoke to ascend "as the smoke of a furnace" (Gen. 19:24-28; see also 1 Ne. 19:11; 3 Ne. 10:13-14), may be a type of the destruction that will befall some in the last days. Moroni's prophecy of the conditions and events at the coming forth of the Book of Mormon included these words: "Yea, it shall come in a day when there shall be heard of fires, and tempests, and vapors of smoke in foreign lands" (Morm. 8:29).

D&C 45:42 before the day of the Lord shall come. Before the second coming of Jesus Christ.

sun shall be darkened, and the moon be turned to blood, and the stars fall from heaven. See the commentary on Rev. 6:12-17, below.

The Sun Will Become Black as Sackcloth and the Moon As Blood

Rev. 6:12-17

12 And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and, lo, there was a great earthquake; and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon became as blood;

13 And the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a fig tree casteth her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wind.

14 And the[heaven[s opened] [^4] as a scroll [is opened] [^5] when it is rolled together; and every mountain and island were moved out of their places.

15 And the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every free man, hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains;

16 And said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb.

17 For the great day of his wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand?

This section of Rev. 6 sets forth seven signs of the times that will occur after the opening of the sixth seal but before the second coming of the Lord. The seven signs are the earthquake, the darkened sun, the blood-red moon, falling stars, the heavens opening as a scroll, the movement of mountains and islands, and fear coming upon humanity. Many other passages of scripture parallel John's vision (Joel 3:15-16; D&C 29:14; JS 1:33).

These signs of the times warn the earth's inhabitants that the end of the earth is near. They are designed, in part, to encourage the wicked to repent of their sins. In fact, many will misinterpret these signs, believing that the time of the Second Coming has actually arrived. They will say, "The great day of his wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand?" (Rev. 6:17). But the scriptures inform us that Jesus will not make his great appearance until some time after the opening of the seventh seal (D&C 77:12-13).

Yet these signs are imminent. On 27 December 1832, the Lord revealed, "Not many days hence and the earth shall tremble and reel to and fro as a drunken man; and the sun shall hide his face, and shall refuse to give light; and the moon shall be bathed in blood; and the stars shall become exceedingly angry, and shall cast themselves down as a fig that falleth from off a fig-tree" (D&C 88:87).

Notes and Commentary

Rev. 6:12 he . . . opened the sixth seal. Christ opens the sixth seal, which "contains the revealed will, mysteries, and the works of God" (D&C 77:6), for the sixth thousand years of the earth's temporal existence.

there was a great earthquake. The great earthquake identified in Rev. 6:12 will be a testimony and a warning voice to earth's people that the Lord is God. The earthquake (and possible accompanying phenomena) may cause the sun to become black and the moon to look like blood. Other earthquakes are identified in Revelation 11:13; 16:17-20.

sun became black as sackcloth. The sun will look as if it is covered with black sackcloth, which is made from the hair of black goats. Sackcloth often symbolizes mourning, and its connection with the darkened sun implies that all God's creations are in mourning over the wickedness of the world. As seen by the inhabitants of the earth, the sun may appear to be darkened on account of volcanic ash, dust, smoke, or other such things. This darkening may be a result of the "great earthquake," or some other cause. We must remember that "the events of that day shall be so unprecedented and so beyond human experience, that the prophets are and have been at an almost total loss for words to describe those realities pressed in upon them by the spirit of revelation." [^6] Many prophecies have testified of this great event: "the sun shall be turned into darkness" (Joel 2:31) "shall the sun be darkened" (Matt. 24:29; JS 1:33); "the sun shall be darkened" (D&C 29:14; 34:9; 45:42) "the sun shall hide his face, and shall refuse to give light" (D&C 88:87).

moon became as blood. The moon does not become actual blood but becomes "as blood," probably meaning that it will look red to the inhabitants of the earth. This change in the appearance of the moon may be the result of the great earthquake spoken of in Rev. 6:12, which would send a great amount of dust and debris into the atmosphere. Such airborne particles could make the moon appear red "as blood." Many prophets have foretold this event, using such phrases as "the moon into blood" (Joel 2:31; Acts 2:20), "the moon shall be turned into blood" (D&C 29:14), "the moon be turned into blood" (D&C 34:9; 45:42), and "the moon shall be bathed in blood" (D&C 88:87). Though we may not know the actual cause in the change of the appearance of the moon—as well as any symbolism the Lord intended with this imagery—we can have confidence that this sign will somehow be given and that all the world will see it and fear.

Rev. 6:13 stars of heaven fell unto the earth. Many of the stars that we see in the sky are much larger than our sun, and their size alone, not to mention their extreme heat, would pulverize and melt the earth should they come in forceful contact with it. That will almost certainly not happen. Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "Such an earthquake [as the one prophesied in the sixth seal] has never before been known (Rev. 16:17-21), and it shall appear to man on earth as though the stars in the sidereal heavens are falling. And in addition, as here recorded, some heavenly meteors or other objects, appearing as stars, will fall 'unto the earth.'" [^7]

Other prophets besides John have foreseen this event. They wrote: "the stars shall fall from heaven" (Matt. 24:29; JS 1:33; D&C 29:14) and "the stars shall refuse their shining, and some shall fall" (D&C 34:9) "the stars fall from heaven" (D&C 45:42) "and the stars shall become exceedingly angry, and shall cast themselves down as a fig that falleth from off a fig-tree" (D&C 88:87).

as a fig tree casteth her untimely figs. "Untimely figs" should read "unripe figs," meaning figs that, before they are ripe, fall off the tree during a great storm or a great gust of wind. Isaiah's words are similar: "And the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll: and all their host shall fall down, as the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as a falling fig from the fig tree" (Isa. 34:4).

Rev. 6:14 [eaven[s opened] as a scroll. This difficult expression parallels a similar one in Isa. 34:4; there however, the heavens are "rolled together as a scroll," whereas here they are "opened as a scroll." The expression "heavens opened as a scroll" may correspond to an experience described by Wilford Woodruff: "When the five men entered the camp there was not a cloud to be seen in the whole heavens, but as the men left the camp there was a small cloud like a black spot appeared in the north west, and it began to unroll itself like a scroll, and in a few minutes the whole heavens were covered with a pall as black as ink. This indicated a sudden storm which soon broke upon us." [^8]

every mountain and island [was] moved out of their places. This movement may be the result of the "great earthquake" spoken of in Rev. 6:12. In the following verse we learn that fearful individuals also hide in the "rocks of the mountains."

Rev. 6:15 kings of the earth . . . and every free man, hid themselves. John lists seven categories of individuals here, the number seven denoting completeness. [^9] The list includes individuals belonging to the upper social class (kings; great, rich, and mighty men; and chief captains), middle class (free men), and lower class (bondmen). All will be affected by these cataclysmic events. Children are not included in this list, perhaps because of their innocence before God.

Why will people attempt to hide themselves from God? Three times Isaiah states that they will do so because of their "fear of the Lord" (Isa. 2:10, 19, 21), which fear is due to their wickedness and its consequences. According to D&C 29:15, these signs of the times will cause "weeping and wailing among the hosts of men." Meanwhile, the righteous, or those who worship the Lord in his sacred temples, will receive deliverance. The prophet Joel stated, "Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered: for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance" (Joel 2:32). A modern revelation, speaking of the same events, commands us to "be not troubled" (D&C 45:35).

Rev. 6:16 said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us. Jesus Christ prophesied of these events to "a great company of people" who followed him as he walked to Calvary: "Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover us" (Luke 23:27-30; see also Hosea 10:8).

face of him that sitteth on the throne. This expression is a reference to God the Father (Rev. 4:2).

wrath of the Lamb. This phrase speaks of Jesus' righteous indignation.

Rev. 6:17 great day of his wrath is come. The wicked, as they hide themselves in the rocks, make this statement out of their own fear. Because of the extraordinary events described in Rev. 6:12-14, the wicked will believe it is the end of the world. Though these events are certainly signs of the times, they do not occur at the Second Coming, for the revelations state explicitly that Christ will not come until after the opening of the seventh seal (see, for example, D&C 77:12-13). In John's book of Revelation, Christ does not make his appearance in glory until Rev. 19. Further, the same writers who prophesied of the darkening of the sun, the moon becoming as blood, and stars falling from heaven (Rev. 6:12-14) record that those events would occur before the Second Coming, not at the Second Coming: "The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and the terrible day of the Lord come" (Joel 2:31; emphasis added; see also Acts 2:20) "but behold, I say unto you that before this great day shall come the sun shall be darkened" (D&C 29:14; emphasis added); "but before that great day shall come, the sun shall be darkened (D&C 34:9; emphasis added); "and before the day of the Lord shall come, the sun shall be darkened" (D&C 45:42; emphasis added). D&C 88:87 notes that these events will occur "not many days hence."

who shall be able to stand? The psalmist asked, "Thou, even thou, art to be feared: and who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry?" (Ps. 76:7). When the judgments of God come, the wicked will fall to the earth in fear. Also, being unable to stand when God sends his judgments corresponds with kneeling "when the hour of his judgment is come." D&C 88:104 states that "every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall confess, . . . for the hour of his judgment is come."

The Sign of the Bow

Joseph Smith

The Lord hath set the bow in the cloud for a sign that while it shall be seen, seed time and harvest, summer and winter shall not fail; but when it shall disappear, woe to that generation, for behold the end cometh quickly. [^10]

Twice Joseph Smith spoke concerning the sign of the rainbow, one of the signs of the times that is not identified in the scriptures (but compare Gen. 9:13-16; JST Gen. 9:21-25). [^11] The Prophet made the statement cited above on 21 May 1843 and offered a second, more expansive statement less than a year later, on 10 March 1844: "I have asked of the Lord concerning His coming; and while asking the Lord, He gave a sign and said, 'In the days of Noah I set a bow in the heavens as a sign and token that in any year that the bow should be seen the Lord would not come; but there should be seed time and harvest during that year: but whenever you see the bow withdrawn, it shall be a token that there shall be famine, pestilence, and great distress among the nations, and that the coming of the Messiah is not far distant.'

"But I will take the responsibility upon myself to prophesy in the name of the Lord, that Christ will not come this year . . . for we have seen the bow." [^12]

Both statements reveal specific aspects of this sign. Both speak of "seedtime and harvest," but the first adds "summer and winter." The first statement reads "woe to that generation" following the bow's disappearance, with no explanation as to why there will be "woe" or anguish and misfortune. The second, however, explains the meaning of the woe as being "famine, pestilence, and great distress among the nations." Both statements include the prediction that with the withdrawal of the bow, "behold the end cometh quickly," or "the coming of the Messiah is not far distant."

We may conjecture that the Lord will withhold rain from the earth for a period of time, preventing rainbows from forming in the sky. The lack of rain, in turn, may be the cause of "famines" mentioned in Joseph Smith's statement that "it shall be a token that there shall be famine, pestilence, and great distress among the nations."

The Sign of the Son of Man

JS-M 1:26, 36

26 For as the light of the morning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west, and covereth the whole earth, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be. . . .

36 And as I said before, after the tribulation of those days, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken, then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in heaven, and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn; and they shall see the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory.

The principal statements regarding the "sign of the Son of Man" may be found in Matthew's record or in Joseph Smith's teachings: [^13]

The sign, which is some kind of heavenly manifestation, will appear after the events and tribulations listed in Joseph Smith- Matt. 1:28-32, for Christ prophesies that "after the tribulation of those days . . . then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man" (JS-M 1:36). [^14]

The sign will appear "in heaven" (JS-M 1:36), which presumably means the sky.

After the sign appears, then shall the people of earth "see the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven" (JS-M 1:36).

No man will see "the sign of the Son of Man, as foretold by Jesus . . . until after the sun shall have been darkened and the moon bathed in blood." [^15]

Perhaps due to its sacredness or its significance, or perhaps to preempt efforts at deception, God has withheld from the devil knowledge of this sign. Joseph Smith explained that "the devil knows many signs, but does not know the sign of the Son of Man, or Jesus." [^16] At the same time, little has been revealed to the Saints or the world concerning the exact nature of this sign. But "when the sign is given, the Lord's servants the prophets, including all the faithful saints, will know it for what it is, and thus be made aware that the long-expected day has arrived. [^17]

The Prophet referred to the sign as "one grand sign of the Son of Man in heaven," [^18] the word grand underscoring the sign's significance and import. The sign will apparently have the appearance of a comet or another heavenly sphere. The Prophet explained in a general conference address in Nauvoo, on 6 April 1843: "There will be wars and rumors of wars, signs in the heavens above and on the earth beneath, the sun turned into darkness and the moon to blood, earthquakes in divers places, the seas heaving beyond their bounds; then will appear one grand sign of the Son of Man in heaven. But what will the world do? They will say it is a planet, a comet, &c. But the Son of Man will come as the sign of the coming of the Son of Man, which will be as the light of the morning cometh out of the east." [^19]

Notes and Commentary

JS-M 1:26 For as the light of the morning cometh out of the east. "East is the sacred direction. Holy temples are oriented eastward, and the east wind (the 'wind of God') originates from this direction. Jesus Christ enters his temples from the east (Ezek. 43:1-2; see also Ezek. 10:19) and at the time of the Second Coming, the Lord will come from the east." [^20] East is also the direction from which earth's inhabitants receive sunlight every morning, which serves as a constant reminder of Christ's glory and may be considered a type of his second coming; and at Christ's first coming in mortality, the wise men stated, "We have seen his star in the east" (Matt. 2:2).

shineth even unto the west, and covereth the whole earth, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be. Jesus likens his coming to the rising of the sun, the light of which originates in the east, then shines to the west, until the entire land is covered with light. Joseph Smith explained, "The Son of Man will come as the sign of the coming of the Son of Man, which will be as the light of the morning cometh out of the east." [^21] Thus, the sign of the coming of the Son of Man also appears to shine out of the east like the sun. JS-M 1:26 provides us with a description of Christ's second coming and assures us that on that occasion he will not come in any other way.

Such was clearly taught by President Harold B. Lee: "We are actually seeing [false Christs and false prophets] among us today, where individuals are coming forward with claims of Deity for their leaders. These arch-deceivers are among us, and some have come in person claiming to be God. . . .

"The Master gave a sure way for the saints to herald the coming of our Lord again to the earth, as he promised. This is how the Savior said he would appear: 'Wherefore if they [meaning heralds of the false Christs] shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert; go not forth: behold, he is in the secret chambers; believe it not. For as the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.' (Matt. 24:26-27; see also JS-M 1:25-26.)

"If we could remember that, and put to flight all the foolish ideas about how the Savior will appear, we would be ready when he comes." [^22]

JS-M 1:36 as I said before, after the tribulation of those days. Jesus refers to the tribulations that he listed in JS-M 1:28-32, which include wars, famines, pestilences, earthquakes, iniquity, lack of love, and the abomination of desolation.

then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn. The Revelator similarly prophesied that Jesus "cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him: and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him" (Rev. 1:7). Perhaps people will mourn or wail at this event because they realize that during their mortal probation they rejected their Savior and his redeeming grace and also because they know that suffering and destruction are imminent.

they shall see the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven. Earth's people will first see the sign of the Son of Man, and afterwards they will see the Son of Man appear with great glory in the clouds.

---
Notas:
[^1] God shows great signs and wonders in the skies. 2. The sun is darkened and the moon becomes "as blood." 3. The absence of the rainbow is a sign that the end is near. 4. The sign of the Son of Man appears in the sky shortly before Christ's second coming. History of the Church, 1:439-40.
[^2] Parley P. Pratt and others with him saw the same amazing scene on the same night; see Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, 110.
[^3] History of the Church, 1:440.
[^4] JST Rev. 6:14 changes heaven departed to heavens opened.
[^5] JST Rev. 6:14 adds is opened.
[^6] McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:486.
[^7] Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:486.
[^8] History of the Church, 2:104.
[^9] McConkie and Parry, Guide to Scriptural Symbols, 98-99.
[^10] History of the Church, 5:402.
[^11] See McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 413-17.
[^12] History of the Church, 6:254.
[^13] See also McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 418-20.
[^14] Joseph Smith also placed the chronology of the sign of the Son of Man after several tribulations (History of the Church, 5:337).
[^15] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 280.
[^16] History of the Church, 4:608.
[^17] McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 419.
[^18] History of the Church, 5:337.
[^19] History of the Church, 5:337.
[^20] McConkie and Parry, Guide to Scriptural Symbols, 44.
[^21] History of the Church, 5:337.
[^22] Ensign, Dec. 1971, 31.
