Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Signs of the Times ( 1999)

Christ Comes in Glory

Chapter 10

Jesus' Second Coming in Power and Glory

Signs of the Times

Â½Â½1. No one knows the exact time of the Second Coming. 2. Christ's coming is for the wicked like that of a thief in the night, but the righteous are prepared. 3. The Saints wait patiently for Christ's second coming. 4. Those who have the Holy Ghost as their guide are prepared for Christ's coming. 5. The great council at Adam-ondi-Ahman meets to prepare the Saints for Jesus' coming. 6. Jesus Christ comes "suddenly" to his temples and to the earth. 7. The Saints rejoice in knowing that the Lord will come again to the earth. 8. The Second Coming is a time of darkness and trouble forÂ½Â½ sinners. 9. Jesus Christ appears in glory, majesty, and power. 10. Righteous people from all ages of the earth will accompany Jesus Christ at his coming. 11. Sinners are burned with fire when Christ appears again. 12. Jesus joins the righteous in a joyous reunion at his coming.

Prophets from all ages and every dispensation have prophesied that Jesus Christ will make a great and glorious appearance to the earth; yet only once in the entire standard works does the expression second coming appear (D&C 34:6). In place of this expression, so commonly used in our Church, the scriptures use the terms coming, come, and cometh. The following examples demonstrate this usage:

Asaph: "Our God shall come, . . . a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him" (Ps. 50:3).

The psalmist: "Before the Lord: for he cometh, for he cometh to judge the earth" (Ps. 96:13).

Isaiah: "The Lord will come with fire, and with his chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire" (Isa. 66:15).

Zechariah: "The Lord my God shall come" (Zech. 14:5).

Matthew: "The Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his angels" (Matt. 16:27).

Luke: "Blessed are those servants, whom the lord when he cometh shall find watching" (Luke 12:37).

John: "Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see him" (Rev. 1:7).

Paul: "And then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming" (2 Thes. 2:8).

James: "Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord" (James 5:7).

Peter: "There shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of his coming?" (2 Pet. 3:3-4).

Jude (citing Enoch): "Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints" (Jude 1:14).

Joseph Smith: "O Lord, thou shalt come down . . . and all nations shall tremble at thy presence" (D&C 133:42).

The Doctrine and Covenants uses the verbs coming, come, and cometh extensively to express Christ's return to the earth. For instance, the Lord invites the faithful to pray for his coming: "Calling upon the name of the Lord day and night, saying: O that thou wouldst rend the heavens, that thou wouldst come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence" (D&C 133:40). He commands the Saints to "be faithful, praying always, having your lamps trimmed and burning, and oil with you, that you may be ready at the coming of the Bridegroom" (D&C 33:17). And he promises those who overcome the world that they will accompany Christ, "when he shall come in the clouds of heaven to reign on the earth over his people" (D&C 76:63).

Sinners receive a different message. The Lord warns that the unrepentant will be "utterly destroyed by the brightness of my coming" (D&C 5:19). The Lord's word to the children of darkness is, "The coming of the Lord draweth nigh, and it overtaketh the world as a thief in the night" (D&C 106:4).

Many from different spheres are preparing for Christ's coming, including God's angels, his mortal ministers, those who have passed on, and at least some of the 144,000 high priests. [^1] Angels are also making preparations. The Revelator speaks of angels who are preparing to sound their trumpets while there is "silence in heaven" (Rev. 8:1). Six angels then sound their trumpets in Rev. 8 and 9 and bring to the earth judgments that serve to cleanse the earth for Christ's coming. Three angels of judgment (Rev. 14:6-13) fulfill sacred duties, as do the angels of earth's harvest (Rev. 14:14-20). Seven angels also prepare and then pour out seven final judgments on the earth, encouraging people to repent (Rev. 15-16). Angels with their trumpets will herald the resurrection, destruction of the mother of abominations, the judgment, and other events (D&C 88:94-107).

In sum, "the sounding of the trumpets of the seven angels are the preparing and finishing of his work, in the beginning of the seventh thousand years—the preparing of the way before the time of his coming" (D&C 77:12). Further, angels cry out to the world: "Behold, and lo, the Bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him" (D&C 88:92). Paul taught that Michael the archangel would announce Christ's descent from heaven: "The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God" (1 Thes. 4:16). The scriptures also attest that angels will accompany Christ at his coming (Matt. 25:31).

We as members of the Church are also preparing for Christ's coming. We are instructed to "go forth, crying with a loud voice, saying: The kingdom of heaven is at hand; crying: Hosanna! blessed be the name of the Most High God. Go forth baptizing with water, preparing the way before my face for the time of my coming. . . . And again, it shall come to pass that on as many as ye shall baptize with water, ye shall lay your hands, and they shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and shall be looking forth for the signs of my coming, and shall know me" (D&C 39:19-20, 23).

On 3 November 1831, the Lord gave, through Joseph Smith, "D&C 133," D&C 133, addressed to "ye people of my church." It begins with a command to hearken and hear (D&C 133:1). In verses 8-10 the Lord commands the Church's elders to "call upon all nations, first upon the Gentiles, and then upon the Jews" and to "awake and arise and go forth to meet the Bridegroom; behold and lo, the Bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him. Prepare yourselves for the great day of the Lord."

Other revelations command the elders to declare repentance, to baptize, to make the Lord's paths straight, to harvest the field, and to gather people to Zion, all of which prepares souls for the coming of the Bridegroom (D&C 4; 11:1; 12:1; 14:1; 33:1). Although D&C 34:6 was revealed to Orson Pratt, the verse is directed to all of the Church's elders: "Lift up your voice as with the sound of a trump, both long and loud, and cry repentance unto a crooked and perverse generation, preparing the way of the Lord for his second coming."

Many scriptures indicate that the righteous dead are making preparations for Christ's coming (D&C 61:38-39; 133:57; see also 1 Thes. 4:13-17). [^2] And the 144,000 individuals fulfill a special function in the last days. They are "high priests, ordained unto the holy order of God, to administer the everlasting gospel" and "to whom is given power over the nations of the earth, to bring as many as will come to the church of the Firstborn" (D&C 77:11; see also Rev. 14:1-5).

Christ, of course, promises to make many appearances to the earth before his coming in great power and glory. He will "suddenly come to his temple" (Mal. 3:1; see also D&C 36:8; 42:36) he will make an appearance at the great council of Adam-ondi-Ahman (Dan. 7:13-14) 3 he will stand on the Mount of Olives and save the Jews (Zech. 14:3-5) and he will make other appearances (D&C 133:18-25). [^3]

President Ezra Taft Benson described the order of three of Jesus' appearances to the earth:["[At his second coming, the Savior's] first appearance will be to the righteous Saints who have gathered to the New Jerusalem. In this place of refuge they will be safe from the wrath of the Lord, which will be poured out without measure on all nations. . . .

"The second appearance of the Lord will be to the Jews. To these beleaguered sons of Judah, surrounded by hostile Gentile armies, who again threaten to overrun Jerusalem, the Savior—their Messiah—will appear and set His feet on the Mount of Olives. . . .

"The third appearance of Christ will be to the rest of the world.Â½Â½Â½Â½ . . .

"All nations will see Him 'in the clouds of heaven, clothed with power and great glory; with all the holy angels.'" [^4]

No One Knows the Day or the Hour

JS-M 1:40-46

40 But of that day, and hour, no one knoweth; no, not the angels of God in heaven, but my Father only.

41 But as it was in the days of Noah, so it shall be also at the coming of the Son of Man;

42 For it shall be with them, as it was in the days which were before the flood; for until the day that Noah entered into the ark they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage;

43 And knew not until the flood came, and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be.

44 Then shall be fulfilled that which is written, that in the last days, two shall be in the field, the one shall be taken, and the other left;

45 Two shall be grinding at the mill, the one shall be taken, and the other left;

46 And what I say unto one, I say unto all men; watch, therefore, for you know not at what hour your Lord doth come.

Jesus Christ uttered these words to his disciples privately, while sitting on the Mount of Olives. They asked him, "Tell us when shall these things be which thou hast said concerning the destruction of the temple, and the Jews; and what is the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world, or the destruction of the wicked, which is the end of the world?" (JS-M 1:4). Jesus responded by giving them signs by which they would know that Christ's coming was "near, even at the doors" (JS-M 1:39), and then he said, "But of that day, and hour, no one knoweth; no, not the angels of God in heaven, but my Father only."

The value of this statement should not be underestimated, for it has helped God's true followers in many generations discern false prophets who have attempted to declare the exact day or hour of Christ's coming. The statement also warns every generation to be constantly alert for his coming, because no one knows the day of his appearance.

Nevertheless, the Saints, as "children of light" (1 Thes. 5:5) are expected to know the season or the generation of his coming. This truth is taught clearly by Paul, who wrote, "But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief. Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day: we are not of the night, nor of darkness" (1 Thes. 5:4-5).

Furthermore, although we do not know the exact time of Jesus' second coming, we should be ever mindful that the time draws ever closer. Elder N. Eldon Tanner taught during general conference of October 1968 that "the last days are here and now." [^5] Elder Neal A. Maxwell concurred: "The Savior has told us that just as when the fig tree puts forth its leaves, we may know that summer is nigh, so it will be with his second coming (see Luke 21:28-30). The foreseen summer of circumstances is now upon us. Let us not, therefore, complain of the heat!" [^6] And in 1951, President Joseph Fielding Smith told the Saints at general conference: "I believe that the coming of the Son of God is not far away, how far I do not know, but I do know that it is over one hundred years nearer than it was when Elijah the prophet came to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple on the third day of April, 1836. Elijah's words point to the fact that we are that much nearer. And this ancient prophet declared that by the restoration of those keys we should know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at our doors. (D&C 110:13-16.)" [^7]

Notes and Commentary

JS-M 1:40 But of that day, and hour, no one knoweth. This saying is expressed again in the Doctrine and Covenants: "For the time is at hand; the day or the hour no man knoweth; but it surely shall come" (D&C 39:21) and again, "which time is nigh at hand—I, the Lord God, have spoken it; but the hour and the day no man knoweth, neither the angels in heaven, nor shall they know until he comes" (D&C 49:6-7). Elder M. Russell Ballard said: "I am called as one of the apostles to be a special witness of Christ in these exciting, trying times, and I do not know when He is going to come again. As far as I know, none of my brethren in the Council of the Twelve or even in the First Presidency know. And I would humbly suggest . . . that if we do not know, then nobody knows, no matter how compelling their arguments, or how reasonable their calculations. The Savior said that 'of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of heaven, but my Father only' (Matt. 24:36)." [^8]

no, not the angels of God in heaven, but my Father only. Jesus uses a triple negative ("no one knoweth; no, not") to stress that even the angels do not know the time of his coming.

JS-M 1:41-43 as it was in the days of Noah. Jesus likens the events connected with the great deluge to those preceding his second coming. Noah's contemporaries "were eating and drinking," an idiom that suggests riotous living (2 Ne. 28:7-8). They were involved in all types of sins. Moses listed some of these: "Behold, they are without affection, and they hate their own blood . . . and among all the workmanship of mine hands there has not been so great wickedness" (Moses 7:33, 36) "the earth was corrupt before God, and it was filled with violence. And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth. And God said unto Noah: The end of all flesh is come before me, for the earth is filled with violence, and behold I will destroy all flesh from off the earth" (Moses 8:28-30).

"As it was in the days of Noah," explained Jesus, "so it shall be also at the coming of the Son of man." Most of earth's inhabitants will either be involved in riotous living or will simply be walking heedlessly through life, unaware of impending disaster. Once again they will ignore the prophet's warning to repent and to come unto Christ, and once again they will be destroyed for their iniquities. [^9]

Luke, as did his contemporary Matthew, recorded Jesus' comparison of the circumstances surrounding the deluge with those of the Second Coming (Luke 17:26-27) but Luke adds a teaching of Christ that underscores the idea that the world will not be mindfully watching for Christ's coming: "Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; but the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed" (Luke 17: 28-30).

JS-M 1:44-45 grinding at the mill. When Christ comes again, many people will be caught unaware: they will be "eating and drinking, marrying" (JS-M 1:42), working in their businesses and generally pursuing their occupations. Verse 44 specifically mentions farmers; verse 45 speaks of grinders, but farmers and grinders seem to represent people from all occupations. Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained the phrase "the one shall be taken, and the other left" as follows: "The one who is taken, of the two laboring side by side, is the righteous one, the one to be gathered with the saints. He is taken to the body of the Church." [^10]

JS-M 1:46 And what I say unto one, I say unto all men. Although Christ speaks privately to his disciples on the Mount of Olives, his message is addressed to all people of all ages.

watch. This injunction means "be alert and ready." D&C 61:38 states it this way: "Gird up your loins and be watchful and be sober, looking forth for the coming of the Son of Man, for he cometh in an hour you think not." Then the following verse explains how to watch for Christ's coming: "Pray always that you enter not into temptation, that you may abide the day of his coming, whether in life or in death" (D&C 61:39).

for you know not at what hour your Lord doth come. Christ returns to his statement of JS-M 1:40: "But of that day, and hour, no one knoweth; no, not the angels of God in heaven, but my Father only." It is spiritually healthy for us not to know the time of Jesus' coming. Elder Gordon B. Hinckley explained, "To know when [the Second Coming] will come would take from us much of the self-discipline needed to walk daily in obedience to the principles of the gospel." [^11] "Deliberately and advisedly the actual time of [Jesus'] coming has been left uncertain and unspecified," taught Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "so that men of each succeeding age shall be led to prepare for it as though it would be in their mortal lives." [^12]

Christ's Coming Is Like That of a Thief for the Wicked but Not for the Righteous

1 Thes. 5:1-8

1 But of the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have no need that I write unto you.

2 For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night.

3 For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape.

4 But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief.

5 Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day: we are not of the night, nor of darkness.

6 Therefore let us not sleep, as do others; but let us watch and be sober.

7 For they that sleep in the night; and they that be drunken are drunken in the night.

8 But let us, who are of the day, be sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love; and for an helmet, the hope of salvation.

Paul, the author of these verses in 1 Thes. 5, explained that the Second Coming will catch the wicked unprepared and unaware. To illustrate his point he used the images of a calendar, a thief, war, a pregnant woman, nighttime, sleep, a drunken person, and a warrior.

The calendar: The wicked can read "the times and the seasons" (v. 1) because of weather changes, leaves turning colors and falling to the ground, snow falling, new plant growth in the spring, fowls flying south, and so on, but they seem unable to detect the signs of the times.

A thief: To the wicked, the day of the Lord will come quickly and unexpectedly, as a thief breaks into one's home during the night. The righteous, or the children of light, will be alert and awake when Christ comes, fully expecting him.

War: Many say "peace and safety," but they are caught unaware when war breaks out and they experience "sudden destruction" (v. 3). Similarly, at the Second Coming many will believe they are secure, but suddenly "destruction cometh upon them" (v. 3). The theme of war continues in verse 8, in which a breastplate and a helmet are mentioned.

A pregnant woman: Although a pregnant woman knows the approximate time of her delivery and receives indications that she is about to give birth, still the beginning moment of her travail (labor) comes quickly and by surprise. In a like manner, the day of the Lord will surprise the wicked (v. 3).

Nighttime: Paul wrote of "darkness" and "night" (vv. 4-5) and hinted that the wicked, in their spiritual darkness, cannot be alert to Christ's coming. The righteous, on the other hand, are "children of light" and "children of the day" and are "not of the night, nor of darkness" (v. 5). This terminology suggests that the righteous, who have the light of the Holy Ghost, will know the season of Christ's coming.

Sleep: This image, set forth in verses 6-7, is connected to the previous two verses that speak of darkness and night. Paul suggests that the wicked will be caught "sleeping" when the Lord comes, while the righteous, "who are of the day" (v. 8), will be watching for Christ's coming.

A drunken person: A righteous person is like a "sober" (vv. 6, 8) person, who is alert and has a clear mind; an evil person is like one who is drunk (v. 7) and has a clouded mind and impaired judgment. The drunk will lie in his or her stupor when Christ comes, while the sober person welcomes him.

Warrior: Children of light are prepared for the Second Coming, for they have armed themselves with the "breastplate of faith and love" and they wear the "helmet, the hope of salvation" (v. 8). Paul implies that the evil are not so prepared.

Notes and Commentary

1 Thes. 5:2 the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night. Paul borrowed images and language from the teachings of Jesus Christ, who taught, "Watch therefore: for ye know not what hour your Lord doth come. But know this, that if the goodman of the house had known in what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house to be broken up. Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not the Son of man cometh" (Matt. 24:42-44). Peter also compared the day of the Lord to the coming of "a thief in the night" (2 Pet. 3:10). In our dispensation, the Lord has told us that "the coming of the Lord draweth nigh, and it overtaketh the world as a thief in the night—Therefore, gird up your loins, that you may be the children of light, and that day shall not overtake you as a thief" (D&C 106:4-5).

1 Thes. 5:3 For when they shall say. The pronoun they refers to those who are unprepared for the coming of the Lord, those who cry "peace and safety," failing to recognize that destruction is imminent. Paul warned that such people "shall not escape."

1 Thes. 5:4 But ye . . . are not in darkness. Those who obey God's commands are "children of light" (v. 5) and will be prepared for Christ's coming; it shall not overtake them as a thief in the night.

1 Thes. 5:5 Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day: we are not of the night, nor of darkness. In four separate phrases, Paul instructed Church members that they are children of light. Those who await Christ's coming are of light and day, not of night and darkness. To the Ephesian Saints Paul wrote, "Now are ye light in the Lord: walk as children of light" (Eph. 5:8). A child of light is one who wears "the whole armour of God," also called the "armour of light" or the "armour of righteousness" (Eph. 6:11-16; Rom. 13:12; 2 Cor. 6:7). Such have learned to love and walk in God's light while shunning Satan's darkness.

1 Thes. 5:6 let us not sleep . . . but let us watch and be sober. Elder Delbert L. Stapley emphasized how we should "watch and be sober," or how to prepare for Christ's coming: "Let us be sure we thoroughly understand the most important things we can do to prepare ourselves for our Lord's second coming to earth and, by our obedience and faithfulness, escape his punishment. . . . We must set our lives and homes in order. This means a searching of our souls, an admittance of wrongdoing, and repentance where needed. It means keeping all of God's commandments. It means loving our neighbor. It means being good husbands and wives. It means teaching and training our children in the ways of righteousness. It means being honest in all our doings, in business and at home. It means spreading the gospel of Jesus Christ to all the peoples of the world." [^13]

1 Thes. 5:7 For they that sleep in the night. Sleep is often a metaphor for physical death (Dan. 12:2; 1 Thes. 4:14; 1 Cor. 15:6), but here it stands for one who is spiritually dead, especially as it pertains to an awareness of the signs of the times.

1 Thes. 5:8 breastplate of faith and love. The breastplate and the helmet are two parts of the "whole armor of God" that assist the righteous in the spiritual war "against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places." Other parts of this spiritual armor include the "sword of the Spirit" and the "shield of faith" (Eph. 6:11-17; D&C 27:15-18). The armor of God is also called the "armor of righteousness" (2 Cor. 6:7; 2 Ne. 1:23) and the "armor of light" (Rom. 13:12). From 1 Thes. 5:8 we learn that those who wear God's armor will be prepared for Christ's coming.

The Saints Patiently Await the Coming of Jesus

James 5:7-11

7 Be patient . . . therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord. Behold, the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth, and hath long patience for it, until he receive the early and latter rain.

8 Be ye also patient; stablish your hearts: for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh.

9 Grudge not one against another, brethren, lest ye be condemned: behold, the judge standeth before the door.

10 Take, my brethren, the prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction, and of patience.

11 Behold, we count them happy which endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy.

James, who addressed his epistle "to the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad" (James 1:1), counseled us to await patiently the coming of Jesus Christ. He used several expressions to encourage our patience, including be patient, waiteth, hath long patience (v. 7), be ye . . . patient (v. 8), patience (v. 10), endure, and patience of Job (v. 11). James provided a primary reason for patiently waiting for the Second Coming: "Behold, we count them happy which endure" (v. 11).

What should the Saints do to be patient? James gives us the answer: "Stablish your hearts . . . grudge not one against another" and follow the prophets "for an example of suffering affliction, and of patience" (James 5:8-10). "Patience will see us through troubles," Elder Neal A. Maxwell taught, "because of the perspective that patience brings. A patient Paul declared, 'We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down but not destroyed.' (2 Cor. 4:8-9.)" [^14] On another occasion Elder Maxwell stated, "While the virtue of patience, which was fully developed in Him, is never out of season, patience in tribulation will surely be a premiere virtue in the last days." [^15]

As we patiently wait for Christ's coming, we should be obedient and prepare. As Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin said: "We do not know the precise time of the Second Coming of the Savior, but we do know that we are living in the latter days and are closer to the Second Coming than when the Savior lived his mortal life in the meridian of time. We should resolve to begin a new era of personal obedience to prepare for His return. Mortality is fleeting. We all have much to accomplish in preparation to meet Him." [^16]

Notes and Commentary

James 5:7 Be patient . . . unto the coming of the Lord. Be patient is an imperative found here and again in James 5:8. The coming of the Lord refers to Christ's second coming.

the husbandman waiteth . . . and hath long patience. James likened those who look for the Lord's coming to the farmer who patiently waits for his crops to grow. Both are required to be patient, and eventually both receive their reward. While the farmer is waiting for his crops to grow, he waters, fertilizes, weeds, and generally cares for his crops. We are required to do likewise while awaiting Christ's coming: attend to the Lord's work, provide spiritual nourishment for others, provide tender care, and show forth great love for others.

James 5:8 stablish your hearts. James instructs us not to lose heart, because "the coming of the Lord draweth nigh." Be firm.

the coming of the Lord draweth nigh. This phrase is revealed anew in our dispensation (D&C 106:4).

James 5:9 Grudge not one against another. Do not judge or complain against one another.

the judge standeth before the door. Jesus Christ is the Judge to whom James refers. James seems to say, in different terms, what he has already stated in verse 8: "for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh."

James 5:10 Take . . . the prophets . . . for an example of suffering affliction. Prophets of all ages have suffered afflictions, setting an example of patience, faith, and humility for us. Paul, for instance, summarized the afflictions he received while ministering on behalf of Christ. He wrote: "Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have been in the deep; in journeyings often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren; in weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness" (2 Cor. 11:24-27; see also Mosiah 17:23; Alma 14:26; JS 1:22). Yet through it all he remained faithful, praising God and saying, "The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ . . . is blessed for evermore" (2 Cor. 11:31).

an example . . . of patience. James held up the ancient prophets (only Job is explicitly mentioned; see v. 11) as an example of patience.

James 5:11 we count them happy which endure. This short phrase sums up the essence of the entire section. Those who remain patient in the face of the adversity of the last days, looking to the coming of the Lord, will be happy. They will receive the Spirit, the gifts of the Spirit, and the comfort and blessing of the atonement of Christ.

Ye have heard of the patience of Job. The prophet Job is well known for his patience in affliction. Though he lost his children, his flocks, and his worldly goods, and though he suffered in body, mind, and spirit, he still trusted in the Lord.

have seen the end of the Lord. We have seen the Lord's purpose with Job—and with us.

the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy. The Lord is kind, compassionate, and full of loving gentleness.

Those with the Holy Spirit Will Be Prepared

D&C 45:56-59

56 And at that day, when I shall come in my glory, shall the parable be fulfilled which I spake concerning the ten virgins.

57 For they that are wise and have received the truth, and have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived—verily I say unto you, they shall not be hewn down and cast into the fire, but shall abide the day.

58 And the earth shall be given unto them for an inheritance; and they shall multiply and wax strong, and their children shall grow up without sin unto salvation.

59 For the Lord shall be in their midst, and his glory shall be upon them, and he will be their king and their lawgiver.

The parable of the ten virgins (Matt. 25:1-13) describes five wise virgins who had oil for their lamps and five foolish virgins who did not. All ten took their lamps as they went out to meet the bridegroom (who represents Christ), but only those with oil were permitted to enter with him to the marriage (representing the union of Christ with his Saints); the others were shut out when the door was closed.

On 7 March 1831 the Lord revealed a partial interpretation of this parable when he explained that the wise virgins are they who "have received the truth, and have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived" (D&C 45:57). Elder Spencer W. Kimball explained that "the Ten Virgins represent the people of the Church of Jesus Christ and not the rank and file of the world." [^17]

The parable's central message is set forth in verse 13: "Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh." We must do these three things—receive the truth, take the Holy Ghost as our guide, and be not deceived—if we hope to be prepared for the coming of the Bridegroom. All three focus on the Holy Ghost, who helps us to receive the truth, serves as our guide, and helps us to avoid deception.

Notes and Commentary

D&C 45:56 at that day. Day hearkens back to D&C 45:39, which speaks of "the great day of the Lord," or the time of "the coming of the Son of Man" (see also D&C 45:42).

when I shall come in my glory. This phrase refers to the Second Coming. Many prophets have described Jesus as coming "with power and great glory" (Matt. 24:30; D&C 29:11; 34:7; see also Isa. 2:10; D&C 65:5). The word glory means brightness, splendor, and magnificence. [^18]

the parable be fulfilled which I spake concerning the ten virgins. This parable, recorded in the testimony of Matthew (Matt. 24:1-13), speaks of Church members. Elder Spencer W. Kimball taught: "There are even many members of the Church who are lax and careless and who continually procrastinate. They live the gospel casually but not devoutly. They have complied with some requirements but are not valiant. They do no major crimes but merely fail to do the things required—things like paying tithing, living the Word of Wisdom, having family prayers, fasting, attending meetings, serving. . . . The ten virgins belonged to the kingdom and had every right to the blessings—except that five were not valiant and were not ready when the great day came. They were unprepared through not living all the commandments. They were bitterly disappointed at being shut out from the marriage—as likewise their modern counterparts will be." [^19]

D&C 45:57 have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived. The first statement, "have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide," implies the second, "and have not been deceived." Those who have learned how to hear and listen to the Holy Spirit will not be deceived, and will therefore not be "cast into the fire, but shall abide the day" of Christ's coming. The Holy Ghost is symbolized by oil (see, for example, 1 Sam. 10:1, 6, 9; 16:13; Isa. 61:1; Acts 10:38; 2 Cor. 1:21-22). [^20] In the parable of the ten virgins, there is a connection between the lamp oil and the Holy Ghost: those who possess oil are guided by the Spirit, have received the truth, and are not deceived.

they shall not be hewn down and cast into the fire. The words hewn down imply that people are like trees that are cut down with an ax. Other scriptures are explicit in their symbolic identification of people as trees. Green trees often represent the righteous (Ps. 1:3; D&C 135:6; Rev. 11:4) dry trees symbolize the wicked (Luke 23:31; 3 Ne. 14:17-18). Alma 5:52, using language similar to that of D&C 45:57, summarizes the eventual destination of the wicked, "Behold, the ax is laid at the root of the tree; therefore every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit shall be hewn down and cast into the fire, yea, a fire which cannot be consumed, even an unquenchable fire."

but shall abide the day. The green trees, or the righteous, may be scathed by fire (D&C 135:6), but they will not be destroyed, and will abide (meaning they will survive) the great day of the Lord.

D&C 45:58-59 an inheritance. These two verses set forth blessings that will belong to those who are guided by the Holy Spirit during mortality and who abide the day of Christ's coming. The specific blessings are that they will inherit the earth and have many, sinless children; moreover, Jesus Christ will dwell with them, place his glory upon them, and rule over them as their king and lawgiver.

the earth shall be given unto them. The Lord's people often possess a land of promise during mortality, and those who abide the day of the Lord's coming will inherit the earth "to possess . . . forever and ever" (D&C 103:7; see also Ps. 37:9; Matt. 5:5; D&C 63:20). The land of promise possessed by mortals is a type of the greater "land of promise" (D&C 38:18), speaking of the earth in its celestial state. This celestialized land of promise will be "a land flowing with milk and honey, upon which there shall be no curse when the Lord cometh; and I will give it unto you for the land of your inheritance, if you seek it with all your hearts. And this shall be my covenant with you, ye shall have it for the land of your inheritance, and for the inheritance of your children forever, while the earth shall stand, and ye shall possess it again in eternity, no more to pass away" (D&C 38:18-20).

Adam-ondi-Ahman: Preparing the Saints for Christ's Coming

Dan. 7:9-27

9 I beheld till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool: his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire.

10 A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him: thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him: the judgment was set, and the books were opened.

11 I beheld then because of the voice of the great words which the horn spake: I beheld even till the beast was slain, and his body destroyed, and given to the burning flame.

12 As concerning the rest of the beasts, they had their dominion taken away: yet their lives were prolonged for a season and time.

13 I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him.

14 And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.

15 I Daniel was grieved in my spirit in the midst of my body, and the visions of my head troubled me.

16 I came near unto one of them that stood by, and asked him the truth of all this. So he told me, and made me know the interpretation of the things.

17 These great beasts, which are four, are four kings, which shall arise out of the earth.

18 But the saints of the most High shall take the kingdom, and possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever.

19 Then I would know the truth of the fourth beast, which was diverse from all the others, exceeding dreadful, whose teeth were of iron, and his nails of brass; which devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with his feet;

20 And of the ten horns that were in his head, and of the other which came up, and before whom three fell; even of that horn that had eyes, and a mouth that spake very great things, whose look was more stout than his fellows.

21 I beheld, and the same horn made war with the saints, and prevailed against them;

22 Until the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the saints of the most High; and the time came that the saints possessed the kingdom.

23 Thus he said, The fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom upon earth, which shall be diverse from all kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces.

24 And the ten horns out of this kingdom are ten kings that shall arise: and another shall rise after them; and he shall be diverse from the first, and he shall subdue three kings.

25 And he shall speak great words against the most High, and shall wear out the saints of the most High, and think to change times and laws: and they shall be given into his hand until a time and times and the dividing of time.

26 But the judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion, to consume and to destroy it unto the end.

27 And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him.

At some point in the near future, before the Second Coming, a great meeting or grand council will be held at Adam-ondi-Ahman, located in Daviess County, Missouri (D&C 116:1). Elder Joseph Fielding Smith called this meeting "one of the greatest events this troubled earth has ever seen." [^21] One purpose of this meeting, wrote Joseph Smith, is to prepare the Saints for Christ's coming: "Daniel in his seventh chapter speaks of the Ancient of Days; he means the oldest man, our Father Adam, Michael, he will call his children together and hold a council with them to prepare them for the coming of the Son of Man." [^22] Part of this preparation, as explained by Elder Joseph Fielding Smith, will involve "all who have held keys [making] their reports and [delivering] their stewardships, as they shall be required. Adam will direct this judgment, and then he will make his report, as the one holding the keys for this earth, to his Superior Officer, Jesus Christ." [^23]

In all of the standard works there is no greater or more complete description of the council to be held at Adam-ondi-Ahman than in Dan. 7. There the prophet Daniel details "a dream and visions of his head upon the bed: then he wrote the dream" (Dan. 7:1). Throughout this chapter we are reminded that he beheld a vision: "I saw in my vision" (v. 2), "I beheld" (v. 6, 9, 11, 21), "I saw in the night visions" (v. 7, 13), "the visions of my head troubled me" (v. 15). A revelation from God, this dream may be divided into three parts: the four beasts (Dan. 7:1-8) the council at Adam-ondi-Ahman (Dan. 7:9-14) and the interpretation of the dream (Dan. 7:15-28).

The four beasts (Dan. 7:1-8). Daniel's entire vision is full of symbolism. He sees four ferocious creatures: a lion, a bear, a leopard, and an unnamed beast, each representing a king or kingdom (or political system). All have great political power in the earth (see also Dan. 7:17-19, 23-25). The predatory nature of these four beasts represents power to rule with terror, to kill and destroy. Daniel described the fourth beast as "the fourth kingdom upon earth, which . . . shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces" (Dan. 7:23).

The council at Adam-ondi-Ahman (Dan. 7:9-14). This section of Daniel holds considerable significance for members of the Church because it provides much information regarding the great council, including the following:

Thrones for Adam and others will be set up (Dan. 7:9).

The four beasts, or kingdoms, will be stripped of their dominion and powers (Dan. 7:12) because of the events that will take place at Adam-ondi-Ahman (Dan. 7:17-18, 22-23, 25-27).

The fourth beast, the most ferocious of the four, will be "slain, and his body destroyed, and given to the burning flame" (Dan. 7:11) because of events that will occur at Adam-ondi-Ahman (Dan. 7:19-27).

A great spiritual court will be held, judgment will be given to the Saints, and they will take the kingdom (Dan. 7:10, 18, 22, 27).

Jesus Christ will appear, and upon him will be given "dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him" (Dan. 7:13-14).

There is historical precedent for this council to be held at Adam- ondi-Ahman, "the land where Adam dwelt" (D&C 117:8). D&C 107:53-57 describes a meeting that was held three years before Adam's death, at which Adam and his posterity gathered at Adam-ondi-Ahman. At least three major events occurred there: Adam bestowed a blessing upon his posterity, the premortal Christ appeared and made Adam a head and a prince, and Adam "predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation" (D&C 107:56), perhaps also prophesying of the latter-day council at Adam-ondi-Ahman.

The interpretation of the dream (Dan. 7:15-28). Perhaps because of the strange symbolism or the graphic scenes in the dream, Daniel stated that "the visions of my head troubled me" (Dan. 7:15). He therefore asked for (Dan. 7:16) and received an interpretation, but only in the broadest terms. The meaning of the four beasts of verses 2-7 is touched on in verses 17, 19, 23-24; brief interpretative comments about the ten horns mentioned in verse 7 are provided in verses 20 and 24; the import of the small horn of verse 8 is presented in verses 20-21, 24-26; the divine judgment of verses 9-10 is further discussed in verses 22, 26; and mention of the great hosts in verse 10 is explained further in verses 18, 22, 27.

The text of Rev. 11:14-18 and Rev. 13 corresponds with Dan. 7; these passages should be studied together.

Notes and Commentary

Dan. 7:9 the thrones were cast down. A more correct reading of this phrase is "the thrones were set in place," or "the thrones were set up" (see footnote to Dan. 7:9 in the LDS edition of the KJV). In his vision Daniel saw places of honor being set up in preparation for the great meeting to be held at Adam-ondi-Ahman. Thrones rather than chairs are set in place because exalted beings will be present (see also Rev. 20:4). For part of the council, at least, the "ten thousand times ten thousand" Saints are standing (see Dan. 7:10).

the Ancient of days did sit. "Daniel in his seventh chapter speaks of the Ancient of Days; he means the oldest man, our Father Adam" [^24] (see also D&C 138:38). It is Adam who "will call his children [or posterity] together" to hold this council because he is the "father of the human family" and because he "presides over the spirits of all men." [^25]

garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool. Daniel described Adam as a glorious, exalted being, using images (snow and wool) that characterize purity and glory.

his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire. Adam's throne, like his garment and resurrected body, are shown to be glorious and heavenly, surrounded by great light. Daniel spoke in similes: actual fire may not be present on the throne and wheels, but the glory and brightness are real. This throne with its wheels recalls God's celestial throne described in Ezek. 1:13-19, which like a chariot, may symbolize God's power to move about through the heavens.

Dan. 7:10 A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him. The fiery stream is yet another symbol used by Daniel to describe the glory of Adam, who is a celestial being. Fire is often used to describe glorified beings or settings (see, for example, Ex. 3:2; 1 Ne. 1:6; 3 Ne. 17:24; and D&C 110:3).

ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him. This number is the same as that of the exalted beings who will worship God in the celestial kingdom as he sits upon his throne (Rev. 5:11). The numerical expression "ten thousand times ten thousand," or one hundred million, is probably a symbolic expression for a vast number of Saints who will be present at the council. Who are these ten thousand times ten thousand? Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained that Jesus Christ "will come in private to his prophet and to the apostles then living. Those who have held keys and powers and authorities in all ages from Adam to the present will also be present. And further, all the faithful members of the Church then living and all the faithful saints of all the ages past will be present. It will be the greatest congregation of faithful saints ever assembled on planet Earth. It will be a sacrament meeting. It will be a day of judgment for the faithful of all the ages. And it will take place in Daviess County, Missouri, at a place called Adam- ondi-Ahman." [^26]

the judgment was set. The term judgment, a legal term used numerous times in the Mosaic legal code (Deut. 17:8), also means court, [^27] and some biblical translators prefer to translate this phrase as "a court was held" (NJB). Daniel used the term three times in this section: here, and again in verses 22 and 26. This court is not an earthly court of law but a spiritual forum or tribunal held by celestial beings together with righteous mortals. This court will be held by the Saints, and it is in this setting that "the saints of the most High shall take the kingdom, and possess the kingdom" (Dan. 7:18).

Daniel explained: "The Ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the saints of the most High; and the time came that the saints possessed the kingdom," concluding, "the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him" (Dan. 7:22, 27; see also Rev. 11:14-18).

The earthly kingdoms, then, will be succeeded by the heavenly kingdom, or God's kingdom, and Adam-ondi-Ahman will be the place where this will occur. Little is known regarding when this council will be held or how long earth's kingdoms will endure after the judgment is set.

Dan. 7:10 describes not the Last Judgment, in which wicked individuals will be judged by Jesus Christ, but the judgment of the time when the fourth kingdom (perhaps representing earth's kingdoms, dominions, governments, and political systems in the last days), spoken of in Dan. 7:23-25, will lose its power. Hence, Dan. 7:26 reads, "a court will be held and his [speaking of a king belonging to the fourth kingdom] power will be stripped from him, consumed and utterly destroyed" (NJB).

the books were opened. Rev. 13 parallels Dan. 7, and Rev. 13:8 speaks of "the book of life of the Lamb," wherein are written the names of the righteous. Perhaps the book of life is opened during the council at Adam-ondi-Ahman and judgment is directed against all those who worship the beast and whose names are not written in the Lamb's book of life (see also 1 Cor. 6:2).

Dan. 7:11 I beheld even till the beast was slain . . . and given to the burning flame. The same or a similar event is described in Rev. 19:20: "And the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet that wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had received the mark of the beast, and them that worshipped his image. These both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone" (see also Rev. 20:10).

Dan. 7:12 they had their dominion taken away. The other beasts, representing other earthly kingdoms, lost their "dominion," but they continued to exist for a period of time: "their lives were prolonged for a season."

Dan. 7:13 one like the Son of man. The divine title Son of man, revealed to Adam (Moses 6:57), is an abbreviated form of "Son of Man of Holiness." Son of man speaks of Jesus Christ, who will come with the clouds of heaven to the council of Adam-ondi-Ahman.

with the clouds of heaven. Christ will come down from heaven to attend the council. Clouds, located high in the skies and brilliantly white, represent the Lord's glory. For instance, after the New Jerusalem temple is built, "a cloud shall rest upon it, which cloud shall be even the glory of the Lord" (D&C 84:5; see also Ezek. 10:3-4). Perhaps these clouds of heaven that reveal Jesus Christ to those at Adam- ondi-Ahman will conceal his presence from outsiders (3 Ne. 18:38; Ether 2:4-5).

came to the Ancient of days. Although there is a great host in attendance at this meeting, Christ proceeds to the Ancient of Days (Adam), and then "the Son of Man stands before him, and there is given him glory and dominion. Adam delivers up his stewardship to Christ, that which was delivered to him as holding the keys of the universe." [^28]

Dan. 7:14 there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom. Jesus Christ will be invested as king at Adam-ondi-Ahman, and he will receive dominion, glory, and a kingdom. After the judgment is set (Dan. 7:10), and earth's kingdoms lose their power, "all people, nations, and languages" will serve Jesus Christ, and "his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed."

Dan. 7:15-16 I Daniel was grieved in my spirit. The vision, perhaps especially the graphic scenes dealing with the four ferocious beasts, disturbs Daniel. He seeks understanding from one of the heavenly attendants who is standing nearby, and receives the interpretation, presented in Dan. 7:16-27. The attendant, perhaps one of the thousands mentioned in verse 10, remains unnamed, although it may have been Gabriel (Dan. 8:16).

Dan. 7:17 These great beasts . . . are four kings. The four beasts are kings or kingdoms (Dan. 7:23) that belong to this earth, our telestial world. These four kingdoms may be identified with actual kingdoms, as some scholars have argued, or they may signify all of this world's kingdoms and governments since its beginning.

Dan. 7:18 the saints of the most High shall take the kingdom. Although earth's kingdoms at present rule the world's inhabitants, eventually the Saints will inherit the earth and reign over it with their Lord, Jesus Christ (D&C 43:29; 103:7). As Jesus is granted his dominion at Adam-ondi-Ahman (Dan. 7:14), it appears the Saints may receive theirs at that time as well. The "Most High" is one of God's titles, perhaps used in this context as a contrast to the lowly and beastly kingdoms of this world.

possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever. Note the triple use of ever in this phrase, emphasizing that the Saints will possess God's kingdom throughout eternity.

Dan. 7:19-20 fourth beast. These two verses elaborate on Daniel's vision of the fourth beast, described in Dan. 7:7-8.

Dan. 7:21-27 the same horn. The horn in these verses represents a great and mighty king who will war against the Saints and for a period of time prevail (see also Rev. 13:7) he will be powerful enough to conquer three other kings with their kingdoms; he will blaspheme God; and he will attempt to change seasons and laws (Dan. 7:21, 24-25; Rev. 13:5-6). But the rule of this king will be short-lived and his kingdom will be destroyed, along with all other kingdoms, because Adam will come and organize the great council at Adam-ondi-Ahman. At this meeting the Saints will counsel together as a spiritual court of law, judgment will be given to God's righteous (Dan. 7:22, 26; see also Rev. 11:14-18), "and the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him" (Dan. 7:27).

The Lord Shall Suddenly Come to His Temple

Mal. 3:1

1 Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he shall come, saith the Lord of hosts.

When we read the context of this verse we readily see it pertains to the Second Coming. The passage continues: "Who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire." Also, "I will come near to you to judgment; and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against false swearers" (Mal. 3:2, 5). Mal. 4:1 continues the theme of Christ's coming: "For, behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them up," and Mal. 4:5 speaks about the "coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord."

Notes and Commentary

Mal. 3:1 I will send my messenger . . . he shall prepare the way before me. In the last days Sidney Rigdon was one of the Lord's messengers who was sent forth to prepare the way for his coming. The Lord revealed to him: "Behold thou wast sent forth, even as John, to prepare the way before me, and before Elijah which should come" (D&C 35:4). Many others have served as the Lord's special messengers to prepare the way for his coming, including John the Baptist (D&C 13), Moroni, Peter, James, John (D&C 128:20), and others. The Lord has revealed that the gospel of Jesus Christ also serves as a messenger to prepare the way. "And even so I have sent mine everlasting covenant into the world, to be a light to the world, and to be a standard for my people, and for the Gentiles to seek to it, and to be a messenger before my face to prepare the way before me" (D&C 45:9).

the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple. This prophecy was revealed anew in our dispensation: "I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God; wherefore, gird up your loins and I will suddenly come to my temple" (D&C 36:8). D&C 42:35-36 suggests that the temple mentioned in this prophecy will be the temple in New Jerusalem, but the phrase "the Lord . . . shall suddenly come to his temple" likely has multiple fulfillments. Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "The Lord, whom we seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, meaning that he will come to the earth, which is his temple, and also that he will come to those holy houses which he has commanded us to build unto his blessed name. Indeed, he came suddenly to the Kirtland Temple on the 3 rd day of April in 1836; he has also appeared in others of his holy houses; and he will come in due course to the temples in Jackson County and in Jerusalem." [^29]

The Righteous Sing and Rejoice, for the Lord Cometh

Ps. 96:1-13

1 O sing unto the Lord a new song: Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ sing unto the Lord, all the earth.

2 Sing unto the Lord, bless his name; Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ shew forth his salvation from day to day.

3 Declare his glory among the heathen, Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ his wonders among all people.

4 For the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised: Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ he is to be feared above all gods.

5 For all the gods of the nations are idols: Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ but the Lord made the heavens.

6 Honour and majesty are before him: Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.

7 Give unto the Lord, O ye kindreds of the people, Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ give unto the Lord glory and strength.

8 Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name: Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ bring an offering, and come into his courts.

9 O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness: Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ fear before him, all the earth.

10 Say among the heathen that the Lord reigneth: Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ the world also shall be established that it shall not be moved: Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ he shall judge the people righteously.

11 Let the heavens rejoice, Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ and let the earth be glad; Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ let the sea roar, Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ and the fulness thereof.

12 Let the field be joyful, Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ and all that is therein: Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ then shall all the trees of the wood rejoice

13 Before the Lord: Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ for he cometh, Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ for he cometh to judge the earth: Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ he shall judge the world with righteousness, Â½Â½Â½Â½Â½ and the people with his truth.

When Jesus Christ returns to the earth in great glory and power, those who have loved truth and righteousness will sing, worship, and be joyful. This psalm sets forth several such expressions of joy, as shown by the terms sing (three times), rejoice (twice), glad, and joyful. In fact, it appears we are not simply invited to sing and rejoice at the Second Coming; we are commanded to have joy, as indicated by the nineteen imperatives—sing, sing, sing, bless, shew forth, declare, give, give, give, bring, come, worship, fear, say, rejoice, be glad, roar, be joyful—all of which pertain to the expression of joy, particularly in context. The gladness and joy in this psalm emphasize the rejoicing at the second coming of Jesus Christ: "He cometh . . . he cometh to judge the earth" with righteousness and truth (Ps. 96:13).

Elder Russell M. Nelson taught that the wonderful spiritual experiences of our lives, "glorious as they are, become but prelude to that great day ahead, when the faithful will stand at the latter day upon the earth. They shall abide the Second Coming of the Lord and shall stand with him when he appears (see Mal. 3:2-12; 3 Ne. 24:2-12). On that joyous morning, . . . [the] faithful shall be crowned with glory, immortality, and eternal life (see D&C 75:5; 138:51).

"Once again 'morning stars [will] sing together, and . . . all the sons [and daughters] of God [will] shout for joy!' (D&C 128:23; see also Job 38:7). For on that morning, 'the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together' (Isa. 40:5; see also Ezek. 20:48; Luke 3:6; D&C 101:23).

"Then, 'there'll be peace and contentment evermore, ev'ry heart, ev'ry voice on that day will rejoice. . . . There'll be joy in the morning on that day' (Natalie Sleeth, "Joy in the Morning," Carol Stream, Ill.: Hope Publishing Co., 1977, pp. 4-5, 9-10)." [^30]

Notes and Commentary

Ps. 96:1 sing unto the Lord. This expression is repeated three times in verses 1 and 2. The song is directed to the Lord; it is a song of worship.

a new song. The psalmist may refer to a specific "new song" (see, for example, Isa. 42:10; Rev. 14:3; D&C 84:98) or he may be speaking generically of all hymns and inspired religious songs.

all the earth. The command to sing a new song is directed to all earth's inhabitants, not just Church members.

Ps. 96:2 bless his name. This expression speaks of formal prayer as well as the prayer of the heart, which belongs to the righteous, who continually consider God's greatness and mercy.

shew forth his salvation from day to day. This passage is one of four imperatives in which we are commanded to share with others our knowledge of God's goodness. The other three imperatives are to "declare his glory among the heathen" (v. 3),["[declare] his wonders among all people" (v. 3), and "say among the heathen that the Lord reigneth" (v. 10). We are to frequently ("from day to day") "shew forth" (or proclaim) God's salvation.

Ps. 96:3 Declare his glory/his wonders among all people. We are to declare God's glory and wonders to all of earth's people because "the Lord is great," because he is "greatly to be praised," and because "he is to be feared above all gods."

Ps. 96:5 For all the gods of the nations are idols: but the Lord made the heavens. The psalmist contrasts the Lord with the nations' idols. The colossal difference between the two is this: The Lord created the heavens. Not stated but certainly implied is that idols do not create the heavens but rather are created by the hands of mortals.

Ps. 96:6 Honour and majesty are before him: strength and beauty are in his sanctuary. Four terms describe the Lord in this verse: honor, majesty, strength, and beauty. The sanctuary mentioned here refers to his temple in heaven, or the celestial kingdom.

Ps. 96:7 Give unto the Lord . . . glory and strength. Of course, we can give neither glory nor strength to the Lord, but we can and must fully acknowledge these attributes in him.

O ye kindreds of the people. The psalm speaks of and to everyone: "all the earth" (vv. 1, 9), "heathen" (vv. 3, 10), "all people" (v. 3), "nations" (v. 5), "kindreds of the people" (v. 7), "people" (v. 10), "the earth" (v. 13), "the world" (v. 13).

Ps. 96:8 the glory due unto his name. God's name is hallowed (Matt. 6:9), Christ's name is "far above . . . every name that is named" (Eph. 1:21), and "there is no other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved" (Acts 4:12).

bring an offering, and come into his courts. Ps. 96 may have been sung in the temple of Jerusalem as one of the hymns that existed during that period. The psalm may be one that is sung in worship during the Millennium, when the nations will worship the Lord in the temple of Jerusalem during the feast of tabernacles (Zech. 14:16-21).

Ps. 96:9 O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness. The New Jerusalem Bible correctly renders "in the beauty of holiness" as "in his sacred court"; hence, the entire phrase reads, "O worship the Lord in his sacred court." Court refers to the court of the temple; we are to worship God in our temples.

fear before him. The word fear here means to reverence, meaning "show reverence before him."

Ps. 96:10 he shall judge the people righteously. The theme of judgment is introduced here, at the beginning of the psalm, and its significance is underscored at the end. Its final words read, "he cometh to judge the earth, he shall judge the world with righteousness, and the people with his truth." At his second coming Jesus Christ will judge the wicked with righteous judgment; Christ's original Old World twelve apostles will "judge the whole house of Israel, even as many as have loved me and kept my commandments, and none else" (D&C 29:12).

Ps. 96:11-12 heavens rejoice. These verses use a poetic figure of speech, called personification, through which inanimate objects or things acquire qualities or perform the actions of humans. Here the heavens, earth, sea, field, and trees are commanded to perform human actions: to rejoice, be glad, roar, and be joyful, because the Lord comes to judge the earth and to establish a new order wherein there will be peace and righteousness. The heavens, earth, sea, field, and trees may refer symbolically to groups or individuals. Heavens may refer to those in heaven who will rejoice when Christ comes again upon the earth, and earth, sea, field, and trees may refer to earth's inhabitants who look for his coming in power and glory.

Ps. 96:13 Before the Lord. These words belong to verses 11 and 12, which should read, "Let the heavens rejoice, . . . all the trees of the wood rejoice before the Lord."

for he cometh, for he cometh to judge the earth. One common technique used in ancient Hebrew poetry was the placement of the poem's most significant words at the poem's conclusion or end. Such is the case in Ps. 96, in which the words "he cometh" close the poem and represent the psalm's central point. Note that these words are repeated for emphasis: "for he cometh, for he cometh."

Â½

The Lord's Day Is Darkness to the Unrepentant

Amos 5:18-20

18 Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord! to what end is it for you? the day of the Lord is darkness, and not light.

19 As if a man did flee from a lion, and a bear met him; or went into the house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent bit him.

20 Shall not the day of the Lord be darkness, and not light? even very dark, and no brightness in it?

In Amos 5 the Lord speaks through his prophet, who warns his contemporaries, especially those who belong to the house of Israel, to repent and to "seek" Jehovah (Amos 5:4, 6, 8). The chapter is introduced with "hear ye this word which I take up against you, even a lamentation, O house of Israel" (Amos 5:1). Amos speaks against Israel's corrupt temple practices, their social injustices and various iniquities, and promises destruction: "Wailing shall be in all streets; and they shall say in all the highways, Alas! alas!" (Amos 5:16). Verses 18 through 20 speak expressly about the "day of the Lord," a phrase repeated three times in these three verses. The day of the Lord is the time of the Second Coming and includes the period that immediately precedes this event, when the Lord's judgments are sent to earth's inhabitants. Although these verses were uttered to ancient Israel, they have direct application to every generation of earth's inhabitants, including our own.

Notes and Commentary

Amos 5:18 Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord! to what end is it for you? The Lord addresses unrepentant souls (Amos 5:4-17). Rhetorically he asks, "Why do you look forward to the day of the Lord, since to you it is a day of darkness and not light?"

the day of the Lord is darkness, and not light. This phrase has at least two meanings. First, the words darkness and not light refer to the spiritual darkness that attends the unrepentant, those who feel the guilt and pain associated with personal sin. When the Lord sends his fierce judgments on the world, the unrepentant will feel the weight of their sins. Second, the words may also describe the actual atmosphere in our skies in the last days. Joel similarly describes the day of the Lord as "a day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds and of thick darkness" (Joel 2:2), and Zephaniah characterizes that day as "a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness" (Zeph. 1:15). Yet to the righteous who dwell in Zion, the day of the Lord is not darkness but a time when they will sing praises, worship the Lord, and be joyful. [^31] They will experience "peace," "refuge," and the "glory of the Lord" (D&C 45:66-67).

Amos 5:19 As if a man did flee from a lion, and a bear met him. To the unrepentant the Second Coming is likened to a person who encounters a ferocious lion on the path. In great fear this person turns to flee, running for his life, but immediately encounters a great bear. Like the person who encounters the lion and the bear, the wicked will experience great fear when they face God's judgments but will be unable to escape them.

or went into the house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent bit him. To the unrepentant the Second Coming is like a person entering his home, thinking to find safety and finding instead a poisonous snake.

Amos 5:20 Shall not the day of the Lord be darkness, and not light? This phrase, introduced in Amos 5:18, is repeated here for emphasis. The final phrase of verse 20 expresses the same idea: "even very dark, and no brightness in it." Consequently Amos 5:18, 20, in defining the day of the Lord to the unrepentant, twice asserts that the day of the Lord is darkness and not light, and once uses the expressions dark and no brightness.

The Lord Comes in Glory on a White Horse

Rev. 19:11-16

11 And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse; and he that sat upon him was called Faithful and True, and in righteousness he doth judge and make war.

12 His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns; and he had a name written, that no man knew, but he himself.

13 And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood: and his name is called The Word of God.

14 And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean.

15 And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron: and he treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God.

16 And he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.

John the Revelator saw a vision of the second coming of Jesus Christ, when he will return to the earth with great glory, power, and judgment. John saw Christ as a mighty warrior-king: as a warrior, Christ["make[s] war," his vesture is blood-red, he rides a white horse, he["smite[s] the nations," and his armies follow him, also riding white horses. As a king Jesus wears "many crowns," judges the nations, rules "with a rod of iron," wears a regal vesture, and possesses the royal name "King of kings and Lord of lords." Much of John's language describing Jesus Christ as a warrior-king is symbolic. Christ's names and titles are instructive and explain his character and divine mission. He is called "Faithful and True," "the Word of God," "King of kings," and "Lord of lords" (Rev. 19:11, 13, 16).

Elder Charles W. Penrose provided the following beautiful description of Jesus Christ's coming: "He comes! The earth shakes, and the tall mountains tremble; the mighty deep rolls back to the north as in fear, and the rent skies glow like molten brass. He comes! The dead Saints burst forth from their tombs, and 'those who are alive and remain' are 'caught up' with them to meet him. The ungodly rush to hide themselves from his presence, and call upon the quivering rocks to cover them. He comes! with all the hosts of the righteous glorified. The breath of his lips strikes death to the wicked. His glory is a consuming fire. The proud and rebellious are as stubble; they are burned and 'left neither root nor branch.' He sweeps the earth 'as with the besom of destruction.' He deluges the earth with the fiery floods of his wrath, and the filthiness and abominations of the world are consumed. Satan and his dark hosts are taken and bound—the prince of the power of the air has lost his dominion, for He whose right it is to reign has come, and 'the kingdoms of this world have become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ.'" [^32]

Notes and Commentary

Rev. 19:11 I saw heaven opened. This expression may mean that John saw an opening in our atmospheric sky as Jesus descended, or perhaps more likely, that the veil was parted and the heavens were opened in a metaphoric sense. A latter-day revelation explains the power by which heaven was opened to John: "The power and authority of the higher, or Melchizedek Priesthood, is to hold the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the church—to have the privilege of receiving the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, to have the heavens opened unto them" (D&C 107:18-19).

behold a white horse. As the horse in scripture is representative of warfare (Isa. 31:3; Jer. 4:13; 8:16), the white horses in this section (vv. 11, 14) are symbolic, presenting Christ and members of his armies as great warriors. Christ's white horse, as envisioned by John, may have looked as terrible, mighty, and fierce as the following warhorse, described in Job 39:19-24:

Hast thou given the horse strength? hast thou clothed his neck with thunder? Â½. . . the glory of his nostrils is terrible. He paweth in the valley, and rejoiceth in his strength: he goeth on to meet the armed men. He mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted; neither turneth he back from the sword. The quiver rattleth against him, the glittering spear and the shield. He swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage.

Contrast Christ's two comings on two different kinds of animals: during his first coming he was "meek, and sitting upon an ass" (Matt. 21:5; cf. Zech. 9:9) as he entered into Jerusalem shortly before his death; at his second coming he will ride an indomitable warhorse, bringing judgment to the earth.

he that sat upon him was called Faithful and True. These two titles characterize Christ and recall earlier passages in Revelation in which he is called "faithful witness" (Rev. 1:5) and "he that is true" (Rev. 3:7). He is faithful in that he holds steadfastly to the right and keeps all his promises. He is true in that he acts always in accordance with true and righteous principles.

in righteousness he doth judge. The Father has "committed all judgment unto the Son" (John 5:22). As the God who is called "Faithful and True," Jesus Christ's judgments are "true and righteous altogether" (Ps. 19:9; cf. Isa. 11:4; 2 Ne. 9:46) he renders proper justice to both the righteous and the wicked.

and make war. Jesus Christ, the meek and gentle "Prince of Peace" (Isa. 9:6), will render judgment on the world. As a "man of war" (Ex. 15:3) he will destroy all corruptible things at his coming in power and glory to cleanse the earth for his millennial reign.

Rev. 19:12 His eyes were as a flame of fire. The phrase is found elsewhere in the scriptures where the glory of the resurrected Lord is described in symbolic language (Rev. 1:14; D&C 110:3). The eyes "as a flame of fire" suggest light and knowledge (D&C 77:4) as well as the resolute countenance of a warrior.

on his head were many crowns. The crown, along with the royal vesture (Rev. 19:13), is part of the regal attire belonging to the king. But Christ will have "many crowns" upon his head. This signifies that Christ, as the "King of kings" (Rev. 19:16), is ruler over all. Rev. 11:15 clarifies that "the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign forever and ever." As Paul explained, Christ is "far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come" (Eph. 1:21; see also Col. 1:16; 2:10). Satan attempts to deceive people when he imitates Jesus Christ by wearing seven crowns (Rev. 12:3), as does the beast who wears ten crowns (Rev. 13:1).

he had a name written, that no man knew, but he himself. Jesus Christ has a name that no man knows. Those who overcome the world will be identified with Christ and his new name. Rev. 3:12 explains, "Him that overcometh will I . . . write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, . . . new Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven from my God: and I will write upon him my new name." [^33] Those who overcome the world also will receive "a new name written, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it" (Rev. 2:17). By contrast, the great whore has a name on her forehead that identifies her as "Babylon the Great, the Mother ofÂ½Â½ . . . Abominations" (Rev. 17:5). While Christ's name is one that no man knows, the name of the Mother of Abominations, because of her pride and arrogance, is prominently visible.

Rev. 19:13 he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood. At his second coming Jesus will be clothed in red garments. A latter-day prophecy portrays Christ coming "down from God in heaven with dyed garments, . . . clothed in his glorious apparel, . . . red in his apparel, and his garments like him that treadeth in the wine-vat" (D&C 133:46, 48; see also Isa. 63:1-4). Jesus' red garments recall his atoning sacrifice, when he bled from every pore (D&C 19:18), thus staining his clothing with his own blood. Elder Neal A. Maxwell testified: "Soon, He who was once mockingly dressed in purple will come again, attired in red apparel, reminding us whose blood redeemed us." [^34] And further, "having bled at every pore, how red His raiment must have been in Gethsemane, how crimson that cloak! No wonder, when Christ comes in power and glory, that He will come in reminding red attire (see D&C 133:48), signifying not only the winepress of wrath, but also to bring to our remembrance how He suffered for each of us in Gethsemane and on Calvary!" [^35]

Isa. 63:2-3 provides a second reason for the red garments. The text is placed in a question-and-answer format. At the second coming the people will ask Christ why his garments are red:

Why are your garments red, your clothes as if you had trodden the winepress?

His reply:

I have trodden the winepress alone. Of the men of my people not one was with me. In my anger I trod them down, trampled them in my wrath. Their juice spattered my garments, and all my clothes stained. (New Jerusalem Bible)

This passage is describing a winepress not of atonement but of judgment. At Christ's second coming, he will trample to destruction the nations as if they were grapes, and their juice (that is, blood) will splatter his garments so that they become red (see also D&C 133:48-51).

his name is called The Word of God. In Joseph Smith's translation of John 1:14 and 16, Jesus Christ refers to himself as the Word.

Rev. 19:14 the armies which were in heaven followed him. Jesus Christ, as "captain" (2 Chr. 13:12), "commander" (Isa. 55:4), "leader" (Isa. 55:4), and "Lord of Sabaoth" (D&C 87:7; 98:2; Sabaoth is a Hebrew word which means "armies" or "hosts"), leads his armies to "make war" (Rev. 19:10) against the world. The armies that follow Jesus Christ are his Saints, those who wear the "whole armour of God" (Eph. 6:11-17; see also D&C 27:15). They, together with their Commander, will battle and overcome the evil in the world.

All the true Saints will accompany Christ at his coming (D&C 88:96-98). Matthew recorded that "the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his angels" (Matt. 16:27) Paul spoke of "the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints" (1 Thes. 3:13) and D&C 76:63 says of those who "overcome all things": "These are they whom [Christ] shall bring with him, when he shall come in the clouds of heaven to reign on the earth over his people" (see also 1 Thes. 4:13-17; Col. 3:4).

upon white horses. See the commentary on Rev. 19:11, page 417.

clothed in fine linen, white and clean. Contrast the white garments of Christ's armies with his blood-red vesture, identified in Rev. 19:13, and note the paradox: the Saints' "white and clean" garments have become such because they have washed and "made them white in the blood of the Lamb" (Rev. 7:14; see also 1 Ne. 12:10-11; Alma 5:21), meaning they have become sanctified through Jesus' atonement. The linen symbolizes "the righteousness of saints" (Rev. 19:8).

Rev. 19:15 out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword. The Joseph Smith Translation makes an important change that clarifies this phrase, reading "out of his mouth proceedeth the word of God." God will use his word, which "is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit" (Heb. 4:12), to "smite the nations" at his second coming. The smiting of the nations may have reference to the great burning that will accompany Christ's coming (D&C 64:23-25).

he shall rule them with a rod of iron. The Joseph Smith Translation renders this phrase as "he will rule them with the word of his mouth." God will first "smite the nations" with his word, and then he will rule them with that word.

he treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God. As grapes were harvested, they were placed in a trough and trampled by foot to produce juice, or wine. The winepress represents God's terrible wrath (meaning the execution of his judgments), which, according to justice, exacts the full and terrible payment for sin. The grapes, which represent the sinner, are trodden under foot until nothing is left but pulp and wine, the wine being a symbol of the blood of the sinner.

In performing the Atonement, Christ suffered that wrath for us, so that we might escape both the wrath and the consequent suffering if we would repent. In the time of judgment, all those who did not truly repent and come unto Christ will suffer the wrath of God themselves; it will be for them as if they themselves were cast into the winepress and trampled. "I have trodden the winepress alone," the Lord said through Isaiah, "I will tread them in mine anger, . . . and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments" (Isa. 63:3). D&C 19:11-19 describes the suffering of Christ in performing the Atonement and the suffering of those unrepentant souls who will be cast into the winepress themselves.

Rev. 19:16 he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written. The name "King of kings and Lord of lords," shown prominently on the Lord's red clothing and on his thigh, communicates his supremacy to those who see him. The name written "on [the] thigh" may instead be written on the vesture that covers the thigh; or the thigh may be a symbol or figure of speech for the sword found at the warrior's side, meaning the name is written on the horseman's sword.

KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS. Jesus Christ is the King and Lord over all of the heavenly hosts, including those who are "kings and priests of the Most High God" [^36] (see also Rev. 1:6; 5:10; 20:6). President Ezra Taft Benson testified of the power that Jesus will possess at his coming: "Not many years hence Christ will come again. He will come in power and might as King of Kings and Lord of Lords. And ultimately every knee shall bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ." (See Rom. 14:11; D&C 88:104; Mosiah 27:31.) [^37]

The Righteous Will Appear with Christ in the Sky

D&C 29:11-13

11 For I will reveal myself from heaven with power and great glory, with all the hosts thereof, and dwell in righteousness with men on earth a thousand years, and the wicked shall not stand.

12 And again, verily, verily, I say unto you, and it hath gone forth in a firm decree, by the will of the Father, that mine apostles, the Twelve which were with me in my ministry at Jerusalem, shall stand at my right hand at the day of my coming in a pillar of fire, being clothed with robes of righteousness, with crowns upon their heads, in glory even as I am, to judge the whole house of Israel, even as many as have loved me and kept my commandments, and none else.

13 For a trump shall sound both long and loud, even as upon Mount Sinai, and all the earth shall quake, and they shall come forth—yea, even the dead which died in me, to receive a crown of righteousness, and to be clothed upon, even as I am, to be with me, that we may be one.

When Jesus Christ appears in the clouds of glory, he will be accompanied by a great number of righteous individuals. Matthew and Luke identified them as "angels" when they wrote, "For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his angels" (Matt. 16:27; see also Mark 8:38; Luke 9:26). Paul identified those who will accompany Christ as "saints" (1 Thes. 3:13), as does the Old Testament prophet Zechariah (Zech. 14:5). Paul wrote an epistle "to the saints and faithful brethren in Christ which are at Colosse" (Col. 1:2), prophesying, "When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory" (Col. 3:4; see also 1 Thes. 2:19).

D&C 76 is the clearest in its description of those who shall appear with Christ in the sky at his coming. It speaks of those who "received the testimony of Jesus," who kept "the commandments" and were "washed and cleansed from all their sins," who received "the Holy Spirit by the laying on of the hands," "who overcome by faith and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise," "who are the church of the Firstborn," and "who are priests and kings. . . . And are priests of the Most High, after the order of Melchizedek. . . . These are they whom he shall bring with him, when he shall come in the clouds of heaven to reign on the earth over his people" (D&C 76:51-63).

Paul's epistle to Church members of Thessalonica indicates that righteous souls who are on the earth when Jesus comes again will actually ascend into the clouds to meet him in the air as he descends. The apostle wrote: "For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not [precede] [^38] them which are asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first: Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord" (1 Thes. 4:15-17).

Notes and Commentary

D&C 29:11 For I will reveal myself from heaven. Christ's second coming will be a revelation of the greatest magnitude because "every eye shall see him" when "he cometh with clouds" (Rev. 1:7). He explains elsewhere, "Prepare for the revelation which is to come, when the veil of the covering of my temple, in my tabernacle, which hideth the earth, shall be taken off, and all flesh shall see me together" (D&C 101:23).

with power and great glory. Power and glory describe Christ himself (Isaiah uses the phrase "glory of his majesty" to describe Christ at his coming; Isa. 2:10, 19, 21), as well as his appearance at his coming (Matt. 24:30; D&C 34:7; 65:5). His power and glory, with the attending fire, will be of such great intensity that even the mountains of the earth will "flow down at [his] presence" (D&C 133:40, 44), and the hills will melt "like wax at the presence of the Lord" (Ps. 97:5).

with all the hosts thereof. A great company of Saints will accompany Christ in the air at his coming.

and dwell in righteousness with men on earth a thousand years. This phrase refers to the Millennium, when Christ will reign in peace and righteousness. Those who live during the reign of Christ will sing praises and clap their hands:

O clap your hands, all ye people; shout unto God with the voice of triumph. For the Lord most high is terrible; he is a great King over all the earth. He shall subdue the people under us, and the nations under our feet.

He shall choose our inheritance for us, the excellency of Jacob whom he loved. Selah. God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a trumpet. Sing praises to God, sing praises: sing praises unto our King, sing praises.

For God is the King of all the earth: sing ye praises with understanding. God reigneth over the heathen: God sitteth upon the throne of his holiness. (Psalm 47:1-8)

the wicked shall not stand. These five words summarize the state of the wicked at the Second Coming. Isaiah uses similar words in his prophecy regarding the wicked at Jesus' coming. He wrote, "The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. For the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up; and he shall be brought low" (Isa. 2:11-12).

D&C 29:12 the Twelve which were with me in my ministry at Jerusalem. It is Heavenly Father's clear desire that the Twelve Apostles who served with Christ in Jerusalem accompany him at his coming. [^39]

stand at my right hand at the day of my coming. The right hand is a place of great honor and is associated with power (Ex. 15:3; Ps. 89:13). The exalted Jesus Christ himself stands at the Father's right hand (Acts 7:55-56) at the right hand of Christ will stand the Twelve Apostles.

in a pillar of fire. Speaking of Jesus at his coming, the psalmist testified that "a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him" (Ps. 50:3). The pillar of fire recalls the fire that led ancient Israel through the wilderness. "And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud to lead them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire" (Ex. 13:21).

being clothed with robes of righteousness, with crowns upon their heads, in glory even as I am. The apostles who will stand at Christ's right hand will be glorified beings, just as Christ is glorified. Like Jesus, who shall wear "many crowns" (Rev. 19:12), signifying that he is the King of kings, the Twelve will have crowns upon their heads; but unlike Jesus, who will wear a red vesture, the Twelve will wear robes that are "white and clean" (Rev. 19:13-14). The robes and crowns indicate that the Twelve are "priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory" (D&C 76:56; see also D&C 76:63).

to judge the whole house of Israel, even as many as have loved me and kept my commandments, and none else. Christ's Twelve Apostles will judge those members of the house of Israel who have kept Jesus' commandments and loved him. Mormon declared, "I write unto all the ends of the earth; yea, unto you, twelve tribes of Israel, who shall be judged according to your works by the twelve whom Jesus chose to be his disciples in the land of Jerusalem" (Morm. 3:18; see also Matt. 19:28; 1 Ne. 12:9). Although Jesus will delegate authority to the Twelve to judge members of the house of Israel, he will judge the wicked himself (Matt. 25:31-46; Jude 1:14-16).

D&C 29:13 For a trump shall sound both long and loud, even as upon Mount Sinai, and all the earth shall quake. The Lord promised ancient Israel that he would meet with them on Mount Sinai, if they would first sanctify themselves and properly prepare for this event. The signal that would inform Israel to "come up to the mount" would be the long sound of a trumpet (Ex. 19:13; see also vv. 16, 19). At this great event, "the whole mount quaked greatly" (Ex. 19:18). The event at Sinai is a type and shadow of similar events that will occur when Christ comes. Again there will be a trumpet blast, an earthquake, and a sanctified people, and once again the Lord will descend to meet with his Saints.

they shall come forth—yea, even the dead which died in me. This particular resurrection will occur at the sound of a trumpet and at the time of an earthquake. D&C 43:18 describes the events that will occur: "For the day cometh that the Lord shall utter his voice out of heaven; the heavens shall shake and the earth shall tremble, and the trump of God shall sound both long and loud, and shall say to the sleeping nations: Ye saints arise and live; ye sinners stay and sleep until I shall call again."

to receive a crown of righteousness, and to be clothed upon, even as I am. Jesus Christ, his apostles, and the Saints will possess a crown and regal vestments consistent with their royal nature.

that we may be one. God will make his Saints "equal in power, and in might, and in dominion" (D&C 76:95).

The Proud Shall Be Burned at His Coming

D&C 64:23-25

23 Behold, now it is called today until the coming of the Son of Man, and verily it is a day of sacrifice, and a day for the tithing of my people; for he that is tithed shall not be burned at his coming.

24 For after today cometh the burning—this is speaking after the manner of the Lord—for verily I say, tomorrow all the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, for I am the Lord of Hosts; and I will not spare any that remain in Babylon.

25 Wherefore, if ye believe me, ye will labor while it is called today.

Many prophets, including Isaiah, Micah, Nahum, Malachi, and Joseph Smith, have prophesied that a great burning will accompany Christ at his coming (Isa. 30:27-33; Micah 1:3-4; Nahum 1:1-10; Mal. 4:1; D&C 29:9). They have promised that all the proud and wicked, along with all corruptible things, will be destroyed by Christ's glory and brightness. For instance, Asaph, one of the authors of the Psalms, predicted, "Our God shall come . . . : a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him" (Ps. 50:3). Using a poetic style, Isaiah explained that Jesus Christ himself is the source of the burning fire: "Behold, the name of the Lord cometh from far, burning with his anger, and the burden thereof is heavy: his lips are full of indignation, and his tongue as a devouring fire: and his breath, as an overflowing stream, shall reach to the midst of the neck" (Isa. 30:27-28). The prophet Nahum spelled out the magnitude of the Lord's destructive fire: "The mountains quake at him, and the hills melt, and the earth is burned at his presence, yea, the world, and all that dwell therein" (Nahum 1:5).

Elder Gordon B. Hinckley told us how to avoid the burning and destruction that will accompany Christ's second coming: "Some years ago one of our brethren spoke of the payment of tithing as 'fire insurance.' That statement evoked laughter. Nonetheless, the word of the Lord is clear that those who do not keep the commandments and observe the laws of God shall be burned at the time of his coming. For that shall be a day of judgment and a day of sifting, a day of separating the good from the evil. I would venture a personal opinion that no event has occurred in all the history of the earth as dreadful as will be the day of the Second Coming; no event as fraught with the destructive forces of nature, as consequential for the nations of the earth, as terrible for the wicked, or as wonderful for the righteous." [^40]

In D&C 64, the Lord revealed his divine calendar: The present era is called today until Christ's second coming. Today is the time to prepare, to pay tithing, and to sacrifice for the kingdom of God. Tomorrow, when Christ comes in power and glory, the wicked and the proud will burn as stubble.

Notes and Commentary

D&C 64:23 Behold. Pay strict heed.

now it is called today until the coming of the Son of Man. God sets forth his divine calendar by explaining that the present era, which began 11 September 1831 (the date of this revelation) or even before that date, is called today. It will remain today until Jesus' second coming (see also D&C 45:6). The divine title Son of Man, first revealed to Adam (Moses 6:57), is an abbreviated form of "Son of Man of Holiness." The title is also used six times in Matt. 24, an important chapter on the signs of the times.

it is a day of sacrifice. Today is the season to sacrifice, to give of our time, means, and talents for the sake of Zion. By sacrificing we prepare for Christ's coming.

a day for the tithing of my people. The payment of tithing is a commandment, or "standing law," to the Church; the money is used "for the building of [the Lord's] house and for the laying of the foundation of Zion" (D&C 119:1-5). Those who faithfully tithe are promised that they "shall not be burned at [Jesus'] coming."

D&C 64:24 For after today cometh the burning. The word today refers to the era or season belonging to the restoration of the gospel before the Second Coming. Christ will come tomorrow, and that will be the day when all sinners will burn.

this is speaking after the manner of the Lord. The Lord explains that he is not speaking in these verses of twenty-four-hour time periods when he names today and tomorrow; he is speaking of broader periods of history.

tomorrow all the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble. Tomorrow signifies the time when the wicked and proud will burn with fire. The burning fire will be complete, not partial, for the wicked will "be as stubble." Nothing will be left except charred remnants.

I will burn them up. Jesus Christ himself will burn the wicked with the brightness of his glory and the great power of his judgments.

for I am the Lord of Hosts. Jesus reminds us that he is the Lord of hosts, perhaps because the hosts of heaven will accompany him in his second coming (Matt. 17:27; 1 Thes. 4:13-17; Rev. 19:14).

I will not spare any that remain in Babylon. None who belong to the world of wickedness will escape the Lord's burning. Although the proud and wicked will attempt to hide in holes, rocks, and caves at the Lord's appearance (Isa. 2:19-21; Rev. 6:15-16), they will not escape.

D&C 64:25 if ye believe me, ye will labor while it is called today. We who have faith in Jesus Christ are commanded to work and prepare now for his coming.

The Marriage Supper of the Lamb

Rev. 19:6-10

6 And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia: for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth.

7 Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honour to him: for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made herself ready.

8 And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white; for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints.

9 And he saith unto me, Write, Blessed are they which are called unto the marriage supper of the Lamb. And he saith unto me, These are the true sayings of God.

10 And I fell at his feet to worship him. And he said unto me, See [that] [^41] thou do it not: I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus: worship God: for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.

The marriage of the Lamb, who is Christ (D&C 33:17-18), to his bride, who is the Church (D&C 109:73-74) and also the New Jerusalem (Rev. 21:2, 9-10 ), is a metaphor for the union between the Lord and his people, made possible through the atonement of Christ. In fact, the very name of Christ's sacrifice (at-one-ment) suggests the purpose of that sacrifice: to make us one with both the Father and the Son (John 17:11, 19-23). The Lord uses marriage as a symbol to underscore the sweetness and blessing of that union. There is no sweeter or more meaningful relationship on earth than that between a holy husband and a holy wife; that is the kind of relationship (in depth of feeling and completeness of union) that the Lord is inviting us to participate in. That marriage is between Christ and the Church, but the Church is not just an organization on the earth; it is also the individual souls who belong to that organization. Though we are to prepare for the marriage all our lives (Matt. 25:1-13; D&C 45:56-57), it will be brought to its culmination, with the body of the Church, when Christ returns in glory. Of course, as individuals, we are bound to Christ as soon as we are ready.

The marriage supper may refer to a time when the Saints sit with Jesus Christ and partake of the sacrament. He taught: "Behold, this is wisdom in me; wherefore, marvel not, for the hour cometh that I will drink of the fruit of the vine with you on the earth. . . . And also with all those whom my Father hath given me out of the world" (D&C 27:5, 14).

Notes and Commentary

Rev. 19:6 the voice of a great multitude. This multitude is probably the "many angels round about the throne" spoken of in Rev. 5:11, "and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands."

as the voice of many waters. The noisy sound of a huge rushing river or of the crashing breakers of the ocean is a very apt description of the sound of an immense crowd of people.

as the voice of mighty thunderings. This expression is another apt description of the sound of many people.

saying, Alleluia: for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth. To paraphrase this passage, "Praise Jehovah, for the Lord who has power over all kingdoms" (see Mosiah 3:5; A of F 1:10). This is the fourth cry of Alleluia recorded in Rev. 19; unlike the other cries, which praised him for his judgments against Babylon, this cry praises God for coming to bless and reign over his Saints. The establishment of Christ's reign is the fulfillment of the request made in the Lord's prayer, "Thy kingdom come" (Matt. 6:10).

Rev. 19:7 Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honour to him. We do indeed have cause to be glad, to rejoice, and to give honor to the Lord. He has offered the great mediating sacrifice for us, enabling us to repent and be cleansed from our sins, and to draw near to him to be joined in an eternal, holy union with him (John 17:11, 19-23). The specific reason for this present rejoicing is that union, "the marriage of the Lamb."

for the marriage of the Lamb is come. The marriage of the Lamb has been described in the scriptures (for example, Isa. 54:4-5; 62:5; Jer. 31:32; JST Matt. 22:1-14; Eph. 5:23, 32; D&C 58:6-11; 65:3; 88:92; 133:10, 19). In latter-day revelation the Lord speaks of "a feast of fat things . . . for the poor; yea, a feast of fat things, of wine on the lees well refined, that the earth may know that the mouths of the prophets shall not fail; yea, a supper of the house of the Lord, well prepared, unto which all nations shall be invited. First, the rich and the learned, the wise and the noble; and after that cometh the day of my power; then shall the poor, the lame, and the blind, and the deaf, come in unto the marriage of the Lamb, and partake of the supper of the Lord, prepared for the great day to come" (D&C 58:8-11; see also 65:3).

Joseph Smith wrote of this feast and our attendance: "Those who keep the commandments of the Lord and walk in His statutes to the end, are the only individuals permitted to sit at this glorious feast. . . . [Paul wrote:] 'I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. . . .' His labors were unceasing to spread the glorious news: and like a faithful soldier, when called to give his life in the cause which he had espoused, he laid it down. . . . Follow the labors of this Apostle from the time of his conversion to the time of his death, and you will have a fair sample of industry and patience in promulgating the Gospel of Christ. Derided, whipped, and stoned, the moment he escaped the hands of his persecutors he as zealously as ever proclaimed the doctrine of the Savior. . . . Reflect for a moment, brethren, and enquire, whether you would consider yourselves worthy a seat at the marriage feast with Paul and others like him, if you had been unfaithful? Had you not fought the good fight, and kept the faith, could you expect to receive?" [^42]

his wife hath made herself ready. Through repentance, sanctification, and a heart that is fully turned to God, the wife of Christ, which is the Church, has prepared herself to be joined with him.

Rev. 19:8 to her was granted. It was granted to the bride to wear fine linen, which represents the righteousness of the Saints. To her was granted is an expression that reveals an important truth. Though we may labor hard to be righteous, in the final event even our righteousness is possible only because of the grace and power and gifts granted to us by God (Deut. 30:20; John 1:12; 2 Cor. 4:7; Col. 1:10-11).

she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white. The bride of Christ wears simple clothing, which symbolizes "the righteousness of saints" (see also Rev. 15:6). The linen is white because it was "washed . . . in the blood of the Lamb" (Rev. 7:14), meaning that the Saints are sanctified through the atonement of Christ.

Rev. 19:9 And he saith unto me, Write. An angel tells John specific words to record.

Blessed are they which are called unto the marriage supper of the Lamb. This passage is one of the "beatitudes" of the book of Revelation. [^43] Those who are invited guests at the Lamb's celebratory marriage feast are blessed indeed. There are three persons or groups at the marriage supper: the Bridegroom, Jesus Christ, who is the Lamb; the Bride, who is the Church (as an institution but also as a collection of many individuals); and the guests ("they which are called unto the marriage supper"), who also are likely the individual members, those who have qualified by righteousness for the grace of Christ.

he saith unto me, These are the true sayings of God. The angel bears witness that these words, which he has instructed John to write, come from God himself.

---
Notas:
[^1] For parables concerning the last days and the Second Coming, see Appendix 3, page 483.
[^2] See the commentary on Babylon, page 285.
[^3] See also Bruce R. McConkie's discussion of similitudes of the Second Coming, Millennial Messiah, 361-65.
[^4] Promised Messiah, 378.
[^5] See also Elder McConkie's discussion of Noah and the Flood as a similitude of the Second Coming, Millennial Messiah, 357-61.
[^6] See the commentary on conditions in Noah's day, page 233.
[^7] LDS Bible Dictionary, 783, s.v. "Temple of Zerubbabel."
[^8] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 286.
[^9] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 158-59.
[^10] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 122.
[^11] Dahl and Cannon, Teachings of Joseph Smith, 364.
[^12] See the commentary on Adam-ondi-Ahman, page 399.
[^13] Doctrines of Salvation, 3:52.
[^14] See McConkie and Parry, Guide to Scriptural Symbols, 61.
[^15] See the commentary on the Restoration, page 25.
[^16] E. Dale LeBaron, in his article entitled "The Book of Mormon: The Pattern in Preparing a People to Meet the Savior" (in Doctrines of the Book of Mormon, 70-79), has made a careful and accurate study of this subject, listing several examples of historical events from Hel. 10 through 3 Ne. 11 that serve as types of Christ's second coming.
[^17] Promised Messiah, 31
[^18] Faith Precedes the Miracle, 253.
[^19] Webster, American Dictionary, s.v. "glory."
[^20] Miracle of Forgiveness, 7-8.
[^21] For a discussion of this symbolism, see Parry, "Ritual Anointing with Olive Oil," in Ricks and Welch, Allegory of the Olive Tree, 279-81.
[^22] Progress of Man, 481.
[^23] History of the Church, 3:386-87. Joseph Fielding Smith stated that the council at Adam-ondi- Ahman will be a time of "preparation"; see Way to Perfection, 290.
[^24] Way to Perfection, 291. Joseph Smith spoke also regarding this event: "He (Adam) is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men, and all that have had the keys must stand before him in this grand council" (History of the Church, 3:386-87).
[^25] History of the Church, 3:386.
[^26] History of the Church, 3:386.
[^27] Millennial Messiah, 578-79.
[^28] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon of the Old Testament, 1088.
[^29] History of the Church, 3:387.
[^30] Millennial Messiah, 577.
[^31] Conference Report, Oct. 1986, 88.
[^32] See the commentary on Ps. 96, page 411.
[^33] "Second Advent," 583.
[^34] For a discussion of Rev. 3:12, see Parry and Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation, 49.
[^35] Even As I Am, 120.
[^36] Ensign, May 1987, 72.
[^37] History of the Church, 5:555.
[^38] Ensign, Mar. 1986, 5.
[^39] The word precede is found in note c to 1 Thes. 4:15 in the LDS edition of the KJV.
[^40] We assume that Matthias, who replaced Judas Iscariot in the original Twelve (Acts 1:21-26), will also be the twelfth member of the group at the Second Coming.
[^41] "'We Need Not Fear His Coming,'" 82-83.
[^42] This addition is found in JST Rev. 19:10.
[^43] History of the Church, 2:19-20.
