Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Signs of the Times ( 1999)

Chapter 11

Scriptural Types of the Last Days and the Second Coming

Signs of the Times

Â½Â½1. The Second Coming is like the destruction at the time of the Flood. 2. The gifts of the Spirit exist in the latter-day Church as they did during Pentecost. 3. The Jews gather to Jerusalem, as they did during the days of Cyrus. 4. The Saints again gather at Adam-ondi-Ahman. 5. Many unbelievers deny the signs of the times. 6. Many cities are destroyed before Christ's coming, similar to the manner in which Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed anciently. 7. The wars of the last days are in some respects similar to the Jaredite wars. 8. Sinners are destroyed when Christ comes again. 9. Those who are righteous at Christ's coming are spared. 10. Jesus Christ appears to the righteous at his temples. 11. Jesus Christ reigns in glory and splendor during the Millennium. 12. The events preliminary to the visit of the resurrected Christ to ancient America give a pattern for many events of the last days. 13. The Sabbath day, a day of rest, is a type of the Millennium.

The Lord has given us many tools to understand the last days and the second coming of Christ. For instance, he has spoken in parables, [^1] in symbols, [^2] and in plain language. He has also given us scriptural types to teach important truths about these things. When we understand the meaning of types he has given us, we better understand these great events to come. In the language of the Book of Mormon, a type is an event or image that encourages one to look forward to the future. The law of Moses, for instance, encouraged the Israelites to "look forward to the coming of Christ, considering that the law of Moses was a type of his coming" (Alma 25:15). The "ordinances were given after this manner, that thereby the people might look forward on the Son of God, it being a type of his order, or it being his order, and this that they might look forward to him for a remission of their sins" (Alma 13:16). King Benjamin declared that God had given to ancient Israel "many signs, and wonders, and types, and shadows" (Mosiah 3:15). [^3] As with all types, these types encourage us to look forward to the signs of the times and Christ's glorious second coming. Types are a great blessing to us because they add to our understanding of the future and help to prepare us for what is to come.

Examples of Scriptural Types

Abinadi's death by fire was "a type and a shadow of things which [were] to come" (Mosiah 13:10), speaking of the manner in which the descendants of the priests of Noah would be destroyed. The fulfillment of this prophecy is outlined in Alma 25:9-12: "Thus the words of Abinadi were brought to pass, which he said concerning the seed of the priests who caused that he should suffer death by fire. For he said unto them: What ye shall do unto me shall be a type of things to come. . . . And he said unto the priests of Noah that their seed should cause many to be put to death, in the like manner as he was, . . . and now behold, these words were verified."

The brazen serpent lifted up by Moses before the children of Israel, as recorded in Num. 21:6-9, served as a type. It was lifted up in similitude of Jesus Christ, who would be raised up on the cross: "And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up" (John 3:14-15). Those who looked at the raised brazen serpent were healed of their physical wounds; this healing was a type of those who look to Jesus Christ for spiritual healing. "And as many as should look upon that serpent should live, even so as many as should look upon the Son of God with faith, having a contrite spirit, might live, even unto that life which is eternal" (Hel. 8:14-15; see also Alma 33:19).

The binding of Isaac on Mount Moriah was an event that looked forward to the sacrifice of Jesus Christ. Abraham and Isaac were types of the Father and the Son. As the Father would offer up Jesus, his Only Begotten Son, so Abraham was to["[offer] up Isaac, . . . his only begotten son" (Heb. 11:17). Jacob, the son of Lehi, wrote that "it was accounted unto Abraham in the wilderness to be obedient unto the commands of God in offering up his son Isaac, which is a similitude of God and his Only Begotten Son" (Jacob 4:5).

The law of Moses was "a law of performances and of ordinances, a law which they were to observe strictly from day to day, to keep them in remembrance of God and their duty towards him. But behold, I say unto you, that all these things were types of things to come" (Mosiah 13:30-31), meaning, the life, ministry, and sacrifice of Christ.

The three days and three nights that Jonah remained in the belly of the fish was an event that anticipated the death, burial, and resurrection of Jesus. Jesus prophesied, "For as Jonas was three days and three nights" in the belly of the great fish, "so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth" (Matt. 12:39-40).

Numerous types and shadows symbolize Christ's mission, ministry, and atonement. "All things bear record of me" (Moses 6:63), the Lord testified, as did Nephi: "All things which have been given of God from the beginning of the world, unto man, are the typifying of him" (2 Ne. 11:4). Baptism, for example, is a type of Christ's death, burial, and resurrection (Rom. 6; D&C 128:12-13). Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained, "If we had sufficient insight, we would see in every gospel ordinance, in every rite that is part of revealed religion, in every performance commanded of God, in all things Deity gives his people, something that typifies the eternal ministry of the Eternal Christ." [^4] Both Melchizedek and Moses were types of the Son of God (Heb. 7:15; Moses 1:6). Their lives, ministries, teachings, sacrifices, prophecies, and priesthood looked forward to the life of Christ.

Noah and the Flood

Matt. 24:37-39

37 But as the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.

38 For as in the days that were before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark,

39 And knew not until the flood came, and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.

Noah and the Flood are clearly a type of the last days and the Second Coming. Perhaps for emphasis, twice in three verses in Matt. 24 the Lord compared the "days of Noah" to the "coming of the Son of man" (vv. 37, 39). [^5] There are at least four great parallels between Noah's time and that of Christ's second coming:

The wickedness of the people. Great wickedness existed during Noah's lifetime: "Behold, they are without affection, and they hate their own blood, . . . and among all the workmanship of mine hands there has not been so great wickedness" (Moses 7:33, 36) "and God saw that the wickedness of men had become great in the earth; and every man was lifted up in the imagination of the thoughts of his heart, being only evil continually" (Moses 8:22). "The earth was corrupt before God, and it was filled with violence. And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth. And God said unto Noah: The end of all flesh is come before me, for the earth is filled with violence, and behold I will destroy all flesh from off the earth" (Moses 8:28-30). The iniquity of the people during Noah's time was a prelude to the sinfulness of the world in our own dispensation, at the time when the Lord will destroy the wicked with his presence.

A significant difference, however, between the events connected with Noah and those of the last days is in the number of persons who accept or reject the principles of the gospel. Apparently, most of Noah's contemporaries rejected his preaching of faith, repentance, baptism, and the Holy Ghost (Moses 8:19-24), a sharp contrast to the great numbers of Church members who will accept the principles and ordinances of the gospel in the latter days, follow the modern prophet, and await Christ's coming.

The heedlessness of the people. Despite the warnings of Noah, most of the people paid him little attention, continuing with their normal lives without concern for the coming disasters. [^6]

The destruction of the wicked. The prophet Enoch foresaw many events that would take place on the earth before the coming of Christ, including the destruction by flood of those who refused to repent and heed Noah's warnings: "Upon the residue of the wicked the floods came and swallowed them up" (Moses 7:43). This destruction of evil people by water looks forward to the end of days when wickedness will be destroyed by fire.

The righteous, who heeded the words of the prophet, were saved. Moses 7:43 records: "Noah built an ark; and . . . the Lord smiled upon it, and held it in his own hand" (Moses 7:43). Two expressions in this verse teach us about how God cares for and secures obedient souls during great tribulation: "the Lord smiled upon [the ark]," and the Lord "held [Noah's family] in his own hand." The first expression evokes the image of a caring mother who lovingly shelters her young child from danger; the second evokes that of a father who holds his beloved child in his arm in a protective manner. As God preserved Noah and his family "with a temporal salvation" (Moses 7:42), so will he smile upon those who obey him and who follow the prophets of our own dispensation.

The Day of Pentecost

Acts 2:1-4

1 And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one place.

2 And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting.

3 And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them.

4 And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.

This record gives us several significant details regarding the outpouring of the Spirit on the day of Pentecost, which occurred soon after the ascension of Christ into heaven (Acts 1:9-11). Luke writes of "a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind," of "cloven tongues like as of fire" which "sat upon each" of the persons who were in the house, who "were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues" (Acts 2:1-4). According to Peter, who spoke to an "amazed" audience who had witnessed the speaking in tongues (Acts 2:7, 12), the great blessings of the Holy Ghost on this occasion satisfied Joel's prophecy: "And it shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams" (Acts 2:17-18; see also Joel 2:28-29).

That spiritual outpouring almost two millennia ago anticipates and serves as a type of similar blessings that have been and will yet be received by the Saints of this last dispensation. Moroni, during an appearance to Joseph Smith, quoted Joel 2:28-32 and promised that the words would soon be fulfilled (JS-H 1:41). One fulfillment of Joel's prophecy, a latter-day Pentecost, took place at the Kirtland Temple after Joseph Smith prayed: "Let the anointing of thy ministers be sealed upon them with power from on high. Let it be fulfilled upon them, as upon those on the day of Pentecost; let the gift of tongues be poured out upon thy people, even cloven tongues as of fire, and the interpretation thereof. And let thy house be filled, as with a rushing mighty wind, with thy glory" (D&C 109:35-37). Joel's prophecy will again find fulfillment "in the last days" many times as the Saints build Zion, worship the Lord in sacred places, and prepare for his coming. The promises of this prophecy will come to full fruition during the Millennium.

Exiled Jews Return to Judah and Rebuild the Temple

Ezra 1:2-5

2 Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, The Lord God of heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the earth; and he hath charged me to build him an house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah.

3 Who is there among you of all his people? his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and build the house of the Lord God of Israel, (he is the God,) which is in Jerusalem.

4 And whosever remaineth in any place he sojourneth, let the men of his place help him with silver and with gold, and with goods, and with beasts, beside the freewill offering for the house of God is in Jerusalem.

5 Then rose up the chief of the fathers of Judah and Benjamin, and the priests, and the Levites, with all them whose spirit God had raised, to go up to build the house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem.

In the year 538 b.c., the Persian king Cyrus issued a decree to the inhabitants of his kingdom, inviting the exiled Jews to return to their homeland to rebuild the temple in Jerusalem, which had been destroyed decades earlier by Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon (2 Kgs. 24-25; 2 Chr. 36). Thousands returned to Judah to rebuild the temple's foundation, walls, and altar, under the direction of Zerubbabel, the representative of the royal house of Judah. Although the temple was considered inferior to Solomon's, [^7] the Jews found great satisfaction when the builders laid its foundation, celebrating with music, song, thanksgiving, praise, and great shouts (Ezra 3:10-13).

This historic return of the Jews to their homeland and their rebuilding of the temple anticipates the Jewish return to Israel during our own day as well as the future rebuilding of the Jerusalem temple. Joseph Smith prophesied: "Judah must return, Jerusalem must be rebuilt, and the temple, and water come out from under the temple, and the waters of the Dead Sea be healed. It will take some time to rebuild the walls of the city and the temple, &c.; and all this must be done before the Son of Man will make his appearance." [^8]

The Gatherings at Adam-ondi-Ahman

D&C 107:53-57

53 Three years previous to the death of Adam, he called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, who were all high priests, with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing.

54 And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the prince, the archangel.

55 And the Lord administered comfort unto Adam, and said unto him: I have set thee to be at the head; a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou art a prince over them forever.

56 And Adam stood up in the midst of the congregation; and, notwithstanding he was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy Ghost, predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation.

57 These things were all written in the book of Enoch, and are to be testified of in due time.

These verses detail the great, ancient meeting at Adam-ondi- Ahman, in which Adam's righteous posterity gathered and received great blessings, including the following:

Adam "bestowed upon them his last blessing" (D&C 107:53).

"The Lord appeared unto them" (D&C 107:54).

The assemblage honored Adam, calling him "Michael, the prince, the archangel" (D&C 107:54).

The Lord "administered comfort unto Adam" and spoke great promises to him (D&C 107:55).

Adam prophesied "whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation" (D&C 107:56).

Joseph Smith testified: "I saw Adam in the valley of Adam-ondi- Ahman. He called together his children and blessed them with a patriarchal blessing. The Lord appeared in their midst, and he (Adam) blessed them all, and foretold what should befall them to the latest generation. This is why Adam blessed his posterity; he wanted to bring them into the presence of God." [^9]

In the last days, before Christ's second coming, another great gathering will take place at Adam-ondi-Ahman. This second great gathering will parallel, in many respects, the earlier one. Again Adam will be present; [^10] he, as a glorious being, will sit upon a throne, wearing brilliant white garments, and "ten thousand times ten thousand" will stand before him. During this gathering Jesus Christ will come, and there will be "given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed" (Dan. 7:9-14). One purpose of this meeting is to prepare the Saints for the Second Coming; [^11] this preparation will be accomplished in part when the "kingdom," "dominion" and "greatness of the kingdom . . . shall be given to the people of the saints of the most High" (Dan. 7:27; see also vv. 18, 21- 22). [^12]

Many Deny the Signs of Christ's Coming

3 Ne. 1:4-10

4 And it came to pass that in the commencement of the ninety and second year, behold, the prophecies of the prophets began to be fulfilled more fully; for there began to be greater signs and greater miracles wrought among the people.

5 But there were some who began to say that the time was past for the words to be fulfilled, which were spoken by Samuel, the Lamanite.

6 And they began to rejoice over their brethren, saying: Behold the time is past, and the words of Samuel are not fulfilled; therefore, your joy and your faith concerning this thing hath been vain.

7 And it came to pass that they did make a great uproar throughout the land; and the people who believed began to be very sorrowful, lest by any means those things which had been spoken might not come to pass.

8 But behold, they did watch steadfastly for that day and that night and that day which should be as one day as if there were no night, that they might know that their faith had not been vain.

9 Now it came to pass that there was a day set apart by the unbelievers, that all those who believed in those traditions should be put to death except the sign should come to pass, which had been given by Samuel the prophet.

10 Now it came to pass that when Nephi, the son of Nephi, saw this wickedness of his people, his heart was exceedingly sorrowful.

Notwithstanding the "greater signs and greater miracles" (3 Ne. 1:4) that existed among the Nephites during the years shortly before Christ's birth, some of the people denied them, persecuting those who believed in the signs. An account of the denial and also the fulfillment of the signs is recorded in 3 Ne. 1:4-22, where Nephi, the author of the account, concludes, "And it had come to pass, yea, all things, every whit, according to the words of the prophets" (3 Ne. 1:20).

History will repeat itself during the last days, when many will deny the signs of the times. Peter taught that "there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation" (2 Pet. 3:3-9). A latter-day revelation adds that some "shall say that Christ delayeth his coming until the end of the earth" (D&C 45:26).

Even Church members are not exempt from claiming that Jesus delays his coming. President Joseph Fielding Smith taught: "I know that there are many, and even some among the Latter-day Saints, who are saying just as the Lord said they would say, 'The Lord delayeth his coming.' One man said: 'It is impossible for Jesus Christ to come inside of three or four hundred years.' But I say unto you, Watch." [^13]

As the signs of the times continue to unfold in this dispensation, some will rationalize away the signs, arguing, "Some things they may have guessed right, among so many; but behold, we know that all these great and marvelous works cannot come to pass, of which has been spoken. And they began to reason and to contend among themselves, saying: That it is not reasonable that such a being as a Christ shall come. . . . And notwithstanding the signs and the wonders which were wrought among the people of the Lord, and the many miracles which they did, Satan did get great hold upon the hearts of the people upon all the face of the land" (Hel. 16:16-18, 23).

The Destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah

Gen. 19:24-28

24 Then the Lord rained . . . brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven;

25 And he overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground.

26 But [Lot's] wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt.

27 And Abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he stood before the Lord:

28 And he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace.

The destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah by God is well known. The sins of Sodom were enumerated by Ezekiel: "Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her and in her daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy. And they were haughty, and committed abomination before me: therefore I took them away as I saw good" (Ezek. 16:49-50). Jude added that Sodom and Gomorrah committed "fornication" and went "after strange flesh" (Jude 1:7).

These cities were destroyed because of the evil lives of their inhabitants. Their destruction was total and absolute, for they had become "the breeding of nettles, and saltpits, and a perpetual desolation" (Zeph. 2:9) wherein "no man shall abide" or "a son of man dwell" (Jer. 49:18). The very definition of the Hebrew names of these cities describes their final desolate condition, for Sodom is a "volcanic" or "bituminous" area, and Gomorrah, "a ruined heap." [^14] Because of their enormous sins and the resultant destruction, these cities "are set forth for an example" (Jude 1:7; see also 2 Pet. 2:6) of the places that await desolation when the Lord returns in judgment and glory.

Luke made this comparison: "And as it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man. . . . Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; but the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed" (Luke 17:26, 28-30).

Jaredite Warfare

Ether 15:1-3

1 And it came to pass when Coriantumr had recovered of his wounds, he began to remember the words which Ether had spoken unto him.

2 He saw that there had been slain by the sword already nearly two millions of his people, and he began to sorrow in his heart; yea, there had been slain two millions of mighty men, and also their wives and their children.

3 He began to repent of the evil which he had done; he began to remember the words which had been spoken by the mouth of all the prophets, and he saw them that they were fulfilled thus far, every whit; and his soul mourned and refused to be comforted.

A preeminent sign of the last days pertains to "wars and rumors of wars," when "nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom" (Matt. 24:6-7). On Christmas Day 1832, the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith, "And the time will come that war will be poured out upon all nations" (D&C 87:2).

Although it was fought centuries ago, the final Jaredite battle serves as a type of the warfare and confrontations of the last days, when the earth's inhabitants witness or hear of wars in many lands. The full account of the final battles and wars of the Jaredites covers several chapters in the Book of Mormon (Ether 11, 13-15). The parallels between the Jaredite nation and latter-day peoples are numerous. For example, Jaredite prophets "prophesied of the destruction of that great people except they should repent, and turn unto the Lord, and forsake their murders and wickedness" (Ether 11:1), just as prophets now warn the people of the world to repent and forsake their sins. Jaredite individuals studied "all the arts of war and all the cunning of the world" (Ether 13:16), just as institutions, schools, programs, and manuals are designed to prepare individuals for warfare in our day. Many Jaredite "fair sons and daughters" (this phrase is repeated four times in a single verse) refused to repent of their sins (Ether 13:17), just as many of our own generation prefer wrongdoing over repentance. And Moroni recorded that there was among the Jaredites "all manner of wickedness upon all the face of the land" (Ether 13:26), just as there are all types of iniquity in the world today. Certainly many other parallels could be listed.

Meanwhile, as the wicked are fighting among themselves, the righteous will be preserved by God's power. As 1 Ne. 22:16-17 records: "For the time soon cometh that the fulness of the wrath of God shall be poured out upon all the children of men; for he will not suffer that the wicked shall destroy the righteous. Wherefore, he will preserve the righteous by his power, even if it so be that the fulness of his wrath must come, and the righteous be preserved, even unto the destruction of their enemies by fire. Wherefore, the righteous need not fear; for thus saith the prophet, they shall be saved, even if it so be as by fire."

The Wicked Nations Destroyed

Isa. 10:12-19

12 Wherefore it shall come to pass, that when the Lord hath performed his whole work upon mount Zion and on Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks.

13 For he saith, By the strength of my hand I have done it, and by my wisdom; for I am prudent: and I have removed the bounds of the people, and have robbed their treasures, and I have put down the inhabitants like a valiant man:

14 And my hand hath found as a nest the riches of the people: and as one gathereth eggs that are left, have I gathered all the earth; and there was none that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or peeped.

15 Shall the axe boast itself against him that heweth therewith? or shall the saw magnify itself against him that shaketh it? as if the rod should shake itself against them that lift it up, or as if the staff should lift up itself, as if it were no wood.

16 Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord of hosts, send among his fat ones leanness; and under his glory he shall kindle a burning like the burning of a fire.

17 And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his Holy One for a flame: and it shall burn and devour his thorns and his briers in one day;

18 And shall consume the glory of his forest, and of his fruitful field, both soul and body: and they shall be as when a standardbearer fainteth.

19 And the rest of the trees of his forest shall be few, that a child may write them.

The ancient nation of Assyria, with its cruel and bloody leaders and well-disciplined, fierce armies, destroyed other evil nations. The scenario of Assyria and war anticipates the warring nations of our own day and of the future, in their contending for land, power, and riches. Those same evils will be present in our own day, and the thirst for blood will also exist. But just as Assyria, her leaders, and her armies were soon destroyed according to God's plan, so also will the warring nations of the last days be annihilated at the Second Coming. Isaiah's language—burning of a fire, fire, flame, devour, and consume—applies to both ancient Assyria and the future nations at Christ's coming. Meanwhile, a righteous remnant of Israel will be saved at the last day as they worship at God's temples. [^15]

Righteous Nephites and Lamanites Are Spared

3 Ne. 10:12-19

12 And it was the more righteous part of the people who were saved, and it was they who received the prophets and stoned them not; and it was they who had not shed the blood of the saints, who were spared—

13 And they were spared and were not sunk and buried up in the earth; and they were not drowned in the depths of the sea; and they were not burned by fire, neither were they fallen upon and crushed to death; and they were not carried away in the whirlwind; neither were they overpowered by the vapor of smoke and of darkness.

14 And now, whoso readeth, let him understand; he that hath the scriptures, let him search them, and see and behold if all these deaths and destructions by fire, and by smoke, and by tempests, and by whirlwinds, and by the opening of the earth to receive them, and all these things are not unto the fulfilling of the prophecies of many of the holy prophets.

15 Behold, I say unto you, Yea, many have testified of these things at the coming of Christ, and were slain because they testified of these things.

16 Yea, the prophet Zenos did testify of these things, and also Zenock spake concerning these things, because they testified particularly concerning us, who are the remnant of their seed.

17 Behold, our father Jacob also testified concerning a remnant of the seed of Joseph. And behold, are not we a remnant of the seed of Joseph? And these things which testify of us, are they not written upon the plates of brass which our father Lehi brought out of Jerusalem?

18 And it came to pass that in the ending of the thirty and fourth year, behold, I will show unto you that the people of Nephi who were spared, and also those who had been called Lamanites, who had been spared, did have great favors shown unto them, and great blessings poured out upon their heads, insomuch that soon after the ascension of Christ into heaven he did truly manifest himself unto them—

19 Showing his body unto them, and ministering unto them; and an account of his ministry shall be given hereafter.

Before the Savior's visit to the Nephites at the temple in Bountiful, the land was cleansed of filthiness and corruption as individuals and communities were destroyed. Some were burned or crushed to death; others were buried in the earth or drowned; still others were destroyed by whirlwinds, smoke, and tempests. Only the "more righteous part of the people" (3 Ne. 10:12) were spared during these destructions, and it was to these people that the resurrected Lord appeared and ministered. Not only were the righteous saved from destruction but they were recipients of "great favors" and "great blessings" (3 Ne. 10:18).

Such is a pattern for our own day when God's judgments of destruction are poured out. Most of the righteous will be protected from harm and, perhaps more important, they will find peace and calm in their lives amid hardship. They, like the righteous who gathered at Bountiful, will receive great favors and blessings.

Christ's Appearance at the Temple in Bountiful

3 Ne. 11:8-12

8 And it came to pass, as they understood they cast their eyes up again towards heaven; and behold, they saw a Man descending out of heaven; and he was clothed in a white robe; and he came down and stood in the midst of them; and the eyes of the whole multitude were turned upon him, and they durst not open their mouths, even one to another, and wist not what it meant, for they thought it was an angel that had appeared unto them.

9 And it came to pass that he stretched forth his hand and spake unto the people, saying:

10 Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world.

11 And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning.

12 And it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these words the whole multitude fell to the earth; for they remembered that it had been prophesied among them that Christ should show himself unto them after his ascension into heaven.

There are many common points between the events set forth in 3 Ne. 8-11 and the events connected with Christ's second coming. For example, on both occasions the wicked are destroyed and Christ descends from heaven. The text states, "They cast their eyes up again towards heaven; and behold, they saw a Man descending out of heaven" (3 Ne. 11:8). D&C 45:44 describes Christ in the "clouds of heaven": "And then they shall look for me, and, behold, I will come; and they shall see me in the clouds of heaven, clothed with power and great glory; with all the holy angels." At both events Christ wears distinctive clothing: at his appearance in Bountiful he wore a "white robe," and for his second coming he will be clothed in a red robe (Isa. 63:1-3; Rev. 19:13). Many witness these great events. At Bountiful "the eyes of the whole multitude were turned upon him" (3 Ne. 11:8) at his second coming "every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him" (Rev. 1:7).

The Nephites' Zion

4 Ne. 1:13-18

13 And it came to pass that there was no contention among all the people, in all the land; but there were mighty miracles wrought among the disciples of Jesus.

14 And it came to pass that the seventy and first year passed away, and also the seventy and second year, yea, and in fine, till the seventy and ninth year had passed away; yea, even an hundred years had passed away, and the disciples of Jesus, whom he had chosen, had all gone to the paradise of God, save it were the three who should tarry; and there were other disciples ordained in their stead; and also many of that generation had passed away.

15 And it came to pass that there was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people.

16 And there were no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults, nor whoredoms, nor lyings, nor murders, nor any manner of lasciviousness; and surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God.

17 There were no robbers, nor murderers, neither were there Lamanites, nor any manner of -ites; but they were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of God.

18 And how blessed were they! For the Lord did bless them in all their doings; yea, even they were blessed and prospered until an hundred and ten years had passed away; and the first generation from Christ had passed away, and there was no contention in all the land.

This passage from 4 Nephi outlines the peace that existed among the "children of Christ" after Jesus' postresurrection ministry. This specific, historical group of people is a model of a larger assembly who will live in joy during the Millennium, after Jesus' second coming. The millennial Zion, like the Nephites' Zion, will have "no contention, . . . no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults, nor whoredoms, nor lyings, nor murders, nor any manner of lasciviousness; . . . no robbers, nor murderers, neither . . . any manner of -ites" (4 Ne. 1:15-17). In place of these, there will exist "the love of God" (4 Ne. 1:15), peace, unity, happiness, prosperity, and great blessings (4 Ne. 1:16-18) among the children of Christ.

Solomon's Earthly Kingdom

Ps. 72:1-19

1 Give the king thy judgments, O God, and thy righteousness unto the king's son.

2 He shall judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with judgment.

3 The mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little hills, by righteousness.

4 He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children of the needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressor.

5 They shall fear thee as long as the sun and moon endure, throughout all generations.

6 He shall come down like rain upon the mown grass: as showers that water the earth.

7 In his days shall the righteous flourish; and abundance of peace so long as the moon endureth.

8 He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth.

9 They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him; and his enemies shall lick the dust.

10 The kings of Tarshish and of the isles shall bring presents: the kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts.

11 Yea, all kings shall fall down before him: all nations shall serve him.

12 For he shall deliver the needy when he crieth; the poor also, and him that hath no helper.

13 He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall save the souls of the needy.

14 He shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence: and precious shall their blood be in his sight.

15 And he shall live, and to him shall be given of the gold of Sheba: prayer also shall be made for him continually; and daily shall he be praised.

16 There shall be an handful of corn in the earth upon the top of the mountains; the fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon: and they of the city shall flourish like grass of the earth.

17 His name shall endure for ever: his name shall be continued as long as the sun: and men shall be blessed in him: all nations shall call him blessed.

18 Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only doeth wondrous things.

19 And blessed be his glorious name for ever: and let the whole earth be filled with his glory; Amen, and Amen.

The headnote to Ps. 72 says, "David speaketh of Solomon, who is made a type of Christ." The psalm refers to Solomon as an ideal king who brings perfect judgment and righteousness to all people. The poor and the needy receive emphasis in this psalm: each of these words appears four times. Certainly the king's special attention is directed to them: "He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children of the needy" (v. 4); "he shall deliver the needy when he crieth; the poor also, and him that hath no helper" (v. 12); "He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall save the souls of the needy" (v. 13). He will not allow injustice or abuse but will "break in pieces the oppressor" (v. 4). During his reign the righteous will flourish, and peace will exist "as long as the moon endureth" (v. 7); he will have "dominion" (v. 8); people will bow to him (v. 9); kings will present him with gifts (vv. 10-11); "all nations shall serve him" (v. 11); and "all nations shall call him blessed" (v. 17). And at last, his "name shall endure for ever: his name shall be continued as long as the sun" (v. 17).

Although it was David's prayer (v. 20) that this psalm of the ideal king speak of Solomon (who did reign in righteousness and power for a time), in actuality the words typify the glorious millennial reign of Jesus Christ, when the Perfect King will fulfill all parts of the psalm, bringing peace, righteousness, and judgment to earth's inhabitants.

Signs of the First Coming Are Types of the Second Coming

The portion of the Book of Mormon record that immediately precedes the visit of the resurrected Lord to the Nephites (Hel. 10 through 3 Ne. 11) contains a number of historical events that prefigure, or typify, similar events that will occur when Jesus returns to the earth at his second coming. [^16] Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "It is no surprise to spiritually literate souls to learn that the prophecies of the First Coming are but types and shadows of similar revelations relative to the Second Coming." [^17] For example, wars and rumors of wars existed among the Nephites, and they also are among the signs of the times approaching the Second Coming (Hel. 11:1; 3 Ne. 3:4; D&C 45:26, 68; 63:32). The willful rebellion of individuals that existed among the Nephites will be found again in the last days (3 Ne. 6:17-18; 7:7; D&C 64:34-36; 112:24). Famines and plagues existed among the Nephites and serve as signs of the times (Hel. 10:6; 12:3; D&C 43:25; 84:96; 87:6; 45:31). People rejected the Lord's prophets and will do so again (3 Ne. 6:23; 7:14; D&C 1:14; 133:71; 135:1; 136:35). The pride that existed in the church will be found again before Christ comes (3 Ne. 6:11-14; D&C 41:1; 50:2; 63:63; 98:19). Murders existed then, and they do so now (Hel. 10:18; 11:4; D&C 45:33, 68; 63:33; 130:12).

Many other parallels exist between the period preceding Christ's appearance to the Nephites and the period preceding his second coming. These include the existence of secret combinations (3 Ne. 6:25-30; 7:7; 9:9; Moro. 8:34-40; Ether 8:20-25; D&C 38:28; 42:64; 123:13), the persecution of the righteous (Alma 1:25-28; 3 Ne. 6:12-13; D&C 99:1; 101:32; 123:1), earthquakes and great disturbances (3 Ne. 8:6-19; D&C 29:13; 43:18, 25; 45:26, 33, 48; 49:23; 88:88-89), and tempests, thunderings, and lightnings (Hel. 14:23, 26; 3 Ne. 8:5-6; 10:14; D&C 43:20-25; 87:6; 88:88).

Other Types and Shadows

Other historical events foreshadow the great events of the last days. For example, the word Sabbath originates from the Hebrew word shabbat, which means "to cease" or "to rest"; hence, the scriptures declare that the Sabbath "is a day appointed unto you to rest from your labors" (D&C 59:10) also "God made the world in six days, and on the seventh day he finished his work" (D&C 77:12). Inasmuch as the Sabbath is a day of rest, joy, peace, and a time to worship the Lord, it seems natural to compare it with the Millennium, the seventh "day" of the earth's "temporal existence" (D&C 77:6) and also a time of peace, joy, and rest. Another example is the destruction of many cities and peoples—Babylon (Isa. 13:6-22; 21:1), Damascus (Isa. 17:1-11), Moab (Isa. 15:1-9), Edom (Isa. 34:1-8; 34:9), Judah (Zeph. 1), the Nephite nation (Morm. 6), and Nineveh (Nahum 2)—which is a type of Jesus' judgments upon the world at his coming.

---
Notas:
[^1] For more details on this promise, see page 351.
[^2] Conference Report, Apr. 1950, 105-6.
[^3] See also Bruce R. McConkie's discussion of similitudes of the Second Coming, Millennial Messiah, 361-65.
[^4] Promised Messiah, 378.
[^5] See also Elder McConkie's discussion of Noah and the Flood as a similitude of the Second Coming, Millennial Messiah, 357-61.
[^6] See the commentary on conditions in Noah's day, page 233.
[^7] LDS Bible Dictionary, 783, s.v. "Temple of Zerubbabel."
[^8] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 286.
[^9] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 158-59.
[^10] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 122.
[^11] Dahl and Cannon, Teachings of Joseph Smith, 364.
[^12] See the commentary on Adam-ondi-Ahman, page 399.
[^13] Doctrines of Salvation, 3:52.
[^14] See McConkie and Parry, Guide to Scriptural Symbols, 61.
[^15] See the commentary on the Restoration, page 25.
[^16] E. Dale LeBaron, in his article entitled "The Book of Mormon: The Pattern in Preparing a People to Meet the Savior" (in Doctrines of the Book of Mormon, 70-79), has made a careful and accurate study of this subject, listing several examples of historical events from Hel. 10 through 3 Ne. 11 that serve as types of Christ's second coming.
[^17] Promised Messiah, 31
