Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Signs of the Times ( 1999)

Conclusion

"Come, Lord Jesus"

When most people list the signs of the times, they often think first of those things that are negative and challenging: wars and famines, earthquakes and pestilences, the general and increasing condition of sinfulness in the world. These are important signs heralding the coming of the Lord, as many prophetic witnesses have attested. But the signs of the last days are much more than trial and trouble. The Lord's gifts to the righteous of our time are greater far than his punishments upon those with rebellious hearts.

In the opening lines of his classic novel A Tale of Two Cities, Charles Dickens described the time of the French Revolution in language that could also describe our day: "It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness, it was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity, it was the season of Light, it was the season of Darkness, it was the spring of hope, it was the winter of despair, we had everything before us, we had nothing before us." Such are the last days. They are days of trial and days of blessing. During our lifetimes, we will see God sending judgments of punishment upon the wicked. But during the same period he will pour forth great gifts and graces upon the heads of his righteous children.

These are the best of times, and they are the worst of times. These are days of apostasy and days of continuing restoration, days of false priesthoods and days of powerful priesthood keys, days of dreadful plagues and days of spiritual healing, days of drought and famine and days of living water and the bread of life, days of devastating warfare and days when the Prince of Peace reigns in the hearts of the meek. The wicked and unbelieving will see the signs and mock, but the righteous, as children of light, will see them as portents of the coming of their divine Redeemer, Jesus Christ. The unrepentant will eventually mourn their course and its consequences, while the faithful Saints will be filled with gratitude and rejoicing for the loving kindness of their God.

Of course, it is not only the wicked who will suffer from the trials of our times. The righteous, too, will suffer from famine and warfare. They will suffer from many of the evil choices of the wicked, but the righteous have three promises from the Lord:

First, the Lord will provide a measure of protection to those who do his will. They will not be immune to the trials of the day, but they will receive greater blessing and protection than those who choose wickedness. [^1]

Second, when the righteous suffer, they may know that "all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good" ( D&C 122:7).

Third, if the righteous die as a result of the perils of the last days, they will go to a place of peace and glory (Rev. 14:13; Alma 14:9-11). Their existence in the spirit world is one of opportunity to continue to serve God and partake of the sweet gifts of his Spirit.

We have set before us two paths: one of faith, obedience, and sacrifice, which will guide our feet through times of trouble and bring us safely to the bright day of Christ's coming; and one of selfishness, doubt, and sin, along which many will walk to the dreadful day of Christ's wrath. That day will surely come. Thus the world rolls through the events leading to disaster for some and supernal blessing for others. Which will it be for us? The paths of choice lie before us.

Given for Our Blessing

The signs are set, and they are remarkably clear. Some are unique to the last days (the restoration of the gospel, for example, and the moon appearing as blood); others are events or phenomena that have always existed but will occur at an increased rate in the last days (wars or earthquakes, for example). But if we are watching, and if we have the Holy Spirit for our guide, we will recognize the signs for what they are, and we will be blessed.

Blessing is the Lord's very purpose in giving us the signs. Many of the signs are designed to motivate the wicked to repent if they will. Famines and plagues and earthquakes, by their very nature, engender feelings of fear and weakness and insufficiency. If the wicked will allow those feelings to turn their hearts to God, he will bless them and heal them. But if they will not repent, their eventual destruction will be justified, for they were warned and chose not to hear or obey.

Ezekiel characterized this pattern of warning, possible repentance, and the choice between salvation or destruction when he recorded:

"Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

"Son of man, speak to the children of thy people, and say unto them, When I bring the sword upon a land, if the people of the land take a man of their coasts, and set him for their watchman:

"If when he seeth the sword come upon the land, he blow the trumpet, and warn the people;

"Then whosoever heareth the sound of the trumpet, and taketh not warning; if the sword come, and take him away, his blood shall be upon his own head.

"He heard the sound of the trumpet, and took not warning; his blood shall be upon him. But he that taketh warning shall deliver his soul. . . .

"Therefore, O thou son of man, speak unto the house of Israel; Thus ye speak, saying, If our transgressions and our sins be upon us, and we pine away in them, how should we then live?

"Say unto them, As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel? . . .

"Again, when I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; if he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right;

"If the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he had robbed, walk in the statutes of life, without committing iniquity; he shall surely live, he shall not die.

"None of his sins that he hath committed shall be mentioned unto him: he hath done that which is lawful and right; he shall surely live" ( Ezek. 33:1-16).

Of course, the signs of the times are given not only to call the wicked to repentance but also to bless the righteous in several ways:

To warn us that we must be spiritually prepared for the coming of the Lord. We know that we must be pure and holy to greet the Lord. The signs show us that the time is ripening and that we must be ready spiritually.

To warn us that we must be temporally prepared if we hope to be able to meet and endure the trials to come. How can we survive physically in the midst of the disasters coming upon the world? How can we help others to survive? Only by preparing early. The signs remind us that we must do so.

To give us the knowledge we need so we will not be deceived. When some cry, "Lo, here!" and others shout, "Lo, there!" and when some claim Christ has come already and he is in the desert, or others say he has come but is hiding in the secret chambers ( JS-M 1:21-22, 25), we can know that their claims are false. The Lord will come in a manner that all will see him, as clearly as the light of the sun comes from the east at dawn ( JS-M 1:26; Rev. 1:7), and he will come preceded by his signs.

To give us markers, or signposts, showing us where we are in time relative to the second coming of Christ. If we see truly, we will know which signs have been given (whether in whole or in part) and which remain to be seen.

To serve as a witness of God's plan and his power, bearing testimony through remarkable events that God is in charge of the world and its progress through time. With his power, he will deliver us from the bondage of a wicked world, and he will keep all of his promises.

Each of these purposes is a great blessing to all who will watch for the signs and respond with righteous hearts. Thus, the signs of the times are signals sent from God to his children. Almost all of the signals are visible to many people, particularly if they are paying attention. When we see the signal of the gathering of Israel, for example, as carried out by the missionary work of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, we can know that the Lord is performing his work preparatory to his second coming. When we see famines or pestilences, we can know them as signals from God, given to remind us that the Lord will come in glory—and that we need to be ready. When we see the sun darkened, or the nations gathering to battle, or the continuing establishment of Zion, we can know that we are in the last days and that the Lord will indeed come.

Interpreting Current Events

How are we to interpret the events around us? When we hear of a devastating earthquake or see the increase of sin in our city or nation, how are we to know whether such events are signs or are simply natural consequences of living in a fallen, mortal world? Nephi counsels us on how to interpret scripture relative to latter-day events:

"I did read many things unto [my people] which were written in the books of Moses; but that I might more fully persuade them to believe in the Lord their Redeemer I did read unto them that which was written by the prophet Isaiah; for I did liken all scriptures unto us, that it might be for our profit and learning. Wherefore I spake unto them, saying: Hear ye the words of the prophet, . . . which were written unto all the house of Israel, and liken them unto yourselves" ( 1 Ne. 19:23-24).

"And now I write some of the words of Isaiah, that whoso of my people shall see these words may lift up their hearts and rejoice for all men. Now these are the words, and ye may liken them unto you and unto all men" ( 2 Ne. 11:8).

Nephi teaches that all people can benefit from the words of Isaiah by applying those words to themselves, even if they were not the immediate and direct audience Isaiah was addressing. If we do so, we will find meaning and blessing for ourselves; the Holy Ghost will teach us important truths and give us vital direction if we read the scriptures with an eye to their specific meanings for us.

It may be that we can apply a similar rule to an understanding of the signs of the times as they relate to current events. When we see the gospel being preached in many lands, of course we can know that that is a fulfillment of prophecy that the gospel word must go forth before the Lord will return. When we see Saints gathering to the temple, we can know that the Lord's word is being fulfilled in the last days, and we can recognize it as one of the signs of the times. But how are we to view the many earthquakes or wars or famines? It seems that we can "liken" those signs "unto us." We can know that the Lord promised such things as part of the experience of the last days, and when we see them in our time, we can know that the Lord is sending a signal to those "which have eyes to see" ( Ezek. 12:2) that his work is progressing and that the time of his coming approaches.

Even though there have been earthquakes and wars and famines almost from the beginning of time, they apparently will increase in number in the last times, and thus they are given as some of the signs of those times. When we see these conditions in the world, the prophets seem to be saying, we may know that the last days are upon us— and we may properly accept all wars and earthquakes and famines and plagues in our dispensation as signs of the last times.

"Ye say that ye know that the end of the world cometh; . . .

"And in this ye say truly, for so it is; but these things which I have told you shall not pass away until all shall be fulfilled. . . .

"And I [the Lord] said unto them [my disciples]:

"Be not troubled, for, when all these things shall come to pass, ye may know that the promises which have been made unto you shall be fulfilled. . . .

"Ye look and behold the fig-trees, and ye see them with your eyes, and ye say when they begin to shoot forth, and their leaves are yet tender, that summer is now nigh at hand;

"Even so it shall be in that day when they shall see all these things, then shall they know that the hour is nigh.

"And it shall come to pass that he that feareth me shall be looking forth for the great day of the Lord to come, even for the signs of the coming of the Son of Man. . . .

"And then they shall look for me, and, behold, I will come; and they shall see me in the clouds of heaven, clothed with power and great glory; with all the holy angels; and he that watches not for me shall be cut off" ( D&C 45:22-44).

Even though the signs have been given to help us watch for the Lord's coming, we must ever be cautious, both in interpreting scripture (which must always be done with the help of the Holy Ghost and living prophets) and in interpreting the events of our time.

"Planting Cherry Trees"

It appears from the signs that the coming of the Lord is drawing near. But he has not revealed the day or the hour, the month or the year—or even the decade or century. So we watch in a spirit of readiness, preparing both spiritually and temporally. We resist the temptation to become unbalanced in our interest in the signs of the times— after all, the signs are not the gospel in its entirety; they are only one part of the gospel. And we live our lives as best we can, rearing our children in faith, loving our grandchildren, continuing with necessary temporal labors, and seeking to build Zion. In 1950 Elder Richard L. Evans gave some helpful counsel that is still timely:

"We must have faith in the future regardless of the ultimate eventualities. One of the greatest calamities in this world would be the calamity of sitting down and waiting for calamities. We must not let the things we can't do keep us from doing the things we can do. We must not let remote possibilities or even imminent probabilities keep us from moving forward with all earnestness and all effort.

"I should like to say to the young people of this generation that they too must have faith in the future. In spite of all the uncertainties, they must go forward and prepare themselves as best they can for all the problems and opportunities of life. Whatever may come here or hereafter, the future will always be better for those who are best prepared.

"No generation has ever lived without facing uncertainty. If those who faced the uncertainties of ten or twenty-five or fifty years ago had sat by and waited for what seemed to them to be imminent calamities, we should not have had the able and ready and well-qualified men that we have today, and that we need and shall need in the next generation.

"So I say to these youth of ours: go forth and live your lives with humility, with gratitude, with repentance, keeping the commandments of God and having faith in the future and preparing yourselves for the future, as the Church itself continues its building. There is nothing to lose by having faith in the future, but there is much to lose by not preparing for the future. . . .

"I recall a reported statement, attributed, as I remember it, to President Wilford Woodruff. Some of the brethren of his time are said to have approached him (they had their troubles also) and to have inquired of him as to when he felt the end would be—when would be the coming of the Master? These, I think, are not his exact words, but they convey the spirit of his reported reply: 'I would live as if it were to be tomorrow—but I am still planting cherry trees!' I think we may well take this as a page for our own book and live as if the end might be tomorrow—and still plant cherry trees! In worrying about things that are beyond our reach, we should not overlook our opportunities with our own families and friends; in worrying about possible eventualities we should not neglect the things that need to be done here and now, and that are within our reach; the things for which we are immediately responsible; we should not neglect [our] present opportunities and obligations.

"I should like to close with a statement of William Allen White: 'I am not afraid of tomorrow, for I have seen yesterday, and I love today.'" [^2]

With such an attitude we watch and wait, knowing that "blessed are all they that wait" for the Lord ( Isa. 30:18).

"These sayings are faithful and true," the angel said to John the Revelator of his vision of the last days, "and the Lord God of the holy prophets sent his angel to shew unto his servants the things which must shortly be done. Behold, I come quickly. . . . He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still. And, behold, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work shall be. . . . He which testifieth these things saith, Surely I come quickly" ( Rev. 22:6-7, 11- 12, 20).

With that apostle, in trust and hopeful anticipation, we join our voices and say, "Even so, come, Lord Jesus" ( Rev. 22:20).

---
Notas:
[^1] When the Lord comes, every corruptible thing will be consumed, the elements will "melt with fervent heat," and the works of the world will be burned up (2 Pet. 3:10-12; D&C 101:24-25). "In the beginning of the seventh thousand years . . . the Lord God [will] sanctify the earth" (D&C 77:12). Children will grow up and grow old (D&C 63:51). At least for a time, there will be some on earth who are not members of Christ's church during the Millennium. [^2] After the cleansing fire that precedes the Millennium, only righteous people will remain on the earth, for "the wicked shall not stand" (D&C 29:11). The Lord will reign over the earth as king (Dan. 7:13-14; D&C 38:21; 133:25; A of F 10). When the thousand years are over, men will "again begin to deny their God" (D&C 29:22). A celestial glory will be established on the earth; it is called "a new heaven and a new earth." The celestialized earth will have no sea (Rev. 21:1; D&C 29:23-24). Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:251-52.
[^2] After the earth is cleansed by burning, the Lord will bring "new heavens and a new earth" (2 Pet. 3:10-13; Isa. 65:17) in fact, the Lord has proclaimed that "old things shall pass away, and all things become new" (D&C 63:49). The mountains and valleys will be made smooth (D&C 133:22). People will die only after they reach a hundred years old (Isa. 65:20), and then they will "be changed in the twinkling of an eye" to a glorious state (D&C 43:32; 63:51; 101:30). At least for a time, there will be some who worship other gods (Micah 4:5; Zech. 14:16-19). All enmity among mankind will cease (D&C 101:26). Jesus Christ will be our lawgiver (D&C 38:22; 45:59). Satan will be loosed to reign for a "little season" (Rev. 20:3, 7; D&C 43:31). The earth will be "crowned with glory" and "sanctified" (D&C 88:19, 26). Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 1:86-87; 3:63-64.
