Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Signs of the Times ( 1999)

Appendix 2

The Prophets Speak on Preparedness in the Last Days

The prophets have given consistent guidance on preparing ourselves for the Second Coming and for the judgments of the last days. To be spiritually prepared, they tell us, we must repent, be obedient, be humble and prayerful, be united, and live as Saints of God. To be temporally prepared, we need to get out of debt; store a year's supply of food, clothing, and, where possible, fuel; and learn to be self- sufficient.

Keys to Being Spiritually Prepared

Joseph Smith

"When I contemplate the rapidity with which the great and glorious day of the coming of the Son of Man advances, when He shall come to receive His Saints unto Himself, where they shall dwell in His presence, and be crowned with glory and immortality; when I consider that soon the heavens are to be shaken, and the earth tremble and reel to and fro; and that the heavens are to be unfolded as a scroll when it is rolled up; and that every mountain and island are to flee away, I cry out in my heart, What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness!" (History of the Church, 1:442).

"If the Church with one united effort perform their duties; if they do this, the work shall be complete—if they do not this in all humility, making preparation from this time forth, like Joseph in Egypt, laying up store against the time of famine, every man having his tent, his horses, his chariots, his armory, his cattle, his family, and his whole substance in readiness against the time when it shall be said: To your tents, O Israel! Let not this be noised abroad; let every heart beat in silence, and every mouth be shut" (History of the Church, 2:145).

Brigham Young

"While six-tenths or three-fourths of this people will keep the commandments of God, the curse and judgments of the Almighty will never come upon them, though we will have trials of various kinds, and the elements to contend with—natural and spiritual elements" (Journal of Discourses, 10:335-36).

John Taylor

"In relation to events that will yet take place, and the kind of trials, troubles, and sufferings which we shall have to cope with, it is to me a matter of very little moment. These things are in the hands of God. He dictates the affairs of the human family, and directs and controls our affairs; and the great thing that we, as a people, have to do is to seek after and cleave unto our God, to be in close affinity with him, and to seek for his guidance, and his blessing and Holy Spirit to lead and guide us in the right path. Then it matters not what it is nor who it is that we have to contend with, God will give us strength according to our day" (Gospel Kingdom, 349).

Wilford Woodruff

"Can you tell me where the people are who will be shielded and protected from these great calamities and judgments which are even now at our door? I'll tell you. The priesthood of God who honor their priesthood and who are worthy of their blessings are the only ones who shall have this safety and protection. They are the only mortal beings. No other people have a right to be shielded from these judgments. They are at our very doors; not even this people will escape them entirely" (Gates, "Temple Workers' Excursion," 512).

"I want the Latter-day Saints to stop murmuring and complaining at the providence of God. Trust in God. Do your duty. Remember your prayers. Get faith in the Lord, and take hold and build up Zion. All will be right. The Lord is going to visit His people, and He is going to cut His work short in righteousness, lest no flesh should be saved. I say to you, watch the signs of the times, and prepare yourselves for that which is to come" (796-97).

"Those who have got oil in their lamps, are men who live their religion, pay their tithing, pay their debts, keep the commandments of God, and do not blaspheme his name; men and women who will not sell their birthright for a mess of pottage or for a little gold or silver; these are those that will be valiant in the testimony of Jesus Christ" (Journal of Discourses, 21:126).

"Will he [Jesus] receive us to himself? Are we prepared for his coming and kingdom and the fulness thereof, unless we are sanctified, and lay aside sin, and do right? No. We must sanctify ourselves, and keep the commandments of God, and do those things that are required at our hands, before we can be prepared for the coming of the Great Bridegroom" (Journal of Discourses, 2:202).

Lorenzo Snow

"We should understand that the Lord has provided, when the days of trouble come upon the nations, a place for you and me, and we will be preserved as Noah was preserved, not in an ark, but we will be preserved by going into these principles of union by which we can accomplish the work of the Lord and surround ourselves with those things that will preserve us from the difficulties that are now coming upon the world, the judgments of the Lord" (Conference Report, Oct. 1900, 4-5).

"There is rapidly coming something that will try you, perhaps as you have never been tried before. All, however, that is necessary for us to do now is to see where our faults and weaknesses lie, if we have any. If we have been unfaithful in the past, let us renew our covenants with God and determine, by fasting and prayer, that we will get forgiveness of our sins, that the Spirit of the Almighty may rest upon us, that peradventure we may escape those powerful temptations that are approaching. The cloud is gathering in blackness. . . . Therefore, take warning" (762-63).

Joseph F. Smith

"We believe that . . . severe, natural calamities are visited upon men by the Lord for the good of his children, to quicken their devotion to others, and to bring out their better natures, that they may love and serve him. We believe, further, that they are the heralds and tokens of his final judgment, and the schoolmasters to teach the people to prepare themselves by righteous living for the coming of the Savior to reign upon the earth, when every knee shall bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ. If these lessons are impressed upon us and upon the people of our country, the anguish, and the loss of life and toil, sad, great and horrifying as they were, will not have been endured in vain" (Gospel Doctrine, 55).

"Unless the Latter-day Saints will live their religion, keep their covenants with God and their brethren, honor the priesthood which they bear, and try faithfully to bring themselves into subjection to the laws of God, they will be the first to fall beneath the judgments of the Almighty, for his judgments will begin at his own house" (Conference Report, Apr. 1880, 96).

George Albert Smith

"In our day we are warned, in a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, that unless we are more righteous than those who are receiving destruction at the present time in many parts of the world, we, too, must lose our birthright and our opportunity and be destroyed here in the flesh. We will not be justified by saying we are living as well as other people. That is not sufficient, my brethren. We have a special destiny if we live for it. That destiny is to live here upon this earth when it becomes the Celestial Kingdom, where God our Heavenly Father and His Son Jesus Christ will be our King and our Lawgiver" (Conference Report, Oct. 1943, 45).

"He [the Lord] has told us in great plainness that the world will be in distress, that there will be warfare from one end of the world to the other, that the wicked shall slay the wicked and that peace shall be taken from the earth. And He has said, too, that the only place where there will be safety will be in Zion. Will we make this Zion? Will we keep it to be Zion, because Zion means the pure in heart?" (Conference Report, Oct. 1941, 99).

Joseph Fielding Smith

"We shall not escape [the judgments] unless we repent, turn to the Lord, honor our Priesthood and our membership in this Church, and be true and faithful to our covenants" (Conference Report, Apr. 1937, 62).

Spencer W. Kimball

"In the parable, oil can be purchased at the market. In our lives the oil of preparedness is accumulated drop by drop in righteous living. Attendance at sacrament meetings adds oil to our lamps, drop by drop over the years. Fasting, family prayer, home teaching, control of bodily appetites, preaching the gospel, studying the scriptures—each act of dedication and obedience is a drop added to our store. Deeds of kindness, payment of offerings and tithes, chaste thoughts and actions, marriage in the covenant for eternity—these, too, contribute importantly to the oil with which we can at midnight refuel our exhausted lamps" (Faith Precedes the Miracle, 256).

Ezra Taft Benson

"Heed the Lord's counsel to the Saints of this dispensation: 'Prepare yourselves for the great day of the Lord' (D&C 133:10).

"This preparation must consist of more than just casual membership in the Church. You must learn to be guided by personal revelation and the counsel of the living prophet so you will not be deceived" (New Era, May 1982, 50).

Howard W. Hunter

"Jesus taught his disciples to watch and pray; however, he taught them that prayerful watching does not require sleepless anxiety and preoccupation with the future, but rather the quiet, steady attention to present duties" (Conference Report, Apr. 1974, 23).

Melvin J. Ballard

"These are the last days spoken of by the prophets of old. These are the signs. Oh, Latter-day Saints, let us, though we be in Zion, be not asleep, for this is the day when no man can be at peace, nor shall we remain at peace in sin or in transgression; for everything will be shaken that is not built upon righteousness, and every man, whether in Zion or elsewhere, who does not keep the commandments of God, shall be shaken and shall fall, and shall feel the chastening hand of the Almighty" (Conference Report, Oct. 1923, 32).

M. Russell Ballard

"The prophecies of the last days lead me to believe that the intensity of the battle for the souls of men will increase and the risks will become greater as we draw closer to the second coming of the Lord.

"Preparing ourselves and our families for the challenges of the coming years will require us to replace fear with faith. We must be able to overcome the fear of enemies who oppose and threaten us. The Lord has said, 'Fear not, little flock; do good; let earth and hell combine against you, for if ye are built upon my rock, they cannot prevail' (D&C 6:34)" (Conference Report, Oct. 1989, 43).

Charles A. Callis

"To men and likewise to nations the promises and threatenings of God are always conditional. In the wisdom and goodness of God good behavior, sorrowful repentance and conversion can stay the approach of judgment, or at least secure a respite. People are given time by the Almighty to return to him through repentance. There is forgiveness with Him. Thus the Lord turns aside his judgments for a while at least. Nineveh's people were rescued. They were granted an extension of time. Judgments are conditional. The people themselves are responsible for the calamities that befall them, but when they repent and turn unto the Lord, he hears their prayers" (Conference Report, Oct. 1938, 23).

George Q. Cannon

"All can embrace righteousness; all can forsake iniquity; all can turn to the Lord. And those who will not but will continue to practice iniquity, I tell you, as a servant of God, they will be destroyed, whether they be "Mormons" or non-"Mormons." Those who wish to have themselves and their posterity perpetuated in the earth must practice righteousness, for righteousness alone will save the people from the calamities that are coming upon the earth" (24).

Neal A. Maxwell

"In our striving to be prepared, therefore, let us be careful to rely on parents, priesthood, and principles—and on scriptures, and temples, and leaders who lead—to see us through. Let us not mistake program scaffolding for substance" (Conference Report, Oct. 1982, 98).

Bruce R. McConkie

"The Second Coming is a day of judgment, a day of rewards, a day of vengeance for the wicked, a day of glory and honor for the righteous. It is a day for which all men prepare by the lives that they live. Those who live as becometh saints shall be as their Lord; those who walk in carnal paths shall be cast out" (Mortal Messiah, 3:51).

Delbert L. Stapley

"Let us be sure we thoroughly understand the most important things we can do to prepare ourselves for our Lord's second coming to earth and, by our obedience and faithfulness, escape his punishment.Â½Â½Â½Â½ . . . We must set our lives and homes in order. This means a searching of our souls, an admittance of wrongdoing, and repentance where needed. It means keeping all of God's commandments. It means loving our neighbor. It means living an exemplary life. It means being good husbands and wives. It means teaching and training our children in the ways of righteousness. It means being honest in all our doings, in business and at home. It means spreading the gospel of Jesus Christ to all the peoples of the world" (Conference Report, Oct. 1975, 71).

Joseph B. Wirthlin

"Mortality is fleeting. We all have much to accomplish in preparation to meet Him.

"As Latter-day Saints, 'we believe all things, we hope all things. . . . If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy, we seek after these things.' [ A of F 1:13. What do we believe that will motivate us to move forward? What do we hope for? What are the virtuous, lovely, or praiseworthy things we should seek after? I believe we should strive to develop within ourselves the traits of the character of the Savior" (Conference Report, Oct. 1998, 31).

Keys to Being Temporally Prepared

Wilford Woodruff

"The Lord is not going to disappoint either Babylon or Zion, with regard to famine, pestilence, earthquake or storms, he is not going to disappoint anybody with regard to any of these things, they are at the doors. . . . Lay up your wheat and other provisions against a day of need, for the day will come when they will be wanted, and no mistake about it. We shall want bread, and the Gentiles will want bread, and if we are wise we shall have something to feed them and ourselves when famine comes" (Journal of Discourses, 18:121-22).

"We have got either to make ourselves self-sustaining, or we shall have to go without a good many things that we now regard as almost indispensable for our welfare and comfort, for there is not a man who believes in the revelations of God but what believes the day is at hand when there will be trouble among the nations of the earth, when great Babylon will come in remembrance before God, and his judgments will visit the nations. When that day comes, if Zion has food and raiment and the comforts of life she must produce them, and there must be a beginning to these things" (Journal of Discourses, 16:33).

Harold B. Lee

"We have never laid down an exact formula for what anybody should store, and let me just make this comment: Perhaps if we think not in terms of a year's supply of what we ordinarily would use, and think more in terms of what it would take to keep us alive in case we didn't have anything else to eat, that last would be very easy to put in storage for a year . . . just enough to keep us alive if we didn't have anything else to eat. We wouldn't get fat on it, but we would live, and if you think in terms of that kind of annual storage rather than a whole year's supply of everything that you are accustomed to eat which, in most cases, is utterly impossible for the average family, I think we will come nearer to what President Clark advised us way back in 1937" (Welfare Conference Report, 1 Oct. 1966, typescript).

Spencer W. Kimball

"Some have become casual about keeping up their year's supply of commodities. . . .

"Should evil times come, many might wish they had filled all their fruit bottles and cultivated a garden in their backyards and planted a few fruit trees and berry bushes and provided for their own commodity needs.

"The Lord planned that we would be independent of every creature" (Conference Report, Oct. 1974, 6).

"In the twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew, the Lord speaks there of hard times, difficult times, more difficult than anything we have ever dreamed of. There will be famines and there will be sickness and drought. There will be many, many problems come, the like of which [World War II] was nothing. So the thing to do is for every mother and her husband to talk about saving a little something for a future that could be disastrous to their own families" (Manchester England Area Conference Report, June 1976, 23).

Ezra Taft Benson

"What can we do to prepare for what may lie ahead? Answers to this question have been repeated to our people many times, over the years. Here are some of them:

"1. Get out of debt and live within your income.

"2. Save what you can from your income.

"3. Store at least one year's supply of food, clothing, and other household necessities.

"4. Pay your tithes and offerings.

"5. Support the welfare plan" ("Pay Thy Debt and Live," 11).

"Family preparedness has been a long-established welfare principle. It is even more urgent today.

"I ask you earnestly, have you provided for your family a year's supply of food, clothing, and, where possible, fuel? The revelation to produce and store food may be as essential to our temporal welfare today as boarding the ark was to the people in the days of Noah" (Ensign, Nov. 1987, 49).

"Our bishops storehouses are not intended to stock enough commodities to care for all the members of the Church. Storehouses are only established to care for the poor and the needy. For this reason, members of the Church have been instructed to personally store a year's supply of food, clothing, and, where possible, fuel. By following this counsel, most members will be prepared and able to care for themselves and their family members, and be able to share with others as may be needed" (Ensign, May 1977, 82).

"You do not need to go into debt . . . to obtain a year's supply. Plan to build up your food supply just as you would a savings account. Save a little for storage each pay-check. Can or bottle fruit and vegetables from your gardens and orchards. Learn how to preserve food through drying and possibly freezing. Make your storage a part of your budget. Store seeds and have sufficient tools on hand to do the job. If you are saving and planning for a second car or a TV set or some item which merely adds to your comfort or pleasure, you may need to change your priorities. We urge you to do this prayerfully and do it now" (Ensign, Nov. 1980, 33).

"A man should not only be prepared to protect himself physically, but he should also have on hand sufficient supplies to sustain himself and his family in an emergency. For many years the leaders of the Mormon Church have recommended, with instructions, that every family have on hand at least a year's supply of basic food, clothing, fuel (where possible), and provisions for shelter. This has been most helpful to families suffering temporary reverses. It can and will be useful in many circumstances in the days ahead. We also need to get out of financial bondage, to be debt free" (God, Family, Country, 331).

George Q. Cannon

"Do not forget . . . the teachings you have heard and which have been repeated in our hearing for so many years; I refer to the saving and storing of grain; for the day will come when you will see the wisdom of doing so, and when many of you will doubtless wish you had profited by it. For I tell you that wars and desolation will cover the land, just as prophets have declared they would; and these are coming, coming, coming, as plainly and as surely as the light comes in the morning before the sun rises above the summit of yonder mountains, and before we see his rays" (Journal of Discourses, 25:260).

J. Reuben Clark Jr.

"When we really get into hard times, where food is scarce or there is none at all, and so with clothing and shelter, money may be no good for there may be nothing to buy, and you cannot eat money, you cannot get enough of it together to burn to keep you warm, and you cannot wear it" (in "Blessings Promised for Carrying on Welfare Program," 4).

Marion G. Romney

"It is important for us to have, as we have been counseled, a year's supply of food and clothing, and where possible, fuel. We have also been counseled that we should have a reserve of cash to meet emergencies and to carry adequate health, home, and life insurance. Personal and family preparedness, however, is much broader than these tangibles. It must include proper attitudes, a willingness to forego luxuries, prayerful consideration of all major purchases, and learning to live within our means" (6).

"It may be that some time in the future we will survive or starve on what we can produce ourselves" (Conference Report, Apr. 1974, 179).

"We will see the day when we will live on what we produce" (Conference Report, Apr. 1975, 165).

Erastus Snow

[[The Lord] designs his people to prepare while there is time, and while he gives them bread to sustain themselves. But if that time should come suddenly upon us in our present condition, who would be prepared for it? If the news was to reach us that Babylon was really going down, that a general war had overtaken her, causing distress of nations, and the closing up of her manufactories, and the struggle between capital and labor were again renewed, causing domestic and national trouble, and as a consequence we found our foreign supplies cut off, how many would begin to pray that Babylon might be spared a little longer?" (Journal of Discourses, 19:181-82).

First Presidency: Spencer W. Kimball, N. Eldon Tanner, and Marion G. Romney

"Maintain a year's supply of food for your family. Use prudence and seek reliable information on what and how to store, and observe local laws and ordinances in storage procedures" (Circular Letter, to All Members of the Church, 16 Dec. 1974).

First Presidency: Ezra Taft Benson, Gordon B. Hinckley, and Thomas S. Monson

"Speculation engenders fear and can cause members to become caught up in emergency preparedness efforts that are not only costly but go beyond the basics consistently taught. . . .

" . . . We suggest that members concentrate on essential foods that sustain life [for one year] . . . grains, legumes, cooking oil, powdered milk, salt, sugar or honey, and water. The decision to do more than this rests with the individual" (First Presidency Letter, 24 June 1988).
