Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

PREFACE

To add to the knowledge concerning the Book of Mormon that has accumulated since it was first introduced and declared to be, like the Bible, the inspired and revealed "Word of God," the authors of these volumes, after unending study, herewith present their findings.

After reading and re-reading and reading again, its sacred pages, they turned to writing about them. Each time they did, new and more beautiful concepts presented themselves to their always active minds. But it was only a beginning. There was much to learn. Their thoughts were, undoubtedly, like those of Sir Isaac Newton, who, when near the end of a life crowded with the truths he had helped unfold said, "I am but as a child playing on the sands by the sea. I have found a few pretty pebbles, washed by the spray, but beyond me, unfathomed and unexplored, lies the great ocean of whose depths and mysteries I know nothing."

The thoughts expressed in this Commentary are given only as "an introduction to the study of the Book of Mormon" and are intended merely as a guide to its perusal. As the reader progresses in the consideration of this divine and glorious revelation, new vistas and fresh horizons are sure to enter his scope and soon he will find himself worshiping with a strange but delightsome people who testify of their Israelitic ancestry, of the Law of Moses, of Isaiah, and of the Messiah, Jesus Christ, who brought and placed before them his Gospel as he previously had to the Jews.

Every book has, or should have an objective. It may be to impart knowledge of religion, of history, of pedigree, or whatnot; it may be to edify by meditation and essays; or it may to instruct with poetry and by parable. The Book of Mormon, indeed, includes all these objectives and more, but its principal purpose, throughout, is similar to that of the Bible—to bring God and man together through the one great Mediator, Jesus Christ.

To quote some words spoken by the first and the last writers in the sacred record and make them a living part of this preface, we refer the reader to II Nephi 4:15 and Moroni 10:27.

The Prophet Nephi said,

And upon these [the Small Plates] I write the things of my soul, and many of the scriptures which are engraven upon the plates of brass. For my soul delighteth in the scriptures, and my heart pondereth them, and writeth them for the learning and the profit of my children.

A millennium later Moroni wrote,

And I exhort you to remember these things; for the time speedily cometh that ye shall know that I lie not, for ye shall see me at the bar of God; and the Lord God will say unto you: Did I not declare my words unto you, which were written by this man, like as one crying from the dead, yea, even as one speaking out of the dust.

In the ages that came and went between their times, many holy prophets of the Nephites added and recorded their prophecies and their wisdom upon the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated. We offer the following comments, which is our understanding of and our testimony to the great truths they unfold.

To the late Elders George Reynolds and Janne M. Sjodahl, who spent much of their time and abilities ferreting out the accumulated evidence herewith presented, we owe the credit for the comments and biographical notes.

In humility, we offer them, praying our Heavenly Father, by his Spirit, to render them most for our good and greatest for his glory. With full purpose of heart, we dedicate them to all who desire to know the "mind and will of God."

P.C.R.

FOREWORD

For many centuries prior to the ruthless invasion by the Spanish Conquerors, Cortez and Pizarro, in the Sixteenth Century, there flourished at various times in both North and South America, several distinct civilizations, the very remains of which are today the wonder and admiration of the world.

The land of America, known to geographers and early voyagers as the New World, is constantly yielding abundant evidence of ancient cultural enlightenment.

Almost daily, announcement is made of the discovery of objects of ancient art or utility; a temple, a pyramid, a sculptured vase or a finely-woven woolen garment; handiwork of the goldsmith's craft; evidence of the surgeon's skill; objects of reverence and adoration; great cities and highways; altogether prophesying of the past, of a beauty and a culture, of such as, perhaps, we at this time have very little idea.

From the Isthmus of Panama both to the north and also to the south, throughout the uplands and valleys of the great Cordillera, are the remains of great nations and peoples, whose influence and dominion extended to the far-flung shores of both continents and even to the islands of the sea. Of them it has been said that the old and perhaps contemporary nations of the Near-East, i.e. Egypt, Chaldea, and Babylonia, were insignificant when compared with the vast empires which extended over the Americas.

At the time the great armies of the Roman Empire had brought, what was thought to be, all the people of the earth into submission to their imperial master, a civilization in America reached a peak of excellence unprecedented by any people of antiquity. This period is known in history as the "Golden Age of the Maya." Here the fine arts, architecture, astronomy, government, and religion reached a perfection and an originality which make them to America, what the classic creations of Greece and Rome are to Europe.

The question is very often asked "Who were these strange people, and from whence did they come?" Very little is known of the history of these civilizations. Their rise and progress, their millions of people present an enigma which science has been unable to explain. Who they were and where was the land of their genesis we do not know; we cannot tell. Science has formulated very little knowledge to assist us in this dilemma. Indeed, it is one of the most perplexing sections in the history of the world. It is a mystery. Like the rising sun, they suddenly appeared upon the horizon of civilization; almost as suddenly they departed. One sentence may give the experience of a thousand years—"They came; they prospered, and, at the very meridian of their glory, they vanished. It was as the event of a day."

Many attempts have been to answer the foregoing riddle. Most of them have been merely guesses, though, some of course, have bases of fact. LePlongeon, the eminent student of the Maya, in a desperate effort to explain the many relationships between the New and Old World cultures, declares that Egypt, itself, was peopled by wanderers from "Mayapan." Some declare that Asia-Minor or Egypt is the probable answer. Lord Kingsborough energetically defends the idea of Israelitic ancestry. Others suggest the fabled Atlantis of Plato.

There are reasons to support each and perhaps all of these conclusions. Few will deny that much of the learning of ancient America resembles Egyptian and Semitic cultures. Few will deny that its myths and legends are replete with form and ritual, the existence of which had been thought to be only of the "kingdom of Pharaoh and the lands of the prophets." The definite influence of Asiatic forebears may be seen in the numerous writings and the physical characteristics of the wretched remnant which still survives.

Which of all these theories is correct, science has not yet established.

A new group has advanced the theory of American origin, principally on a purely political basis of loyalty to a geographic mass. This group insists that it is not patriotic to attribute to any foreign land the "home-land" of his culture. This unscientific theory appeals to a few.

The real truth is that these civilizations are not indigenous in America. For their beginnings we must seek elsewhere. The several stages of the stone age, followed by the copper or bronze age, upon which archeologists build the pre-historic story of Europe and Asia are missing here. No parallel periods are found here. The beginnings are more abrupt. The earliest evidences of enlightenment are among the civilizations showing the highest development. The first expressions of culture reveal the borrowed customs and learning and experience of ages.

The chronology of man in America, is a sequence of generations of highly social beings. Their legends evince a rich and priestly heritage. They built great cities, improved roads connected remote parts of their empire; government was largely by consent of those governed; their laws were based on their religious conceptions; their ideas of God, with whom they believed they dwelt in close relationship, influenced their art and gave shape and form to many of their conclusions.

Yet, whence they came and when, no man knows. However, nothing is being left undone, no stone untouched or unturned, which like the Rosetta Stone of the Nile, might unlock the vast stores of knowledge and information hidden behind the inscrutable faces of innumerable and incomprehensible glyphs.

This is a work for science to perform. Each season new evidences are being added, yet, students of archeology, like players of chess, are as yet stalemated—they have the kings and the pawns but they cannot move. They have the records, but they cannot read them. Like workmen on a building they constantly increase its size and dimensions, but they know little of the mystery surrounding each stone with which they build.

Science lingers, here, in the lap of abundance; its methods are so slow; its findings of fact are so belated, that impatiently, many have come to regard the problem as the great American Riddle, a puzzle, the parts of which, it is hoped, may eventually be put together and the story of American antiquity be reconstructed.

Book of Mormon Geography

The Book of Mormon is not a geography. The writers of the sacred record gave little space and did not make much of an effort to describe, in so many words, the physical features of the regions, wherein took place, the events they recorded. It is not a record of borders and boundary lines, of rivers and highways, of areas of population and industry but as will be repeatedly shown, the Book of Mormon is a book of doctrine.

In the Book of Alma many find what they consider to be the key to Book of Mormon geography. (Alma 22:27-34) That passage was written to furnish important information concerning the missionary travels of the elders and priests and also to indicate the vast territory over which the Nephites and the Lamanites had spread, as far as knowledge of countries, rivers, and cities can be conveyed without, drawings or maps. But the attempts that are constantly being made to identify the cities and lands of the Book of Mormon with the old and obscure ruins found in Mexico and points further south, will end in failure; this is the opinion of many who have made it an object of search and research. Certainly, such attempts will produce little good. It is folly to associate oneself with any peculiar notion and say of some particular ruin, "This is the City of Zarahelma" or, "There is the Land of Bountiful." Such ventures in thought are merely guesses, and such speculation leads to confusion.

In this connection a statement made in 1890 by George Q. Cannon will be sufficient; Elder Cannon said,

There is a tendency, strongly manifested at the present time among some of the brethren, to study the geography of the Book of Mormon. We have heard of numerous lectures, illustrated by suggestive maps, being delivered on this subject during the present winter, generally under the auspices of the Improvement Societies and Sunday Schools. We are greatly pleased to notice the increasing interest taken by the Saints in this holy book. It contains the fullness of the Gospel of Christ, and those who prayerfully study its sacred pages can be made wise unto salvation. It also unravels many mysteries connected with the history, yet the ancient world, more particularly of this Western Continent, mysteries which no other book explains. But valuable as is the Book of Mormon both in doctrine and history, yet it is possible to put this sacred volume to uses for which it was never intended, uses which are detrimental rather than advantageous to the cause of truth, and consequently to the work of the Lord.

We have been led to these thoughts from the fact that the brethren who lecture on the lands of the Nephites or the geography of the Book of Mormon are not united in their conclusions. No two of them, so far as we have learned, are agreed on all points, and in many cases the variations amount to . . . thousands of miles. These differences of views lead to discussion, contention, and perplexity; and we believe more confusion is caused by these divergences than good is done by the truths elicited.

How is it that there is such a variety of ideas on this subject? Simply because the Book of Mormon is not a geographical primer. It was not written to teach geographical truths. What is told us of the situation of the various lands or cities of the ancient Jaredites, Nephites, and Lamanites is usually simply an incidental remark connected with the doctrinal or historical portions of the work; and almost invariably only extends to a statement of the relative position of some land or city to contiguous or surrounding places, and nowhere gives us the exact situation or boundaries so that it can be definitely located without fear of error.

It must be remembered that geography as a science, like chronology and other branches of education, was not understood or taught after the manner or by methods of the moderns. It could not be amongst those peoples who were not acquainted with the size and form of the earth, as was the case with most of the nations of antiquity, though not with the Nephites. Their seers and prophets appear to have received divine light on this subject.

The First Presidency have often been asked to prepare some suggestive map illustrative of Nephite geography, but have never consented to do so. Nor are we acquainted with any of the Twelve Apostles who would undertake such a task. The reason is, that without further information they are not prepared even to suggest. The word of the Lord or the translation of other ancient records is required to clear up many points now so obscure that, as we have said, no two original investigators agree with regard to them. When, as in the case, one student places a certain investigators agree with regard to them. When, as in the case, one student places a certain city at the Isthmus of Panama, a second in Venezuela, and a third in Guiana or northern Brazil, it is obvious that suggestive maps prepared by these brethren would confuse instead of enlighten; and they cannot be thus far apart in this one important point without relative positions being also widely separate.

For these reasons we have strong objections to the introduction of maps and their circulation among our people which profess to give the location of the Nephite cities and settlements. As we have said, they have a tendency to mislead, instead of enlighten, and they give rise to discussions which will lead to division of sentiment and be very unprofitable. We see no necessity for maps of this character, because, at least, much would be left to the imagination of those who prepare them; and we hope that there will be no attempt made to introduce them or give them general circulation. Ofcourse, there can be no harm result from the study of the geography of this continent at the time it was settled by the Nephites, drawing all the information possible from the record which has been translated for our benefit But beyond this we do not think it necessary, at the present time, to go, because it is plain to seen, we think, that evils may result therefrom. [^1]

From this we may feel sure that if, ever, the time comes, or that it is expedient for the Saints to have this information, it will come to them through the regularly established source, the prophet, seer, and revelator, the Presiding High Priest of the Church and no one else.

* * *

One cannot get a testimony of the Book of Mormon by studying its geography!

There is one way, only, one may attain that end.

There end is once more pointed to by one who was a Lutheran minister and who first heard the Gospel plan preached in Stockholm, Sweden. He came to Utah and joined the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; among its members he became a prominent writer and editor. He compiled, with the late Hyrum M. Smith of the Council of the Twelve Apostles, the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary and who, with George Reynolds, is the author of the comments and biographical notes which follow in this volume.

In an impersonal letter, this same convert, many years ago, wrote,

Dear Reader:

In the Book of Mormon is the Gospel in its fulness. You belong to a church. You probably have a confession of faith. If there is the least shadow of doubt in your mind as to the truth of what you believe, the origin of your ordinances, or the divine approbation of your worship, you would do well if you compare your faith and practices with the teachings of our Lord, as recorded in this Sacred Record. If they do not correspond with these teachings, they are not his and remember the promise is given:—

"And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost."

(Moroni 10:4)

(Signed)—Janne M. Sjodahl.

"Plates of Gold"—Statement by Padre Gay

In a small, but immensely interesting brochure, published by the Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, New York City, 1920, entitled, "Goldsmith's Art in Ancient Mexico," by Marshall H. Saville and one of a Series coming under the heading, "Indian Notes and Monographs," a statement made by Padre Gay in his "Historia de Oaxaca" (1521) is included in his work by the above mentioned author.

Father Gay was one of those self-sacrificing and unselfish Catholic Priests who sought to carry Christianity to the native races of America in the first to explore the vast extent of territory over which the Spaniards later became the complete rulers.

Father gay is the author of "Historia de Oaxaca;" on the page of Volume I, is the statement referred to here. We reproduce, herewith, word for word, Page 175 of the first mentioned treatise, "Goldsmith's Art in Ancient Mexico," in which the statement is used.

The declaration made by Padre Gay is remarkable in that one could barely prepare, in so few words, a description of similar plates, more consistent with what the Latter-day Saints know of the Plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated.

OAXACA JEWELS 175

found at the same time, were formerly in possession of Don Francisco Leon of Oaxaca.

An interesting specimen in the Sologuren collection is a gold disc, 13 cm. 1mm. in Pablo Huitzo. It is a breast ornament, with faint incised lines around the edge, representing the hieroglyph of the sun, tonatiuh. In the center is the hieroglyph ollin, the seventeenth of the twenty day-signs of the Nahuan calendar, and means motion or movement. Hence the meaning of the combined glyphs would be "the four seasons of the year. Padre Gay mentions that the Mixtecan Indians "sold to some European antiquarians, very thin plates of gold, evidently worked with the hammer, which their ancestors had been able to preserve, and on which were engraved ancient hieroglyphs. [^2]

Mrs. William Stuart, during her residence in San Geronimo, in the Tehuantepec region of Oaxaca, was much interested in archeology and accumulated a small collection

AND MONOGRAPHS

Plates

The word plates (not breastplates or headplates) appears 141 times in the Book of Mormon. Two of these can be found in the translation of the inspired Preface. There were the "brass plates" or the "plates of brass" which are sometimes called the "plates of Laban" and on which were engraved a genealogy of Lehi, the "Book of Moses," many of the prophecies of the holy prophets, and a history of the Jews down to the reign of King Zedekiah.

There were the "plates of Nephi," which included a set of "Large Plates" and a set of smaller ones. The "large" plates, Nephi tells us,

"Contain an account of the reign of the kings and the wars and contentions of my people."

Upon the smaller ones he engraved a record of the,

"Ministry of my people."

A part of the smaller plates was known as the "Plates of Jacob."

Nephi says of the "Small Plates,"

"Wherefore the Lord hath commanded me to make these plates for a wise purpose in him, which purpose I know not."

There were, also, the twenty-four good plates found by the followers of King Limhi, who were went out to find Zarahemla. From the place where they started, the Land of Lehi-Nephi, they wandered far to the north and there came upon the remains of a great people, among whose relics were these "plates of gold." King Mosiah was a seer and translated them with the help of the Interpreters and found thereon a story of a people who left the Tower of Babel at the time of the "confusion of tongues." That story follows them from the time mentioned to the time they destroyed each other in civil warfare about nineteen centuries later. A condensed account of their history, taken from those plates by Moroni, is found in the Book of Ether.

It is to be remembered that Mormon made, or caused to be made, a set of plates upon which he recorded the abridgment of the Large Plates as he made it. After he "had the plates of Nephi, down to the reign of this king Benjamin, of whom Amaleki spake," he found, upon examination of the many plates in his possession, the Small Plates. He was so struck by the things he read on them—prophecies concerning the coming of Christ and many of the words of Nephi—that he was constrained, by the Spirit of the Lord that was in him, to put them with his own work. for, he says,

"And now, I do not know all things; but the Lord knoweth all things that are to come; wherefore, he worketh in me to do according to his will."

The wisdom and foreknowledge of the Lord was manifest in the early part of his latter-day work. Martin Harris, than whom, perhaps, there was none other more ready and willing to help the cause than he, in his anxiety to prove to his friends and his relatives that Joseph Smith had the plates, the possession of which he claimed and the work was of God, prevailed upon the Prophet to let him show the first 116 pages of the manuscript to them. These pages were lost. Were it not for the wisdom of him, "who knoweth all things," an insurmountable difficulty may have arisen. The pages lost covered the same period of time as was covered by the Small Plates. In other words, a double record was had of these times. Can we conceive of anything more wise or more "foreknowing" than this?

It is this set of "Small Plates" that this volume will hereafter consider.

In Conclusion

One day the disciples of Jesus were about to despair. They had been thrown out of the synagogue, and some of them had been arrested and scourged and placed in irons. The Savior, seeing their distress, comforted them and said,

"If the world hate you, ye know it hated me before it hated you."

And,

"If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you."

When we remember those who first presented the Book of Mormon and advocated its acceptance as the revealed word of God, we can easily recall the scene presented here. We, also, think of that most beautiful portion of sacred literature, the Sermon on the Mount:

"And blessed are all they who are persecuted for my name's sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

"And blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake;

"For ye shall have great joy and be exceeding glad, for great shall be your reward in heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets who were before you."

(III Nephi 12:10-12)

The ancient Midianite Prophet Balaam was taken to the top of a mountain by Balak, who was king of the Moabites. Below where they stood were the "numbers" of Israel; their thousands and tens of thousands, their flocks and herds and all they possessed. Balak feared the Children of Israel because they had destroyed his neighbors, the Amorites and besides, he had heard much of the strength and fierceness of their armies. The king had sent messengers to the prophet saying,

"Behold, there is a people come out from Egypt: behold, they cover the face of the earth, and they abide over against me:

"Come now therefore, I pray thee, curse me this people; for they are too mighty for me:..." (Numbers 22:5-6)

Balak offered Balaam rich reward and high honor if he would comply. Three times the king importuned the prophet, who, at length, instead of cursing them, blessed them and said something like this,

"How can I curse that which the Lord is pleased to bless?"

Indeed, the Book of Mormon has been cursed by a multitude of Balaams and Balaks in every part of this earth, but the complete answer is the same as the conclusion of Balaam's,

"How can I curse that which the Lord is pleased to bless?"

The preaching of the Book of Mormon brought together many who believed and who took upon themselves the hated name, Mormon. Others became more bitter and malignant. To ridicule the Book of Mormon was a daily pastime and to deny and deride Mormonism was a piety. Any excuse and every pretext was ample in the attempt to exterminate the "Mormonism." With their own hands, they dug pits into which they hoped "Mormonism" would fall. But when they saw their fires illumine the paths of those who sought Eternal Life, when they saw that the more they dug the more they tilled the soil, wherein, had been cast, the seeds of everlasting truth, the more bitter became their hate and the more unlimited their spite. They left no stone untouched or unturned that they might throw at the bulwarks and the battlements of the Restored Church of Christ.

To destroy the Book of Mormon, they argued amongst themselves, would be to get rid of the very idea of "Mormonism." To this end they lost no time or left a thing undone. Soon they reached that point where, it has been said, "The last effort of human wickedness cannot pass,"—they sought the life of God's Prophet. As it is written of the Apostle Paul, so it may be said of the Prophet Joseph Smith: "They hired assassins to put him to death; he was brought before their courts and accused of false crimes by witnesses suborned for that purpose. He was arrested, tried, beaten, scourged, imprisoned" and at length, "He died as a martyr." He sealed his testimony with his own blood.

"Now," they said, "Mormonism will surely die." They thought that the heart beats in the Prophet's breast were the great "heartthrobs" of Mormonism. But, in this they were mistaken. Mormonism is immortal. The Book of Mormon is immortal, because it has "God for its author, Omnipotence for its shield, and Eternity for its glorious life."

Clothed in the beautiful garment of priesthood and sustained by its power, members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will proclaim the Gospel's truths and shall not cease until the last enemy of truth and righteousness is subdued. They will not rest from their labors or slacken their zeal until the blessings of the Gospel of Jesus Christ are spread among all the inhabitants of this earth, and not until his will, done in heaven, shall be done upon earth.

There is no power that can destroy the virtue and vitality of these books, the Holy Bible and the Book of Mormon. There is no darkness that can extinguish their light. But far beyond that point in men's lives, where all human understanding ceases and all worldly glory fades, the Bible and the Book of Mormon will go on to help the helpless and, indeed, help all those who have no other helper but the Lord.

Thanks be to God, this book is written. The Bible now has a companion. Both testify of the other, and together, they will live on forever, the inspired and revealed "Word of God," the Mind and Will of our Father, the Advice and Counsel of our Savior and our King.

Twenty centuries ago, the Risen Redeemer said to his Disciples among the Nephites,

"No weapon that is formed against you shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment, thou shalt condemn."

(III Nephi 22:17)

May I, in humility, apply these words to the Bible and the Book of Mormon.

Now, in conclusion, may I read, in the spirit of prayer, the last verse of the Sixty-fifth Section of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants,

"Wherefore, may the kingdom of God go forth, that the kingdom of heaven may come, that thou, O God, mayest be glorified in heaven so on earth, that thine enemies may be subdued; for thine is the honor, power and glory, for ever and ever. Amen."

—P. C. R.

Footnotes

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

To many persons I express appreciation for their encouragement—with particular mention to Harold Lundstrom for editorial assistance and to Thomas S. Monson for printing and publication advice and help.

—P. C. R.

THE TITLE PAGE OF THE BOOK OF MORMON

We may consider this to be what we now call a Preface. It was written by Moroni, who was the last to engrave his experiences and admonitions upon the sacred plates whereon his father, Mormon, had made an abridgment of the Large Plates of Nephi, It appeared upon the last plate thereof and was translated by the Prophet Joseph Smith. On page 71 of Volume 1, History of the Church, is a statement by the Prophet concerning this Title Page or Preface, we read,

"I wish to mention here that the title page of the Book of Mormon is a literal translation, taken from the last leaf on the left hand side of the collection or book of plates, which contained the record which has been translated, the language of the whole running the same as all Hebrew writing in general; and that said title page is not by any means a modern composition, either of mine or any other man who has lived or does live in this generation.

Joseph Smith, Jun."

THE FIRST BOOK OF NEPHI

HIS REIGN AND MINISTRY

CHAPTER 1

1 Ne 1 1VERSE 1

1 Ne 1 1Nephi, the youngest of four sons of Lehi and Sariah, the others being Laman, Lemuel, and Sam; all born in Palestine. "Nephi" means "prophet," one who speaks for God. That name, the Hebrew "nebi," the Egyptian "Kneph" and "Noub," and the Uto-Astecan "Nahua," seem to be closely related. The word is still found in "Napo," the name of one of the affluents of the Amazon River; also, in such Indian names as "Nepas," "Nahuapos" and "Napotas." There is a city and a river in Colombia, S. A., named "Nechi." This is almost the same as Nephi. If you compare "Nechi" with the Egyptian "Necho" (Pharaoh) which is the same as Nephi, it is evident they are alike. The vowels mean little or nothing. When we consider that the original inhabitants of America were a people who were versed "in the learning of the Jews and the language of the Egyptians" it is not surprising to find the name "Nephi," or that name in a different form, in an amazing number of geographic instances.

1 Ne 1 1Elder George Reynolds traces this celebrated name to an Egyptian root. He says, "Its roots are Egyptian; meaning, good, excellent, benevolent. ... One of the names given to the god (Osiris), expressive of his attributes, was Nephi, or Dnephi ... and the chief city dedicated to him was called N-ph, translated into Hebrew as Noph, in which form it appears in Hosea, Isaiah and Jeremiah, its modern English name is Memphis."

1 Ne 1 1This agrees with a statement credited to Eusebius, to the effect that the Egyptians called the Creator Kneph. Noub or Nouv, according to Champollion, was the Knouphis of Strabo, and the same as the Kneph of Plutarch and Eusebius. Naba, according to Gesenius, in Niphil, means "To speak under divine influence," as a prophet, (Naba, in Kal, means "to boil up," as a fountain; hence to pour forth words, as those who speak under divine influence.)

1 Ne 1 1It is necessary to note that all forms of Nephi, such as Dnephi, Kneph, Noub, Nouv, Knouphis, Nebo, Naba, Nechi, and Necho, with many others, are variants of the same name.

1 Ne 1 1How expressive is the name Nephi, when we understand its meaning. How well it corresponds with the character and mission of this great son of Lehi!

1 Ne 1 1Goodly parents. Nephi, in introducing himself, calls attention to the noble character of his parents. He recognizes the advantages that may come to a child through father and mother, both by means of heredity and superior home environments. He knew the value of parental teaching when coupled with a life worthy of emulation. It is characteristically Jewish to honor the parents in this manner. Jewish autobiographers, in beginning their life story, almost always, pay tribute to their lineage. In doing this, Nephi continued a custom that had become a mark of all faithful writers among the Jews. We may consider the fact that Nephi did this, to be a strong bit of evidence supporting the claims made by the Book of Mormon.

1 Ne 1 1Josephus starts the story of his life by stating that he was a descendant of a long line of priests and nobles. Of his father, Matthias, he states that he "was considerable for his extraction but more for his justice and authority in Jerusalem." He then says that he was raised by his brother, Matthias, and was instructed in the sciences. He was, he adds, so precocious, as a child of fourteen years of age that "I was praised by all men in regard to the good affection I had to learning; and priests and the noblest citizens vouchsafed to ask my opinion of things that concerned our laws and our ordinances." Josephus, like Nephi, notes the piety of his ancestors and the knowledge he had received in his childhood.

1 Ne 1 1The author of "Ecclesiasticus" says of his grandfather, a man named Jesus, that he "was a man of great diligence and wisdom among the Hebrews," and the author of "The History of Susanna" says of the heroine that "her parents were righteous and taught their daughter according to the law of Moses."

1 Ne 1 1The learning of my father. Hebrew learning, also called, "the learning of the Jews," (v. 2), consisted, at this time, chiefly in a knowledge of the Law (Torah), now known as the Pentateuch; the Prophets down to and including Isaiah and some books now no longer extant, some of which are mentioned in the Scriptures, as for instance, the Book of Nathan, (2 Chron. 2:29), the Book of Enoch (Jude 14), the Book of Memorial (Ex. 17:14), the Book of Jasher (Josh. 10:13), and the Book of Records (Ez. 4:15).

1 Ne 1 1In the Law the Jews were taught the divine origin of the heavens and the earth, through acts of creation; the beginning of the human race, the "fall" and its consequences and the promise of redemption. They were taught the lesson of sin and destruction in the flood, but also the renewal of the covenants of God and the re-peopling of the earth by the descendants of Noah. They were further shown the beginning of the Hebrew people, their history and development, by which they became, notwithstanding human frailties and stubbornness, the foundation of the Messianic kingdom of God on earth. They were taught a moral law that surpasses anything ever conceived by man, and a civil law and ritualistic service, exactly suited to their conditions and calculated to educate them in righteousness and holiness.

1 Ne 1 1This "learning of the Jews" was meant to be applied to every day affairs. It was to be their very life, and not only something to discuss. The Jew had to become familiar with the words of the Law. He was told: "Bind them for a sign upon the posts of thy hand"; "they shall be as frontlets between thy eyes," "thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house" and on thy gates (Deut. 6:8-9); "ye shall teach them diligently to thy children, speaking of them when thou sittest in thy house and when thou walkest by the way, when thou liest down and when thou risest up (Deut. 11:19). Joshua was commanded to meditate on the Law day and night (Josh. 1:8-9), and one of the duties of the king was to have a copy of the Law made and to read it every day (Deut. 17:19).

1 Ne 1 1The following quotations illustrate the importance which the Jews attach to the reading of the Law:

1 Ne 1 1"Rabbi Chananya, the son of Teradyon, said, 'That if two sit together and interchange no words of Torah, they are a meeting of scorners, concerning whom it is said, The godly man sitteth not in the seat of the scorners (Ps. 1:1); but if two sit together and interchange words of Torah, the divine Presence abides between them. ... R. Simeon said, If three have eaten at a table and have spoken no words there of Torah, it is as if they had eaten of sacrifices to dead idols. ... R. Chalafta, the son of Dosa, of the village of Chananya, said, When two persons sit together and occupy themselves with the Torah, the Sheschina (the glory of the Lord) abides among them."

1 Ne 1 1Other sacred books were called "Prophets." Some of these were historical, as the Books of Samuel, the Kings, the Chronicles, etc. Others were didactic and prophetic. The Psalms, he Proverbs, the Song of Solomon and Ecclesiastes were known as "the Writings."

1 Ne 1 1Besides the written word, the Jews had a venerable tradition by means of which the historical background of the records was preserved, and opinions, rulings, judgments, judicial decisions, customs and important incidents were transmitted by word of mouth from one generation to another generation. The Levites, who had charge of the sacred buildings and the objects consecrated for the divine services, also were the educators of the people.

1 Ne 1 1Sometime after the destruction of the temple by Titus and the dispersion of the people, the tradition was committed to writing. This literary composition is known as the "Mishna," meaning "repetition." Later, notes or commentaries were written on this text. These explanations are known as the "Gemara," or "complement." The Mishna and Gemara together constitute the Talmud ("instruction"), of which there are two versions: one composed at Jerusalem (about 390 A.D.), and one at Babylon (about 420 A.D.). The Talmud is by far the most important literary work of the adherents of the Mosaic faith, next after the inspired writings of the Old Testament.

1 Ne 1 1As an illustration of the peculiar, deductive explanations of the Scriptures in the Talmud, the following may be referred to. In the Law (Deut. 27:5) it is forbidden to use iron tools in building an altar to the Lord. Why? Rabbi Johannan explains it thus. He says that iron signifies war and strife. The altar is atonement and peace. Therefore the two of them must not come together. "Thus we are taught the value of peace in the home, peace between city and city, nation and nation." (Prof. Graetz, History of the Jews, Vol. 2, p. 329)

1 Ne 1 1The following sentiments are illustrative of the philosophy of the Talmud:

1 Ne 1 1"Love peace and pursue it at any cost." ... "Remember it is better to be persecuted than to persecute." ... "Be not prone to anger." ... "He who giveth alms in secret is greater than Moses himself." ... "It is better to utter a short prayer with devotion than a long one without fervor." ... "He who having but one piece of bread in his basket, and says, What shall I eat tomorrow? is a man of little faith." (Farrar, The Life of Christ, p. 680.)

1 Ne 1 1Curiously enough, some modern critics have belittled the Talmud, very much in the same spirit as that by certain readers of the Book of Mormon. They have found it "uncouth," "unintelligible," "tedious," and "unprofitable." But that only proves that the literary taste and fashions of the world have changed since the composition of these works. It proves nothing against the truths that may be contained in the Talmud, and nothing against the revelations in the Book of Mormon. Truth is truth, no matter how presented, and gold is gold, whether offered on a silver tray or wrapped in rags.

1 Ne 1 1Nephi could, of course, not be familiar with the Talmud, as known in modern times, but the essence of that volume is much older than the books containing it. It gives us an idea of "the learning of the Jews."

1 Ne 1 1Favored of the Lord. To Nephi the most valued favor was his knowledge of the goodness and the mysteries of God. Are we, perhaps, prone to look upon afflictions as evidence of divine disapproval and upon temporal advantages, such as wealth, health, pleasures, power, etc., as "favors"? Well, they may be blessings, but they are not the most valuable possessions of man. Knowledge is worth more than riches; the goodness of God is often manifest in the midst of affliction. We note that Nephi says that it was his knowledge of the goodness and the mysteries of God that inspired him to write. No book is of any real value that is not founded on knowledge and experience.

1 Ne 1 1The Mysteries of God. These are truths known only by divine revelation. The preaching of the gospel to the Gentiles is a "mystery" (Romans 16:25). The doctrines of the incarnation, the birth, the death, the resurrection of Christ and, we may add, the salvation for the dead, are mysteries.

1 Ne 1 2VERSE 2

1 Ne 1 2The language of my father was, undoubtedly, Hebrew, since Lehi had "dwelt in Jerusalem all his days." (v.4)

1 Ne 1 2Learning of the Jews. See notes under verse 1.

1 Ne 1 2Language of the Egyptians. Lehi had mastered the difficult Egyptian language, in addition to the learning of the Jews. This is noted as one of his great accomplishments. Of Moses, too, it was said that he was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians (Acts 7:22), which, of course, included the language of and their writing.

1 Ne 1 2The Egyptians had no less than three different kinds of characters. The oldest was the hieroglyphs. They had about a thousand of these, and some of these were pictures of the celestial bodies, human figures, limbs, animals, such as quadrupeds, birds, fishes, insects, reptiles, houses, furniture, tools, etc., all symbolic of some object, some quality or some action. The Hieratic characters were less elaborate, but still too numerous for practical purposes. The Demotic characters were the simplest. Clement of Alexandria is quoted as having said: "Those who are educated among the Egyptians learn first that mode of writing which is called epistolographic (demotic or common); secondly Hieratic, which the sacred scribers use, and lastly, the Hieroglyphic."

1 Ne 1 2Those who had mastered the difficulties of the language of Egypt, spoken and written, could study the entire civilization of the country. And, be it remembered, the Egyptians excelled in architecture, in sculpture, painting, navigation, metallurgy. They knew how to work in gold, silver, copper, iron and lead. They had musical instruments and were skilled in the art of weaving and dyeing. They had a law code for which they claimed divine origin. They were great agriculturists and prosperous merchants. As for religion, they believed in One God—the only living Substance, "the only existence in heaven and on earth that is not begotten." They further, believed in two divine Beings, whose unity was expressed in the name, "UAEN-UA," which is said to mean, "One of One." But they had, further, so great a number of gods that someone said it was easier to find a god in Egypt than a man. The principal gods were eight in number. Amun was the chief of these, and Maut or Mut was the mother of all. They had a priesthood and a number of consecrated women who assisted in the temple service. The presiding high priest was called Sam. They also had a system of "mysteries" into which only a few were initiated. They had altars and sacrifices, and above all, an elaborate ritual for the dead. One of their resurrection of the body and the appearance of man before the judgment seat of the gods, as understood in Egypt, are set forth.

1 Ne 1 3VERSE 3

1 Ne 1 3The record is true. It is not a romance; it is not fiction. It is founded on "knowledge."

1 Ne 1 4VERSE 4

1 Ne 1 4The first year of the reign of Zedekiah. That is the time in which the great story of Nephi begins. Zedekiah reigned between 597 and 586 B.C., and according to 2 Chronicles 36:11, he was twenty-one years of age, when Nebuchadnezzar, who had extended the Babylonian Empire to the coast of the Mediterranean, appointed him king over Judah. It was a time of political turmoil all over the world. From the very beginning of his reign, some of the priests and princes of Judah urged Zedekiah to revolt and strike for liberty from the Babylonian rule. The Egyptians, who had been beaten back from Asia-Minor, since their crushing defeat at Carchemish (600 B.C.) also urged Zedekiah to break his oath of allegiance to the Babylonians. Ambassadors from Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tyre and Sidon promised support, and even exiles in Babylon agitated for revolt.

1 Ne 1 4It was under such circumstances that the Lord sent many prophets to the people, who warned them of impending disaster, unless they would repent.

1 Ne 1 4One of these prophets was Jeremiah. He told the people that the Lord had given all the surrounding countries to Nebuchadnezzar, "the king of Babylon, my servant," (Jer. 27:6) and to the exiles in Babylon he wrote a special letter, imploring them to be loyal to the king. He promised them that if they would build and plant and live in peace, they would be permitted to return home in 70 years. (Jer. 29:4-10)

1 Ne 1 4Another great prophet, according to the Book of Mormon, was Lehi. His special message is recorded in verse 13.

1 Ne 1 4The Lord sent these messengers because he had "compassion on his people and on his dwelling place: But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy." (Chron. 36:15, 16)

1 Ne 1 4But all warnings were in vain. Zedekiah revolted. Then, in 587 B.C., Nebuchadnezzar came and besieged Jerusalem. Too late did the Egyptians attempt to rescue the city. Zedekiah was captured, as he fled toward Jericho. His sons, who fell into the hands of the Babylonians, were slain. He, himself, after having been blinded, was carried in chains to Babylon. Nebuchadnezzar also took the treasures of the temple and the palace and carried them to his own capital, and thus the words of the prophets of the Lord came true, notwithstanding the efforts of the politicians.

1 Ne 1 8VERSE 8

1 Ne 1 8Lehi's calling and vision. During the first year of the reign of Zedekiah, Lehi was prompted to pray for his people. While thus engaged, a pillar of fire, resting on a rock, appeared before him. While gazing upon this wonder, he heard and saw many things, undoubtedly referring to the history of the people which made him tremble exceedingly. Returning to the house exhausted, he "cast himself upon his bed" (v.7). It was then he saw God sitting upon his throne, surrounded with angels and praising their God.

1 Ne 1 8Numberless concourses of angels. This expression reminds us, perhaps, of Daniel who saw "the Ancient of Days" on his throne: "Thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousands stood before him." All ready to carry out his commandments. Daniel says, "the judgment was set and the books were opened." Or, as we should say, the court was in session. Judgment was about to be pronounced upon the "four beasts," that is, the Babylonian, the Medo-Persian, the Macedonian and the Roman Empires.

1 Ne 1 8The vision of Lehi was analogous to this. But the impending judgment in his vision was upon Judah and Jerusalem, and not upon pagan empires.

1 Ne 1 9VERSE 9

1 Ne 1 9One descending out of the midst of heaven. In the vision of Daniel, "One like the Son of man"—or rather a son of man—"came with the clouds of heaven."

1 Ne 1 11VERSE 11

1 Ne 1 11Gave him a book. This contained the decision of the court. It was the judgment of that great court.

1 Ne 1 15VERSE 15

1 Ne 1 15He did exclaim many things. Lehi, after having read the book, exclaimed, "Great and marvelous are thy works, O Lord God Almighty!" He realized the power of God. But also his justice, goodness and mercy. And therefore his heart was filled with joy, notwithstanding his sympathy with the people. In the vision it became clear to him, as it would be to all who can see "the end from the beginning" that the goodness and mercy of God are best served by his justice. And therefore his heart was filled with joy. (See 2 Samuel 24:14 and Rev. 19:1-3)

1 Ne 1 16VERSE 16

1 Ne 1 16I, Nephi, do not make a full account. Lehi, as Jeremiah and other prophets, kept a record of his visions, dreams and prophecies, his public discourses and his talks to his children; Nephi does not intend or propose to copy his record in full. He gives part of it in an abridged form, as an introduction to his own story. 1 Nephi 1:18 to the end of chapter 8 seems to be a synopsis of the record of Lehi. His own record would then begin with chapter 9.

1 Ne 1 17VERSE 17

1 Ne 1 17Which I have made with mine own hands. Not only the writing, but also the plates. The children of Lehi were well educated and skilful laborers.

1 Ne 1 19VERSE 19

1 Ne 1 19The coming of a Messiah. The message of Lehi included a promise of the coming of the Redeemer of the world. Redemption means deliverance from guilt, from sin, from death and from all evil. (See Eph. 1:7; Col. 1:14; 1 Pet. 1:18; Rom. 8:23 Eph. 1:14 Eph. 4:30 Cor. 1:30; Titus 2:14)

1 Ne 1 20VERSE 20

1 Ne 1 20Here the very mission of the Book of Mormon is stated. The apostate rulers of the people planned the death of Lehi, because of his faithfulness. The Book of Mormon shows that God is mighty "even unto the power of deliverance."

1 Ne 1 20Concourses of Angels. The word "angel" means "messenger"; generally a bearer of a message from God. According to Hebrew writers of old, God makes even winds, his angels and flaming fires his ministers. (Psalm 104:4, literal translation.) Some apply the term to Spiritual forces, as when they tell us that the Almighty sent five angels to punish the idolators that worshiped the golden calf at Mt. Sinai, viz., "indignation, anger, fury, ruin, wrath." But generally angels are regarded as persons of a higher order than human beings. In the apocryphal Book of Enoch the "sons of God," in Gen. 6:2, who begat "giants" with "the daughters of men," are called "angels," (Enoch 7:2). They are, however, fallen angels, sworn to do evil. Their number is given as 200. In other ancient writings angels are represented as innumerable. According to some, 600,000 angels descended on Mt. Sinai, when the Law was given.

1 Ne 1 20The angels were supposed to be organized into classes or divisions, called "thrones, dominions, virtues (meaning, strength, efficacy, as the Latin 'virtus'), princedoms, powers," etc. All these, with their commanders, the archangels, were supposed to act as mediators between God and man. Paul, in his letter to the Colossians refutes this conception, which seems to have entered the churches in Asia Minor. He does not deny the existence of angels, or their organization; but he denies that they are the intermediaries between God and man. His argument is: Christ is the very image of God; all things were created by him; whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers, they were created by him and for him; he has preeminence in all things; he is, therefore, the Mediator, and the angels are his servants. (Col. 1:14-20)

1 Ne 1 20In the Book of Enoch the following names and offices of the chief angels are given:

1 Ne 1 20Uriel is said to preside over clamor and terror.

1 Ne 1 20Raphael presides over the spirits of men.

1 Ne 1 20Raguel inflicts punishment over the world.

1 Ne 1 20Michael presides over human virtues and commands the nations.

1 Ne 1 20Sarakiel presides over spirits of men that have transgressed.

1 Ne 1 20Gabriel presides over Isiat (an unknown region), Paradise and cherubim.

1 Ne 1 20Phanuel is the seventh.

1 Ne 1 20Michael and Gabriel, Raphael and Phanuel, it seems, have the special mission of casting spirits (hosts) of Zazeel (Satan) into a fiery, blazing furnace. (Book of Enoch, 35:6)

1 Ne 1 20All this is, of course, fanciful, but we must not forget that in the Prophet Daniel, Michael is said to be "the great prince which standeth for the children of thy people," or that there is a "Prince of the kingdom of Persia," as well as a Michael and a Gabriel. (Daniel 8:16; 9:21; 10:12 and 13)

1 Ne 1 20According to the "Word of God," the angels are ministering spirits (Heb. 1:14; Ps. 68:17; 91:11; Dan. 7:10; Luke 2:13), and in the Doctrine and Covenants, Moroni, John the Baptist, Peter, James and John, as well as Michael and Gabriel and Raphael are called angels, and the important information is added that, "There are no angels who minister to this earth but those who belong or have belonged to it." We are also informed that the angels reside in the presence of God, "where all things for their glory are manifest—past, present and future." Keys are also given whereby angels of light may be distinguished from the messengers of darkness. (See D. and C., Secs. 129 and 130:5-7; 128:20, 21; Sec. 13; Sec. 17:5-16)

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REGARDING THE PERSONS REFERED TO IN FIRST NEPHI Where Italics are used in writing a name it indicates that a biographical sketch of that person is herewith included.

LEHI

A Hebrew prophet of the tribe of Manasseh, whom the Lord called to warn the Jews of their coming captivity in Babylon. Lehi was a man of considerable means and of good repute among the Jews. He had dwelt in Jerusalem all his life, though, from the influence that the language of the Egyptians appears to have had on him, it is not improbable that he was brought, in some way, in intimate contact with that people. In the first year of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah (B. C. 600) the Lord gave Lehi a number of prophetic dreams and visions and in compliance with the admonitions of those manifestations he went forth among the Jews proclaiming the sorrows that would inevitably be theirs if they did not repent and return to the Lord. But the Jews treated Lehi just as they were treating all the rest of the prophets who came to them. They paid no heed to the message he bore. When he reproved them for their wickedness and abominations they grew angry with him and when he talked of the coming of the Messiah and the redemption of the world they mocked him. But he did not cease to labor in their midst until their anger grew so intense that they sought his life and they would have slain him if the Lord had not protected him; for it was not to be that Lehi should fall a victim to their hatred. The Lord had designed him for a greater work—he was to be the father of a multitude of people and to this end God delivered him from the fury of the Jews. When it became impossible for him to remain longer and minister unto them he was instructed to gather up such things as he could carry and take them into the wilderness with his family where the Lord would teach him what more he required at his hands.

When Lehi received the command to depart he immediately set about fulfilling it, and taking with him his family and such goods and food as he could carry, he left the doomed city where he had so long dwelt, leaving behind him his house and property, his gold, his silver, and other precious things all of which he willingly gave up that he might be obedient to the heavenly message.

Lehi's family consisted of his wife, Sariah, and his four sons Laman, Lemuel, Sam and Nephi. Lehi had also daughters but whether they were born at this time is not evident from the record. We have no account in the Book of Mormon of the precise road which Lehi and his family took when they left Jerusalem. Undoubtedly they traveled through the wilderness of Judea southward till they reached the eastern arm of the Red Sea. They journeyed along the Arabian shore of that sea for some little distance till they came to a valley through which a small stream flowed. To the river Lehi gave the name of Laman after his eldest son and the valley he called Lemuel. Here they pitched their tents and rested for some time. While tarrying in this valley, Lehi, by divine direction, twice sent his sons to Jerusalem: the first time to obtain certain most precious records, the second, to bring a family to join them in their journey. The head of this family was named Ishmael. In both undertakings the young men were successful and the company was strengthened by the addition of Zoram and Ishmael and his family. Soon after, five marriages took place; Zoram married Ishmael's eldest daughter and the four sons of Lehi espoused four younger ones.

While Lehi and his party dwelt in the valley of Lemuel he received many glorious manifestations from the Lord. Like Enoch, John the Revelator and others, he had the world's future history mapped out before him and he not only saw things that related to his own posterity but the scene widened until he appears to have been shown all that would happen to the sons and daughters of mankind to the very last generation. (See I Nephi, chap. 8) Nephi, his son, was favored of the Lord with similar manifestations.

Before long Lehi was directed to resume his journey and a wonderful instrument, prepared by divine condescension which he called "Liahona," was given him to guide the wandering feet of the company in their travels.

So particular was the Lord that Lehi's party should not come in contact with the people of Arabia, through which land they passed, that he gave them the command that they should not cook their meat lest the flames or smoke from their fires should draw attention towards them but he promised that he would make their meat sweet to them, that they could eat it with pleasure and satisfaction without it being cooked with fire. Probably it was dried after the manner that the people in this region often dry beef and other meats.

To their next tarrying place, which they reached in four days, they gave the name Shazer. After a short rest, during which time they killed game for food, they again took up their line of march, keeping in the most fertile parts of the wilderness which were near the borders of the Red Sea. Thus they continued journeying for some time, when by direction of the Liahona they changed the course of their travels and moved almost directly east across the Arabian peninsula until they reached the waters on its eastern coast. There they found a very fruitful land which they called Bountiful because of the abundance of its natural productions. To the sea which washed its shores they gave the name of Irreantum, which being interpreted, means many waters. If we understand correctly these waters were a portion of the gulf of Oman, or Arabian sea. The journey thus far occupied eight years from the time they left Jerusalem.

When the people of Lehi reached the seashore they rejoiced that their tedious wanderings on land were over. Nephi, by divine direction, built a ship to carry them across these great waters. When the vessel was finished the voice of the Lord came to Lehi commanding that he and his people should arise and go aboard the ship. The next day they embarked, every one according to his age, taking with them their provisions, seeds and such other things as it was desirable they should carry across the ocean to their new home, far away on its opposite shores.

During Lehi's travels in the wilderness two sons were born to him whom he named Jacob and Joseph, respectively. The patriarch and his wife were now advancing in years and their peace was much disturbed on the ocean by the cruel conduct of Laman and others towards Nephi. In fact the miseries induced by this conduct nearly resulted in the death of the aged couple.

After many days the vessel with its precious freight reached the shores of this continent, at a place we are told by the Prophet Joseph Smith near where the city of Valparaiso, Chili now stands. Then, with hearts full of rejoicing, they left the vessel that had carried them safely across the wide ocean and went forth upon the land which God had given to them and to their generations after them. And they pitched their tents and began to make a new home. They put the seeds into the earth, which they had brought from Jerusalem. To their great joy these seeds grew exceedingly and they were blessed with abundance. Upon the land they found many beasts of the forest, also cows, asses, horses, goats and other animals that are for the use of man and in the earth they found precious ores of gold, silver and copper. Then they erected an altar and to show their thankfulness to God they offered sacrifices and burnt offerings according to the law of Moses, as was their wont under such circumstances.

The course taken by Lehi and his people has been revealed with some detail. We are told by the Prophet Joseph Smith that Lehi and his company traveled in nearly a southeast direction until they came to the nineteenth degree of north latitude then nearly east to the sea of Arabia, then sailed in a southeast direction and landed on the continent of South America, in Chili, thirty degrees south latitude. This voyage would take them across the Indian and South Pacific Oceans.

Some time, we know not how long, after Lehi's arrival, believing that his end was approaching, he gathered his children together as did his forefathers before him and being inspired by the spirit of prophecy he blessed them, foretelling many things that should occur to them to their latest generations.

Soon after Lehi had uttered these blessings the Lord took him from this earth to dwell with him in eternity.

SARIAH

The wife of Lehi. She was the mother of six sons and some daughters, the number of the latter is not given in the Book of Mormon. But very little is said of Sariah in the sacred record; she is only mentioned by name five times but we are of the opinion, from the incidental references made to her, that she did not possess very great faith in the mission of her husband, or in the fulfillment of his prophecies; she rather regarded him as a visionary man, who was leading her and her children into trouble and danger by his dreams and revelations and consequently was prone to murmur when any difficulty arose. Four of her sons were grown to manhood when she left Jerusalem (B.C.600); the other two were born during the little company's eight years' journey in the wilderness. When Sariah's daughters were born is very uncertain; they are not spoken of at the time their parents left Jerusalem; nor is their birth afterwards mentioned. We are told nine or ten years after the company's departure from the Holy City, when it was on the ocean, that Lehi and Sariah were well stricken with years, so we think it is quite possible that Lehi's daughters were born at Jerusalem. This is made more probable when we remember that Nephi, the youngest of four sons, would probably be about twenty years old when his younger brothers were born. It seems reasonable, when we consider the age of Sariah, that it was during this lapse of twenty years and not later, that his sisters came into the world.

Of Sariah's birth and death we have no record nor to what tribe of Israel she belonged. She lived to reach the promised land and being then aged and worn out by the difficulties and privations of the journey through the Arabian wilderness very probably passed into her grave before her husband.

Sariah is obviously Hebrew. It is a name of extreme beauty and force. Its roots are in Sara, a princess, and Jah or Iah, Jehovah, thus meaning a princess of Jehovah; a most fitting name for the mother of a multitude of nations.

LAMAN

The eldest son of Lehi and Sariah. From the fact that his father dwelt in Jerusalem all his days, it is presumable that Laman was born in that famed city and during the reign of King Josiah. Laman was a stubborn, willful, unbelieving and desperate man. He had no faith in the revelations given to his father and was the leader in all the troubles and contentions in the wilderness, going so far as to propose the murder of his brother Nephi and also of his father. Placing no credence in the prophecies that Jerusalem would be destroyed, he unwillingly left that city and as unwillingly journeyed in the wilderness, every difficulty, every hardship encountered by the party being a fresh pretext for murmurs against God and his father and for renewed assaults upon Nephi. Giving way to this spirit of rebellion and cruelty he grew more hardened as he advanced in years. One of his great complaints was that Nephi had usurped the position properly belonging to his elder brothers as the active leader of the company, though Lehi was recognized as their head as long as he lived and the Lord appears to have so honored him. Laman and Lemuel where not unaware that God had chosen Nephi for the position he occupied; they well knew that the expedition under their guidance would be a failure, as their desires were continually to return to Judea and that, therefore, they would be most unsuitable to carry the purposes of their father to a successful issue. Laman, with his brothers, returned twice to Jerusalem, the first time to obtain the plates of brass from Laban, the second time to bring Ishmael and his family.

Soon after their return this second time, Laman married one of the daughters of Ishmael and from this marriage appears to have sprung the royal house of the Lamanites and the leading spirits of that race, until the times when Nephite apostates gained the supremacy in the Lamanite nation and became the kings, rulers, commanders and teachers of that people. For details of the journey in the Arabian wilderness and across the ocean, see Nephi, Lehi. Laman lived to witness the death of his father and no sooner had this occurred than he entered into a conspiracy with those who sympathized with him to kill Nephi and take charge of the colony. So embittered was their hate, so determined their purpose, that Nephi's friends deemed it advisable to separate; and this left Laman and his followers to the quiet possession of the first home of the race on the land of promise. Those who remained with Laman were his own family, Lemuel and his family and the sons of Ishmael and their families. If there were any others they are not mentioned. No sooner had the division taken place than the Lamanites began to sink into barbarism. The nomadic habits which they had acquired in their wanderings in the wilderness remained with them and dominated their lives; they were shut out from the presence of God, as they were left without the priesthood when Nephi withdrew; the other party had also the possession of the records, which in itself was regarded as a great grievance by the children of Laman. In the next generation, when those who were familiar with the civilization of the Jews had passed away their descent became more rapid and we read of them as a cruel, degraded, dark-skinned race, living by the chase, feeding on raw meat, idle and ignorant and exceedingly loathsome in their habits.

LEMUEL

The second son of Lehi and Sariah, born in Jerusalem about B.C.620 or 625. He appears in history as the shadow of his elder brother Laman; where the latter led he followed but lacked, to some extent, the active, aggressive malignity of Laman's turbulent and vindictive character. In all the rebellions in the Arabian wilderness; in all the murmurings against the providences of the Lord, in all the inhuman assaults upon Nephi, Lemuel sided with and sustained Laman and when, after the death of Lehi, the colony divided, Lemuel and his family joined their fortunes to that of his elder brother. Of Lemuel's domestic life we only know that he married a daughter of Ishmael. Of the time and place of his death we are told nothing. The descendants of Lemuel appear to have inherited the characteristics of their progenitor—they took a secondary place in the Lamanite nation and we do not read of one prominent character in Nephite or Lamanite history, who was descended from him.

SAM

An Israelite of the tribe of Manasseh. He was the third son of Lehi and Sariah and was born and brought up in Jerusalem. He accompanied his parents in their exodus from that city (B.C.600) and was privileged, with them, to reach the promised land. He does not appear to have been a leading spirit but was obedient and faithful and in almost every case sided with the right and followed the teachings of his father and the counsels of his more fervent brother, Nephi. For this he suffered the anger and abuse of his elder brothers who sometimes resorted to personal violence when matters did not go to suit them. When the colony divided, after the death of Lehi, Sam and his family joined their fortunes to those of Nephi. Of Sam's birth and death we have no record. He married one of the daughters of Ishmael while the party was encamped in the valley of Lemuel on the borders of the Red Sea.

Sam is a name which some shallow-pated opponents of the Book of Mormon have been disposed to ridicule. But it is pure Egyptian. It was the distinctive name of one of the highest orders of their priesthood. The great Rameses himself belonged to the order of Sam. The fact that Lehi gave to two of his sons such peculiarly Egyptian names shows how great an influence the literature of that country must have had on his life. (Sam and Nephi)

NEPHI, THE SON OF LEHI

One of the greatest prophets whose presence ever dignified this earth. He was one of the most lovable of men, true as steel, never wavering, full of integrity, faith and zeal. He loved the Lord with all his heart. It is seldom we find a character in the history of this fallen world that was as perfect or as complete as was that of Nephi. He was naturally a leader, his faith and courage made him so, while his devout humility gave him strength with heaven. In many respects he resembled Moses, not only was he their law-giver but a practical teacher of his people in the every-day concerns of life. Like Enoch, he was a prophet, seer and revelator, one in whom were deposited the mysteries of God's dealings with future generations; like Abraham, he was a father to his people; like Melchizedek, he was their king and high priest; like Noah, he was a ship-builder by which he delivered his family and like Tubalcain "an instructor of every artificer in brass and iron." In one respect he was like almost all the prophets, for he was derided, mocked, abused and persecuted by those who should have loved him most, those whose welfare he made his constant labor.

Nephi was the son of Lehi, a devout Israelite, of the tribe of Manasseh, who resided in Jerusalem. He was born probably about B.C. 617, was married B.C. 600 in the valley of Lemuel on the borders of the Red Sea. He lived to a ripe old age and had a numerous posterity, though of his immediate sons and daughters the Book of Mormon is entirely silent. It is presumable that one of his sons succeeded him under the title of Nephi II as king of the Nephites.

When, on account of the persecution of the Jews, Lehi was commanded by the Lord to leave Jerusalem, Nephi gladly seconded all his efforts and became a help and a stay to his father during the many troubles and perplexities of the toil-some journey through the Arabian wilderness. Early in that journey they rested for a time in a little valley bordering on the Red Sea, to which Lehi gave the name of Lemuel. Twice while they tarried there the sons of Lehi were commanded to return to Jerusalem. The first time they went to obtain certain records relating to the tribe and God's dealings with his people (See Zoram); the second time to invite Ishmael and his family to join them in their migration. When they had accomplished the purpose of their stay in the valley of Lemuel the Lord commanded them to depart and provided a guide for their travels in the shape of a divinely prepared compass which they called "Liahona." During the whole of the journey, its peace was marred by the rebellious and violent conduct of Lehi's unbelieving and unrepentant sons, of whom Laman was the leader. The first serious outbreak was during the return of Lehi's sons from Jerusalem to the tents of their father with Ishmael and his family. Some of the sons of Ishmael seem to have regretted the step which their father had taken. Possibly, like Laman and Lemuel, they had no faith in the prophecies of the servants of God, who declared that yet a little while and Jerusalem should be destroyed and Laman and Lemuel soon impregnated them with that spirit of malice and discontent that they themselves had already so prominently shown. Two of the daughters of Ishmael also manifested this spirit. As usual, the way in which they showed their feelings was by abusing and ill-treating Nephi. He was the special object of their dislike, by reason of his faithfulness to the commandments of God and because the Lord had shown to him that he should be their ruler.

When the spirit of rebellion first manifested itself, as they journeyed in the wilderness, Nephi rebuked the malcontents in somewhat severe terms. Angry with his words of reproof and entreaty the rebellious portion of the camp took Nephi and bound him with cords, their intention being to leave him in the wilderness to be devoured by the wild beasts. But Nephi in mighty faith prayed to the Lord to deliver him and that the cords that bound him might be burst. His petitions were answered. No sooner had he offered this prayer than the bands were loosed and he stood a free man before his brethren.

Again, in the love of his heart, he pleaded with his tormentors. But they were still filled with the spirit of malice and murder and once more sought to lay violent hands upon him. However, the wife of Ishmael and one of her daughters and also one son begged so earnestly for them to desist that at last their hearts were softened and in sorrow and humility they sought Nephi's forgiveness. This he freely granted without a moment's hesitation, he was but too glad to have them turn from their cruel and wicked course. Still, as they had offended God as well as injured their brother, Nephi exhorted them to pray unto the Lord for forgiveness, which they did.

This outbreak was but the precursor and type of many others that afterwards troubled the little company. Another, which occurred shortly after, originated in so apparently trivial an incident as the breaking of Nephi's bow while in the Arabian desert. It appears that in one of their expeditions for food Nephi, who was their most expert hunter, broke his bow which was made of fine steel. Because of this misfortune they obtained no food and as a result they became very hungry. Being hungry, they grew quarrelsome and rebellious. To such an extent did this spirit prevail in the camp that even Lehi so far forgot himself as to murmur against the providences of God. Nephi, ever faithful, alone refrained from complaining against the Lord, he exhorted his brethren, as was his custom in times of trouble and sorrow, to put away the hardness of their hearts and humble themselves before the Lord and then all would be well with them. His words had their effect. Lehi felt truly chastened and was brought down into the depths of sorrow. When in this condition the word of the Lord came to him and he was instructed to look upon the Liahona and read the things that were written thereon. The reproof that was written on the ball was such as to make Lehi tremble exceedingly but it also brought relief to the party, as the writing instructed them where food could be obtained. Nephi, having made a bow out of wood, went with it and a sling and stones and found the game in the place that the writing had indicated. He slew enough food for all the company. When he returned to the tents of his people, bearing the beasts he had slain, there was great rejoicing in the hearts of all and they humbled themselves before the Lord and gave thanks to him.

When the people of Lehi reached the sea shore they rejoiced greatly that their tedious wanderings were over; for they had not traveled in a straight line from coast to coast but had wandered around and about as the Liahona directed them, which worked according to their faith and faithfulness. Eight years had been spent in taking a journey which, had they been as faithful as they should have been, would only have occupied a few weeks or months.

They pitched their tents by the sea shore and after many days, the voice of the Lord came unto Nephi, saying, "Arise, and get thee into the mountains." As ever, Nephi obeyed the heavenly word. He went up into the mountain and there cried unto the Lord. Then the Lord spoke unto him and commanded him to build a ship after a manner and pattern that he would show him, that the people might be carried across the great waters that lay before them.

Here a difficulty presented itself to the mind of Nephi. He had no tools and how was it possible to build a ship without the proper instruments. So he laid the matter before the Lord who in answer to his prayers told him where he could find ore with which he might make the tools he needed.

Nephi at once proceeded to carry out the commands of the Lord. With the skins of beasts he made a bellows to blow the fire but fire he yet had none, as the Lord had not permitted a fire to be lighted in the wilderness. So he smote two stones together and their first fire was lighted since the company left the borders of the Red Sea. When his forge was made and his fire was lit, Nephi began to melt the ore that he had obtained to make the tools that he needed.

When his brothers saw that Nephi was about to build a ship they began to ridicule him. They would give him no help for they did not believe he was instructed of the Lord. Nephi became very sorrowful because of the hardness of their hearts. When they saw this they were glad and tauntingly told him they knew that he was lacking in judgment and could not accomplish so great a work as to build a ship. Then Nephi recounted many things wherein the power of God had been manifested in the deliverance of their fathers. All of which he impressed upon them as a lesson that when God commanded men should obey without doubt or without question. Said he, "If God had commanded me to do all things, I could do them. If he should command me that I should say to this water, Be thou earth, it would be earth. Then how much less is it to build one ship than to do the marvelous works of which I have told you."

At first when Nephi held out these great truths to his brethren they were angry and threatened to throw him into the sea but the Spirit of God was so powerfully upon him that they dared not touch him lest they wither, even if he but held out his hand towards them they received a shock.

After a time the Lord told him to stretch forth his hand again toward his brethren and that they should not wither; but the power of God should smite them and this he was commanded to do that they might know that the Lord was their God. So Nephi stretched forth his hand as he was commanded and the Lord shook them as he had promised. Then they fell down to worship their younger brother, whom in times past they had so much abused, but he would not permit them. He said, "I am thy brother, even thy younger brother, wherefore worship the Lord thy God and honor thy father and thy mother."

Then the brothers of Nephi worshiped the Lord and showed their repentance by helping Nephi to build the ship; while he, from time to time, received the word of the Lord as to how he should work its timbers; for he did not work after the manner of the ship-builders of that time nor after any manner that men were accustomed to. But he built the ship just as the Lord had shown it to him and he often went up into the mount and prayed to the Lord and God showed him many great things.

Now, when the vessel was finished Nephi's brothers saw that it was good and its workmanship exceedingly fine therefore they again humbled themselves before heaven. Then the voice of the Lord came to them and commanded them to go on board which words they willingly obeyed and at once put forth to sea. The vessel was then driven by the winds towards the promised land. After they had been sailing prosperously for a number of days the hearts of Nephi's brothers and of the sons of Ishmael and others grew merry and in their merriment they forgot the Lord. They danced and sang and became very boisterous and rude. This conduct pained Nephi exceedingly. He feared lest God should be angry with them and smite them. Therefore he began to protest with much seriousness against the course they were taking but they grew angry with him and his two elder brothers, Laman and Lemuel, took him and bound him. So furious were they that they treated him with great harshness, binding the cords so tightly around his limbs that they caused him much suffering.

Then the Liahona ceased to work. It had been directing the course of the ship thus far but now that they had rebelled against the Lord it would no longer point the way that they should sail. They were in a dilemma, for not one of them knew which way the ship should be steered. To add to their trouble and perplexity there arose a great and terrible tempest and the ship was driven back upon the waters for three days and though they were afraid that the raging waters would ungulf their little vessel yet so hardened were they that they would not loose Nephi.

On the fourth day matters were still worse. There appeared to be no hope but that they would be swallowed up in the sea. Then, and not till then, did they seem to understand that the judgments of God were upon them and that they must unavoidably perish unless they repented. Then they reluctantly loosened the bands which bound Nephi's wrists and ankles, and let him go free. But his limbs by reason of the way in which he had been bound were swollen and he tells us great was the soreness thereof. Nevertheless, in all his afflictions he never murmured.

During the time that Nephi had been thus bound his father Lehi had begged most earnestly for the release of his son but the rebels had threatened everyone who sought Nephi's release and his parents, who had now grown aged, were brought down to sick beds by reason of their afflictions and came very near to being cast into a watery grave.

When Nephi was freed he took the "Liahona" and it commenced to work as before. He prayed to the Lord after which the winds ceased to blow, the storm passed away and there was a great calm. Then Nephi took charge of the ship and guided it in its course towards the promised land, which, after many days it reached in safety.

Arrived on the land of promise they found it rich in minerals and fruitful. The little colony at once proceeded to sow the seeds they had brought with them and were delighted to find that they fruitified and brought forth abundantly and all might have been peace and happiness in their midst had it not been for the murderous jealousy of Laman and his associates. After a time, Lehi called his posterity and others together and blessed them. Many and glorious were the promises made by the patriarch to Nephi. Soon after this Lehi passed away to his eternal reward.

No sooner was Lehi dead than the hatred that rankled in the hearts of Laman and those who sympathized with him seemed to have become intensified. It became evident that the two peoples could not live together in peace. They had nothing in common except that they belonged to the same family. Laman's vindictiveness grew so cruel that Nephi's life was in danger and as the easiest way out of the difficulty Nephi was instructed of the Lord to take those who would listen to his teachings and obey the commandments of God into some other part of the land. Therefore he gathered together those people who would hearken to him and taking that portion of the property that belonged to them, as also the sacred records, the sword of Laban, the Liahona and other treasures they departed into the wilderness. Those who listened to Nephi and accompanied him on this journey were, besides his own family, his brothers Sam, Jacob and Joseph, his sisters, whose names are not given and Zoram, with their families. There might have been, possibly, some others, as we are led to infer from the statement in the Book of Mormon but who they were we are not told.

The distance which Nephi and his people traveled was not, probably, very great; that is, it is not to be measured by thousands of miles, for we find that in a very few years the Lamanites had found out their place of retreat and were harassing and making war upon them.

The Nephites desired that the land they now possessed should be called the land of Nephi and this was the name by which it was always afterward known. The people of Nephi made yet another request. It was that Nephi should be their king. This desire did not altogether please him but for the safety of his people he consented. The kingly power in his hands partook much of the nature of fatherhood. His people were few in numbers and he looked after their individual interests, guided them in their undertakings, directed them in their labors and when he found that there was danger of an attack from the embittered adherents of Laman, he took the sword of Laban and using is as a pattern, fashioned other swords for their defense. Being thus prepared for the attacks of their enemies the Nephites repulsed them every time they came to battle.

Nephi also taught his people to be industrious. They were a lonely people, cut off from communication with all the rest of the world, without excitements and with very few amusements that are common to most peoples. He knew that nothing would be so dangerous to their spiritual welfare, as well as to their health, as to permit them to spend their days in idleness. He, therefore, taught them many kinds of work, the women to take the wool of the sheep and the hair of the llamas and make clothes thereof; while upon the men devolved the labor of building a temple. Holding the Holy Priesthood himself he consecrated his brothers Jacob and Joseph to be priests also.

Shortly after the arrival of Lehi and his little party on this continent Nephi received a commandment from the Lord to make certain plates of ore on which to engrave the doings of his people. And a few years later Nephi received further instructions wherein he was commanded to make other plates upon which also were to be engraven the history of the Nephite people. By them both these plates were called the plates of Nephi but they were not used for identically the same purpose. Upon one set of plates was inscribed the religious history of the people, upon the other was given in greater detail the history of their wars, contentions, development and other secular matters.

Some years later, how long we are not told, Nephi anointed another man to be king over his people and then, having grown old, he died. So greatly was he beloved by his subjects that the people called the next king, Nephi the second, the next, Nephi the third and so on. He had been their prophet, priest and king; father, friend and guide; protector, teacher and leader; next to God, their all in all.

LABAN

A rich, unscrupulous and powerful Israelite of the tribe of Joseph though a dweller in Jerusalem (B.C. 600). While Lehi and his little company were resting in the valley of Lemuel that patriarch was commanded of the Lord to send his sons back to Jerusalem to obtain certain records that were in the possession of Laban. The records, which were engraven on plates of brass, being intimately associated with Lehi's ancestors, were highly necessary for the welfare of his descendants when they established themselves in a new home, far from communication with any other people.

When the elder sons of Lehi were informed of the Lord's wishes they entered many objections to returning to Jerusalem. They claimed to be afraid of Laban, who was a man of considerable influence, having much wealth and many servants at his command. It was not until Nephi had pleaded with them that they would consent to go. Though young, he had learned an exceedingly valuable lesson, that the Lord does not require his children to do impossible things but that when he gives them a command he opens up the way for them to accomplish his requirements. Nephi felt at this time that if the Lord desired that they should have the records, then in the possession of Laban, he would control circumstances in such a way that they could obtain them.

The young men accordingly returned to Jerusalem. When they reached the holy city it was decided that Laman, being the eldest, should first go to Laban and endeavor to obtain the records. Laman had no faith in his mission and consequently was unsuccessful. He was much abused by Laban for asking for the records and returned to his brothers feeling very down-hearted. The young men then decided that they would endeavor to purchase the records from Laban, so they went to their father's house and gathered up some of the valuables that they had left therein when they deserted their home for the journey into the wilderness. Taking these precious things to Laban they offered them in exchange for the plates. He, seeing how great was the value of the property offered him, desired to obtain it without giving up the records in return. He, therefore, with the aid of his servants, drove the young men from his house and sent his retainers to slay them but he did not permit them to carry back the valuables they had brought. These he kept for himself.

After this second unsuccessful effort, Laman and Lemuel were very angry and they went so far as to beat their younger brothers Sam and Nephi with a rod. While doing so an angel appeared before them and upbraided them for their evil conduct. This rebuke for a time quieted them but the effects of this heavenly visitation were short lived.

Laman and Lemuel were now very anxious to return to the wilderness but Nephi would not consent. He was determined that, by the help of the Lord, he would not go back without the records. Accordingly, he resolved to make the next attempt himself; so when night came he walked towards the city, being followed at some distance by his brothers. They do not appear to have had the courage to enter the gates but stood without the walls, while Nephi entered the city not knowing exactly where he should go or what he should do. He relied wholly on the Spirit of the Lord to guide him. As he approached the house of Laban he perceived a man lying on the ground in a drunken stupor. The Spirit of the Lord directed Nephi to slay Laban, for he was a robber and at heart, a murderer. He had robbed the sons of Lehi of the property they had taken to him in their effort to exchange it for the records and had afterwards sought their lives. But, though fully justified, Nephi shrank from taking the life of a fellow being. Never before had he shed human blood. But the Spirit of the Lord whispered to him that it was better that one man should be slain than that a whole people should perish in ignorance. If Lehi's company and their descendants should go to the new land, which would afterwards be their home, without any account of the dealings of God with their forefathers, the mighty works he had done for their preservation and the laws which he had given that they might please him, they would gradually grow in darkness in all these respects and by and by lose sight of their Creator and become a wicked, degraded and unbelieving people.

Nerved by this monition, Nephi drew Laban's sword from its scabbard and cut off his head. He then quickly disrobed the body and placed the dead man's armor on his own person. Thus attired, he entered the house of Laban, and it being dark, it was not easy to recognize him. Assuming the voice of Laban he called to a servant named Zoram, who had the keys of the treasury, and told him to bring the plates which he needed. Zoram, deceived by the voice and the armor of his master, at once obeyed.

ZORAM

The servant of Laban (B.C. 600), afterwards the friend of Nephi. When Nephi had slain Laban near his house at Jerusalem, he went into the dead man's residence and assuming the voice of Laban, commanded Zoram, who had the keys of the treasury, to bring the records he needed. It being night Zoram was deceived and quickly obeyed. Then Nephi commanded Zoram to follow him with the records to his brethren. This Zoram did supposing that the brethren to whom Nephi alluded were the elders of the Jews.

The name Zoram, is probably from the Hebrew "Zur," a rock, [^3] signifying a trustworthy, reliable character. It is perpetuated throughout Book of Mormon history.

Nephi and Zoram took their course to the place where Nephi's brothers had secreted themselves outside the walls of Jerusalem. When the latter saw them coming they were greatly afraid, for they did not recognize their brother, dressed in the armor of Laban. They thought that he had been killed and that these men were coming to slay them also, so they fled before them. Nephi, perceiving the difficulty, called to them in his own voice. While this arrested their flight, on the other hand it alarmed Zoram. He would have returned in terror to Jerusalem and no doubt have spread the alarm if Nephi had not caught hold of him, given him assurances of good will and made a covenant with him that if he would be faithful to Nephi and his brethren he should be a free man like unto them; for it appears that Zoram was a bond-servant, most probably an Israelite who had fallen into debt and as provided by the law of Moses, was serving Laban till that debt was paid by his services. This covenant Zoram faithfully kept. He went down with the sons of Lehi into the wilderness and he and his posterity were numbered with the people of Nephi ever afterward.

In the valley of Lemuel, Zoram married the eldest daughter of Ishmael. When Lehi, previous to his death, blessed his posterity he also extended his blessings to Zoram. Nothing is said of Zoram's children, though some conspicuous men of later Nephite history—Amalickiah, Ammoron, Tubaloth, for instance—were his descendants, neither have we any record of his death.

ISHMAEL

A righteous Israelite of the tribe of Ephraim, who with his family, which was large, lived in Jerusalem, B.C.600. At this time Ishmael must have been advanced in years for he had five marriagable daughters besides several grown up sons. By the commandment of the Lord, the sons of Lehi returned from their encampment on the borders of the Red Sea to Jerusalem and invited Ishmael and his family to join them in their journey to a promised land. The Lord softened their hearts and they accepted the invitation, left their home and went with the young men into the wilderness; though from the oft-repeated rebellious conduct of some of Ishmael's sons it appears that they never had much faith, if any at all, in the prophetic mission of Lehi or in the woes pronounced upon Jerusalem by the servants of the Most High. Soon after the arrival of the party at the tents of Lehi, the eldest daughter of Ishmael was married to Zoram and four others wedded the sons of Lehi. In the vicissitudes of the toilsome journey in the Arabian desert Ishmael appears to have been faithful to the Lord but when the company reached a place to which was given the name of Nahom, Ishmael died and was there buried. His demise was the cause of much sorrow to his family and was made the pretext, by its rebellious portions, for renewed murmuring and fresh outbreaks.

JACOB

See biographical sketch after Book of Jacob.

JOSEPH

The younger son of Lehi and Sariah, born to them during the difficulties and sorrows of their journey across the Arabian Peninsula (about 595 B.C.). We are told very little of his life or character but he appears to have been an upright man and a faithful servant of the Lord. At the time of his father's death he was still small but was blessed by that patriarch with the rest of the family shortly before Lehi's departure from this earth. Joseph with his elder brother Jacob was ordained, by Nephi, a priest to minister to the Nephites, after the separation of that people from the adherents of Laman. Of his private history or death we are told nothing. Jacob, speaking of himself and Joseph, says: We did magnify our office [of priests] unto the Lord, taking upon us the responsibility, answering the sins of the people upon our own heads, if we did not teach them the word of God with all diligence.

JOSEPH

The son of the patriarch Jacob, and the ancestor of the Nephites and Lamanites. Lehi was descended from his son Manasseh and Ishmael from Ephraim. He is referred to with great affection by a number of the Nephite worthies. Lehi quotes (II Nephi, 3) some very important prophecies of Joseph which do not appear in the Bible. The Nephites are frequently called, by their teachers, the seed or house of Joseph.

IRREANTUM

The name given by Lehi's colony to an arm of the Indian Ocean on the eastern coast of Arabia. On its shores Nephi and his brethren built the ship that carried them to this continent. It was either the Persian Gulf or Gulf of Oman, the which does not clearly appear from the records. Nephi informs us that the meaning of the word Irreantum is many waters.

---
Notas:
[^1] An editorial published in The Juvenile Instructor, Jan. 1, 1890. President Cannon was then a member of the First Presidency.
[^2] Italics are this Editor's.
