Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 2

1 Ne 2 1VERSE 1

1 Ne 2 1In a dream. What are dreams, and what causes them? These are questions not yet fully answered. But it is certain that divine messages have often been communicated to man by means of dreams. In all probability, the command of God to Abraham to depart from Haran came to him in a dream. (Gen. 12:1) Atleast, the remarkable vision of which we find an account in Gen. 15, ended in the dream in which the patriarch saw the oppression of his descendants in Egypt for a period of four generations. (Gen. 15:12-16) The dreams of Abimelech (Gen. 20:1-15), of Joseph (Gen. 37:5-11), of Pharaoh (Gen. 41:1-32) are all well known. It was in a dream that the Lord appeared to Solomon and gave that young kind the privilege of asking for a special favor, which the king accepted, by expressing a desire for wisdom and understanding to judge the people. (1 Kings 3:5-12) The dreams of Nebuchadnezzar (Dan. 2:1-28) are important parts of the word of the Lord to all the world. The Prophet Joel promises dreams as one of the manifestations of the Spirit of the Lord: "And it shall come to pass afterward [in the last days, Acts 2:17] that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions." (Joel 2:28)

1 Ne 2 1It has been demonstrated that a person asleep may receive impressions from extraneous sources, although the reflective or reasoning organs are at rest. The smell of flowers may cause him to dream that he is walking in a garden. Sleeping in a smoky room may create the impression of a conflagration and a hot water bottle at his feet, may cause him to dream that he is standing on a volcano. This being the case, we may not deny the power of heavenly messengers to produce certain impressions upon the mind, during sleep, for the purpose of conveying important messages. Only to be thus favored, we must have faith. One who doubts is not in a fit or proper condition to receive a message by that means. We must also have the Holy Spirit to interpret.

1 Ne 2 1There are false, as well as true dreams. Jeremiah says on behalf of the Lord, "I have heard what the prophets said, that prophecy lies in my name, saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamed." (Jer. 23:25) And Zechariah (10:2) utters this solemn warning, "For the idols have spoken vanity, and the diviners have seen a lie, and have told false dreams."

1 Ne 2 1They seek to take away thy life. Persecutors, because inspired by the archenemy, are always murderous. But it was not the mission of Lehi to seal his testimony with his blood. The Lord had other work for him. He was to break new ground and lay the foundations of the great latter-day work, which the Prophet Joseph Smith, as an instrument in the hand of God, established, preparatory to the coming of the Son of Man, to reign over all the earth in power and glory. For that reason, and not merely to save his life, he was commanded to depart.

1 Ne 2 4VERSE 4

1 Ne 2 4Into the Wilderness. Students of the Book of Mormon should note that the Hebrews gave the name of wilderness or desert to places that were suitable for pastures for sheep and cattle even though they were not cultivated. The desert of Judea, south of Jerusalem, which is referred to in this chapter, was the place in which John the Baptist first preached repentance (Matt. 3:1; Luke 1:80), and it was, probably, the wilderness into which Jesus was "led up of the spirit," to be tempted. (Matt. 4:1) At the time of Joshua it had six cities. (Jos. 15:61, 62) It is now, or was a few years ago when the writer (J. M. Sjodahl) was a missionary there for the Latter-day Saints, one of the most dreary and desolate regions of the country.

1 Ne 2 5VERSE 5

1 Ne 2 5The Borders of the Red Sea. May have been near the head of the Gulf of Akabah, the eastern arm of the Red Sea, which is separated from the western arm by the Sinai Peninsula, where the children of Israel wandered for forty years. Anciently Akabah was connected with Suez and Cairo by means of a Roman road. During the Mohammedan reign it has always been an important stopping place for pilgrims on their way to Mekka, the holy city of Islam.

1 Ne 2 5Sariah. The wife of Lehi. The name is derived from the Babylonian, "Sarratu," which, in the city of Ur, where Abraham lived, was the title of a goddess, the consort of the moon god. In the language of Abraham, "Sarratu" became "Sarai." (Gen. 11:28) Later when the Lord made a covenant with the Patriarch and changed his name from "Abram" to "Abraham," his wife's name was changed from "Sarai" to "Sarah." (Gen. 17:15) The name means "Princess." In the Book of Mormon the form of the name is somewhat different. I venture the suggestion that "Sariah" is an abbreviation of "Sarah-Jah," and that means "Princess of the Lord" (Jehovah).

1 Ne 2 5Laman. The oldest son of Lehi. The letter "m" frequently takes the place of "b" "Laman" may, therefore, be regarded as the same as "Laban," which was the name of the father of Jacob's two wives, Leah and Rachel. The word means, "white."

1 Ne 2 5This name is found in various forms all over America. According to Dr. Brinton the Yameos Indians on the Maranon River are also called, Llameos, Lamas and Lamistas. In the Lama linguistic stock he places the Alabonos, in which we easily recognize "Laban" (A labon-o). Near Truxillo, in South America, there are the Lamanos or Lamistas, of the Quichua linguistic stock. According to Reclus, quoted by Dr. Cyrus Thomas, there is or was a tribe of Indians of the Ulva stock, near Blewfields River, also called the Lama River, called Lamans. Dr. Brinton mentions the Rama Indians as living on a small island in the Blewfields lagoon. "Lama" and "Rama" are the same word.

1 Ne 2 5The word "laban" in the Indian language means the same as in the Hebrew, "white." Rafinesque says the Lenape "laban-ibi" means "white water." The word "Lumonaki" is interesting. According to the same authority, it means "white land." In "abnaki" the initial "l" seems to have been dropped. Dr. Brinton says that the Algonquins used to refer to their eastern kindred as Abnakis, meaning their "white ancestors." But if we read Labnakis (from Laban-aki) it means the inhabitants of the "white land" or lamanite (white) ancestors. Lumonaki would be the same as the Book of Mormon "land of Lamoni," and, curious enough, also the "Hvitramannaland" or "white man's land" of the Icelanders who visited America during the Eleventh Century of our era.

1 Ne 2 5Lemuel. The second son of Lehi, probably named after Lemuel mentioned in Prov. 31:1, 4, who is supposed to be Solomon, the king. The name means either "Godward" or "God is bright."

1 Ne 2 5Sam. The third son of Lehi. The name is Egyptian. "It was the distinctive name of one of the highest orders of the priesthood. The great Rameses, himself, belonged to the order of Sam." (George Reynolds)

1 Ne 2 7VERSE 7

1 Ne 2 7An altar of stones. According to the Mosaic law, an altar was to be built either of earth or of stones not "polluted" by any tools. (Ex. 20:20, 25) This injunction seems to have been necessary in order to save Israel from a tendency to make images, like those of the Egyptians, to worship. Their altars were not to be ornamented with heads of apes or dogs or snakes; they were to be built entirely of stones, as formed by nature, lest the worshiper might get the impression that he offered sacrifices to an image instead of Jehovah. The altar of Lehi was built of stones probably because he anticipated an extended sojourn in the Valley of Lemuel, by the River Laman.

1 Ne 2 11VERSE 11

1 Ne 2 11Murmured in many things against their father. Here begins a tragic story of the rebellion of children against their parents. The future history of Nephites and Lamanites, with its wars and contentions, bloodshed and destruction, is here seen, as it were in the embryo from which it was developed.

1 Ne 2 11Note the character of the rebellious sons. Their stubbornness (they were "stiffnecked" V. 11); their love of money (they regretted the treasure that had been left behind, V. 11); their ignorance (they knew not the dealings of God, V. 12 and they rejected his word through the prophets, V. 13); and finally, their weakness in the presence of the manifestations of the Spirit of the Lord, (V. 14).

1 Ne 2 16VERSE 16

1 Ne 2 16Nephi. In Nephi we meet an entirely different character. He was young and strong, and yet possessing that humility which made him hunger and thirst after knowledge. He sought knowledge by means of prayer. And because of the knowledge he received, he also had faith. Where humility, knowledge and faith dwell, there can be no rebellion, neither against parental authority, nor against God, whom the parents represent in the home.

1 Ne 2 17VERSE 17

1 Ne 2 17Sam. Sam also believed, and the two brothers are notable illustrations of obedience to the great commandment, "Honor thy father and thy mother; that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee." (Ex. 20:12)

1 Ne 2 18VERSE 18

1 Ne 2 18Hardness of heart, means unyielding, stubborn, "stiffnecked" (v. 11). Those were the weaknesses that caused the failure of Laman and Lemuel. In the kingdom of God, obedience is the condition of success. When Saul tried to justify his disobedience by the magnitude of his sacrifices, Samuel replied, "Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams. For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry." [^1] Stubbornness is contrasted to obedience to the voice of the Lord.

1 Ne 2 20VERSE 20

1 Ne 2 20Ye shall prosper. The lesson taught in this verse is that the Lord takes an interest in the affairs of nations as well as individuals, and that national prosperity is the result of loyalty to God, while godlessness certainly brings disasters upon nations.

1 Ne 2 20How strikingly this great truth is illustrated in the history of the American natives!

1 Ne 2 20In North America, in Central and South America we find evidences of great culture—ruins of a civilization long ago forgotten. The Pueblo type with its center in upper Rio Grande Valley, the Aztec type in the stretch of country between the Rio Grande and Lake Nicaragua, the Maya type in Yucatan, the Nahua type in Mexico, the Panama and Colombia types in those countries, the Inca type in Peru and the Bolivia type further south—all these, with their achievements in architecture, sculpture, agriculture, spinning, weaving, their skill in forming stone implements and pottery, their rudimentary writing, their ingenious calendars, and their social and religious institutions, testify to prosperity and progression. But degeneration followed in the footsteps of idolatry, sensuality and autocracy and wars and bloodshed completed the destruction.

SC1 Ne 2 181 Ne 2 191 Ne 2 201 Ne 2 211 Ne 2 221 Ne 2 231 Ne 2 24VERSES 18-24

SC1 Ne 2 181 Ne 2 191 Ne 2 201 Ne 2 211 Ne 2 221 Ne 2 231 Ne 2 24of this chapter are a very important part of the the Book of Mormon. They are a record of the divine appointment of Nephi to the position of leadership: "Thou shalt be made a ruler and a teacher over thy brethren." (v. 22)

SC1 Ne 2 181 Ne 2 191 Ne 2 201 Ne 2 211 Ne 2 221 Ne 2 231 Ne 2 24There comes a time in the experience of every servant of the Lord when he, often after an intense spiritual struggle, becomes conscious of his special mission in mortality and his relationship to God. The crisis is sometimes described as a "new birth." It is a complete and actual change in the conditions and circumstances of the person involved. It is as if one were passing from death to life. It is an unconditional surrender to God. Such an experience was that of Jacob at Bethel, where, after the dream of the ladder, he dedicated himself to the service of Jehovah: "The Lord shall be my God ... and I will surely give the tenth unto thee." (Gen. 28:10-22) It was the experience of the boy Samuel, that caused him to exclaim before the Lord: "Speak, for thy servant heareth." (Sam. 3:2-14) See also the vision of Isaiah, who said: "Here am I, send me" (Is. 6:1-8); and Jeremiah, when he was installed in his office by divine authority (Jer. 1:4-10); and Saul, who, trembling and astonished, in perfect submission, asked: "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" (Acts 9:1-8) The boy Joseph Smith passed through a similar crisis in the "sacred grove," where he had the glorious theophany of the Father and the Son. From that day he was another boy, with a new outlook upon the present and the future. It was such experience the boy Nephi had. And he returned to his father's tent with new responsibilities.

---
Notas:
[^1] An editorial published in The Juvenile Instructor, Jan. 1, 1890. President Cannon was then a member of the First Presidency.
