Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 4

SC1 Ne 4 11 Ne 4 21 Ne 4 3VERSES 1-3

SC1 Ne 4 11 Ne 4 21 Ne 4 3We have here another masterly discourse by Nephi. He urges his brothers to carry out the commandment of the Lord, given through the angel, and he argues that the Lord who destroyed the Egyptians in the Red Sea, could destroy Laban, if necessary. His brothers were still angry and murmuring. Even the angel had not been able to change the hearts of Laman and Lemuel. However they went along.

1 Ne 4 5VERSE 5

1 Ne 4 5And it was night. This seems to indicate that the cave in which they had been camping was one day's journey from Jerusalem. That would answer the question of Machpelah at Hebron. A day's journey was 16-20 miles.

1 Ne 4 5Crept into the city. Nephi left his brothers outside the city wall. He himself got into the city. Just how is not explained. In the large gates of a walled city, there was a small door or rather window, through which those who were entitled to enter might do so, when the gate was closed for the night. He might have literally "crept" in through such an aperture, by the grace of the watchman. It was always a small opening, sometimes only two feet square.

1 Ne 4 5Nephi, the son of a prominent, well-to-do citizen, coming alone to the gate, a belated wanderer, unfortunately overtaken by the shadows of the night, might readily obtain an entrance through what some have called "the needle's eye," particularly if he had a piece of money with which to make his account of himself plausible; whereas, if the brothers had come together at that hour, suspicions might have been aroused. The wisdom that inspired Nephi is seen in his conduct, and his account is so simple, so natural, as to make a perfect impression of its authenticity on the mind of the careful reader.

1 Ne 4 8VERSE 8

1 Ne 4 8It was Laban. We note that the youthful leader of his brothers, at the time did not follow a plan previously prepared. He proceeded as the Spirit led the way. Soon he found himself outside the house of Laban. Lying on the ground, was a human form. It was the dreaded enemy. And on closer inspection, Nephi found that he was unconscious, under the influence of wine.

1 Ne 4 8The Hebrews were not, generally speaking, an intemperate people, but they enjoyed festivals. Besides the yearly occasions prescribed by law, they celebrated birthdays, marriages, harvest, vintage, and special occasions, as, for instance the return of the Prodigal. On such occasions great quantities of food and wine were consumed. Even at funerals, they feasted.

1 Ne 4 8It is not improbable that Laban had celebrated, in the midst of convivial friends, his acquisition of the property of Lehi. For that was an unexpected "harvest."

1 Ne 4 8There are some notable instances of intemperate drinking on record in the Hebrew Scriptures.

1 Ne 4 8The case of Belshazzar, king of Babylon, is well known. It was his last debauch. For, "In that night was Belshazzar, the king of the Chaldeans, slain." (Dan. 5:30)

1 Ne 4 8Another but less known instance is that of Nabal, a wealthy sheep owner. On one occasion, when he made a feast for his shearers, David sent word to him and asked for a tribute, as a recognition of the protection he had enjoyed for his flocks. Nabal refused. David then prepared for a raid on his property. But Abigail, the wife of Nabal, saved the situation by sending to David, without the knowledge of her husband, a handsome gift of provisions. In the meantime, Nabal feasted and drank. The next day, when he heard what his wife had done, he suffered a heart attack: "His heart died within him, and he became as a stone." About ten days afterwards he died. (Sam. 25:36-38)

1 Ne 4 8Now here was Laban. Already dead to the world.

1 Ne 4 9VERSE 9

1 Ne 4 9His sword. This weapon was destined to play an important part in the history of the Nephites. It served Nephi as a pattern when he found it necessary to arm his people for defense against Lamanite marauders. (2 Ne. 5:14) He, himself, wielded it in many a sanguinary combat. (Jac. 1:10) King Benjamin won victories with it (Words of Mormon 13), and, toward the end of his reign in Zarahemla, he turned it over to his son Mosiah. (Mos. 1:16) In a revelation dated New York, June, 1829, the Three Witnesses, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris were given the promise, conditioned on their faith and faithfulness, that they would obtain a view of the sword of Laban, as well as the plates, the breastplate, the Urim and Thummim and the miraculous directors. (D. & C. 17:1) A short time after the revelation was given, the promise was fulfilled.

1 Ne 4 9David Whitmer, on Sept. 7, 1878, in a conversation with Elders Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith, said, in part:

1 Ne 4 9"Joseph, Oliver and myself were together when I saw them [the plates]. We not only saw the plates of the Book of Mormon, but also the brass plates, the plates of the Book of Ether ... and many other plates ... there appeared as it were, a table with many records, or plates upon it, besides the plates of the Book of Mormon, also the sword of Laban, the directors [i.e., the ball which Lehi had], and the interpreters. I saw them as plainly as I see this bed [striking it beside him with his hand], and I heard the voice of the Lord as distinctly as I ever heard anything in my life, declaring that the records of the plates of the Book of Mormon were translated by the gift and power of God." (Andrew Jensen, Historical Record, p. 217)

1 Ne 4 9Nephi took this sword from Laban and examined it. Its hilt was of pure gold and the blade of precious steel. There is no reason for doubting the accuracy of this statement.

1 Ne 4 9It is true enough that in most, if not in all, of the passages in the Old Testament where the English version has "steel" the original has a word that means "copper." But in Jeremiah 15:12, where the Prophet asks: "Shall iron break the northern iron and the steel?" scholars have suggested that "the northern iron" may mean steel, while the "steel" mentioned is copper. In Nahum 2:4, where the prophet speaks of raging chariots that seem like "torches," the word translated "torches" (paldah) should be rendered "steel." And weapons of "steel" are said to be found in ancient tombs in Egypt, which statement can well be credited, for steel is not a new invention or discovery. Only the modern way of making it is new. Ancient ironmasters, we are told, obtained iron and steel by simply a hearth or fireplace in which the ore and the charcoal were mixed and a blast applied to obtain the necessary high temperature. According to Diodorus Siculus, [^1] some of the ancients buried sheets of iron in the earth and left them there till what he calls the "weak parts" was consumed by rust. What remained was "steel." This was used for weapons and objects of various kinds.

SC1 Ne 4 101 Ne 4 111 Ne 4 121 Ne 4 131 Ne 4 141 Ne 4 151 Ne 4 161 Ne 4 171 Ne 4 18VERSES 10-18

SC1 Ne 4 101 Ne 4 111 Ne 4 121 Ne 4 131 Ne 4 141 Ne 4 151 Ne 4 161 Ne 4 171 Ne 4 18The death of Laban. Nephi stood there with the sword of Laban in his hand. Presently the voice of the Spirit urged him to destroy his enemy. But he shrunk from the thought. He had never shed the blood of man. The inner voice came again: "Behold the Lord hath delivered him into thy hands." The commandment was from God.

SC1 Ne 4 101 Ne 4 111 Ne 4 121 Ne 4 131 Ne 4 141 Ne 4 151 Ne 4 161 Ne 4 171 Ne 4 18The indictments against Laban were grave. (1) He had refused to deliver up the records peacefully; (2) he had robbed the sons of Lehi of their property; (3) he had decided to kill the brothers; (4) humanly speaking, there was no possibility of obtaining the records as long as Laban lived. Nephi obeyed the inner voice. "It is better that one man should perish than that a nation should dwindle and perish in unbelief." This was a Jewish proverb, equivalent to: "Of two evils choose the lesser." And so, after a great deal of hesitation, Nephi destroyed Laban with his own sword (v. 18).

1 Ne 4 22VERSE 22

1 Ne 4 22The elders of the Jews. This verse and v. 27 gives us, by inference, some interesting information concerning Laban.

1 Ne 4 22The Jews had certain officials they called shoterim. In the English version that word is translated officers, or assistants or Scribes. That is more correct. They were probably, "secretaries." They are mentioned in the following texts:

1 Ne 4 22Deut. 16:18: "Judges and officers shalt thou make thee in all thy gates."

1 Ne 4 22Here the "officers" (shoterim) were associated with the judges in the exercise of their judicial functions in the gates where the courts were held.

1 Ne 4 22Josh. 8:33: "And all Israel, and their elders, and officers, and their judges stood on this side of the ark."

1 Ne 4 22Here their presence was required when the people made a covenant with the Lord at Mt. Ebal. See Deut. 29:10, where we have the account of a covenant made in the land of Moab.

1 Ne 4 22Numb. 11:16: "Gather unto me 70 men of the elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be elders of the people, and officers over them."

1 Ne 4 22Here the duties of the "officers" (shoterim) called them to be present at the appointment of seventies, who were to "bear the burden of the people with Moses."

1 Ne 4 22But the shoterim also had special duties during time of war. In the first place, they were to explain to the conscripts that certain conditions exempted them from service: (1) Those who had a new house not yet dedicated; (2) those that just planted a vineyard; (3) those who were about to be married; (4) and, finally, those who were fearful and fainthearted (probably physically unfit), all these were exempt from service. (Deut. 20:5-8) When the army was ready for organization, the "officers" appointed captains to lead them. (20:9) It was further, the duty of these "officers" to take messages from the commander-in-chief to the people. (Josh. 1:10; 3:2-4) They might be compared to the modern adjutant generals.

1 Ne 4 22Considering the fact that Laban had charge of the genealogy—necessary for religious services and for census taking, in case of war; and also that he was the possessor of a sword, such as only a man of high military rank would be likely to own, we may safely conclude that his position was that of a shoterim (an "officer") in Jerusalem.

1 Ne 4 35VERSE 35

1 Ne 4 35Zoram was the name. Zoram, a servant of Laban, now a captive in the hands of Nephi, evidently became converted by the kind yet powerful address of his captor, who testified that the Lord had commanded him to do "this thing." He made a covenant with the sons of Lehi and accompanied them to the tent of their father. During the journey in the wilderness Zoram married the eldest daughter of Ishmael. (2 Ne. 16-7)

1 Ne 4 35One of their descendants was Ammoron, brother of Amalickiah, who waged war with the Nephites, in the years 26-9 of the reign of the Judges. (Alma 52:3) It is not improbable that the Aymaras in the Andean mountains, from south latitude 15 to 20, and through about 6 degrees longitude (Dr. Brinton) derive their name from this descendant of Zoram. Dr. Brinton estimates the number of Aymaras in this region at about a half million souls.

1 Ne 4 35There is, as far as we know, no certain clue to the meaning of the name Zoram. The Hebrews called the city of Tyre, "Zor," or "Zur," which means a "rock." It was also called, "Zor em Sidonim," meaning, "Tyre, the Capitol of the Sidonians." A natural abbreviation of this descriptive name would be, "Zor-am." If this derivation is correct, the servant of Laban may have been a Tyrian.

1 Ne 4 35Since the days of David and Solomon, there was a lively traffic between Tyre and Jerusalem. Hiram, king of Tyre, sent messengers to David, with timber of cedars, and masons and carpenters, to build him a house (1 Chron. 7:1), and Solomon sent for one Hiram of Tyre, who was the son of a "man of Tyre" and a woman of the tribe of Naphtali. This Hiram was a skilful worker in all "works of brass," and he made the various costly metal ornaments and objects for which the temple of Solomon became famous.

1 Ne 4 35Zoram may have been a descendant of one of these laborers, or some other Tyrian, and therefore known in the house of Laban as Zoram, the man of Tyre.

---
Notas:
[^1] An editorial published in The Juvenile Instructor, Jan. 1, 1890. President Cannon was then a member of the First Presidency.
