Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 8

1 Ne 8 1VERSE 1

1 Ne 8 1All manner of seeds ... and also of the seeds of fruit. Indicates a long stay in the Valley of Lemuel.

1 Ne 8 2VERSE 2

1 Ne 8 2I have had a dream. (See note Chap. 2:1) Dreams and visions are often mentioned together, as here, indicating their close relationship, although belonging to different sections of the mental field. The famous manifestations of Nebuchadnezzar concerning the golden image (Dan. 2) was a dream, but the interpretation of it was revealed to Daniel in a night "vision" (v. 10), and the prophet refers to it as "thy dream and the visions of thy head" (v. 28). On the other hand, the appearance of the Father and the Son to Joseph Smith in the sacred grove was not a dream but a vision. The appearance of our Lord, of Moses, of Elias and Elijah in the Kirtland Temple in 1836 were so many visions. The Prophet explains: "The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened. We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit." (D. & C. 110:1,2)

1 Ne 8 4VERSE 4

1 Ne 8 4Lehi feared exceedingly. Lehi did not dismiss the dream as an illusion. He accepted it as a message from God. It brought him joy because of Nephi and Sam, but he feared because of Laman and Lemuel. In olden days dreams were often accepted as revelations. Eliphas, one of the friends of Job, said, "Now a thing was secretly brought to me, and mine ear received a little thereof. In thoughts from the visions of the night, when deep sleep falleth on men, fear came upon me, and trembling, which made all my bones to shake." (Job 4:13, 15) Job, in his sufferings, exclaims, "When I say, My bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint; then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me through visions."(Job 1:13, 14), an experience which many sufferers have had. Elihu, another of the friends of Job, argues: "For God speaketh once, yea twice, yet man perceiveth is not. In a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falleth upon men, in slumberings upon the bed; then he openeth the ears of men, and sealeth their instruction." (Job 33:14-16) Lehi was seized with fear; not for himself, but for his two sons. One of the objects of this dream was to acquaint Lehi with the condition of his sons, in order that he might warn them, and bring them to repentance. America might have had a different history, if Laman and Lemuel had accepted the sweet fruit of the tree and acknowledged Nephi as their divinely appointed leader.

A Synopsis of the Dream

This, probably, is a representation of the long journey and voyage of Lehi from the Valley of Lemuel to the new, promised land.

The tree we are told, represents the love of God in the hearts of men (1 Ne. 11:22, 25 and 15:22), and, we may perhaps presume, especially as manifested in the many blessings, both temporal and spiritual, which God was about to bestow upon Lehi and his descendants in the new land, in accordance with the promises which Joseph received of his father Jacob. (Gen. 49:22-26) That was the fruit Laman and Lemuel rejected.

Concerning the water in the river, Nephi explains it was "filthiness." But his father was occupied with other things, looking for his family, and he did not notice the filthy condition of the water. (1 Ne. 15:27) The angel who explains the dream to Nephi places before him a fearful picture of war between his descendants and those of his brethren, and then he says, pointing to that battle array, "Behold the fountain of filthy water which thy father saw; yea, even the river of which he spake; and the depths thereof are the depths of hell." Which is about the same as to say that the conditions in which wars originate are the same as those in which all hell has its origin. The "depths" of both are the same. (1 Ne. 12:16)

The rod of iron is the word of God, and more especially the prophetic word concerning the new land of promise and the establishment of the kingdom of God in the latter-days. (See 1 Ne. 11:25 and 15:23-25) The "fountain" in verse 20, must refer to the source from which the tree had its life-giving moisture, for it represented "the love of God," as did the tree. (1 Ne. 11:25) It could not have been the fountain from which the filthy water in the river had its origin. The mists of darkness are the temptations of the devil. (1 Ne. 12:17)

This building represents "vain imaginations and the pride of the children of men." (1 Ne. 12:18) A building of such intangible material and without a foundation cannot stand. Our age needs to be reminded of the fact that mockery is a sin, and that scoffers are far from the kingdom of God. Blessed is the man that does not sit in "the seat of the scornful." (Psalm 1:1) "Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." (Gal. 6:7) We are living in an age in which even sacred things are made the objects of jests and ridicule.

That such conduct is displeasing in the sight of the Almighty is strikingly illustrated by the story of Elisha and the scoffers of Bethel. (2 Kings 2:23, 24) The Prophet Elisha was going to Bethel, and was nearing the city when he was surrounded by a crowd of young scoffers. Our common Bible translations say, "little children," but the words so translated should in this place be rendered, "young men," or "youths," as, for instance, in 1 kings 20:15. These young men, in all probability, were pupils in some idolatrous school of prophets at Bethel, where a golden calf had been set up by Jeroboam, in defiance of the temple service at Jerusalem. Having heard of the miraculous ascent of Elijah and the appointment of Elisha as his successor, they took occasion to ridicule the prophet. "Go up, thou ascend!" Like Elijah! They were mocking God in his representatives. Then Elisha turned toward them and gave them a searching look whereupon he "cursed" or rebuked them in the name of the Lord. "And there came forth two she bears out of the wood, and tare forty and two children of them."

I am aware that critics have aimed their arrows at this Biblical story, as against many others. They have charged the prophet with unnecessary cruelty. But the fact is that the prophet was no more responsible for the fate of these mockers, than was Noah for the flood, or Jonah for the destruction of Nineveh.

But the bears? Well, they did not belong to Elisha. Dr. Clarke, in his Commentary, asks: "It is not possible that these young men had been destroying the whelps of the she bears that now pursued them? The statement that they were she bears gives color to this conjecture." Also the fact so many pupils were gathered together. Most likely, they had been on some kind of an excursion. Children do not accidentally get together in large numbers. Only when they go in the capacity of a school, or a Sunday school, or some organization. They may have been out in the woods for the purpose of ridding the country of predatory animals, to save the sheep. They may have destroyed, or even captured, cubs belonging to these bear mothers, and if they had not stopped to insult the prophet, they might have reached their homes in safety. The fury of a bear mother was proverbial in Israel. When Hushai advised Absalom not to pursue David, he said, "Thou knowest thy father and his men, that they be mighty men, and they be chafed in their minds, as a bear, robbed of her whelps in the field." (2 Sam. 17:8)

The story is a striking illustration of the sinfulness of levity regarding sacred things and persons.

1 Ne 8 36VERSE 36

1 Ne 8 36The Presence of the Lord. Lehi feared that Laman and Lemuel might be cast off from the Presence of the Lord. This Presence is what is order Jewish writings is called the Shekinah, referring to the indwelling of the Lord in his Sanctuary. It was the Shekinah, or indwelling, also called "the Glory of the Lord" that rested on Mt. Sinai, for the Lord "called Moses out of the midst of a cloud, and the sight of the Glory of the Lord was like devouring fire on the top of the mountain in the eyes of the children of Israel." (Ex. 24:15-17)It was a manifestation of Light in the pillar of cloud that guided Israel through the wilderness. (Ex. 40:34-38) "My Presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest." (Ex. 33:14) It was the Shekinah that filled the Temple of Solomon. (2 Chron. 7:1-3) The Prophet Ezekiel in his vision, sees the Shekinah departing from the temple. (Ez. 10:19; 11:22) and then again entering into the new temple. (Ez. 43:2-5) We can understand from this that to be cast out from "the Presence of the Lord" is to become spiritually lost.

1 Ne 8 36What Lehi feared came, alas! to pass. (2 Ne. 5:20)

NOTES

Visions. "God never bestows upon his people, or upon an individual, superior blessings without a severe trial to prove them, to prove that individual, or that people to see whether they will keep their covenants with him, and keep in remembrance what he has shown them. Then the greater the vision, the greater the display of the enemy. So when individuals are blessed with visions, revelations or manifestations, look out, then the Devil is nigh you, and you will be tempted in proportion to the visions, revelations, or manifestations you have received."—President Brigham Young.

"If the Lord Almighty should reveal to a high priest or to any other than the head, things that are true, or that have been and will be and show him the destiny of this people twenty-five years from now, or a new doctrine that will in five, ten, or twenty years from now become a doctrine of this Church and Kingdom, but which has not yet been revealed to this people, and reveal it by the same spirit, the same messenger, the same voice, the same power that gave revelations to Joseph when he was living, it would be a blessings to that high priest or individual; but he must rarely divulge it to a second person on the face of the earth, until God reveals it through the proper source to become the property of the people at large. Therefore when you hear Elders say that God does not reveal through the president of the Church that which they know, and tell wonderful things, you may generally set it down as a God's truth that the revelation they have had is ... not from God."—President Brigham Young.
