Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 9

1 Ne 9 2VERSE 2

1 Ne 9 2The Plates of Nephi. Nephi, in this chapter, closes the abridgment of the record of his father (1 Ne. 1:17) with the statement that he has made two sets of plates, each set being called the "Plates of Nephi." One set contains the record of the "ministry of my people," the other, an account of the reign of kings, wars and contentions; in other words, one is an ecclesiastical, the other a political history.

1 Ne 9 5VERSE 5

1 Ne 9 5For a wise purpose. This arrangement was made in obedience to a divine commandment, for a wise purpose, which, however, was hidden from Nephi. God does not always—perhaps seldom—explain the reason why he gives a commandment. A loving child does not ask for reasons, when God speaks.

1 Ne 9 5When Mormon had finished his abridgment from the political history of Nephi, down to the reign of King Benjamin, he found, after research, the other plates of Nephi, "which contained this small account of the prophets, from Jacob down to the reign of King Benjamin, and also many of the words of Nephi." Being much impressed with the contents of this record, he put the plates with his own work. "And I do this," he says, "for a wise purpose; for thus it whispereth me, according to the workings of the Spirit of the Lord which is in me." (Words of Mormon, 3-7.)

1 Ne 9 5This purpose did not become perfectly clear until during the summer of 1828. About that time Martin Harris had copied 116 pages of the translation, as slowly dictated by the Prophet Joseph, and, in his anxiety to convince his friends of the divinity of the work in which he and the prophet were engaged, he persuaded the latter to permit him to show them these pages. This part of the manuscript was lost. The loss would have been irreparable, but for the existence of the second set of plates of Nephi, which could be translated instead. (See D. & C. 3:12-14; 10:3-13)

NOTES

A second translation of the text represented by the missing manuscript would, except for a special miracle, have been characterized by literary differences which, no matter how unessential, would have furnished enemies an excuse for doubting and rejecting the entire work. The double record obviated that difficulty by providing independent accounts covering the same period of time.

A good translator, it may be observed, does not merely transform mechanically words from one language into the words of another. It is the sentiment, the vision, the inspiration of the author he endeavors to communicate through the new vehicle which we call a "translation." That is one reason why two or more independent translators of the same paragraph never use identically the same words or sentences. Each necessarily leaves some of his own personality in his work, even when it is inspired by the divine Spirit. There is always a marked difference in style in the writings of, for instance, Paul and Peter and John, and, we may add, Joseph Smith, Brigham Young and David O. McKay, because they are not mechanical implements without intelligence. On the contrary, it is their intelligence, their individuality, their will, their free agency as well as their other gifts and accomplishments, that the Spirit of the Lord makes use of. The Spirit is the same, but "there are diversities of gifts." (I Cor. 12:4)

Furthermore, a good translator must be familiar with the subject he deals with. One absolutely ignorant of farming could not translate a work on agriculture. Only a poet can translate Shakespeare, and only a philosopher can give us an idea of Einstein's "Relativity." One who has never left the ground could give us only a poor description, even in a translation, of Lindbergh's flight across the Atlantic. By the same rule, only one who has the Spirit of the Lord can understand and translate the inspired writings, correctly. No philosopher, no school of philosophy can give us a correct understanding of either the Bible or the Book of Mormon, except by the aid of the divine Spirit.

Nephi made two sets of plates. That Nephi made use of metal for writing material, when the intention was to produce a record that could be moved from place to place and yet be durable enough to be preserved for centuries, is very probable. Speaking of the Mayas, Dr. Sylvanus G. Morley says: "The material upon which the Maya glyphs are presented are stone, wood, stucco, bone, shell, metal, plaster, pottery and fiber paper. ... Texts have been found carved on the wooden lintels of Tikal, molded in the stucco reliefs of Palenque, scratched on shells from Copan and Belize, etched on a bone from Wild Cane Key, British Honduras, engraved on metal from Chichen Itza, drawn on the plaster-covered walls of Kabah, Chichen Itza and Uxmal, and painted in fiber-paper books." (An Introduction to the Study of Maya Hieroglyphics, p. 22)

Stone and paper are the most common kind of material used but metal would, naturally, be the best material for the purposes Nephi had in view.

Concerning writing and writing materials in South America little is known. The following from the pens of Rivero and von Tschudi is quoted as being in accordance with the generally reliable information they had:

"The ancient Peruvians had two kinds of writings: one, and certainly the most ancient, consisted in a species of hieroglyphic characters; the other, in knots made of threads of divers colors.

"The hieroglyphics of the Mexicans were very distinct and graved on stone or metal. In southern Peru there has not yet been discovered any vestige of hieroglyphics painted on paper."

In North America, on the Lenape records of the creation, the flood and the crossing of the waters by their ancestors, see, "An Introduction to the Study of the Book of Mormon," Sjodahl, pp. 460-470.
