Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 10

SC1 Ne 10 11 Ne 10 2VERSES 1-2

SC1 Ne 10 11 Ne 10 2Here Nephi begins the story of his own reign and ministry by a synopsis of a prophecy by his father, following the account of the dream of the tree in the field (Chap. 8) Undoubtedly, the dream and the subsequent prophetic discourse influenced the entire life of Nephi. Fathers too often neglect giving the children the benefit of their experiences and mature judgment. Lehi did not neglect his duty in this respect.

1 Ne 10 3VERSE 3

1 Ne 10 3They should be destroyed ... carried away captive. This would indicate that, at the time this prophecy was delivered, Jerusalem had not yet been destroyed, or, if it had, that word of it had not yet reached the Valley of Lemuel. It was in the year 596 B.C., according to the calculation of scholars, that Jehoiachin and thousands of prominent citizens with him, were carried away to Babylon. Among others was the prophet Ezekiel. The temple was also plundered of its costly treasures. Zedekiah was appointed king. It was not until ten years later that Jerusalem, because of the treachery of Zedekiah, was destroyed and the temple and other public buildings were demolished by fire. (2 Kings 24 and 25 ch.) This was in the year 586 B.C.

1 Ne 10 3Then the doom of the kingdom of Judah was complete. The captivity was a separation not only from house and home and the land of inheritance, but also from the worship of Jehovah, the God of their fathers, because to the faithful Jew, worship was intimately connected with the temple in Jerusalem. By the rivers of Babylon the captives wept and hung their harps upon the willows, for, "How shall we sing the Lord's song in a strange land?" (Psalm 137:4) Jeremiah wrote to the captives and tried to arouse them to faith and hope by assuring them that their captivity would be ended in seventy years. (Jer. 29:1-14) Ezekiel, who was in Babylon, also promised them in the name of the Lord that they would be permitted to return and build a new temple.

1 Ne 10 3Destroyed. This word does not mean "annihilated." Jerusalem was "destroyed" when its houses were laid in ashes, its walls broken down and many of its inhabitants carried away into captivity; that was destruction, but the city always remained, even if in ruins. Nephi (2 Ne. 25:9) says the Jews were "destroyed" from generation to generation, but he explains what he means (v. 16), viz., The Lord hath "scourged them from generation to generation." It is well to remember that destruction does not always mean complete extermination.

1 Ne 10 4VERSE 4

1 Ne 10 4Six hundred years. If, as is quite commonly supposed, our Lord was born four years before the beginning of our era, the exodus of Lehi from Jerusalem would have taken place in what in our chronology would be the year 604 B.C., or the year after the battle at Carchemish, where the Egyptians were defeated by the Chaldeans. That would, from an historical point of view, have been the logical time for the laying of the foundations of a new dispensation, in another part of the world, because from now on Palestine was to be the battle ground of the great world powers for supremacy.

1 Ne 10 4A Messiah. Dr. Klausner, in his "Jesus of Nazareth," asks what Jesus is to the Jew. His book is written specially for the Jews. He answers the question by saying that, to the Jew, he is neither God nor the Son of God; neither the Messiah, nor even a prophet; but that, if his teachings were stripped of certain objectionable features, they would form the most admirable code of ethics, and he would be the greatest author of parables that ever lived.

1 Ne 10 4Some Christian theologians have taken a similar view. According to them, all that man needs is a consciousness of his oneness with God. The life of Christ was completely dominated by that consciousness, and his work as a Savior is to arouse his consciousness in us. There is no need of expiation or sacrifice. As we share Christ's consciousness of the divine, our lives are transformed, and we are saved, and that is all there is to it.

1 Ne 10 4Lately, theologians have even gone farther. They have suggested that a new religion is needed, stripped of everything supernatural; they propose substituting "humanism" for the Gospel, and to form a society in which all cooperate for the common good, and call that their church. In that society, there will be no place for the Messiah.

1 Ne 10 4The Book of Mormon does not speak in uncertain terms on such subjects. It does not leave us in doubt. Here, in this discourse, Father Lehi states four positive facts: (1) that the Lord God (Jehovah Elohim), at a stated time, would raise up a prophet among the Jews; (2) that this prophet would be the promised Messiah, or the Savior of the world; (3) that his mission of salvation would be in the nature of "redemption"; (4) that man, in his fallen state, would be lost without a Redeemer. All this refers to Jesus. He is the Prophet, the Messiah, the Savior, the Redeemer.

1 Ne 10 4As the Prophet, he declares the plan of salvation to God's children, for a prophet is one who speaks "for God." As the Messiah, the "Anointed One," the "Christ," he is the Mediator between God and man and the Ruler of God's kingdom. As the Savior, his mission is to save his people—which means all who acknowledge him as their Savior—from their sins. That is the meaning of the blessed name, JESUS, the Greek form of the Hebrew, Jehoshuah, or, Joshuah. As the Redeemer he delivers his people, from guilt, by means of pardon; (Eph. 1:7); from the power and dominion of sin, by means of holiness (1 Pet. 1:16-19); from the grave, by means of the resurrection (Rom. 8:21-23); and from all evil (Eph. 1:14; 4:30; 1 Cor. 1:30; Tit. 2:14).

1 Ne 10 6VERSE 6

1 Ne 10 6A fallen state. The statement that mankind, without a divine Redeemer, would be lost is borne out by history and also by individual experience. Without constant aid and guidance from a higher source, nations degenerate morally, even if they maintain physical superiority, until they lose themselves in superstition on the one hand and atheism on the other, and life becomes very much of a case of "dog eat dog." Consider the human race before the flood, when the wickedness became so great that the Lord actually was sorry "that he had made man on earth." (Gen. 6:1-7) Read David's estimate of the moral status of mankind at his time, when the Lord looked down from heaven to see "if there were any that did understand and seek God," but found that "they are all gone aside, they are all together become filthy." Then look at the picture drawn by Paul in his letter to the Romans, of the moral status of the Greek and Roman civilizations:

1 Ne 10 6"Their throat is an open sepulchre; with their tongues they have used deceit; the poison of asps is under their lips ... their feet are swift to shed blood; destruction and misery are in their ways and the way of peace they have not known." (Rom. 3:9-18)

1 Ne 10 6Read also his picture of the last days:

1 Ne 10 6"Perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce-breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; having a form of godliness but denying the power thereof." (2 Tim. 3:1-5. See also Rev. chap. 18)

1 Ne 10 6The natural tendency of the race, if the Spirit of God withdraws, is toward degeneracy. And that is true of the individual, too. Unless a man constantly studies the word of God, attends to his prayers, partakes of the Sacrament, joins in public worship whenever possible, and attends to his duties, as given him by our heavenly Father, he will gradually sink lower and lower, until he becomes, as far as spiritual things are concerned—a corpse.

1 Ne 10 6Without a divine Redeemer, man would be lost.

1 Ne 10 7VERSE 7

1 Ne 10 7A prophet ... before the Messiah. This refers to John the Baptist, whose mission it was to "prepare the way of the Lord." John was the son of Zacharias, a priest and temple worker, and his wife Elisabeth, a cousin of Mary, the mother of Jesus. He was six months the senior of our Lord. His mission was to be the herald, or forerunner, of the Messiah, and as such prepare the way for him. In pursuance of this mission, he appeared in the wilderness, in the fifteenth year of the reign of the emperor Tiberius, and preached: "Prepare ye the way of the Lord"; the Messiah had already come; he was standing among them, unknown. (John 1:26)

1 Ne 10 7The fact that Jesus had a forerunner, a herald, to proclaim his advent and command that the way be prepared for him, proves that he was more than a common mortal, more than a teacher and reformer. When kings and potentates in those days were about to travel, they notified their subjects that they were coming, and that they wanted the roads repaired and straightened so that there should be no unnecessary delay. A notable illustration of this Oriental custom was furnished by the sultan of Turkey, Abdul-Hamid II, when he, having received word that the German emperor desired to visit Jerusalem, issued an order that the road between Jaffa and Jerusalem be prepared for the imperial visitor. This was done. Hundreds of men and women were drafted for work on the road. Now, the very mission of John proves that the advent of Jesus was the coming of a King to his kingdom.

1 Ne 10 7John appeared in the garb of a prophet. He was clad in a loose garment of camel hair, held together by a leather girdle. His food was wild honey and locusts—probably the pods of the locust tree, known as "Carob," or "Saint John's Bread."

1 Ne 10 7John baptized those who repented and believed his message. For baptism belongs to all dispensations. Adam was baptized. (Pearl of Gr. Pr., Mos., 6:52, 64, 65) There is evidence that baptism was practiced by the Patriarchs. When Jacob received the divine command to go to Bethel and build an altar there "unto God," he ordered his household, and all that were with him, to put away "the strange gods," and to "be clean," and to "change your garments." This cleaning process was not a common washing, but a religious rite connected with the altar service that was to be observed. (Gen. 35:1-7) The washing of clothes, mentioned in Ex. 19:10, is best understood in the same way, since it was part of the "sanctification" of the people, preparatory to the manifestations of God on the mountain. The Jews, at the time of our Lord, understood the principle of baptism, for they asked John, "Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not that Christ, nor Elias, neither that prophet?"

1 Ne 10 7The question is sometimes asked, whether those who were baptized by John had to be baptized again, in order to become members of the Church of Christ. Probably not. The baptism of John was performed with divine authority and had, we may say, legal force until our Lord, after the resurrection, authorized his Apostles to baptize in his name.

1 Ne 10 9VERSE 9

1 Ne 10 9Baptism of the Messiah. Jesus was baptized by John. That was, in his case, the fulfilment of all righteousness. (Matt. 3:15) He was not baptized again. Nor were his apostles, as far as we know. Twelve disciples at Ephesus were rebaptized. (Acts 19:1) In all probability, they had been baptized with the baptism of John after the Christian baptism had been instituted and substituted for that of John, in which case their first baptism would have been invalid.

1 Ne 10 9John the Baptist a great prophet. "The question arose from the saying of Jesus, 'Among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist; but he that is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he' (Matt. 11:11). How is it that John was considered the greatest of prophets?

1 Ne 10 9"First. He was entrusted with the important mission of preparing the way before the face of the Lord. Whoever had such a trust committed to him before or since? No man.

1 Ne 10 9"Secondly. He was entrusted with the important mission, and it was required at his hands, to baptize the Son of man.

1 Ne 10 9"Thirdly. John, at that time, was the only administrator in the affairs of the kingdom there was then on earth, and holding the keys of power. The Jews had to obey his instructions or be damned, by their own law which he had given to Moses on the mount, and thereby magnified it and made honorable, instead of destroying it. The son of Zacharias wrested the keys, the kingdom, the power, the glory from the Jews, by the holy anointing and decree of heaven, and these three reasons constitute him the greatest born of a woman. ...

1 Ne 10 9"Jesus was looked upon as having the least claim in God's kingdom, and, seemingly, was the least entitled to their acceptance of him as a prophet; as if he had said, 'He that is considered the least among you is greater than John—that is I, myself.' " (Hist. of the Church, vol. 5, p. 260-1)

1 Ne 10 9To this we may be permitted to add that, according to the D. & C. (Sec. 84:28) John was ordained, when eight days old, "unto this power, to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews," as well as to prepare them for the coming of the Lord. What a tremendous power and authority were his! And he exercised them, too. For with him the Mosaic dispensation came to an end.

1 Ne 10 10VERSE 10

1 Ne 10 10The Lamb of God. Our Lord is the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world. (John 1:29, 36) He was typified by the paschal lamb and by the sacrifices offered from the beginning. (Is. 53:7; Luke 23:25; Acts 8:32; 1 Pet. 2:21-3; Rev. 5:6, 8, 12; 13:8) In Rev. 5, the Lamb has seven horns and eyes, "which are the seven spirits of God sent forth into all the earth," i.e., invested with the attributes of God, power and omniscience, and receiving the homage of the universe.

1 Ne 10 10Bethabara. The place where John baptized. The meaning of that word is "house" or "place of passing over," supposed to refer to the place where the Israelites passed over Jordan: "Beth-Abarah." It is also called "Bethany" from a word which is said to mean, "place of ships" (boats). It was a place "beyond Jordan," and is not the Bethany on the Mount of Olives, the name of which comes from a word meaning "place of dates."

1 Ne 10 11VERSE 11

1 Ne 10 11The Gospel. Lehi, in his discourses in the Valley of Lemuel, made his little colony acquainted with the Gospel of Jesus. It was necessary for them to know this so that they could take its truth with them over to the new home land. For, after all, there is no knowledge, within the whole range of human thought and research, that is of greater importance. It is his Gospel that has, even in its diluted condition, been an incentive to such progress as has been made. Who has taught men unselfishness? Who has taught us to pray to God, as children to their Father? Who has inspired men to acts of mercy, as evidenced in innumerable institutions? Is there anything that is good, or wise, or noble, that has not come from Jesus? What would song and music and art and architecture be without the inspiration of Jesus? "Take Jesus from civilization and you change its history, its poetry, its art, its literature, its government, its morals, its religion, and its hope of the great hereafter. Since his death art is purer, prose holier, poetry sweeter; man enjoys more, lives better, dies happier; truth has new significance; life better objects, hope better prospects, and death new revelations." (The Church of Christ, by A. Layman)

1 Ne 10 12VERSE 12

1 Ne 10 12In the preceding verse we are informed that Lehi spoke of the Jews and the Gentiles. The Jews were to reject the Gospel of Jesus and then "dwindle in unbelief." Here we are told that he also prophesied concerning the house of Israel, to which he, as a descendant of Manasseh, belonged.

1 Ne 10 12The House of Israel. He compares Israel to an olive-tree, whose branches, i.e., the various tribes, would be broken off and scattered "upon the face of the earth." The ten tribes revolted, in 975 B.C.., under Jeroboam, who introduced idolatry, notwithstanding the protests of such mighty prophets as Elijah and Elisha, and others. The kingdom attained to its greatest political prominence under Jeroboam II, (823-772 B.C.), who added Hamath and Damascus to the territory of Israel. But during the last king, Hoshea, (730-721 B.C..) Tiglath-Pileaser, the Assyrian king, desolated the territory east of the Jordan. Hoshea became tributary to the Assyrians. But, in an evil hour he revolted and entered into an alliance with Egypt. Shalmaneser then came and besieged Samaria, and after three years of hostilities and sufferings on the part of the Israelites, made an end of the independence of the kingdom. A great many of the people were transported to the provinces of Assyria, and people from Media, Babylonia, and neighboring countries were sent to Palestine, to inhabit the abandoned cities and waste places. Thus the branches of the olive-tree were broken off and scattered. (2 Kings 17:1-18)

1 Ne 10 12Very little is known for certain about the fate of the Israelites that were removed to Assyria. But in the II Book of Esdras (apocryphal), chap. 13, a vision is related, in which the seer sees a great multitude gathered against the Messiah, who, from his holy mountain (Zion), overcomes his adversaries. Then he calls to him another multitude, which is said to be the ten tribes. Concerning these, we read:

1 Ne 10 12"Those are the ten tribes, which were carried away prisoners out of their own land in the time of Osea, the king, whom Shalmaneser the king of Assyria led away captive, and he carried them over the waters [the great rivers], and so came they into another land. But they took this counsel among themselves, that they would leave the multitude of the heathen, and go forth into a further country, where never mankind dwelt, that they might there keep their statutes, which they never kept in their own land. And they entered into Euphrates by the narrow passage of the river. For the Most High then shewed signs for them, and held still the flood, till they were passed over. For through that country there was a great way to go, namely, of a year and half: and the same region is called Arsareth. Then they dwelt there until the latter time; and now when they shall begin to come, the Highest shall stay the springs of the stream again, that they may go through: therefore sawest thou the multitude with peace. But those that be left behind of thy people are they that are found within my borders. Now when he destroyed the multitude of the nations that are gathered together, he shall defend his people that remain. And then shall he show them great wonders."

1 Ne 10 12We do not quote this as authoritative history. It is merely the record of a tradition extant at the time the book was written, and undoubtedly long before that time. That it has some historical value cannot be denied. At any rate, we know that Israel has been scattered among the nations, and more particularly among the nations of northern Europe and the islands of the sea, including particularly the British Isles, Iceland, and the Scandinavian and Teutonic countries, all of which were "islands" because they were reached by crossing the water.

1 Ne 10 13VERSE 13

1 Ne 10 13We should be scattered. Lehi argues that, he, since the Lord had decided that Israel should be distributed among all the nations, would willingly go to the land of promise, when called upon to do so. How could, otherwise, the blessing of Jacob upon Joseph (Gen. 49:22-6) "His branches [literally, "daughters"] run over the wall," have been fulfilled? He was to have the blessings of his father "unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills."

1 Ne 10 14VERSE 14

1 Ne 10 14The remnants ... should be grafted in. This is a promise that the house of Israel, wherever the remnants may be, shall come to the knowledge of the true Messiah, after the Gentiles have received the Gospel.

1 Ne 10 14On April 3, 1836, at the Kirtland temple, the prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery had, as will be remembered, four glorious visions. They saw the Lord and received from him the assurance that he had accepted the temple, built to his name. Then "the heavens were again opened unto us; and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north." (D. & C. 110:11) And thus began the fulfilment of this part of the prediction of Lehi in the Valley of Lemuel.

1 Ne 10 17VERSE 17

1 Ne 10 17Desirous ... to know. When Nephi had heard his father's account of his vision and his subsequent discourse (vv. 11-16), he was desirous of obtaining knowledge for himself, by the power of the Holy Ghost, of the great truths revealed to his father. Having strong faith, he felt sure that the Messiah, the Son of God, could, and would, impart that knowledge to him.

1 Ne 10 18VERSE 18

1 Ne 10 18For he is the same ... forever. He, the Messiah, and the way is prepared for all, from the foundation of the world. It was through the Messiah that the Saints in the past obtained knowledge of the truth. It is through the Messiah that the Saints now can receive knowledge, and through him it will come forever, to those who diligently seek him.

1 Ne 10 18"God lives. We are his children. He has given back to earth his priesthood. He has spoken and is speaking through his prophets. To each of us he gives spiritual light just in the measure we are ready and willing to take it, and his blessings are ours, not for sinning disobedience to the truth already given, but through the righteous keeping thereof. We may not rightfully expect that God will flash either to our minds or to our spirits new knowledge for which we are not ready and for which we have no need. We may rightfully expect only that God will give new lessons when we have learned the old ones and they no longer serve our wants." (Pres. J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Conference Sermon, April 9, 1933)

1 Ne 10 20VERSE 20

1 Ne 10 20Thou shalt be brought into judgment. Because the way to obtain knowledge has been prepared, and because the Lord is willing to impart it to those who seek, therefore, those who neglect to avail themselves of the means provided, will justly be brought into judgment. Ignorance, under the circumstances, is condemnable.

1 Ne 10 22VERSE 22

1 Ne 10 22The Holy Ghost giveth authority. Nephi, having obtained a testimony "by the power of the Holy Ghost," could speak by the authority given by the same divine Person. Learning does not give authority to speak for God. Nor is a blameless life the same as divine authority. Nor a desire to speak. One of the early revelations through the Prophet Joseph Smith was addressed to his brother Hyrum on this subject. The Lord said:

1 Ne 10 22"Behold, I command you, that you need not suppose that you are called to preach until you are called. Wait a little longer, until you shall have my word, my rock, my church, and my gospel, that you may know of a surety my doctrine. ... Seek not to declare my word, but first seek to obtain my word, and then shall your tongue be loosed. ... But now hold your peace, study my word which hath gone forth among the children of men [the Bible], and also study my word which shall come forth among the children of men, or that which is now translating," [the Book of Mormon], (D. & C. 11:15-22).

1 Ne 10 22In this revelation, the Lord says (v. 21) that when his tongue is loosed, "Then, if you desire, you shall have my Spirit and my word, yea, the power of God unto the convincing of men." Here, too, we learn that it is the Holy Spirit that giveth authority to speak.

NOTES

"As to the question of authority, nearly everything depends upon it. No ordinance can be performed to the acceptance of God without divine authority. No matter how fervently men may believe or pray, unless they are endowed with divine authority they can only act in their own name, and not legally nor acceptably in the name of Jesus Christ, in whose name all these things must be done. Some suppose this authority may be derived from the Bible, but nothing could be more absurd. ... If by reading and believing the Bible this authority could be obtained, all who read the Bible and believed it would have it—one equally with another." (Pres. Joseph F. Smith, "Gospel Doctrine")

To speak in the name of Jesus without authority is both idle and dangerous. God will not be mocked. We remember the incident related in Acts 19. Certain "vagabond" Jews at Ephesus, professional exorcists, undertook to rebuke evil spirits in the name of Jesus, as the Apostle Paul did. They said, "We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preacheth." There were seven of them. But the demoniac cried, "Jesus I Know, and Paul I know, but who are ye?" Whereupon he leaped upon them and overcame all of them, although they were seven, and they fled naked and wounded. (Acts 19:13-17)

Josephus is authority for the information that some Jews formerly traveled from place to place and performed exorcisms, alleging that the secrets of rebuking evil spirits in the name of the Messiah had been handed down to them from King Solomon. Josephus says he had seen a man by the name of Eleasar adjure a demoniac. And he describes the performance thus, "He put a ring that had a root of those sorts mentioned by Solomon to the nostrils of the demoniac, after which he drew out the demon through his nostrils; and when the man fell down, immediately he adjured him to return into him no more." From this description of a fake performance, we can imagine what kind of "vagabonds" these Jews at Ephesus were. They may have thought that they could effect a genuine cure by merely mentioning the name of Jesus. But, alas! They had no divine authority. They knew that. And the evil spirit knew it too. The result was disastrous to them.

"Vagabonds." The Hebrew word so translated is, "nod." Its fundamental meaning is to wave as reeds in the wind, or to flap like a bird with the wings. Hence Cain is said to be a fugitive and a "vagabonds,"—one moving back and forth. The Jews who practiced exorcism in all probability moved their bodies back and forth, or perhaps they swung their arms or swayed their heads while they were performing, and therefore were called "vagabonds," in the meaning suggested by the Hebrew root of the word. When our Lord, referring to John the Baptist, asked the multitude, "What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind?" It is not impossible that he had this class of "vagabonds" in mind. Did ye come to consult one of your professional exorcists? Well, John was not one of them. He was more than a prophet. He was "Elias, which was for to come." (Matt. 11:7-15)
