Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 11

1 Ne 11 1VERSE 1

1 Ne 11 1Caught away in the Spirit of the Lord. Ezekiel had a similar experience He says the Spirit lifted him up, and he heard the voice of a great "rushing" when the glory of the Lord arose from his place. The Spirit "lifted him up," and took him away. That is, he fell into a trance, after which he went to Tel-Abib, by the river Chebar, where many of the captives of Israel dwelt. And there, after seven days, the word of the Lord came to him. (Ezek. 3:12-27) On another occasion the same prophet says, "The Spirit lifted me up between the earth and the heaven, and brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem." (Ezek. 8:3) Again, speaking of his vision of the valley of the dead, he says, "The hand of the Lord was upon me, and he carried me out in the Spirit of the Lord, and set me down in the valley." (Ezek. 37:1) Moses was "caught up into an exceedingly high mountain" (P. of Gr. Price, Mos. 1:1), and our Lord himself, in his controversy with the Tempter, was shown the glory of the world (Matt. 4:8) from the summit of an exceeding high mountain. Paul was caught up "to the third heaven," which he also calls "paradise," where he heard "unspeakable words," "which it is not lawful for a man to utter." (2 Cor. 12:2-4) The Apostle John, too, was "in the Spirit," when he heard and saw the great visions recorded in his Revelations. Nephi was similarly favored with visions and supernatural manifestations.

1 Ne 11 6VERSE 6

1 Ne 11 6Hosanna. The Spirit of the Lord, contemplating the great faith of Nephi, and his desire for knowledge, cries with a loud voice, "Hosanna to the Lord!" The Hebrew, "hoshiah-na" is an acclamatory prayer for the well-being of somebody, and it means, literally, "save now!" In this connection it is a prayer to the Lord by the Spirit for the preservation of the young prophet in his faith. It is a remarkable illustration of the truth stated thus by St. Paul: "The Spirit itself maketh intercession for us ... according to the will of God." (Rom. 8:26, 27)

1 Ne 11 6We note that this prayer (or, is it a song?) of the Spirit has the form of Hebrew poetry:

1 Ne 11 6Hosanna to the Lord, the Most High God; For he is God over all the earth, yea, even above all. And blessed art thou, Nephi, because thou believest in the Son of the Most High God.

1 Ne 11 6The chief characteristic of Hebrew poetry is, as is well known, "parallelism," which means the rhythm of thought, rather than sound, and the arrangement of the words in such a manner that their full meaning comes out first in the second or third line.

1 Ne 11 7VERSE 7

1 Ne 11 7A man descending out of heaven. The Scriptures tell us that the Lord is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think (Eph. 3:30), and that "he giveth to all men liberally" (James 1:5). This is true in the case of Nephi. He asked to know the things his father had seen. That prayer was granted. And in addition he was accorded the privilege of visions far beyond his expectations. That is always the case when we ask in faith and let the Holy Spirit dictate our prayers.

1 Ne 11 8VERSE 8

1 Ne 11 8I looked and beheld a tree. The prayer of Nephi is heard, and he is shown the very tree which his father had seen (v. 21); it was a tree of dazzling beauty, "white as driven snow." There can be no more striking symbol of purity than that.

1 Ne 11 11VERSE 11

1 Ne 11 11The interpretation. Having seen the tree, in the vision, Nephi was desirous, more than ever, to know the interpretation.

1 Ne 11 12VERSE 12

1 Ne 11 12He had gone. The Spirit of the Lord did not answer the question concerning the interpretation of the symbol directly. He withdrew his visible presence, but the manifestation continued. Nephi saw first the City of Jerusalem, and then the City of Nazareth. And in this city he saw a beautiful Virgin. (v. 13)

1 Ne 11 12And then the heavens were opened to him, and he saw an angel come down and stand before him. From now on, it is this heavenly messenger who acts as interpreter. "What beholdest thou?" he asks. (v. 14) The answer is, "A Virgin, most beautiful and fair." (v. 15)

1 Ne 11 16VERSE 16

1 Ne 11 16The condescension of God. The next question of the angel is: "Knowest thou the condescension of God?"

1 Ne 11 16To "condescend" is to descend, voluntarily, from a superior rank, or position, to one that is inferior. The Apostle Paul uses the word in that sense, in his admonition, "Mind not high things, but condescend to men of low estate." (Rom. 12:16) But how did the vision of the Virgin suggest the question of the condescension of God? That Nephi did not understand. His answer, therefore, was somewhat hesitating: "I know that God loves his children; nevertheless, I do not know all things." (v. 17)

1 Ne 11 18VERSE 18

1 Ne 11 18The Virgin. The angel recognized that here was a mystery, too deep for Nephi, wherefore he hastened with the explanation that, "Behold the Virgin whom thou seest is the Mother of the Son of God, after the flesh." As Nephi accepted this tremendous revelation by faith, he needed no further explanation of the significance of the term, "condescension of God," used by the angel.

1 Ne 11 19VERSE 19

1 Ne 11 19The Virgin carried away in the Spirit. Now the vision of the Virgin is, for a time, blotted out, and when she again appears, she has a lovely child, whom the angel introduces by the joyful message: "Behold the Lamb of God, yea, even the Son of the Eternal Father!"

1 Ne 11 19That was the end of this part of the vision. The angel, therefore, asked Nephi, "Knowest thou [now] the meaning of the tree which thy father saw?" He had asked for an explanation of the symbol of the tree. The vision had been given in answer to that request. He understood.

1 Ne 11 22VERSE 22

1 Ne 11 22The love of God. He could truthfully reply, as he did, "Yea, it is the love of God, which sheddeth itself abroad in the hearts of the children of men."

1 Ne 11 22In other words, the tree symbolized the same eternal truth, which our Lord taught Nicodemus: "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." (John 3:16) That also explains the vision of the Virgin and the blessed Child, Jesus.

1 Ne 11 22Kenosis. Bible students have a special term, "Kenosis," for the voluntary condescension, or humiliation, of our Lord, in coming to this world as its Redeemer. This word means that he gave up his divine attributes completely and became a man, like other sons of Adam. Paul states this clearly. (Phil. 2:5-8) See the accounts of the birth of our Savior, Matt. 1:18-24; Luke 1:26-38; 2:1-14. St. Paul says, "When the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons." (Gal. 4:4-5)

1 Ne 11 22Such are the historical facts. Our Lord came. The Eternal Father sent him. It was divine love that caused him to come.

1 Ne 11 22"That the Son of God, in becoming the Son of man, should submit himself to the regular human method of coming into the world is one of the most sublime proofs of his loving condescension to us. Yet one thing we must not forget,—that this family into which he was born was, on both sides, of royal stock, both Joseph and Mary being descendants of King David." (The Popular and Critical Bible Encyclopedia, vol. 2, p. 1017, under, "Kenosis.")

1 Ne 11 22The condescension of our Lord in coming to fulfil his mission in mortality was also the condescension of God, the Eternal Father, in sending him forth on this mission.

1 Ne 11 22The Virgin. That is the title given to the Mother of Jesus in the prophecy of his birth. (Is. 7:14; Matt. 1:23) There is very little information in the New Testament concerning Mary. But from what is written about her, it is evident that she was a woman of the highest mental and spiritual culture. That she was a regular visitor in the temple, well known by the officials in the sacred edifice, is also indicated by the story of the appearance of her divine Son there at the age of twelve years. A boy of obscure parentage would not have had a chance to remain among the learned doctors for several days, as he did.

1 Ne 11 22Early traditions, recorded in the Protevangelium and some other apocrypha, relate that Mary was born at Nazareth, the daughter of Joachim and his wife, Anna. The father is said to have been a very wealthy citizen, known for his generosity and observance of the law. For many years the worthy couple lived together childless. But, finally, they promised the Lord that a child of theirs would be dedicated to the Lord, i.e. to the temple service. Then, in due time, the baby girl, to whom they gave the name of Mary, came. She was the answer to their prayers, the reward for their faithfulness.

1 Ne 11 22When the little girl was three years old—so the tradition avers—she was taken to the temple and, in accordance with the promise made, dedicated to the service of the Lord. From now on, she was raised and educated under the direction of the authorities of the temple. The summer months, it is said, she spent at Nazareth, the rest of the year she served in the Sanctuary.

1 Ne 11 22Now, it seems to have been customary, as regards the young ladies raised for the temple service, to give them an opportunity, when they arrived at the marriagable age, to choose for themselves whether they would continue to remain the virgins of the Lord for ever, or become wives and mothers. Mary's choice was to continue the temple service, but, guided by a special revelation, the high priest selected Joseph of Nazareth to be her legal guardian and husband. (Protev. Chapt. 8) She was then twelve years old.

1 Ne 11 22After the wonderful story of the birth of the Savior of the world the evangelists say little of Mary. She is mentioned in the account of the marriage feast at Cana (John 2), and as one attending a gathering outside a synogogue where Jesus had been preaching (Mark 3:31), and then as standing near the cross, when her crucified Son commended her to the care of John (John 19:25-7). She is, finally, mentioned as one of the women present in the "upper room" in Jerusalem, after the ascension of Jesus from the Mount of Olives. (Acts 1:13, 14)

1 Ne 11 22Tradition has it that she died in Jerusalem in the year 48 A.D., and that her body also was taken to heaven. The latter "assumption" is based on the story that the apostles, three days after her interment, found the tomb empty.

1 Ne 11 22All this, except the accounts given by the evangelists, is tradition. That the story has an historic foundation is not denied. But to separate the historic element from what is mere fiction, is not always possible at this late day.

1 Ne 11 22Before leaving this subject, a word should be said of Anna, the prophetess, mentioned by Luke. She, too, must have been one of the virgins of the Lord, dedicated to the temple service. She was of the tribe of Asher. This may be accounted for by the fact that when Hezekiah, king of Judah, sent a call to Israel, as well as Judah, to come to Jerusalem to celebrate the passover, some people of the tribe of Asher, and also of the tribes of Manasseh, Issachar, and Zebulon, humbled themselves and came to Jerusalem. The forefathers of Anna may have come to Jerusalem at that time. The forebears of Lehi, of the tribe of Manasseh, may also have come at the invitation of Hezekiah. (2 Chron. 30:1-12, 16 16, 19 19) The Evangelist says of Anna, that she was a prophetess. Like Mary, she had been given to a husband, when grown up. She had lived with him only seven years. Now she was eighty-four years old, a widow, but "she departed not from the temple, but served God with fastings and prayers night and day." Furthermore, she preached the gospel of the Redeemer "to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem." (Luke 2:36-8)

1 Ne 11 22The regular hours of prayer were "the third hour of the day" (Acts 2:15), corresponding to 9 o'clock a.m.; "the sixth hour" (Acts 10:9), 12 o'clock noon; and the "ninth hour" (Acts 3:1), 3 o'clock p.m.

1 Ne 11 22Fasting seems to have been required twice a week. (Luke 18:12)

1 Ne 11 25VERSE 25

1 Ne 11 25The Rod of Iron. In this remarkable vision, there are several parts which all call for serious thought.

1 Ne 11 25There is the "mist of darkness" (1 Ne. 8:23), which is so thick that people lose their way in it. That is the actual condition of the world, as regards moral and spiritual truths. Notwithstanding the numerous institutes of learning, and the marvelous progress in material and mechanical fields, people are lost, as in a fog, when confronted by the social problems of the day.

1 Ne 11 25Then, there is the iron rod, which represents the word of God (I Ne. 15:24) and is so placed that those who are lost can seize it, and, by following it, will reach safety.

1 Ne 11 25There is, further, the fountain of living water, symbolizing the love of God, as manifested in the outpouring of the Holy Spirit; for we read,

1 Ne 11 25"In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. He that believeth on me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. But this he spake of the Spirit, which they that believeth on him should receive." (John 7:37-9)

1 Ne 11 25Finally, there is the tree of life, which symbolizes the love of God, as manifested in the gift of life eternal.

1 Ne 11 25The great lesson of the vision of the iron rod is, therefore, that the word of God—and by this we mean the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price, and whatever else the Lord graciously reveals through the channels selected by him—has been given, or will be given, in order that his children may not get lost in the dark mists, but find the truth, and the way to temporal salvation and life eternal, through the Holy Spirit.

1 Ne 11 25Well may we then ask ourselves, Do we study the Word of God? In our homes and our meetings of worship? Are we teaching our children the word of God? Do we believe the word of God? Are we practicing its precepts? These are questions of life and death.

1 Ne 11 26VERSE 26

1 Ne 11 26Look ... the condescension of God. Another manifestation in the great vision begins here. It is another revelation of the condescension of God.

1 Ne 11 27VERSE 27

1 Ne 11 27The Lamb of God was baptized. The evangelists tell us that John the Baptist, at the time of the maturity of Jesus, appeared in the wilderness of Judea and proclaimed that the kingdom of God, of which the prophets of old had spoken (Is. 40:3-5; Dan. 7:13, 14) was at hand. His appearance caused a tremendous sensation. Large crowds from Jerusalem and Judea, and especially from the region round about Jordan, came to hear John, who urged them to repent and prepare themselves to receive the Messiah. Many believed, confessed their sins and received baptism for the remission of sins.

1 Ne 11 27Even some Pharisees and Sadducees came to his baptism. There is reason to believe that they came privately (like Nicodemus to Jesus, because they did not wish to mingle with the common herd of sinners), wherefore John rebuked them with words that must have penetrated their very souls:

1 Ne 11 27"O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Bring forth therefore fruits of repentance ... And now also the ax is laid unto the root of the trees: therefore every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire." (Matt. 3:1-12; Mark 1:3-8; Luke 3:4-18; John 1:19-28)

1 Ne 11 27The main topics of the discourses of John were repentance, confession of sin, forgiveness, and the coming of the kingdom of God. But those were also the chief subjects that occupied the thoughts of the Jews when they were preparing themselves for the new year, the ten days of repentance between New Year's day and the day of atonement ("yom kippur"), and that great fast day, itself, wherefore it has been thought probable that John began his ministry during that time of preparation.

1 Ne 11 27To this day, the Jews, in their synagogues, as part of their services on the day of atonement, confess their sins and pray, in unison:

1 Ne 11 27"Thou hast chosen us from all peoples, thou hast loved us and taken pleasure in us, and hast exalted us above all tongues; thou hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and brought us near unto thy service, O our King, and hast called us by thy great and holy Name. ... And thou hast given us in love, O Lord our God, this day of atonement for pardon, forgiveness and atonement ... We have trespassed, we have been faithless, we have robbed, we have spoken basely, we have committed iniquity, we have wrought unrighteousness," etc. ... "Our God and God of our fathers, pardon our iniquities on this day of atonement; blot out our transgressions and our sins, and make them pass away from before thine eyes; as it is said, I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake; and I will not remember thy sins."

1 Ne 11 27Some such confessions and prayers were undoubtedly said by the multitudes by the Jordan, who came to be baptized, as a preparation for the coming of the kingdom of the Messiah. And now, the Messiah, himself, came and prayed. Not secretly, but openly, among the people. That is clear from John's reply to the Pharisees, "There standeth one among you, whom ye know not" (John 1:26), and also from the record of Luke, "Now when all the people were baptized, it came to pass, that Jesus also being baptized and praying, the heaven was opened." (Luke 3:21)

1 Ne 11 27Now we understand why the angel calls attention to the condescension of God as manifested in the baptism of his beloved Son. For Jesus actually took part, with the people, in the services of John. It "becometh us," he said, "to fulfil all righteousness." That is, all the ordinances instituted for the furtherance of righteousness. He had been circumcised, and became an heir to all the promises to Abraham. He observed the passover and the other festivals. He fasted and prayed, and now he accepted the initial rite of John, in the same spirit.

1 Ne 11 27He had no sins of his own to confess, but, as the Lamb of God, the sin of the world had been laid upon him. It was for the entire world he acted, when he confessed and prayed for forgiveness, and then was baptized. That is clear from what John says on that occasion: "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world." (John 1:29) That is what baptism was to Jesus.

1 Ne 11 27In the form of a dove. Different opinions have been held regarding this phrase. Did the Holy Spirit descend in the form of a dove, literally speaking, or is that only a figure of speech? Matthew, Mark and John say that he descended "like a dove," which may mean in the manner of that beautiful bird, but Luke seems to give ground for the opinion that the Spirit had assumed the form of a dove, for he says, "descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him." But there is really no contradiction in the inspired accounts. The Prophet Joseph explains that the meaning is that the Spirit descended "in the sign of the dove." The Prophet says:

1 Ne 11 27"The sign of the dove was instituted before the creation of the world, a witness for the Holy Ghost, and the devil cannot come in the sign of a dove. The Holy Ghost is a personage, and is in the form of a personage. It does not confine itself to the form of a dove, but in sign of the dove. The Holy Ghost cannot be transformed into a dove; but the sign of a dove was given to John to signify the truth of the deed, as the dove is an emblem, or token, of truth and innocence." (Hist. of the Church, vol. V, p. 261).

1 Ne 11 27In all probability the Spirit appeared to our Lord "in bodily form" as he appeared to Nephi at the beginning of this vision (v. 11), but invisible to the multitude and even to John. However, John and the people, probably, saw a dove, as it descended and hovered over Jesus. The people paid little or no attention to the incident, but to John it was the sign by which he recognized that Jesus was the Messiah, the Son of God.

1 Ne 11 27The additional manifestation, the voice: "Thou art my beloved Son; in thee I am well pleased" (Luke 3:22), was heard, probably, only by Jesus. He needed that very assurance, before the Spirit "led," or as Mark says, "drove" him out into the wilderness, to be tempted "of the devil." (Matt. 4:1-11; Mark 1:12, 13)

SC1 Ne 11 271 Ne 11 281 Ne 11 291 Ne 11 301 Ne 11 31VERSES 27-31

SC1 Ne 11 271 Ne 11 281 Ne 11 291 Ne 11 301 Ne 11 31In this section, Nephi is shown in vision the administration of our Lord, including the selection of twelve apostles. It is a peculiarity of this part of the vision that the twelve, during the time of the ministry of the Master, are eliminated; they are "carried away in the Spirit from before my face," (v. 29) and then, after a while, they appear as "angels descending upon the children of men; and they did minister unto them." The word "angel," means "messenger," especially from God to man, and that is what the apostles are. The word "apostle" also means "messenger."

1 Ne 11 31VERSE 31

1 Ne 11 31Healed by the power of the Lamb of God. Nephi now sees Jesus as the great Physician, surrounded by multitudes who were afflicted with all manner of diseases. "And they were healed by the power of the Lamb of God."

1 Ne 11 31According to the Scriptures, God has in all ages manifested his power by means of miraculous healing. David sings:

1 Ne 11 31"Bless the Lord, O my soul; and all that is within me, bless his holy name. "Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits: "Who forgiveth all thy iniquities; who healeth all thy diseases; "Who redeemeth thy life from destruction, who crowneth thee with loving-kindness and mercies."

1 Ne 11 31(Ps. 103:1-4)

1 Ne 11 31Here, the forgiveness of sins, the healing of infirmities, and the redemption of life itself from destruction are said to be the "benefits" which God confers upon his children.

1 Ne 11 31Our Lord began his ministry on earth by preaching and healing (Mark 1:21-3:11). And when, on one occasion, some officers (scribes) charged him with blasphemy, because he said to one afflicted with palsy, "Son, thy sins be forgiven thee," he refuted the charge by asking them "whether it is easier to say to the sick person, Thy sins be forgiven thee; or to say, Arise, and take up thy bed and walk." When no one answered, he continued, "But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins (he saith to the sick of palsy), I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy bed and go thy way into thy house." (Mark 2:6-11) The power to heal the sick was the evidence of the authority to forgive sins. The apostles were endowed with the same power. (Mark 3:14, 15) And so were the Seventy. (Luke 10:1-9, 17)

1 Ne 11 31Furthermore, power to heal is one of the spiritual gifts promised to those who believe. (I Cor. 12:28-31; Acts 5:12-15)

1 Ne 11 31The Biblical miracles have been the subject of controversy among students of theology. Nature study, in the opinion of many, has seemed to justify the conclusion that the so-called laws of nature are absolutely unchangeable, and that a miracle in defiance of any such law is an impossibility.

1 Ne 11 31The obvious reply to this view is that no one knows all the laws of nature, and that a miracle may be as much in accordance with some law of nature as the most common occurrence. In other words, healing by faith, or by the power of the priesthood, may be as scientifically possible as cure by any of the remedies known to materia medica. Leibnitz, for one, is an exponent of this view.

1 Ne 11 31The laws of nature are unchangeable. That is to say, as far as we know, a given cause always has the same effect. If it were not so, rational beings would have no incentive to effort, since effects could not be calculated from cause. You might sow, but there would be no reason to expect a harvest. You might build, but would your building stand the next day? Possibly. Possibly not, if there is no link between cause and effect. The world would then be chaos.

1 Ne 11 31But, if God sees fit, in any particular case, to deviate from the uniformity which we call natural law, he certainly has the power to do so, whether with or without any human instrumentality, and then we have a miracle. "Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven, and in earth, in the seas, and all deep places." (Ps. 135:6) "But our God is in the heavens: he hath done whatsoever he hath pleased." (Ps. 115:3) That is the only rational explanation of the miracles, ever offered.

1 Ne 11 31The devils and the unclean spirits were cast out. Attention is called to the fact that the Jewish people, at the time of the beginning of our era, suffered oppression under a foreign government. Nature added calamities to the trying situation. An earthquake is mentioned, in which 30,000 people perished. Hostile Arabs made incursions from time to time. Scarcity of food and diseases went hand in hand. The whole country, and particularly Galilee, had an unusual number of sick persons. Many were epileptics; others suffered from mental disorders. Even educated persons at that time regarded epilepsy and insanity as "possession." The sufferer, it was thought, had a demon, an unclean spirit, and sometimes several such spirits in his body, besides his own. The disciples of our Lord, who wrote the New Testament, believed in the terrible reality of "possession." And so did our Lord, himself.

1 Ne 11 31Let us consider one instance. It happened in the synagogue at Capernaum. A pitiable sufferer, who had "a spirit of an unclean demon" (literal translation), had managed to enter the house of worship with the multitude. The very presence of Jesus seemed to be a torment to the spirit, for he cried with a loud voice, and demanded not to be destroyed. Jesus, rebuked him and commanded him to leave the sufferer. Immediately the latter fell into a paroxysm which must have been fearful to witness, but as soon as it was over, the patient arose, unharmed and cured. Whereupon the people were amazed and said to each other, "What a word is this! For with authority and power he commandeth the unclean spirits, and they come out." Here was no sorcery, no incantations, no herbs with magic power. Here was, clearly, divine authority. And the fame of him went out ... round about. (Mark 1:23-27; Luke 4:33-37) There can be no doubt that both our Lord and the people generally regarded this as a reality.

1 Ne 11 31In all probability, popular opinion went too far at times, in attributing all cases of certain maladies to the direct interference of the devil and his servants. But it is equally probable that the so-called scientific view of our day also goes too far, in branding all explanations that accept the reality of spiritual evil forces in connection with diseases, as superstition. That is not scientific. With the Scriptures before us we cannot reject the belief in spirits, good and bad, as a delusion. Furthermore, in the experience of some of our missionaries, cases of "possession" are not entirely unknown in our own age. (D. and C. Commentary, Sec. 76, notes; see also "History of the Scandinavian Mission," Andrew Jenson, pp. 30, 50, 82)

1 Ne 11 33VERSE 33

1 Ne 11 33Lifted up upon the cross. Nephi now sees the Lamb of God "taken by the people," "judged of the world," "lifted up upon the cross and slain for the sins of the world."

1 Ne 11 33"Taken by the people" is a remarkably accurate statement of what actually happened in Gethsemane. For all the evangelists relate that Judas came with a great multitude, really a mob, sent by the chief priests and elders of the people, and armed with swords and staves, just like a rabble. John adds that they were led by "officers from the chief priests and Pharisees," and Luke notes that there were "chief priests, captains of the temple and elders" in the crowd. (Matt. 26:47, 48; Mark 14:43, 44; Luke 22:52; John 18:3, 12-14)

1 Ne 11 33"Judged of [or by] the world" is also a notable expression.

1 Ne 11 33The word "world" in the New Testament has different meanings. For instance, it stands for an "age," an era, as in Matt. 28:20. (Aionos) But another word (kosmos) is also used, which stands either for the entire universe, as an organized arrangement, or for the people on earth, mankind. It means also, in a narrower sense, the government of a dispensation, as for instance the old Mosaic rule, which placed itself in opposition to the kingdom of God, as represented by our Lord and his Council of Twelve. In this sense it is found in John 14:19 and 15:18, 19, and other places.

1 Ne 11 33Jesus was actually judged by the representatives and rulers of the old dispensation, the old "world" as seen by Nephi, in his vision.

1 Ne 11 33Jesus, having been apprehended in Gethsemane, was first taken to Annas, the father-in-law of Caiaphas and formerly president of the Sanhedrin, whom Josephus refers to as Ananus, the son of Seth. (John 18:12, 13 and 19-25) Annas sent him, bound, to Caiaphas, the president of the Sanhedrin. (John 18:24) As soon as this council could be summoned for a session, Jesus was arraigned and witnesses were introduced to testify against him. But it soon developed that it was not easy to establish guilt where no guilt existed. Witnesses had heard him say this or that, but nothing he had said or done could be construed as blasphemy against God, or profanation of the sanctuary. He had, it is true, cleansed the temple ground, but they could not urge that against him, although that was the actual "offense" which the priests could not forgive him. It is possible that he had interfered with their filthy business of cattle selling and shady money transactions in the close proximity of the temple on two different occasions, (Matt. 21:12, 13; John 2:13-17) but, as stated, they could not demand a death sentence on that ground, because they, themselves, not he, were the offenders. Finally Caiaphas, fearing that the victim might escape him rose and said, "I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God."

1 Ne 11 33There is silence in the hall. Every eye is focused on the prisoner. And in the stillness of death, turning toward the persecutor and, with a voice that must have penetrated the very soul of the old sinner, he replied, "Thou hast said!" which is the same as, "Yes, I am!" And then he added, "Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of Power, and coming in the clouds of heaven." (Matt. 26:57-68)

1 Ne 11 33Now they did not, according to the high priest, need any witnesses. He himself had said that he was the Messiah, and the Son of God, and he asserted that he would some day be their judge. "What think ye?" The Sanhedrin thus appealed to, answered, "He is guilty of death." That was the sentence of that Jewish council.

1 Ne 11 33If there had been any feelings of humanity in that assembly, they might have executed the sentence by stoning, as in the case of Stephen, the martyr. (Acts 7:54-60) In fact, they threatened to take his life in accordance with their own law. (John 19:7) And Pilate urged them to do just that. (John 16:6) But stoning would have been a comparatively speaking, humane death. Their plan was to deliver him up to the Roman governor as a traitor and a rebel, and to demand crucifixion, the most agonizing, the most degrading mode of death ever conceived either on earth or in hell. Consequently, they immediately delivered Jesus to Pontius Pilate. (Matt. 27:2) The accusation before the governor was that he claimed to be the Messiah, which to the Roman could mean only one thing, "the king of the Jews," a pretender in opposition to Caesar. On that charge, Pilate, after tremendous pressure had been brought to bear, condemned him to the cross. And thus he was judged by the representatives of the entire world, Jewish and Roman, as stated in the vision of Nephi.

1 Ne 11 33Crucifixion was an indescribably cruel and loathsome mode of death. It is supposed to have come from Persia, and that it was adopted by the Romans as a fitting punishment of rebellious slaves. It was always preceded by scourging, which reduced the naked body to a bleeding, quivering mass, and when the victim, after this unnecessary cruelty, was tied, or nailed, to the cross, where he suffered all the torments of the damned—burning fever, thirst, the sting of insects, utter helplessness as regards all the elementary functions of nature—the spectacle presented was one of extreme horror. No wonder that Nature shrouded Calvary in a thick veil of darkness, while the Son of God suffered and expired on the cross. "Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land unto the ninth hour." (Matt. 27:45) From noon till 3 o'clock, the time for the evening sacrifice. And thus the "Lamb of God" died for us.

1 Ne 11 34VERSE 34

1 Ne 11 34Against the apostles of the Lamb. In his vision, Nephi sees the multitudes of the earth" arrayed against the Apostles of the Lamb. The war between the two opposing forces did not end with Calvary. The apostles represented the kingdom of God on earth. For did not our Lord, at his last meeting with his disciples before his death, assure them that he had "appointed" (bequeathed) them the kingdom as the Father had appointed him (Luke 22:29; see also 12:31, 32)? Hence the war upon the apostles, who represented that kingdom, and who had at their service all authority in heaven and on earth (Matt. 28:18-29), through the exercise of the Priesthood, in righteousness. (D. and C. 107:18, 19; 121:35-37)

1 Ne 11 35VERSE 35

1 Ne 11 35A large and spacious building. This war was carried on by the "multitudes of the earth," whose headquarters was some large structure "like unto the building which my father saw."

1 Ne 11 35The world and the wisdom thereof. This large building, the angel explains, is, or represents, the world and its wisdom. It represents the world as marshaling and mobilizing the forces of its institutes of learning, all its philosophy (wisdom), against the apostles of the Lord.

1 Ne 11 35What is, then, the nature of this wisdom?

1 Ne 11 35The "wisdom of the world," for one thing, is not, like divine truth, an unchangeable, eternal rock; rather, it resembles the waves that beat against the cliff, now rising, now falling, now raging, now gently rolling, according to the winds that blow. It is constantly changing.

1 Ne 11 35The "wisdom of the world" today is different to that of yesterday; tomorrow it will be different to that of today. But no matter what form or color it may assume in the marvelous kaleidoscope of history, it offers no clue today, and will offer none tomorrow, any more than it did in the past, to the solution of the vital problems, the true answer to which it has pleased God to reveal only in the gospel of the Crucified One—"Unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks foolishness; but unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God." (1 Cor. 1:21-4) And this is as true now as it ever was. That "the world by wisdom knew not God" was never more evident than it is in our day.

1 Ne 11 35The so-called "Enlightenment" in the 18th century, which was a natural but radical re-action against the then prevalent orthodoxy, is an illustration of the futility of trusting to the wisdom of the world for guidance in matters of eternal values.

1 Ne 11 35During this "Enlightenment" it was discovered that man was not the miserable earth worm of the old theology, to be trampled in the dust, but that he is a being exalted above other creatures, possessing intelligence, entitled to certain inalienable rights on earth as well as an eternal destiny.

1 Ne 11 35An estimate of the world different from that of the old orthodoxy followed. The absurd view that matter itself is evil and that the earth is at best a prison, the kingdom of satan, an abode of torment from which to escape by death, was discarded. By and by the sciences made themselves heard. The telescope, the microscope, the appliances of the various laboratories, unveiled ever more and greater wonders and constructed a marvelously beautiful universe of which previous centuries did not even dream.

1 Ne 11 35During this period of Enlightenment human reason was awakened from a long slumber and placed in a seat of honor.

1 Ne 11 35The Enlightenment freed man from the serfdom of feudalism, if not entirely from the curse of its degrading militarism; it paved the way for the great ideals of democracy which are the cornerstones of the government of the United States and all free governments. It was the beginning of an industrialism which, if rightly guided, would have ennobled the human race and made every home a divine abode. It blazed the way for liberty, equality and fraternity—the very goal of human existence.

1 Ne 11 35With these achievements to its credit, it appeared for a while as if human philosophy might have found God and a restored paradise, independently of divine revelation. Especially since the most brilliant minds of the age, freed from fear and "prejudices," engaged in the endless search. With philosophers, such as Bacon, Descartes, Locke, Spinoza, Kant, Fichte, Schopenhauer, Hegel, Leibnitz; with scientists, among whom we need only mention Galileo, Kepler, Newton, Lamarck, Darwin, Spencer, Lyell, Laplace, Huxley; with theologians, such as De Wette, Schleiermacher, Wellhausen, Driver, and with a host of others including poets, historians, dramatists, biographers, and even revivalists, all devoting their resources of knowledge and powers of reasoning to the search, one would seem justified in expecting success.

1 Ne 11 35And the results?

1 Ne 11 35One result is that the world quite generally has come to regard the sacred Scriptures as nothing but fragmentary remnants of an ancient literature. It is hardly ever consulted as a guide to correct conduct in the affairs of daily life.

1 Ne 11 35Human reason has been exalted to the position of highest authority on questions of truth and morals, a position it cannot fill, now or ever.

1 Ne 11 35Another result is that the 19th century democracy has broken down in war, revolution, economic disorder and crime. Wise men of the present day admit that what they call the "old order" is irrevocably gone and is about to be replaced by a new form of government.

1 Ne 11 35And it is not only religion that is under attack. Scientific research and application are also in danger. Over a large part of the world, censorship is threatening to enslave the sciences. This generation has lived to see students in great institutes of learning take the lead in a crusade against free speech, and a free press. The prevalence of that spirit would be the end of learning. It would mean death to all sciences.

1 Ne 11 35The Godhead. The doctrine of the Deity is by far the most important of all. On a correct knowledge of God depends life eternal. (John 17:3) And our life on earth, our personal conduct, our relations with our fellowmen and with society are governed by our belief in, or rejection of, God as our Father, our Ruler, our final Judge. Godlessness is a menace to a family, a community, a nation, as well as the individual.

1 Ne 11 35According to the revelations—the only reliable source of information on that subject—three Divine Persons constitute the Council of the Godhead.

1 Ne 11 351. The Father. That there is a Divine Father we learn from innumerable revelations, former as well as recent. Consider the following:

1 Ne 11 35"Do ye thus requite the Lord? ... Is not he thy Father that hath brought thee?" (Deut. 32:6)

1 Ne 11 35"Now therefore thus shalt thou say unto my servant David ... and when thy days shall be fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee ... I will be his father, and he shall be my son." (2 Sam. 7:8-14)

1 Ne 11 35"Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not; Thou O Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer; thy name is from everlasting." (Is. 63:16)

1 Ne 11 35"Ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit that we are the children of God. (Rom. 8:15, 16)

1 Ne 11 35(See also Alma 11:44; Hela. 14:12; Mor. 5:77)

1 Ne 11 35(Christ) "glorifies the Father, and saves all the works of his hands, except those sons of perdition who deny the Son after the Father has revealed him." (D. and C. 76:43)

1 Ne 11 352. The Son. There is also a Son in the Godhead. Jesus Christ is called the Father's "beloved Son." (Ps. 2:7; Matt. 3:17) In the view of the Apostle Paul, God raised Jesus from the dead because he is his Son:

1 Ne 11 35"And we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto the fathers, God hath fulfilled the same unto us their children, in that he hath raised us Jesus again; as it is also written in the second psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee." (Acts 13:32, 33)

1 Ne 11 35Jesus Christ is "the Great I AM." (D. and C. 29:1; 38:1; 39:1; 110:1-3) Compare the vision of Moses as related in Ex. 3:1-14. Here we learn that the Great I AM is none other than the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob (v. 6), whose name is Jehovah, or Yahveh.

1 Ne 11 35Jesus Christ is also called, God's "Holy Child":

1 Ne 11 35"The kings of the earth stood up, and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and against his Christ. For of truth against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou hast anointed, both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the gentiles, and the people of Israel, were gathered together." (Acts 4:26, 27)

1 Ne 11 35See also John 1:34; 5:25; 19:7; Acts 9:20; Rev. 2:18.

1 Ne 11 35Jesus speaks of his angels. (Matt. 13:41; 16:27; 24:31) He makes the claim that the Father has delivered "all things" to him, and that knowledge of the Father can be obtained only through him. (Matt. 11:27) He claims, furthermore, that prayers offered in his name will receive special attention by the Father:

1 Ne 11 35"Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: Ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full." (John 16:23, 24)

1 Ne 11 35No mere human being could make such a claim, truthfully.

1 Ne 11 353. The Holy Ghost. In this Divine Council there is also a third member, a Person, sometimes called, The Holy Ghost, and sometimes, The Holy Spirit. He has all the divine characteristics. He is infinitely wise, holy, good and tender. Our Lord, immediately before his death, explained the special mission of the Holy Spirit. He told his disciples that he was about to leave them, but would return. However, they were not to be left "comfortless" (rather, "orphans") while waiting for him (John 14:18). They would have the Spirit of Truth abiding with them. Our Lord says:

1 Ne 11 35"When the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak; and he will show you things to come.... He shall glorify me; for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you." (John 16:13-15; comp. 14:15-18)

1 Ne 11 35That the Holy Spirit is a Divine Person is further evident from the instructions of our Lord concerning baptism. He said to the Twelve:

1 Ne 11 35"Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. (Matt. 28:19)

1 Ne 11 35Here both the personality and equality of the three members of the Godhead are clearly taught.

1 Ne 11 35The same truth is conveyed in the Apostolic blessing:

1 Ne 11 35"The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all." (2 Cor. 13:14)

1 Ne 11 35The enumeration of the three is the recognition of three distinct Personalities, and each has, moreover, his own characteristic—"grace," "love," and "communion."

1 Ne 11 35Distinct personal acts are attributes to the Holy Spirit. He speaks. (Acts 28:25) He prophesies. (I Tim. 4:1-3) He makes intercession for the Saints. (Rom. 8:25, 27) He can be grieved. (Eph. 4:30) He can be sinned against. (Matt. 12:31)

1 Ne 11 35All these are attributes of a person. (See also I Ne. 11:11)

1 Ne 11 35A Divine Power. But there is also a "Spirit of Jehovah," a "Spirit of God" (Ps. 51:13; Is. 63:11-14) which is not a person, but that divine force, or power, that, like the wind, cannot be seen, and yet is the element by which all animate creatures live. (Job 27:3; 33:4; Ps. 104:29, 30) By which the whole universe is animated, filled with life, and governed. It was this spirit that "moved upon" (might be translated, "was brooding upon") the face of the waters (Gen. 1:2) as a bird broods over its nest (Deut. 32:11). It is a regenerating principle which "bloweth where it listeth, but [thou] canst not tell whence it cometh and whither it goeth. (John 3:8) It is an element in which we "live, move, and have our being" (Acts 17:28), a true light which "lighteth every man that cometh into the world. (John 1:9) It can be imparted and received. (John 20:29; Acts 2:4) It is an element in which the believer is baptized. (Acts 1:5; 2:16-18; Joel 2:28) It is the light of Christ

1 Ne 11 35"... and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made. As also he [Christ] is in the moon, and is the light of the moon, and the power thereof by which it was made; and also the light of the stars, and the power thereof by which they were made; and the earth also, and the power thereof, even the earth upon which you stand. And the light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings; which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space—the light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things." (D. and C. 88:7-13)

1 Ne 11 35It is through this Light, this Power, that God

1 Ne 11 35"Comprehendeth all things, and all things are before him, and all things are round about him; and he is above all things, and in all things, and is through all things, and is round about all things; and all things are by him, and of him, even God, forever and ever." (D. and C. 88:41)

1 Ne 11 35Immanence. Some exponents of the wisdom of the world—philosophers, we may call them—who reject the revelations concerning the personal Godhead, yet claim to be believers in the divine element, or force, which they conceive of as "immanent" in the matter of which the universe is composed. By "immanence" they mean the indwelling of something divine in the material world as its soul, or "the spirit that animates it and which takes various forms, such as heat, light, gravitation, electricity, and the like; the all-embracing substance of which men and things are but differentiations; the principle of unity underlying all multiplicity; the infinite consciousness in which all things have their existence; the indwelling personality with whom we commune when we contemplate nature or look into our own souls." (Arthur C. McGiffert, "The Rise of Modern Religious Ideas," p. 201)

1 Ne 11 35It will be seen from this that the philosophy referred to and revelation come quite close to a perfect agreement on recognizing the existence of a divine element that permeates the universe. But there is a noteable difference. Revelation says that, transcending this force, directing and controlling it, there is a Godhead, consisting of three divine Persons, infinite in majesty and glory, the Creators and Rulers of heaven and earth and all that is in them; while the philosophy boldly asserts that there are no such Persons. The force directs itself. It is God. That is the philosophy of immanence. But is that real philosophy?

1 Ne 11 35We are told that the indwelling divine force manifests itself as electricity. Very well. Can that force send a message without a person who thinks and writes and operates the keys according to certain rules? Has the force itself personality enough to act without a person on the outside of it in control? Or, we hear a sermon over the radio. Is there no person somewhere who speaks? Worldly wisdom says, Certainly not. Revelation says, Yes, indeed.

1 Ne 11 36VERSE 36

1 Ne 11 36The pride of the world. The large and spacious building also represents the pride of the world. The world, just now, is very proud of its wisdom, although it is a building standing "as it were in the air," doomed to fall.

1 Ne 11 36"Pride goeth before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall." (Prov. 16:18) "A man's pride shall bring him low, and honor shall uphold the humble in spirit." (Prov. 29:23)

1 Ne 11 36Pride was the downfall of Lucifer. It was manifested, first, in his exaggerated estimate of himself. Did he not come before the Lord God and in a boastful spirit asserted his ability to redeem all mankind? "One soul shall not be lost." It was secondly, manifested in his demand for reward: "I will be thy Son." "Give me thine honor." It was, finally, manifested in his rebellion against the allwise decision of God. Then he was cast out. (Book of Moses, Pearl of Great Price, 4:1-4; B. of Abr. 3:26-27; D. and C. 29:36, 37; 76:25-29. Compare Is. 14:3-23, where the destruction of Babylon is depicted under the imagery of the fall of Lucifer.)

1 Ne 11 36Korah, Dalthan and Abiram rose up against Moses, and were swallowed by the earth. (Num. 16:1-3, 32, 33) Miriam spoke against Moses, and became leprous. (Num. 12:1, 2, 10) Absalom lied about his father David, and ended his days hanging in an oak. (2 Sam. 15:3-11; 18:9, 14) Nebuchadnezzar became boastful and lost his reason for some time. (Dan. 4:29-34) Herod (Agrippa), the murderer of the Apostle James, the brother of John, accepted divine honor by his flatterers, and was eaten by loathsome worms. (Acts 12:21-23)

1 Ne 11 36Surely, "God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the humble." (James 4:6)

GENERAL NOTES

The Holy Spirit. Last spring, when we visited Walker, the Indian Chief, he was dull and sulky, and lay in his tent, and the first thing he said was, 'Brother Brigham, lay your hands upon me, for my spirit has gone away from me, and I want it to come back again! He was full of anger, for his people had been fighting, and he did not know whether to turn to the side of peace or war. We laid hands upon him, and he felt-better. At his request we sang some Mormon hymns, and as we left his tent, he was full of the good Spirit and would not injure this people, no not one particle. He was full of kindness and love of God, and all his works. He traveled with us to Iron County and had dreams which amounted to revelations. If I could have kept him with me all the time, do you suppose he would have had an evil spirit? No, he would have been, filled with the Spirit of the Lord." (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., vol. 2, p. 143-4).

Jesus and the Jews. Among the educated Hebrews of our day a change of attitude toward Jesus of Nazareth has taken place. Several publications on his life and teachings prove this. "A Jewish View of Jesus," by H.G. Enelow, published by the Bloch Publ. Co., New York, is an illustration of this fact. This author arrives at the conclusion that the love Jesus has inspired, the solace he has given, the good he has engendered, the hope and joy he has kindled are unequaled in human history, and he expresses the hope that Jesus may yet serve as a bond of union between Jew and Christian, when his teaching is better known. Mr. Enelow also says, "Of course, the modern Jew deplores the tragic death of Jesus. Yet, if it was not inevitable—which perhaps it was—it certainly is irrevocable."

Without, at this time, discussing the question whether the crucifixion was, or was not, inevitable, I venture one suggestion. The adherents of the Mosaic faith in our day have various representative organizations. One of these might, even at this late day, sincerely review the proceedings against Jesus before the Sanhedrin, and if he is found to be innocent, as he certainly would be, then proclaim that fact before all the world. That would go far toward restoring the ancient covenant people to the favor of God and men.

In a revelation to the Prophet Joseph, the Lord has provided that if "the children shall repent, or the children's children, and turn to the Lord their God," and make restitution for their own trespasses or those of their fathers, or fathers' fathers, "then thine indignation shall be turned away; and vengeance shall no more come upon them, saith the Lord thy God, and their trespasses shall never be brought any more as a testimony before the Lord against them. (D. and C. 98:47-48)

The Jews and the Saints. "Some of you may be familiar with the agitation that is going on at the present time, in the publications, against the Jewish people. There should be no ill-will, and I am sure there is none, in the heart of any true Latter-day Saint, toward the Jewish people. By the authority of the holy Priesthood of God, that has again been restored to the earth, and by the ministration, under the direction of the prophet of God, apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ have been to the Holy Land and have dedicated that country for the return of the Jews, and we believe that in the due time of the Lord they shall be in the favor of God again. And let no Latter-day Saint be guilty of taking any part in any crusade against these people. I believe in no other part of the world is there as good feeling in the hearts of mankind towards the Jewish people as among the Latter-day Saints." (President Heber J. Grant, Improvement Era, vol. 24, p. 747)
