Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 13

1 Ne 13 1VERSE 1

1 Ne 13 1Many nations and kingdoms. The angel first shows him the Gentile nations and governments, as they existed, probably, at the time when the Roman Catholic church began to become a world power, after the end of the western Roman empire. This is generally regarded as having come in 476 A.D., when Romulus Augustus was deprived of his office as the representative of the Emperor Zenis, who resided in Constantinople, and Odoager assumed the place of ruler over Italy. That was one of the great epochs in history. For the removal of the imperial power from Rome paved the way for the assumption of worldly sovereignty by the popes, as the Apostle Paul says would happen: "For the mystery of iniquity doth already work: only he who now letteth will let, until he be taken out of the way. And then shall that Wicked be revealed." (2 Thess. 2-7, 8) It came about gradually. In 607 Pope Boniface III was recognized as the spiritual ruler of the world, by Emperor Phocas. Later the ruling descendants of Charles Martel and the popes exchanged courtesies and gifts. The popes bestowed divine blessings and titles on the Carolingians, and these gave the popes large sections of Italy, which really were not theirs to give. Finally, in the year 800 A.D., Pope Leo III put a crown on the head of Charlemagne and proclaimed him the emperor of a new holy Roman empire, a proclamation which must have been in the nature of high treason, since the actual emperor still lived in Constantinople.

1 Ne 13 1Gibbon says of these times: "The world beheld for the first time a Christian bishop invested with the prerogatives of a temporal prince: the choice of magistrates, the exercise of justice, the imposition of taxes and the wealth of the palace of Ravenna."

1 Ne 13 1Nephi saw the condition of the gentile nations and governments during this critical time of history.

1 Ne 13 1The kingdoms of the world being spread out, in this vision, as a map, before the eyes of the prophet, he sees a great and abominable church taking form. Its characteristics are given.

1 Ne 13 4VERSE 4

1 Ne 13 4Among the Gentiles. (1) He notes that the foundations are being laid among the Gentiles, not among the Jews.

1 Ne 13 5VERSE 5

1 Ne 13 5Slayeth the Saints of God. (2) He notes that it is a persecuting church, which brings thralldom, instead of liberty, into the world.

1 Ne 13 6VERSE 6

1 Ne 13 6The devil the foundation of it. (3) He notes that the organizer is no other than the devil.

SC1 Ne 13 71 Ne 13 8VERSE 7-8

SC1 Ne 13 71 Ne 13 8Wealth and harlots, its possessions. (4) He notes her wealth in gold and silver; her gorgeous apparel, silks and scarlets and fine-twined linen and all manner of precious clothing, and, in addition, a multitude of harlots.

1 Ne 13 9VERSE 9

1 Ne 13 9For the praise of the world. (5) He notes, finally, that this church occupies such a position relative to the world, that, by destroying the Saints of God and bringing them into captivity, she gains the praise of the world.

1 Ne 13 9"Saints." This refers, probably, to the Jews. The Jews, as a people, chosen by God and consecrated to his service, are called "saints." (See Psalms 16:3; 34:9; 89:5, 7; 106:16; and possibly Dan. 7:18, 21, 27.) The word has the same meaning of men and women consecrated to the service of the Lord, in the New Testament and the revelations given in our day, and is, therefore, applied to the members of the Church of our Lord. The persecuting church in the vision was to be the enemy of all the Saints of God, beginning with the children of Israel.

1 Ne 13 9This persecuting church is identical with the "woman" in the Revelation by John (18:14), which is arrayed in purple and scarlet, and keeping a golden cup full of filthiness. She is also called "Babylon," from an inscription on her forehead.

1 Ne 13 9It is an organization characterized by that condition of spiritual degeneracy described by St. Paul as a "falling away," the "man of sin," "perilous times," or, the reign of antichrist. (2 Thess. 2:3, 4; 1 Tim. 4:1-5; 2 Tim. 3:1-5)

1 Ne 13 9From the early days of the Christian church, these prophecies have been understood to refer to the Roman Catholic church and papacy.

1 Ne 13 9The reformers generally so understood them. In the dedication of the authorized version of King James, the translators say that the writings of that monarch "in defense of the Truth" "hath given such a blow unto that man of sin, as will not be healed," and in the Westminster Confession it is expressly stated that, the head of the Roman church is "that antichrist, that man of sin and son of perdition, that exalteth himself in the church against Christ and all that is called god." This is the view of Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, Luther, Calvin, Melancthon, Beza and many others; and of later writers, Hooker, Newton, Bengal, Doddridge, Michaelis, and others.

1 Ne 13 9According to this school of interpreters of the prophecies, all the marks of the apostasy, all the characteristics of the man of sin, are found in the Roman church and the papal institution. The man of sin is represented as opposing and exalting himself above all that is called god, and this is considered fulfilled in the papal office, the incumbents of which exalt themselves above all authority, human and divine, claiming the title of "king of kings and lord of lords," and applying to themselves the words of the psalm: "All kings shall bow down before thee." The man of sin is seated in the "temple of God," showing himself as God, and this, they claim, is fulfilled in the papal office, where the popes assume divine attributes and prerogatives, such as infallibility and authority to forgive sins.

1 Ne 13 9Even some Catholic writers agree with the interpretation here outlined. Hear, for instance Abbot Joachim, founder of a Catholic monastery, Giovanni del Fiore, in Calabria. He wrote toward the end of the 12th century:

1 Ne 13 9"The church of Peter, the church of Christ which was full, is now empty. For, although she now seems full of people, yet they are not her people but strangers. They are not her sons, the citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, but the sons of Babylon. What profits the name of Christ, where the power is wanting? The church is, as it were, widowed; there are but few or no bishops, who, to save the flock, expose themselves a prey to the wolves. Every man seeks his own, and not the things of Jesus Christ."...

1 Ne 13 9"Where is there more contention, more fraud, more vice and ambition than among the clergy of our Lord? Therefore must judgment begin from the house of the Lord, and the fire go forth from his sanctuary, to consume it, in order that others may perceive what will be done with them, when he spares not even his sinning children."...

1 Ne 13 9The abbot characterizes Pope Pascal II as a traitor of the church, who has reduced her to servitude. He says:

1 Ne 13 9"Although the secular princes have wrested many things by violence from the church, as for example, the kingdoms of the Sicilies ... yet, even the popes themselves have wrested many things from the princes ... and the pope will not only long after temporal things, as belonging to him, but also after spiritual things [such] as do not belong to him, Thus will it come to pass, that he will seat himself in the temple of God, and, as a god, exalt himself above all that is called god, that is, above the authority of all prelates."

1 Ne 13 9"Gold was brought to Christ, that he might have the means of fleeing to Egypt; myrrh, was offered him as if in allusion to his death; incense, that he might praise God; not that he might rise up against Herod, or fall as a burden upon Pharaoh; not that he might give himself up to sensual delights, or reward benefits received with gratitude. The vicegerents of Christ in these latter times care nothing for the incense; they seek only the gold, in order that they, with great Babylon, may mingle the goblets, and pollute their followers with their own uncleanliness."

1 Ne 13 9Abbot Joachim held the view that antichrist would be a king in alliance with a pope. Such a pope, he thought, might come from the heretics and, armed seemingly, with power to perform miracles, ally himself with the antichristian secular power and stir up persecution, as Simon Magus is said to have incited Nero to kindle the fires of hatred against the Christians.

1 Ne 13 9Robert Grosshead, an English, Catholic bishop, in 1250, A.D., wrote:

1 Ne 13 9"To be sure, the pope, being the vicegerent of Christ, must be obeyed. But when a pope allows himself to be moved by motives of consanguinity, or any other secular interest, to do anything contrary to the precepts and will of Christ, then he who obeys him, manifestly separates himself from Christ and his body, the church, and from him who fills the apostolic chair as the representative of Christ. But, whenever universal obedience is paid him in such things, then comes the true, and complete apostasy—the time of antichrist." (See the History of the Church by Neander, vol. 4, pp. 185 and 222-26)

SC1 Ne 13 71 Ne 13 8VERSES 7-8

SC1 Ne 13 71 Ne 13 8Many harlots. In the Scriptures this word generally denotes a woman who is unfaithful to her husband. But it also means a nation, pledged to serve Jehovah, that turns away from him to worship other gods. (Hos. 1 and 2; Ez. 16 and 23) It also means an apostate church. (Rev. 17:1; 19:2; and perhaps Nah. 3) Sometimes the term is applied to a community that excels in commercial activities, as, for instance, Tyre. (Is. 23:17, 18) That city is said to be committing fornication with all the kingdoms of the world, referring to its far-flung commerce and shipping. Rahab, the woman in Jericho who befriended the two scouts of Joshua and who became one of the maternal ancestors of Jesus, is called a "harlot." (Josh. 2:1; Heb. 11:31) But it is possible that this is a misunderstanding of a word in the original which may mean a "hostess," an "inn-keeper." Some scholars favor this interpretation of it. It is highly improbable that the two spies of Joshua would have resorted to a house of ill-fame in order to obtain the information desired by the commanding general. It is also improbable that a common woman would have had the religious faith in God which Rahab had, who said: 'For the Lord your God, he is God in heaven above, and in earth beneath." Those are hardly the words of an outcast.

SC1 Ne 13 71 Ne 13 8What does the word stand for in the vision of Nephi? Is it a literal or a figurative expression? If we interpret it at all, we must understand it literally. During the days of the apostate church, "harlots" were a merchandise, as were gold, silver, purple, scarlet, linen and precious clothing. That is according to the text.

SC1 Ne 13 71 Ne 13 8Let us remember that the moral condition in the pagan world during the early centuries of our era was anything but one of purity. St. Paul describes it as it was in his day. (Rom. 1:21-32) Not only did immorality in its various revolting forms flourish privately, but it was legalized in some countries. Christianity tried to extirpate it, but, it stands to reason that when entire nations were incorporated in the church, individual immorality went in with the crowd. The efforts of the church were, therefore, not successful. And during the Middle ages deplorable conditions prevailed. It is claimed that during the crusades thousands of women accompanied the armies who went to fight for the holy places in Palestine. Prostitution came to be regarded as an indispensable social institution, and even high clergymen are said to have derived incomes from it. When all the facts are considered, it is clear that the vision of Nephi is literally true. "Harlots" were actually considered a desirable merchandise.

1 Ne 13 11VERSE 11

1 Ne 13 11The wrath of God upon the seed of thy brethren. That explains the condition of the native communities in America at the time immediately preceding the incursion of the Spaniards. These came as the executors of divine judgment, just as the Babylonians at one time overran Palestine as the messengers of divine wrath. The descendants of Lehi had been given to understand repeatedly that they could prosper here only if they would keep the commandments of God. This they failed to do. As communities, they destroyed each other. By bloodshed they polluted the country that ought to have been dedicated to the Lord. They dwindled in unbelief. That caused darkness, both in body and soul. Mr. Bancroft, speaking of some of the Indians, observes:

1 Ne 13 11"From the frozen, wind-swept plains of Alaska to the malaria-haunted swamps of Darien, there is not a fairer land than California; it is the neutral ground, as it were, of the elements, where hyperboreal cold, stripped of its rugged aspect, and equatorial heat, tamed to a genial warmth, meet as friends, inviting, all blustering laid aside. Yet if we travel northward from the Isthmus, we must pass by ruined cities and temples, traces of mighty peoples, who there flourished before a foreign civilization extirpated them. On the arid deserts of Arizona and New Mexico is found an incipient civilization. Descending from the Arctic sea we meet races of hunters and traders, which can be called neither primitive nor primordial, living after their fashion as men, not as brutes. It is not until we reach the Golden Mean in Central California that we find whole tribes subsisting on roots, herbs and insects; having no boats, no clothing, no laws, no God; yielding submissively to the first touch of the invader; held in awe by a few priests and soldiers."—(Native Races, vol. 1, p. 339)

1 Ne 13 11That is strange. But from the wrath of the Lord, neither a congenial climate nor a bounteous soil can furnish man protection.

1 Ne 13 11However, the Lamanites were by no means all bad. Compared to their conquerors, they were rather a superior race, if Las Casas, the great bishop of Chiapas, does not exaggerate. He writes:

1 Ne 13 11"I was one of the first who went to America. Neither curiosity nor interest prompted me to undertake so long and so dangerous a voyage. The saving of souls of the heathen was my sole object. It was said that barbarous executions were necessary to punish or check the rebellion of the Americans. But to whom was this owing? Did not this people receive the Spaniards who first came among them with gentleness and humanity? Did they not show more joy in proportion, in lavishing treasure upon them, than the Spaniards did greediness in receiving it? Though they gave up to us their lands and riches, we would also take from them their wives and children and liberty. To blacken the character of this unhappy people, their enemies assert that they are scarcely human beings. But it is we who ought to blush for having been less men and more barbarous than they ... The Indians still remain untainted by many vices usual among Europeans, such as ambition, blasphemy, swearing, treachery, which have not taken place among them. They have scarcely an idea of these. (Quoted by Israel Worsley in, A View of the American Indian, p. 35)

1 Ne 13 11Bancroft, too, finds much to admire in the natives. Speaking of the Nahuas, for instances, he describes them as frugal, kind to children and slaves, possessing a degree of civilization, ingenuity and aptitude for learning. And yet, with these and other redeeming qualities, they were vain as regards gorgeous clothing and costly feasts; they were ferocious in war and cruel in inflicting punishments. Thus, for instance, they would kill a couple of women who happened to quarrel in a public place. They were superstitious. They practiced human sacrifices. In fact, prisoners of war were often disposed of on the altar of some deity. On occasions, they ate human flesh, possibly as a religious rite.

1 Ne 13 11By incessant warfare and acts of violence, they dimmed the light of revelation and polluted the land dedicated to the cause of God and liberty.

1 Ne 13 11Therefore, the wrath of God was poured out upon them. But the wrath of God, was as always, intended for their salvation from total destruction.

1 Ne 13 12VERSE 12

1 Ne 13 12A man among the Gentiles. This man, who was separated from the Lamanites by many waters and who was prompted to cross those waters, was Columbus.

1 Ne 13 12Christopher Columbus, or, as his name is written in Spanish, CristÃ³l CÃ³lon, was born in Genoa (or vicinity), Italy in the year 1436. Neither birth place nor birth date is known with absolute certainty. The parents were Domenico and Susanna Fontanarossa Colombo, both belonging to families of weavers.

1 Ne 13 12Christopher Columbus, at a very early age went to sea. He became familiar with the routes followed by the merchantmen in the Mediterranean and the Atlantic. In 1477 he went to Iceland and Frislanda (supposed to be the Faeroislands), and a few years later he spent some time on the Gold Coast, in Africa.

1 Ne 13 12Notwithstanding his life as a sailor, Columbus found time to study languages, astronomy, and the science of navigation. He became also an expert map maker—all necessary accomplishments for the fulfilment of his mission.

1 Ne 13 12In 1470, Columbus after a battle with pirates, escaped to Lisbon, where many prominent geographers and navigators lived. Here, at a religious service, he saw a young, noble lady, Philippa, the daughter of the governor of Porto Santo, then deceased. They were married, and for some time they lived with her mother on the estate. This was situated on a little island three hundred miles out in the ocean. The governor had left a number of maps and valuable notes on navigation, and Columbus studied these thoroughly. In this quiet resort, the thought of going out west on the mysterious expanse of water may well have ripened in the mind of the young adventurer.

1 Ne 13 12At this time, Genoa, Florence and Venice commanded the commerce of the Mediterranean. They brought silks, and other costly fabrics, and spices from Persia and India. These were carried by camels across the deserts to the Red Sea and the Nile, and then by ships over the Mediterranean to Europe. Those who commanded the trade routes became wealthy and powerful. The great question of the age was, therefore, how to reach the East by some cheaper and more convenient route than by the sea. Columbus was one of the few at that time, who believed that the East, with its fabulous wealth of gold, perfumes and spices, could be found by sailing west. Consequently, he laid his plan before the king of Portugal. This monarch seems to have looked upon the daring scheme with favor. But he could not afford to invest large sums on a problematic enterprise, the country being impoverished by war. He submitted the question to learned men who, as usual, did not agree. A trial expedition was sent out secretly, and the leaders of this dishonest attempt to rob Columbus of the fruit of his labors, returned after a few days and reported that you might as well expect to find land in the sky as in that waste of waters. Columbus, on learning that the Portuguese king had played a trick, decided to appeal to the rulers of Spain.

1 Ne 13 12During seven long years Columbus importuned King Ferdinand for a hearing. But he was generally regarded as a visionary. Even the children in the streets knew him as one mentally unsound. When, at last, the learned council condescended to make a report, it was to the effect that the plan was too foolish to merit attention. "It is absurd," they said, "to believe that there are people on the other side of the world, walking with their heels upward, and their heads hanging down. And then, how can a ship get there? The torrid zone through which they must pass, is a region of fire, where the very waves boil. And even if a ship could perchance get around there safely, how could it ever get back? Can a ship sail uphill?"

1 Ne 13 12With such arguments the wise men of Spain were about to drive Columbus out of the country. In fact, he decided to go to France. But, fortunately, the queen, Isabella, had as much to say in such matters as her royal consort. And she listened to friends of Columbus. She was even willing to raise money on her jewels to defray the expenses of a voyage. But this was not required of her. Luis de Santangel, who held the keys to the treasury of Aragon, looked after the finances. The agreement between the regents and Columbus was signed on April 17, 1492. Columbus shed tears of joy. He had reached the goal, after eighteen long years of labor, disappointments and heartache.

1 Ne 13 12Columbus is described as a man of commanding presence, tall and powerful, fair, ruddy complexion, and blue-grey eyes. By the time he sailed for the new world, his hair had turned white. His bearing was courteous and his conversation was captivating. Notwithstanding all discouragement, he never lost faith in his divine calling and mission.

1 Ne 13 12It was on August 3, 1492, that Columbus with three vessels—the Santa Maria, the Pinta, and the Nia, with 90 souls on board—set out from Palos, Spain. It was on October 12, the same year that Columbus with a retinue of officers and men set foot on the beach of an island which he named San Salvador. Columbus was dressed in a gorgeous military suit of scarlet, embroidered with gold, for how did he know whether he was not to meet some splendidly arrayed potentate in this land? Had he not arrived in India, of which country Marco Polo and others had told such wonderful tales? At all events, he was prepared. But as soon as he landed, he prostrated himself and on bended knees kissed the ground. Then he planted a cross and took possession of the country in the name of Ferdinand and Isabella. The natives who witnessed these to them incomprehensible ceremonies, he called Indians, because he supposed that he had reached an island off the coast of India.

1 Ne 13 12The nationality and birthplace of Columbus have frequently been discussed. A few years ago, on January 14, 1922, to be exact, an Associated Press dispatch from Lisbon, Portugal, announced that a member of the Portuguese Academy of Science, Senor Patrocinio Ribeiro, in an address to the academy, had maintained that he was born in Portugal.

1 Ne 13 12That announcement came shortly after a prelate, the Right Rev. Mgr. Rey Soto, during a visit in New York, had stated that Columbus was of Jewish lineage. He claimed that this had been proved by documents at the home of ancestors of the great sailor, in Spain. He said Columbus knew this but concealed it because of the persecution that raged against the Jews at that time.

1 Ne 13 12There is nothing in itself improbable in the assumption that Columbus had the blood of Israel in his veins. On the contrary, his character and his mission were of such nature as to lend some color to that assumption. Nephi saw him "among" the Gentiles, but that does not necessarily mean that he was a Gentile. I am inclined to the view that Nephi, when stating that he was "separated from the seed of my brethren by the many waters," in reality says that they were brethren and that was the main element that separated them from each other. But, be that as it may, the following lines are of interest in this connection:

1 Ne 13 12"The story of the Jews in America begins with Christopher Columbus. On Aug. 2, 1492, more than 300,000 Jews were expelled from Spain...and on Aug. 3, the next day, Columbus set sail for the west, taking a group of Jews with him...Columbus himself tells us that he consorted much with Jews. The first letter he wrote detailing his discoveries was to a Jew. Indeed, the eventful voyage itself which added to men's knowledge and wealth 'the other half of the earth,' was made possible by Jews.

1 Ne 13 12"The pleasant story that it was Queen Isabella's jewels which financed the voyage has disappeared under cool research. There were three Maranos or 'secret Jews' who wielded great influence at the Spanish Court: Luis de Santangel, who was an important merchant of Valencia and a 'farmer' of the royal taxes; his relative Gabriel Sanchez, who was the royal treasurer; and their friend, the royal chamberlin, Juan Cabrero ... Santangel craved permission to advance the money himself, which he did, 17,000 ducats in all, about $20,000, perhaps equal to $160,000 today.

1 Ne 13 12"Associated with Columbus in the voyage were at least five Jews: Luis de Torres, interpreter; Marco, the surgeon; Bernal, the physician; Alonzo de la Calle, and Gabriel Sanchez...Luis de Torres was the first man ashore... He settled in Cuba." (The International Jew, Dearborn, Mich., 1920, p. 33)

1 Ne 13 12On January 4, 1493, Columbus set sail on the Nina for Spain, having left 40 men at Fort Nativity, as a beginning of a colony. He reached the harbor of Palos in Spain, on March 15. His first voyage ended in a blaze of glory. The story of his return and achievements flew from mouth to mouth. Bells were ringing, and torches were blazing in the streets at night. Their royal majesties wept for joy, when thinking of the palaces and riches that would be theirs, as their reward for having beaten the Moors at Granada and driven the Jews out of Spain.

1 Ne 13 12Columbus made three more voyages. He cruised in the Caribbean, discovered the island of Trinidad and the South American coast at the delta of the Orinoco, and he coasted along the coast of Honduras. But the vision of Nephi does not include the later experiences of Columbus. In opening the way across the deep between the Gentiles in the Old World and the descendants of Lehi in the New, his mission was fulfilled.

1 Ne 13 13VERSE 13

1 Ne 13 13Other Gentiles. Other than those with whom the lot of Columbus had been cast, others than the Latin race. Others were also to be urged by the Spirit to go forth on the waters. This calls our attention to the Cabots, whose discoveries were as momentous as those of Columbus.

1 Ne 13 13John Cabot, an Italian navigator who had moved to Bristol, England, came to the conclusion that since the degrees of longitude are shorter towards the pole than at the equator, the shortest route to India would be in a north-westerly direction. King Henry VII authorized him to try. He reached the coast of Labrador, and supposed that he had come to the kingdom of Tartary, just as Columbus imagined he had reached India. This was in 1497.

1 Ne 13 13Sebastian Cabot, son of John, had accompanied his father on this voyage. He continued the explorations after him. The same year in which Columbus found the coast of South America and Vasco de Gama rounded the Cape of Good Hope, on the way to India, Sebastian Cabot discovered New Foundland and coasted as far south as Chesapeake Bay. He gave England a continent, but no one, at that time, considered his achievement worth while. Nobody now knows even his burial place.

1 Ne 13 13Spirit of God. According to the vision of Nephi, it was the Spirit of God that prompted first Columbus and then the Gentiles to go forth upon the waters.

1 Ne 13 13That Columbus considered himself inspired is well authenticated history. The following from an enlightening article by Mark Petersen on, "American History and Nephi's Vision," published in the Deseret News, March 25, 1933, proves that he was very much conscious of his divine calling:

1 Ne 13 13"Many biographies have been written concerning Columbus. We take one at random, and quote from 'Columbus, Don Quixote of the Seas," by Jacob Wasserman, translated into English from the German by Eric Sutton and published in Boston:

1 Ne 13 13"On page 18 of this book, Columbus is directly quoted as follows:

1 Ne 13 13" 'From my first youth onward, I was a seaman, and have so continued until this day. Wherever ship has been I have been. I have spoken and treated with learned men, priests and laymen, Latin and Greeks, Jews and Moors, and with many men of other faiths. The Lord was well disposed to my desire, and he bestowed upon me courage and understanding; knowledge of seafaring he gave me in abundance; of astrology as much as was needed, and of geometry and astronomy likewise. Further, he gave me joy and cunning in drawing maps and thereon cities, mountains, rivers, islands and the harbors, each one in its place. I have seen and truly I have studied all books, cosmographies, histories, chronicles and philosophies, and other arts, for which our Lord with provident hand unlocked my mind, sent me upon the seas, and gave me fire for the deed. Those who heard of my emprise called it foolish, mocked me, and laughed. But who can doubt but that the HOLY GHOST INSPIRED ME?' "

1 Ne 13 13"On page 46 of the same book, we read that in the year of his success, Columbus wrote upon one occasion to King Ferdinand: 'I CAME TO YOUR MAJESTY AS THE EMISSARY OF THE HOLY GHOST.' "

1 Ne 13 13John Fiske has this to say: "It was no doubt the symptom of a reaction against his misfortunes that he grew more and more mystical in these days, consoling himself with the belief that he was a chosen instrument in the hands of Providence for enlarging the bounds of Christendom." In this mood, Columbus, the historian says, studied the prophecies and attributed his discoveries to miraculous inspiration.

1 Ne 13 13VERSE 13

1 Ne 13 13Out of captivity. The "other" Gentiles are here referred to as captives, and their going forth is their liberation. On this subject, Mr. Petersen, in the article just quoted, says:

1 Ne 13 13"The history of the Pilgrims and Puritans gives ample evidence of the type of captivity they left to come to a land of freedom and liberty. However, we quote herein a story published in the 1933 manual for deacons quorums of the Church to illustrate that the captivity was literal—even a captivity behind jail doors."

1 Ne 13 13The story follows:

1 Ne 13 13"If one were to search among all the Prophet Joseph Smith's progenitors for one who best typified his righteous zeal for true freedom and his dauntless devotion to truth, perhaps no finer exemplification could be found than his fifth great-grandfather, the Rev. John Lathrop.

1 Ne 13 13"He was a young minister of the Church of England, happily married, with a family of beautiful children. He labored faithfully until in his conscience he felt he could no longer approve the things he must teach. He resigned his position, left the church, and in 1623 became pastor of the First Independent Church of London.

1 Ne 13 13"Persecution raged against him and his little band of devoted followers. They were forced to meet secretly, to escape the anger of the opposing bishop. One day, as they met in worship, they were discovered by agents of the bishop, who suddenly invaded their meeting place, seized forty-two of their number, and sent them in fetters to the old Clink Prison, in Newgate. Finally all but Mr. Lathrop were released on bail, but he was deemed too dangerous to be set at liberty.

1 Ne 13 13"During these months of his imprisonment a fatal sickness had seized upon his wife, and she was about to die. Upon his urgent entreaty the bishop consented for him to visit his dying wife, if he would promise to return. He reached home in time, gave her his blessing, and she passed away. True to his promise, he returned to prison. His poor, orphaned children wandered about in helpless misery, until some one suggested that they appeal to the bishop at Lambeth. One can picture the mournful procession as they came before him, and made known their sorrowful plight.

1 Ne 13 13" 'Please, sir,' they cried piteously, 'release our father or we too shall die.' The bishop's heart was softened and touched with pity, and he granted to John Lathrop his freedom, if he would promise to leave the country and never return.

1 Ne 13 13"Gathering around him his children and 32 of his congregation, he sailed to America, settling in New England, where he was warmly welcomed and soon became one of the leaders among the Puritans of his day."

1 Ne 13 13The literal fulfilment in all its details of this prophetic vision is a marvelous feature of it.

1 Ne 13 14VERSE 14

1 Ne 13 14Multitudes of the Gentiles upon the Land of Promise. With this paragraph the story of the vision of Nephi is focused more particularly on the United States. The prophet sees multitudes gathered here.

1 Ne 13 14The First Settlers. The explorations of the Cabots proved the beginning of the colonization of North America. Before the close of the 17th century, the French had explored the Great Lakes, the Fox, Maumee, Wabash, Wisconsin, and Illinois rivers, and the Mississippi from the Falls of St. Anthony to the Gulf. They had traversed a vast region from New Foundland to Texas. In 1688, the population of this "New France" was estimated at 11,000.

1 Ne 13 14British sailors and colonists were also moved upon to settle in the new country. Sir Martin Frobisher, in 1576, entered Baffin Bay and declared the country in that region to be the possession of the British crown. Sir Francis Drake, from a mountain top in Panama, gazed upon the Pacific, and decided that he would sail on that ocean. He went through the straits of Magellan and then coasted north as far as Oregon. Sir Humphry Gilbert and his half-brother Sir Walter Raleigh planted colonies here and hunted for gold and pearls, and learned to use tobacco. At that time England was threatened by the Spanish Armada, and when Sir Walter returned to America, after an absence of three years, he found that his family and colony had perished. How, history does not say. In 1607, the London Company sent a colony to South Virginia, where Captain Newport founded the first permanent English settlement in the United States. It was called Jamestown in honor of the King of England. Another trading concern, the Plymouth Company, sent settlers to North Virginia.

1 Ne 13 14In 1609, Captain Henry Hudson, an English navigator in Dutch service, entered the Hudson River. The Hollanders claimed the territory called New Netherland, where the foundations of the city of New York were laid, in 1613.

1 Ne 13 14The first permanent settlement in Delaware was made near Wilmington by Swedish colonists, in 1638, on a tract of land called New Sweden. Swedes also established the first settlement in Pennsylvania, but these settlements were soon absorbed by the Hollanders and then by the English.

1 Ne 13 14The period between 1607 and 1775 saw the English settlements expand and become thirteen prosperous colonies. They were: Virginia, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Connecticut, Rhode Island, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, South Carolina, North Carolina and Georgia. They had little in common. Each colony had its own problems, its own struggles. But this seeming disorder was but transitory. The Divine Architect was assembling his material for a new nation, destined to raise the Ensign of liberty to all the world.

1 Ne 13 15VERSE 15

1 Ne 13 15The Gentiles did prosper and obtain the land. According to the vision of Nephi, the wrath of God was upon the descendants of his brothers, wherefore they were scattered, while the Spirit of the Lord was upon the Gentiles, and they obtained the land as their inheritance. The title is therefore of divine origin. It is indisputable.

1 Ne 13 15—White, fair, and beautiful. Those characteristics seem to point to the Anglo-Saxon race. In this connection a few statistics may be of interest. The entire population of the United States in 1950 was, according to the census, 150,697,361. Of these, 343,410 were Indians. Consequently, 150,353,951 were immigrants or descendants of immigrants.

1 Ne 13 15In 1950 there were in the United States 33,750,653 persons born in foreign countries, some as follows:

1 Ne 13 15England and Wales 2,027,845 Netherlands 374,668

1 Ne 13 15North Ireland 45,228 Belgium 138,391

1 Ne 13 15Ireland (Eire) 2,396,456 Switzerland 287,175

1 Ne 13 15Norway 854,674 France 361,589

1 Ne 13 15Sweden 1,189,639 Germany 4,726,946

1 Ne 13 15Denmark 426,607 Canada 2,982,318

1 Ne 13 15This is an index to the origin of a majority of the population in the United States, counting both foreign born and their descendants.

1 Ne 13 15—Like unto my people. Nephi saw the resemblance between this race and the Children of Israel. We know that the blood of Israel is flowing in the veins of a great many of these immigrants.

SC1 Ne 13 161 Ne 13 171 Ne 13 181 Ne 13 19VERSES 16-19

SC1 Ne 13 161 Ne 13 171 Ne 13 181 Ne 13 19The discovery and settlement of America, and more particularly, the United States, was the work of the Lord.

SC1 Ne 13 161 Ne 13 171 Ne 13 181 Ne 13 19"Our fathers, under His inspiration, gave us the constitution of our country, the bill of rights which defines our privileges and places limitations beyond which we may not go. Liberty, when carried to the extreme, results in license. I want to impress upon this congregation, my brethren and sisters who are here, that the Lord our God has been the author of it all. It was he who led you from your native lands. You people from the green fields and lanes of England, you did not leave your homes because you did not love your native land. You had fought for it, defended it, and were ready to fight for it again. You people from Scotland, you people from Ireland and Wales, from Germany and the islands of the sea, oh, if I only had the time to go back and tell you I could show you that the whole story of your lives had been written by the finger of God. So we are here; here, thank the Lord, citizens of the best government in the world. We are here, members of the Church of Christ our Lord which has been restored through the medium of heavenly messengers who had authority to give to men upon earth, the keys of the holy priesthood. What for? For the redemption of the human family. Whether men believe it or not these things are true, and ultimately they will believe it, and there is no power either in earth or hell that can stay the progress of the Church, unless its people prove recreant to the covenants that they have entered into with our Father who is in heaven. Just so, there is no power that can wreck the government that God has established in this country unless it be the people themselves, and that I do not expect nor believe can occur.

SC1 Ne 13 161 Ne 13 171 Ne 13 181 Ne 13 19"The Lord in his scripture tells us that no one can come to this land unless he be brought or directed by the Spirit of the Lord, and so he has brought this people here. He brought the faith of the devoted Puritans of New England; he brought the patriotism of the Dutch at New York; he brought the gallantry of the cavaliers of Virginia; the light-hearted energy of the French of New Orleans. Just the kind of composite body of men to establish a government that could not be dominated by any particular race or tongue, but made composite, that all men might be welcomed to it, live under and enjoy its privileges." (President Anthony W. Ivins, Conference Sermon, Oct. 1932, pp. 107-108)

SC1 Ne 13 161 Ne 13 171 Ne 13 181 Ne 13 19George Washington acknowledged the sovereignty of the Lord and the importance of religion as a condition of national success. In his Farewell Address he expresses this as follows:

SC1 Ne 13 161 Ne 13 171 Ne 13 181 Ne 13 19"Of all the dispositions and habits which lead to political prosperity, religion and morality are indispensable supports. In vain would that man claim the tribute of patriotism who should labor to subvert these great pillars of human happiness, these firmest props of the duties of men and citizens. The mere politician, equally with the pious man, ought to respect and cherish them. A volume could not trace all their connections with private and public felicity. Let it simply be asked—and I ask it of you—Where is the security for property, for reputation, for life, if the sense of religious obligation desert the oaths, which are the instruments of investigation in courts of justice? And let us with caution indulge the supposition that morality can be maintained without religion. Whatever may be conceded to the influence of refined education on minds of peculiar structure, reason and experience both forbid us to expect that national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principle."

1 Ne 13 17VERSE 17

1 Ne 13 17Mother Gentiles ... to battle against them. In verses 17-19 the prophet beholds in his vision the war by which the independence of the United States was established: (1) The Gentile immigrants humbled themselves before the Lord. (2) The "mother gentiles" were defeated, because the wrath of God was upon them. (3) The Gentile immigrants were delivered by the power of God "out of the hands of all nations."

1 Ne 13 17The conflict known as the American War of Independence was precipitated (April 19, 1775) when General Gage sent a force from Boston to seize provisions at Concord, Mass., and to capture the two prominent leaders, Samuel Adams and John Hancock. On June 15, George Washington was appointed Commander of the Colonial forces, and on July 4, 1776, the Declaration of Independence dissolved allegiance to the British crown. In July 1778, the Americans were strengthened by the presence of a French fleet outside New York, and a considerable land force. Cornwallis, trapped in the Yorktown peninsula, where LaFayette's forces were joined by Washington's, and by 4,000 under Rochambeau, and 3,000 from De Grasse's fleet in the West Indies, surrendered on October 19, 1781. The treaty of peace was signed in Paris, September 3, 1783. By this treaty the independence of the United States was recognized, and the colonies received an addition of all the territory between the Alleghanies and the Mississippi. New York was evacuated by the British on November 25, 1783. The battles on the waters were mostly confined to privateering. John Paul Jones, with a few vessels, made important captures in British waters.

1 Ne 13 17It was thus that the land was "redeemed by the shedding of blood." (D. and C. 101:79, 80; 77:2 N. 1:7)

1 Ne 13 20VERSE 20

1 Ne 13 20And I beheld a book. A book appears in notable visions of other prophets of old. Daniel is instructed regarding the contents of the "Scripture of Truth," containing a prophetic history of the world to the last days. (Dan. 10 and 11) Ezekiel was shown a book, which he was commanded to "eat," or, as we should say, "digest," containing a message to the house of Israel. (Ez. 5:1) Zechariah (5:1) saw a "flying roll," which contained a "curse" upon the land because of the transgressions of the inhabitants. And John the Revelator mentions the "Book of Life" (3:5; 13:8; 20:12); also a sealed book (5:1), containing the history of the world in prophetic symbols, and a "little book" (a codicil, as it were). (Rev. 10:2, 8:11)

1 Ne 13 23VERSE 23

1 Ne 13 23It proceedeth out of the mouth of a Jew. The book which Nephi saw was the Old Testament, and more especially the Law, also called the "Torah," as given to the world by Ezra.

1 Ne 13 23Ezra was one of the most prominent Jews in the Babylonian captivity, a descendant of Aaron and in all probability born in Babylon. It was through his influence, humanly speaking, that the return of the exiles was accomplished. (Ez. 7:6 and 28) He led, personally, the second great company to Jerusalem.

1 Ne 13 23Jews and Christians alike regard Ezra as one of the great prophets of the Lord. Among the Jews there is a saying, something like this, "If the Law had not been given by Moses, Ezra was worthy, and by him it would have been given. And Christian authors, such as Irenaeus, Tertullian, Clement of Alexandria, and others actually thought that the Old Testament had become lost during the Babylonian captivity, and that it was restored through Ezra, by divine revelation. Modern scholars do not accept that view, but it is thought that he collected copies of the sacred manuscripts extant, and that he, and other learned men, by scholarly criticism, determined the text and the canon. They accepted twenty-two books as divine. They divided them into three parts, the Law, the Prophets and the Hagiographa or Psalms, a division to which our Lord refers as follows, "All things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me." (Luke 24:44) It is also thought probable that Ezra and the other members of the governing council, such as Haggai and Zechariah, edited the manuscripts, and added such passages as could not have been written by the authors of the sacred books themselves, as for instance the account of the death of Moses, etc.

1 Ne 13 23In the book of Nehemiah there is a very impressive account of the acceptance of the Word of God by the people, that may be compared to a similar scene at Sinai, when the Law was given through Moses. (Ex. 24:3-8) In the Book of Nehemiah we read that the people asked Ezra to bring the Book of the Law. He did so. The people were gathered at the water gate (on the east). Ezra and a number of the priesthood occupied a platform. From this, Ezra, after a fervent prayer, read "in the book of the law of God distinctly and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the reading. (Neh. 8:1-8) The reading occupied several hours every day for seven days (v. 18). And on another occasion, "And they stood up in their place, and read in the book of the Law of the Lord their God one fourth part of the day; and another fourth part they confessed and worshiped the Lord their God." (Neh. 9:3)

1 Ne 13 23This was the beginning, as far as known, of the Jewish divine services, with prayer, Bible reading and preaching from Scripture texts, a form that has been perpetuated in Christian churches, and which should never be abandoned, for the obvious reason that it is the word of God that is the life of the Church.

1 Ne 13 23We can now understand why the Prophet Nephi sees the ancient Scriptures proceeding from the "mouth of a Jew." His prophetic vision was fulfilled in the year 444 B.C.

1 Ne 13 26VERSE 26

1 Ne 13 26Many parts taken away. We are here informed that this book, as it came from the mouth of the Jew, contained the same gospel of the Lord of which the Apostles bear record That is to say, the prophecies and the rites, the clothes, the buildings, the sacrifices, all were typical of the plan of salvation which became a reality in the life, the teachings, the death, and glorification of our Lord, as recorded in the New Testament. The Apostle Paul, in the letter to the Hebrews, makes this very clear.

1 Ne 13 26But after this book, together with the record of the Apostles, goes forth "by the hand [not mouth] of the Apostles" (v. 26), then the ecclesiastical organization comes into existence, which has "taken away from the gospel of the Lamb many parts which are plain and most precious." (v. 26) The object of this mutilation is stated in verse 27.

1 Ne 13 28VERSE 28

1 Ne 13 28Many plain and precious things taken away from the book. This, as I understand it, refers to books and, perhaps, parts of books, that have been destroyed, rather than to the corruption of the texts in the books extant.

1 Ne 13 28Many modern scholars are changing their attitude toward the Bible. They admit, for instance, that the books of the New Testament almost without exception belong to the first century, although they were not gathered together in a volume, as we know them, until a couple of centuries later. Archeological finds prove that the grammar, the vocabulary, the form of the letters, the diction and the historical background stamp them as products of that early age. They also admit that in all essential particulars the text we have is identical with the original writings. They consider these conclusions established by the scientific methods of criticism applied to thousands of manuscripts. [^1]

1 Ne 13 28There are discrepancies. And even apparent contradictions. In the Old Testament, and particularly in the Chronicles, dates and names are sometimes hopelessly changed. In fact, the entire chronology of the Old Testament, before the Temple of Solomon, is guesswork. Usher calculates the time from the creation to the flood to be, 1656 years; the Septuagint makes it, 2262 years; Josephus, 2256 years. Similar discrepancies appear in the following periods. From the flood to the call of Abraham, Usher, 427 years; Sept., 1207; Josephus, 1062. From the call of Abraham to the exodus, Usher, 430, Sept. 425, Josephus, 445. From the exodus to the foundation of the temple of Solomon, Usher, 479, Sept. 601, Josephus, 621. From the temple of Solomon, to the restoration of Cyrus, Usher, 476, Sept. 476, Josephus, 493. From the restoration by Cyrus to our Lord, Usher, 536, Sept. 537, and Josephus, 534 years. That is, the entire time from the creation to the beginning of our era appears thus:

1 Ne 13 28Usher 4004 years

1 Ne 13 28Septuagint 5508 years

1 Ne 13 28Josephus 5411 years

1 Ne 13 28To this may be added that the Samaritan text makes the period between the creation and the exodus 2809 years. [^2]

1 Ne 13 28In the New Testament, too, there are numerous variations. A few of these will have to suffice for illustrations. In Matthew 19:17: "Why callest thou me good?" Griesbach notes another reading: "Why asketh thou me concerning the good?" The doxology in the Lord's prayer, "For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen," is lacking in some MSS. Matt. 16:2, 3 is omitted in some MSS. The last 12 verses of Mark are missing in some MSS. The story of an angel "moving" the water of Bethesda (John 5:4) is absent from some MSS. Many omit the story of the woman in John 8:1-11. Peter's visit to the grave (Luke 24:12) is omitted in some MSS, but Griesbach considers the verse genuine.

1 Ne 13 28Such are the variations in the text. Dr. Joseph Angus remarks: "In the 7959 verses of the New Testament there are not more than ten or twelve various readings of great importance, and these affect not the doctrines of the Scriptures, but only the number of proof passages in which they are revealed."

1 Ne 13 28Such variations are easily accounted for. Many of them are accidental. A copyist can accidentally mistake one letter for another. He can happen to leave out words or lines, or repeat sentences. Sometimes the changes are made deliberately, in order to correct grammar, or perhaps establish proof of a doctrine. Sometimes owners of a manuscript would make marginal notes, and a copyist may have incorporated them in the text, thinking that they belonged to it originally. An Armenian translation of St. Mark has been found in which the last 12 verses of Mark are said to have been written by a church father, Aristion. If that is correct, he, no doubt, added it to the gospel because it was an accepted tradition at that time in his part of the church. They may have been part of the original, for the end leaf of a papyrus might easily get lost.

1 Ne 13 28Nephi, in his wonderful vision, sees that many precious things had been taken away from the book. For the reasons here given I believe this was fulfilled in the destruction of books that originally belonged to the collection of inspired literature.

1 Ne 13 28People have a wrong idea of the civilization of the early ages. They are apt to think of the people as ignorant, unable to read and write. But not so. In all probability, while the slaves were ignorant, a majority of the citizens could both read and write. Letters, written even by school children, have been unearthed in later years.

1 Ne 13 28It is not maintained that every one could write like the artists whose manuscripts have been preserved. On the contrary, experts in penmanship were probably few, as they still are. For that reason, even the apostles engaged writers, as we may gather from the statement of St. Paul in his letter to the Colossians, that only the salutation was by his own hand. (Col. 4:18; 1 Cor. 16:21; 2 Thess. 3:17) This is important. For, if the writers of the books of the Bible engaged amanuensis, as they certainly did, then the discrepancies in "style" which have caused "higher critics" to dissect the writings, may be due to different secretaries instead of different authors, since the learned scribes certainly had some latitude in the choice of words or construction of sentences.

1 Ne 13 28Books were numerous. In the famous Alexandrian library, there were at one time circa 700,000 volumes. During the siege of the city by Julius Caesar, part of the library was destroyed by fire, but the loss was somewhat repaired by the turning over of the collection at Pergamos to Cleopatra by Mark Anthony. It remained for the so-called Christian Roman emperor, Theodosius the Great, to destroy that precious collection of literature, in the interest of the church, in the year A.D. 389. Similar acts of vandalism have occurred again and again. Precious books were given to the flames. The same policy was resurrected in America by the first Spanish missionaries who made bonfires of the literature of the Mayas. The vision of Nephi was fulfilled literally.

1 Ne 13 29VERSE 29

1 Ne 13 29Goeth forth unto all the nations. The collection of sacred books, thus limited, is given to all nations as the "Bible."

1 Ne 13 29The first Bible society for the purpose of distributing Bibles was formed in 1710 by Baron Karl Hildebrand von Canstein, Halle, Germany, and by the year 1834 this institute had distributed 2,754,350 copies of the Bible, and about two million copies of the New Testament. The American Bible Society, founded in 1816, in 1930, had distributed in all, 216,189,915 copies of the Bible. The British and Foreign Bible Society alone has distributed the sacred volume in 450 different languages and dialects, and altogether, the Scriptures are now available in more than 500 tongues. Thus, the vision of Nephi has come true.

1 Ne 13 30VERSE 30

1 Ne 13 30The mixture of thy seed, which are among thy brethren. The Indians, whom we usually call Lamanites, are a mixed race. Some are the descendants of Nephi, some of the brothers of Nephi. That is evident from the divine promise: "God will not suffer that the Gentiles will utterly destroy the mixture of thy seed (v. 30), which are among thy brethren. Neither will he suffer that the Gentiles shall destroy the seed of thy brethren" (v. 31). See also 4 Ne. 17.

1 Ne 13 34VERSE 34

1 Ne 13 34The remnant of the house of Israel. This "remnant," is the "seed of thy father;" that is, the descendants of Lehi, both Nephites and Lamanites.

1 Ne 13 34Smitten by the Gentiles. From the very first advent of the European conquerors, the Indians have been the victims of cruelty. Las Casas, who came to America with Columbus in his third voyage, and who from the year 1530 traveled as a missionary in various parts of Central America, reports what he saw in Hispaniola. Indians were distributed in lots of 50 or 100 or 500, with the understanding that they were to be taught "the things of our holy faith." They became slaves and were simply worked and flogged to death. Sometimes they attempted mutiny with disastrous consequences to themselves. They were slaughtered, impaled on stakes, burned at the stake. Indians were hung up in rows and slowly tortured to death with sword points. Some were broiled over a slow fire and children were drowned without compunction. Mr. John Fiske says, "This tyranny went on until the effect was like that of a pestilence. The native population rapidly diminished until labour grew scarce, and it was found necessary in Hispaniola to send and kidnap Indians from other islands, and to import from Seville, negroes that had been caught in Portuguese Africa." (John Fiske, The Discovery of America, vol. 2, p. 445)

1 Ne 13 34The remnant was indeed "smitten." The Indians were "visited in judgment," but their day of judgment in this probation is passed, and the day of salvation has come, with the coming forth of the Book of Mormon (v. 36), and the proclamation of the gospel from the mountains (v. 37).

1 Ne 13 39VERSE 39

1 Ne 13 39I beheld other books. The Book of Mormon. Its mission is to convince Gentiles, Lamanites and Jews of the truth of the Bible.

1 Ne 13 40VERSE 40

1 Ne 13 40These last records. The Book of Mormon confirms the Bible. It makes known "plain and precious things," once a part of the Bible but now missing. The lost records may, or may not, be recovered, but the truths they contained are not lost. They are found in the Book of Mormon. This volume also testifies to all the world that Jesus is the Son of God, and the Redeemer of the world.

1 Ne 13 42VERSE 42

1 Ne 13 42Shall manifest himself. Two epochal manifestations are here mentioned. In the first he appears to both Jews and Gentiles. The New Testament is a record of this manifestation. In the second he appears to the Gentiles and also to the Jews. "The last shall be the first, and the first shall be the last." We now seem to be in the second manifestation, at the beginning of its last phase, the manifestation to the Jews.

1 Ne 13 42For a comprehensive account of the origin, contents and authenticity of the Book of Mormon, see "The Articles of Faith" by Dr. James E. Talmage and "An Introduction to the Study of the Book of Mormon," by Elder J.M. Sjodahl.

GENERAL NOTES

The Book of Mormon, the book which the world today needs. No apology for the Book of Mormon is offered. None is needed. It is the very book the world today needs.

It is a witness for God—a "new witness," as the late President B.H. Roberts put it. It testifies to the divinity of Jesus, and the relationship of man to God.

It shows, moreover, the only road there is to universal peace and prosperity, two conditions that have eluded human wisdom for centuries. It proves that the children of God can live together in brotherly love and economic independence, if they will cleanse their hearts of sinful selfishness, be just in all their dealings and live in accordance with the laws of God. The descendants of Lehi lived in Millennial conditions for a century and a half, until class distinction again arose, which, as always, resulted in religious strife, civil war, and, finally, a war of extermination. If the Book of Mormon had no other message to the world than this, it would, even so, be a pearl of great price. It is a book for our statesmen, our sociologists and jurists, as well as for theologians and philosophers.

Remarkable evidence. The following remarkable incident was told by President Heber J. Grant in his sermon in the Tabernacle, Salt Lake City, April 8, 1932:

I have often mentioned it in public, that while I was being entertained at a dinner in London by one of the managers of the great New York Life Insurance Company I met a gentleman who had been connected with the British Legation in Constantinople and who had spent years in the Holy Land. He had been to America a number of times. I spent the evening, after dinner, chatting with him because of his remarkable experiences and the interesting things he had to say. Finally he said to me:

"Mr. Grant, do you know that I ran across the most inexplicable thing of my life the last time I visited Canada. I went way up into the northern wilds of Canada, beyond all civilization, visiting with those heathen Indians. I found among them the exact pattern, woven in colored beads, of Holy Land rugs, and in no other part of the world that I have visited have I seen rugs of the same pattern as those oriental rugs in the Holy Land, and in some sections certain patterns have come down for hundreds, almost thousands of years, in one family. They have no fabrics up among those Indians with which to do weaving, but they had the exact patterns, yet they had never heard of Jerusalem, and it is the most inexplicable thing of my life."

I said: "That is very easy to a Mormon. Have you ever heard of the Book of Mormon?"

"No."

"I will send you a copy. It is the Bible, so to speak, of the American Indians, their sacred history, and you will find that the forefathers of the American Indians and other peoples who have been in this continent came from Jerusalem."

He said: "What! That explains the inexplicable."

Now that may not be counted by some as much as a straw of evidence, but to my mind it is a very great evidence regarding the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon.

---
Notas:
[^1] A man robed in white, a messenger from our Heavenly Father, takes Lehi, in a dream, through a dark and dreary wilderness, to a large and spacious field. (1 Ne. 8:5-9)
[^2] In this spacious field he sees a tree, bearing sweet and delicious fruit, the eating of which filled his soul with joy. (vv. 10-12)
