Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 15

1 Ne 15 1VERSE 1

1 Ne 15 1I returned to the tent. Nephi had been "caught away in the Spirit of the Lord" into an exceedingly high mountain. (Chap. 11:1) Now he returns. This expression may indicate that he had been absent in body as well as in spirit; or it may mean that he awoke from the special condition during which the impressions of the vision had been received. The Apostle Paul, speaking, no doubt, of his own experience, when he was "caught up to the third heaven," says, "Whether in the body, I cannot tell; or whether out of the body, I cannot tell: God knoweth," and this he repeats, as if for greater emphasis. (2 Cor. 12:2, 3)

1 Ne 15 5VERSE 5

1 Ne 15 5I was overcome. From this verse and the following, it is clear that what he had seen had overwhelmed him so completely that it took some time before he regained his physical strength.

1 Ne 15 5If I understand the chapter correctly, it tells us that the family were gathered for devotion in the tent of Lehi, and that the vision of their father was the subject under discussion. Very soon the discussion became a dispute between the sons of Lehi, who had neglected to pray for light and guidance. Then Nephi, as soon as he was able to speak to them, gave his testimony and explained the points in dispute.

1 Ne 15 5The Olive Tree. This was one of the subjects of dispute. The expression refers to the house of Israel (v. 12). The descendants of Lehi are of the house of Israel, and therefore a branch of the olive tree (v. 14). This branch was broken off when the people dwindled in unbelief (v. 13). It was grafted into the tree when, after many generations, the Gospel was revealed in its fulness and so far as it has been accepted by the remnant (v. 16). But the restoration applies not only to the descendants of Lehi but also to the Jews (v. 19). And it is the last. There will be no more dispersion (v. 20).

1 Ne 15 5This sermon had the intended effect. The brothers of Nephi humbled themselves before the Lord. (v. 20) The only criterion of a successful sermon is its effects on the hearers. Nephi gained his object.

1 Ne 15 5The olive tree is very beautiful. Its white flowers are produced in great abundance. They resemble those of the lilac. The aged olive tree is often surrounded by young and thrifty shoots (Ps. 128:3), like children. On festive occasions women sometimes adorned themselves with garlands of olive leaves (Judith 15:13), which have a silvery, glistening sheen.

1 Ne 15 5An olive branch was the emblem of peace. The door and posts of the entrance to the temple, and also to the holy of holies, were made of olive wood, to symbolize the access to God through peace as a result of the atonement. The two large cherubim on the ark were also made of olive wood. (1 Kings 6:23, 31, 33)

1 Ne 15 5The Prophet Zechariah had a remarkable vision of two olive trees standing by a golden candlestick. He asked the angel who was his guide, for an explanation of the two trees. He answered, "These are the two anointed ones," [probably Joshua and Zerubbabel] "that stand by the Lord of the whole earth," as waiting for his commands in order to carry them out. Jehovah surveys the whole earth, and is cognizant of the disturbing events that are troubling his people, and his inspired servants are ready at all times to bring divine light to them, from the sanctuary. (Zech. 4:1-3, 11-14)

1 Ne 15 5The Prophet Jeremiah compares Judah to a "green olive tree, fair and of goodly fruit" (11:16; Hos. 14:6). In Romans 11:17, 24, the Gentiles are "wild olives" grafted upon the the stock of a cultivated olive tree, while the "natural branches" are broken off. Wicked men are compared to olive trees that cast off their flowers and therefore bear no fruit. (Job 15:33) Children are compared to "olive plants" (Ps. 128:3). They are beautiful. They are a blessing. They are God's reward for righteousness.

1 Ne 15 21VERSE 21

1 Ne 15 21What meaneth this thing which our father saw? There were three kinds of trees, or plants, in the garden which our heavenly Father planted eastward in the Land of Eden. There were plants beautiful to the eye, fragrant, and suitable for food. In the midst of the garden there was the tree of life, which seems to have had medicinal qualities. (See Gen. 3:22, and Rev. 2:7 and 22:2, where the tree is said to bear twelve manner of fruits and leaves "for the healing of the nations.") There was also the tree, the eating of which produced knowledge of good and evil, but also death. (Gen. 2:9 and 17; comp. Prov. 3:18, 11:30; Ezek. 47:12)

1 Ne 15 21Lehi, in his vision had seen a beautiful tree with sweet fruit (1 Ne. 8:10, 11), and this tree, we are told, was a representation of the tree of life.

1 Ne 15 21We may not fully understand all that the account in Genesis of the fall of man conveys to the reader, but we do realize that it is not a myth. It is history. "Adam fell that man might be; and men are that they might have joy." (Alma 2:25) "Adam did fall by the partaking of the forbidden fruit, according to the word of God; and thus we see, that by his fall, all mankind became a lost and fallen people." (Alma 12:22) "Now we see that the man had become as God, knowing good and evil; and lest he should put forth his hand and take also of the tree of life, and eat and live for ever, the lord God placed cherubim and the flaming sword, that he should not partake of the fruit—" (Alma 42:3)

1 Ne 15 21From a moral point of view, we learn in this narrative that our first parents were free, moral agents, capable of choosing for themselves a course of action, and therefore responsible for their acts.

1 Ne 15 21We also learn that sin is the transgression of the divine law, the result of which is death. From the very moment that man partook of the forbidden tree he was in the power of death.

1 Ne 15 21The Scriptures refer to death in various terms, all very instructive. It is a return to dust (Gen. 2:7; 3:19). It is a withdrawal of the breath (Ps. 104:29, 30). It is being unclothed (2 Cor. 5:3, 4). It is a sleep (Ps. 76:5; John 11:13). It is a journey (Phil. 1:23; 2 Tim. 4:6, 7). It is also an enemy, to be destroyed by our Lord (1 Cor. 15:25, 26, 54-57).

1 Ne 15 21The Mosaic story of the fall conveys another important truth. It shows us that man was not sent out upon the uninhabited wastes of the earth before he was fully equipped for the struggle before him. How long time he had developed in Paradise under divine tuition, we know not. But we know that in the garden, God had taught him the value of plants and trees, and how to take care of them. (Gen. 2:15) He had become so familiar with the animal kingdom that he could name the animals according to their characteristics. (v. 19) He was undoubtedly familiar with astronomy, for otherwise the sun, the planets, the stars could not have been to him for signs, and for seasons, and for days and for years. (Gen. 1:14)

1 Ne 15 21The first man, according to the Mosaic account, appeared on earth with a remarkable degree of civilization. History confirms this view, for, no matter how far back the records go, they present us with evidences of civilization.

1 Ne 15 24VERSE 24

1 Ne 15 24It was the Word of God. In his vision, Lehi saw a rod of iron, by means of which the wanderers on Life's narrow path, surrounded by dark, delusive mists of error, could find their way to the tree of life. (I Ne. 8:19) This "rod," Nephi says, was the Word of God.

1 Ne 15 24This term, as I understand it, comprehends all that God has revealed to man, and more especially that which belongs to the plan of salvation. Some of the revelations have been preserved in written volumes, of which we then can properly say that they contain the Word of God.

1 Ne 15 24Among the ancient books so known are the Old and New Testaments, and, as we, as members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints believe, the Book of Mormon, and the writings of Moses and Abraham, as preserved in the Pearl of Great Price. All these, we claim, are inspired, which means that they were written by "holy men of God," who spake [as they were] moved by the "Holy Ghost" (2 Pet. 1:21); they are given by "inspiration of God" [^1] (2 Tim. 3:16).

1 Ne 15 24Modern volumes, similarly inspired, are, The Doctrine and Covenants and the writings of Joseph, the Prophet, as preserved in the Pearl of Great Price.

1 Ne 15 24Let us hear some testimonies concerning the Word of God, universally known as the "Bible."

1 Ne 15 24"Here is a book whose ante-mundane voices had grown old, when voices spoke in Eden. A book which has survived not only with continued but increasing lustre, vitality, vivacity, popularity, rebound of influence. A book which comes through all the shocks without a wrench, and all the furnaces of all the ages—like an iron safe—with every document in every pigeon hole, without a warp upon it, or the smell of fire ... a book dating from days as ancient as those of the Ancient of Days, and which, when all that makes up what we see and call the universe shall be dissolved, will still speak on in thunder-tones of majesty, and whisper-tones of love, for it is wrapping in itself the everlasting past, and opening and expanding from itself the everlasting future; and, like an all-irradiating sun, will roll on, while deathless ages roll, the one unchanging, unchangeable revelation of God." (The Rev. George S. Bishop, D.D., East Orange, N.J.)

1 Ne 15 24"Young man, my advice to you is that you cultivate an acquaintance with and firm belief in the Holy Scriptures, for this is your certain interest. I think Christ's system of morals and religion, as he left them with us, the best the world ever saw or is likely to see." (Benjamin Franklin)

1 Ne 15 24"I have said and always will say that the studious perusal of the sacred volume will make better citizens, better fathers, and better husbands." (Thomas Jefferson)

1 Ne 15 24"The Bible is the book of all others for lawyers as well as divines, and I pity the man who cannot find in it a rich supply of thought and rule of conduct." (Daniel Webster)

1 Ne 15 24"The farther the ages advance in civilization the more will the Bible be used." (Goethe)

1 Ne 15 24"All countries that refuse the cross wither, and the time will come, when the vast communities and countless myriads of America and Australia, looking upon Europe as Europe now looks upon Greece, and wondering how so small a space could have achieved such great deeds, will find music in the songs of Zion and solace in the parables of Galilee." (Benjamin Disraeli)

1 Ne 15 24As Latter-day Saints we believe that such testimonies are applicable to all revelations of God to man.

UNIVERSAL RELIGION

Since the human race has a common origin, all religions must have come from the one source. The covenant of God with Noah is the beginning, after the flood, of all religious systems. The Author of that covenant was God. And he made it binding upon Noah and all his descendants. It included "all flesh that is upon the earth." (Gen. 9-1-17) It was essentially the same as the covenant with our first parents in the garden of Eden (Comp. Gen. 1:22, 26-28), but it had two important additions. It prohibited the eating of flesh with the blood in it, because the blood, or rather the life, was the essential element in the atoning sacrifices. It also prohibited the shedding of human blood and fixed the penalty for the transgression of this law:

"Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God made he man."

The rainbow now became the visible symbol of this covenant. God so ordained it.

From this originally pure source all religions have come. As the descendants of Noah dispersed, the inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Arabia, Palestine, Syria, etc., received their religious traditions, customs and ideals through Shem, while those who occupied the shores of the Persian Gulf, Egypt, Ethiopia, Libya, etc., preserved the traditions of Ham, and the Aryan race, sometimes called the Japhetic or Indo-European group, perpetuated the religious ideals as handed down by the descendants of Japhet. Even the religions of the American Indians—the Peruvians, the Mayas, the Nahuas, and the North American tribes—are from the same source, through the Jaredites and the descendants of Lehi, and perhaps other immigrants from the Old World. The common origin accounts for the similarity that exists. The widely different conditions of life account for many of the differences in religious ideas and observances.

When speaking of the various races, it may be necessary to remember that there never was any well defined geographic line between them. They always intermingled, in some places more, in others less intimately, as Noah, in his patriarchal blessings foretold, when he said that Ham, through Canaan, would become a servant of servants "unto his brethren," and that Japhet would be enlarged and dwell "in the tents of Shem." (Gen. 9:25-27) This has been fulfilled. Various kindreds, tongues, peoples and nations have always occupied the same territory, in part. And as they mingled together, they borrowed from each other, they added their own philosophies, their own ceremonies, they made changes to suit new conditions, they formed, reformed, and reformed the reforms, and gradually a great number of religious systems were brought into existence, each different from the others, and all retaining a modicum of the original truth. The rod of iron is in evidence, even where the mists are thick.

Contrary to prevalent impressions perhaps, we must regard the various "pagan" religions and philosophies—the doctrines of Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, etc., in Asia; the mythologies of the ancient Greeks, Romans, Anglo-Saxons, and Teutons in Europe; the elaborate observances and rites of the Egyptians in Africa, and the simpler religious legends and forms of worship of the Indians in America—all these, we say, must be regarded, historically considered, as the development in divergent directions of the one original patriarchal religion, precisely as we regard the Roman and Greek Catholicism and Protestantism, with all its sects, historically, as so many parts of the religion of Jesus of Nazareth.

This view of the nature of paganism is suggested by the argument of St. Paul at Lystra, when the priests of the Roman colonists there were about to offer sacrifices to him and Barnabas, thinking that they were Jupiter and Mercurius. Paul argued: They were not gods but men; they were the servants of the living God, which made heaven and earth—

"Who in times past suffered all nations to walk in their own ways, nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. (Acts 14:16, 17; comp. Rom. 1:19, 20)

The manifestation of the power and the goodness of God was a revelation that even the natural man could understand, and many did. There must have been men and women in many parts of the world, in all ages, who feared God and lived righteous lives, according to the light they had. The Apostle Peter learned that lesson by special revelation (Acts 10:9-16), in which he was warned not to call "common" (or unclean), that which God had cleansed.

In the Old Testament we read of Job. He was a native of the land of Uz, possibly in Arabia, and he lived before the Mosaic dispensation had been established. It is supposed that he was a contemporary of Isaac, the son of Abraham. He certainly was a servant of the Lord, and was recognized as such by the Lord (Job 1:8; Ezek. 14:14, 20; Jas. 5:11), although he was not, as far as now known, a Hebrew. We read of Jethro (also called, Hobab, Reuel and Raguel), the father-in-law of Moses, who was a priest in the land of Midian, presumably a descendant of Cush, the son of Ham, and not of the fourth son of Abraham and Kethurah. He was a servant of the Lord. (Ex. 18:1-23)

A strange character is Balaam. He was a resident of Pethor (probably in Mesopotamia) and he was widely known for his prophetic gift. (Numb. 22:5) He had communication with God, and he certainly received information concerning the future of Israel and its enemies. He fell, because he loved the wages of un-righteousness, and was slain in a battle against Israel (Numb. 31:8). But he did not sin through ignorance. (Comp. Deut. 23:4, 5; Josh. 24:9; Jude 11; Rev. 2:14)

In the prophetic book of Jonah we are taught that the Lord was concerned about the wicked, idolatrous city of Nineveh (Jonah 4:11), which was founded by Nimrod, a descendant of Ham, through Cush, (Gen. 10:8) and that he accepted the prayers and the repentance of the inhabitants.

Cyrus, the Persian ruler, is by the Lord himself accorded such titles as "my shepherd" (Isa. 44:28), his "Anointed" [^2] (Isa. 45:28). According to 2 Chron. 36:22, the Lord inspired Cyrus to set the exiles free, and he acknowledged that, "The Lord God of heaven hath charged me to build him a house in Jerusalem."

The Ethiopian nobleman, the queen's secretary of the treasury, (Acts 8:27) and Cornelius, the Roman Centurian at Caesarea, are notable examples of the love of God of his children, without preference for race or nationality. (Acts 10:1, 2, 34, 35) Consider the following:

SOME ANCIENT RELIGIONS

Zoroastrianism. At times men have arisen in the various nations who, like Moses or Elijah among the Jews, have endeavored to arouse the people from slumber and direct their spiritual life according to high ideals.

One of these mighty men of old was Zoroaster, or, Zarathustra, the founder of Zoroastrianism. He was born, as now generally accepted, in the northwestern part of Persia, near the Caspian sea, probably in the year 660 B.C. Tradition has it that when he was thirty years of age he received a revelation, whereupon he came forward as a reformer of the superstitions and falsehoods that had crept into the old religion.

Zoroastrianism teaches the existence of One, Supreme God, Ahura Mazda, a name generally abbreviated to, Ormadz. Over against this Deity the Zoroastrians place the personified evil principle, Angra Mainyu, which name appears in the abbreviated form, Ahriman. On the side of Ormadz there are a host of good angels, such as Good-mind, Right, Justice, Power, Dominion, Kingdom, Piety, Love, Immortality, etc. On the side of Ahriman there are evil spirits, such as Hunger, Thirst, Wrath, Lies, Harlots, etc. Between these two opposite hosts there is constant warfare, but the good will ultimately overcome the evil.

The Zoroastrians are generally classed as fireworshipers. But they deny this, and explain that they fix their eyes on the flame as the purest and most glorious element in existence, while they humble themselves before the Supreme Being and acknowledge their dependence on him.

The Medians and Persians had a tribe, or a caste, the Magi, who had charge of religion, arts, and the higher culture generally. They were highly honored, as was the tribe of Levi in Israel. Three of these Magi, as will be remembered, came to Bethlehem to pay homage to Jesus, whose star they had seen in the east. The followers of Zoroaster are still represented by the Ghebers in Persia and the Parsees in India.

Manicheism. This religious system is a modification of Zoroastrianism. Its founder was a Persian nobleman, Mani, or Manes, born in the year 216 A.D. In his youth he joined a sect in South Babylonia, known as Baptists. At the age of 25 he appeared at the coronation of the Persian ruler, Schapur I. Shortly afterwards he traveled through India and made a number of converts. His disciples proclaimed him to be a true prophet of the living God, and his philosophy was diffused throughout the then known world. During the reign of King Boram I over Persia, he suffered martyrdom by crucifixion.

Manicheism recognizes the existence of the two principles of good and evil and the constant conflict between them. Darkness, it holds, always aspires to light, and, at times, engulfs a portion of it. By such a process the world, including human nature with its conflicting impulses and desires, has come into existence.

The great church father, Augustine (b. 354, d. 430) bishop at Hippo, Africa, was in his younger years associated with the Manicheans. Later he carried on a controversy against them, as well as the Donatists and the Pelagians, but, although he opposed them on behalf of the church, their philosophical speculations penetrated the whole church, and are still in evidence in the theology of Christian churches. [^3]

Greek and Roman myths. According to the poets, the gods dwelt in a palace on Olympus, the highest peak of the mountain chain between Thessaly and Macedonia. Zeus was the chief of the gods. They were in appearance human in form; grander and more beautiful than men, but still human. They were inconceivably strong. When Zeus shook his locks the whole Olympus trembled. They moved with lightning speed from one place to another. In the twinkling of an eye, Athene, the goddess, drops from the heights of Olympus down to Ithaca. They see all; they hear all. Zeus, from his throne on Mount Ida, can follow the events of the battle before Troy in Asia Minor. As regards mental qualifications they are also far above men, and they visit impiety and injustice with punishment, but they are not above exhibiting deceit, hatred, cruelty and jealousy, themselves.

Tremendous battles were fought by the gods. After the conflict with the Titans, Zeus divided the government of the world between himself and his two brothers. He gave the oceans and the waters to Poseidon and the infernal regions to Hades. This did not suit the powerful goddess Gaea, wherefore she gave birth to the giant Typhoeus, a monster with a hundred flame-breathing dragons' heads, whom she sent to overthrow Zeus. A great battle followed which shook heaven and earth. Zeus, at length conquered and cast his adversary into Tartary, or, according to another version, into Mount Aetna, Sicily, whence he at times still breathes fire and flames towards heaven.

The most ancient legend concerning the origin of man derives the human race from trees and rocks. But some asserted that man was called into existence by Zeus and the other gods. Another account makes Prometheus, a Titan, the originator of men. Man, they say, was made of clay and water, and the goddess Athene breathed a spirit into him.

Various views were also held concerning the original condition of mankind. Some held that the race worked itself up from a state of barbarism, with the assistance of the gods. Others held that man was at first living in a state of innocent happiness, communicating with the gods, and that he lost this happiness by his presumption.

Prometheus helped man to become civilized. He stole fire from the gods and taught man how to use it. But because man polluted this pure element, Prometheus was seized and chained to a rock, where an eagle devours his liver in the daytime. But as it grows again during the night, there is a meal every day for the eagle.

Another legend accounts for the existence of evil in the world. Zeus ordered Hephaestus to make an image of a beautiful woman. The gods gave her life and named her Pandora. Aphrodite gave her the charms that kindle love. Athene instructed her in the arts. Hermes gave her a smooth tongue and a crafty disposition. The seasons and the graces adorned her with flowers and fine raiment. Zeus then sent her to Epimetheus who made her his wife. In the house of Epimetheus there was a closed jar which contained all kinds of diseases and ills. No one was allowed to open this jar, but curiosity got the better of Pandora, and she removed the lid. Out came all kinds of diseases and troubles. They have been with us ever since. The only thing left is Hope.

According to another legend, the gods first created a golden age. Men lived in this age free from care and sorrow and disease. At last they sank into death peacefully; how, we do not know. But they live in the upper regions as good spirits, and they are guarding and protecting mortals. After this, the gods created a second race of men. They were inferior to the first. Their age was the silver age. By and by they became idle, effeminate and rebellious. Zeus then blotted out that race, and created a third, the race of bronze. This became headstrong and violent. They destroyed themselves in sanguinary strife, or, according to another version, they perished in the flood of Deucalion, the Greek Noah, who became the ancestor of a new race of men.

It is quite interesting to compare such myths and legends of paganism with the authentic accounts of the sacred Scriptures.

Hinduism is the oldest of the living religions of India. Its chief characteristic is the caste system. The name of the ruling caste is "Brahman," or "Brahmin." They are the priests, and their word is law. Even the shadow of a Brahman is sacred. The three chief gods of Hinduism are Brahma, the creator, Vishnu, the preserver, and Siva, the destroyer. The sacred books of the Hindus are the Vedas.

Jainism is an early reform movement in India, by which it was hoped to improve Hinduism. Soon after Jainism another reform movement arose, known as Buddhism. Some regard Buddhism not as a religion but as a system of morality and philosophy. Some have suggested that Buddha is none other than Noah.

Sikhism is another Indian religion. Its founder, Nanak, was born in 1469 at Lahore, and died in 1539. The aim of Nanak was to unite the Mohammendans and Hindus into one brotherhood. The Sikhs have been taught to worship God, to practice morality and to fight. They have had two wars with the British, and been defeated. In the World War they distinguished themselves on several occasions. There are now about three million Sikhs in India.

Confucianism can be referred to as proof of the divine sanction of the Command, "Honor thy father and thy mother," for the strength of China, notwithstanding her weakness, is obedience to that precept. Confucius lived 551-479 B.C. Late in life he was appointed minister of crime in the province of Lu, and it is said he was so successful, through his wisdom and justice, that he almost wiped out crime in that province. He held that acts in conformance with the five virtues of kindness, uprightness, decorum, wisdom and truth comprise the whole duty of man. He was a teacher of morals rather than religion. He considered that the history of China dates back to 2356 B.C.

Taoism is another religious, or philosophic, system of China. The founder, Laotse, is venerated throughout the empire. Its object is to give the greatest possible happiness to the individual.

Shinto is the official religion of Japan. It originated about 660 B.C. According to its sacred records Japan was the first divine work of creation, and the Mikado was the son of the Sun. The Japanese constitution starts with the declaration that the emperor occupies the throne of a lineal succession unbroken for eternities. The emperor is, therefore, regarded as a person of divine origin, with divine authority. Shintoism, it is said, has no creed, no doctrinal system, no moral code, no priests, and no images, although it has about 14,000 gods, and is broken up into 13 sects.

1 Ne 15 26VERSE 26

1 Ne 1 11 Ne 15 26What meaneth the river of water? The brothers of Nephi asked this question. Nephi explains that the water in the river was filthy, but that the fact had escaped their father, because of other things that had occupied his mind. He also explains that the water represents the awful gulf that separates the wicked from the tree of life, and from the association with the saints (v. 28). The gulf that separates Dives from Lazarus in Hades is in existence already on this side of the grave. Saints and sinners never endure the company of each other.

1 Ne 15 26The water also represents hell, prepared for the wicked (v. 29) by the devil (v. 35).

1 Ne 15 30VERSE 30

1 Ne 15 30The Justice of God. The gulf represented by the contaminated water is not the only separating obstacle between the righteous and the wicked, saints and sinners. The justice of God also stands between the two camps. In the vision of Lehi, this appeared like a flaming fire, ever ascending toward heaven. Note that the fountain of this contaminated river is the "depth of hell," and that the wars that ensued between the descendants of Lehi originated in those depths. (I Ne. 12:15, 16)

1 Ne 15 32VERSE 32

1 Ne 15 32They must be judged by their works. As a consequence of this justice of God, the day of judgment will come to each individual, and all will be judged according to the deeds done in the body.

SC1 Ne 15 331 Ne 15 341 Ne 15 35VERSES 33-35

SC1 Ne 15 331 Ne 15 341 Ne 15 35If they be filthy ... they cannot dwell in the kingdom of God. The judgment of God is not the arbitrary dictum of an Autocrat; it is rather a careful selection, a classification and an assignment of each soul, to the place and condition for which he is best fitted, on the evidence of his own thoughts, words and acts in this life. It is an eminently just judgment. "Even so, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments." (Rev. 16:7)

SC1 Ne 15 331 Ne 15 341 Ne 15 35"Does not the soul, then, when in this state, depart to that which resembles itself, the invisible, the divine, immortal, and wise? And on its arrival there, is it not its lot to be happy, free from error, ignorance, fears and the wild passions and all the other evils to which human nature is subject?" (Plato)

GENERAL NOTES

The student of the Book of Mormon may be interested in the following specimens of non-Christian literature.

Special attention is called to the Icelandic songs. They are interesting both on account of the language and the contents.

The Icelandic tongue was spoken, until the 13th century, not only in Iceland but in the Scandinavian countries. the Faeroe Islands, Shetland, the Orkneys, the Hebrides, and on the coasts of England, Scotland and Ireland. It was brought over to Iceland by the Norwegians who first settled there.

It is closely related to what is known as Old English, which was spoken in England till the time of William the Conqueror (1027-87).

We who believe that the blood of Israel is coursing in the veins of a large portion of the Anglo-Saxon race and its near kindred, also realize that these venerable compositions, together with the sagas, myths and biographies of the Icelanders must have been influenced by the Israelites who settled among them. that enhances their interest.

ICELANDIC SONGS

END OF THE WORLD

(Ragnarok)

Brothers go to combat, Cruel wounds inflicting. Kindred tear asunder Friendship's tender bonds. Earth is full of evil: Whoredom, fornication; Swords and battle axes Beat against the shields. Wolves and mighty whirlwinds Spread on earth destruction Ere the world goes under, Ere dread ragnarok. Earth is quaking, trembling, Female giants flying, None regards another, Each one for himself. Mime's sons are playing, Gjallarhorn is brought forth, Aesir-god is well known By the sounding blasts. Hejmdal sounds the trumpet Toward heaven pointing, From the head of Mime Odin counsel seeks. Branches of the ash-tree, Yggdrasil, the olden, They are sighing, trembling For the giant's free. Wanderers to Helhjem Move with fear and terror Until death is swallowed By a son of Surt. What about the Aesir? What about the Elfins? Jotunhejm is shaking, Aesir meet to plan, Dwarfs, though wise, are helpless At the rocky portals Of the lofty mountains, Know ye also that? Garm, at Gnipehollow, Barks, the world arousing; Fenris' chains are breaking, Soon the wolf is free. Farther still I'm seeing, Much more I could tell you Of the gods, exalted, And of Ragnarok. * * * * Darkened is the sungod, Earth by water covered, And the stars of heaven Give no more their light. Flames strike flames, like serpents, Hissing, spitting, circling; Towards heaven the dancing, Lurid blazes flash.

But after this fiery consummation, there is a resurrection of the world:

Again I see the earth Arising from the deep, And on the mountain top The eagle finds his prey. The purling mountain streams Are hast'ning to their goal, And earth in green arrayed Is fair as ne'er before. * * * * Fairer than the sun Is a hall I see, Covered all with gold, GIMLE is its name. There will all the good Live and dwell in joy In eternity. Then the Mighty One, He who rules the world, Comes from Heaven down, Takes the judgment seat. All things he doeth judge, Ending strife for ever, Tells us what is holy Here upon the earth.

STANZAS from HAVAMAL

Better burden none can carry On his way, than wisdom, knowledge; Poorest baggage on the journey Is intoxicating drink. Mead is not for men to relish, 't is not good, as some folks tell us; For the more we drink such nectar, Sooner do we loose our minds. Dullard is the bird, the heron, Hov'ring round a drunkard's tables, Robbing people of their senses. By such feathers I was tied up When I was at Gunlod's home. Drunk I was, intoxicated, At the home of Wise Man Fjalar. Well it is when, after drinking, Each one gets his senses back. Wise let princes be, and silent, Fearless, brave and strong in combat. Glad let all men be and joyful Till the last day's early dawn. Craven, dumb is he who's thinking That his life will last for ever If he only shuns all danger. Old age finds and ends him surely. Though he may have dodged the spear. Death takes herds and flocks and kindred, Thou, thyself, wilt soon be lifeless; But the praise you've been accorded, That will never, never die. Death takes herds and flocks and kindred, Death thyself will soon make lifeless; One thing lives, I know, for ever: Judgment passed on him who died.

PERSIAN

O Thou who existedst from eternity, and abidest for ever! Sight cannot bear thy light, praise cannot express Thy perfection. Thy light melts the understanding, and Thy glory baffles wisdom; to think of Thee bewilders reason; Thy essence confounds thought. Science is like blinding desert sand on the road to Thy perfection. The town of literature is a mere hamlet compared with the word of Thy knowledge.

* * *

Human thought and knowledge combined can only spell the first letter of Thy love.

* * *

The man who has constantly contended against evil, morally, physically, inwardly and outwardly, may fearlessly meet death; well assured that radiant spirits will lead him across the luminous bridge into a paradise of eternal happiness.

* * *

Souls risen from the grave will know each other, and say: That is my father, or my mother, my wife or sister.

* * *

The wicked will say to the good, Wherefore, when I was in the world, did you not teach me to act righteously? O ye pure ones, it is because you did not instruct me, that I am excluded from the assembly of the blessed.

* * *

The best way of worshiping God is in allaying the distress of the times, and improving the condition of mankind.

* * *

All good thoughts, words and actions are from the celestial world.

* * *

Be very scrupulous to observe the truth in all things.

Once upon a time the fishes of a certain river took counsel together, and said: They tell us that our life and being is from the water; but we have never seen water, and we know not what it is. Then some among them, wiser than the rest, said, We have heard that there dwelleth in the sea a very wise and learned fish who knoweth all things. Let us journey to him and ask him to show us water, or explain to us what water is. So seven of them set out on their travels and came at last to the sea wherein the sage fish dwelleth. On hearing their question, he replied,—

O ye, who seek to solve the knot, Ye live in God, yet know him not.

* * *

One night Gabriel from his seat in Paradise heard the voice of God sweetly responding to a human heart. The angel said, Surely this must be an eminent servant of the Most High, whose spirit is dead to lust and lives on high. The angel hastened over land and sea to find this man, but could not find him in the earth or heavens, At last he exclaimed, O Lord, show me the way to this object of thy love. God answered, Turn thy steps to yon village, and in the pagoda thou shalt behold him. The angel sped to the pagoda, and therein found a solitary man kneeling before an idol. Returning, he cried, O Master of the world! Hast thou looked with love on a man who invokes an idol in a pagoda? God said, I consider not the error of ignorance. This heart, amid its darkness, has the highest place.

BUDDHIST TEACHINGS

The effect of water poured on the root of a tree, is seen in the branches and fruit; so in the next world are seen the effects of good deeds performed here.

* * *

There are treasures laid up in the heart—treasures of charity, piety, temperance and soberness. These treasures a man takes with him beyond death, when he leaves this world.

* * *

Man never dies. The soul inhabits the body for a time, and leaves it again. The soul is myself; the body is only my dwelling place.

* * *

Death is not death; the soul merely departs, and the body falls. It is because men see only their bodies that they love life and hate death.

* * *

O Thou Eternal One! Thou Perfection of Time! Thou Truest Truth! Thou Changeless Essence of all Change! Thou Most Excellent Radiance of Mercy, I take refuge in Thee.

As the great universe hath no boundary, and the light sections of heaven have no gateway, so the Supreme reason has no limits.

We do not suppose our prayers are the only prayers in the world. We ought to respect all prayer. Men of prayer belong to all countries; they are strangers nowhere. Such is the doctrine taught by our holy books.

The divine law is as a cloud which, with a garland of light, spreads joy on the earth.

The water falls on all creatures, on herbs, bushes and trees; and each pumps up to its own leaves and blossoms what it requires for its special need. So falls the rain of the law on the many-hearted world. The law is for millions; but it is one, and it is alike beautiful to all.

Only the religious man is good. And what is religion? It is the perfect agreement of the will with the conscience.

Alms and pious demonstrations are of no worth compared with the loving-kindness of religion. The festival that bears great fruit is the festival of duty.

A man may recite large portions of the law, but if he is not a doer of it, he is like a herdsman who counts the cattle of others.

One should seek for others the happiness one desires for one's self.

There is no higher duty than to work for the good of the whole world.

Practise not usury in thy lending. Thou shalt abstain from acquiring the property of another by fraud or violence.

Contract no friendships with the hope of gain.

Speak the truth; do not yield to anger; and when asked, give of the little thou hast. By those steps thou wilt approach the Immortals.

The good man, when reviled, reviles not again; when smitten, he is not angry; when treated violently, he returns love and good-will; when threatened with death, he returns no malice.

We should be deaf to hear evils of others and blind to perceive their imperfections.

HINDU TEACHINGS

Shun wealth and pleasures repugnant to law; and avoid even lawful acts, if they may cause pain or offense to mankind.

* * *

No man can obtain knowledge of the soul without abstaining from evil actions and having control over his senses and his mind; nor can he attain it if he is actuated by desire for reward.

* * *

Labor makes known the true worth of man, as fire brings the perfume out of incense.

* * *

Religion is tenderness toward all creatures.

* * *

Large rivers, great trees, wholesome plants and wealthy persons are not created for themselves, but to be of service to others.

* * *

He who, to give himself pleasure, injures animals that are not injurious, adds nothing to his own happiness, either living or dead. But who never gives pain to any creature, by confinement or death, but seeks the good of all sentient beings, enjoys bliss without end.

CHINESE WISDOM

God is the parent of men. He is compassionate and unwearied in blessing. He inspects kingdoms and makes no mistakes. Clear-seeing and intelligent, he dwells with men in all their actions. He is offended with wrong-doing.

* * *

What you would not like to have done to yourself, do it not unto others. When you labor for others, do it with the same zeal as if it were for yourself.

* * *

The mean man sows, that himself or his friends may reap; but the love of the perfect man is universal.

EGYPTIAN WISDOM

God all in all.

I am that which has been, which is, and which will be; and no one has yet lifted the veil which covers me.

The world is not to be comprehended. God, who made it, has forbidden it.

What we say in secret is known to him who made our inner nature. He who made us is present with us, though we are alone.

Who can bless Thee or give thanks for Thee or to Thee? How shall I revere Thee? O Father! It is impossible to comprehend Thy hour or Thy time.

Shall I love Thee as if I were something of myself, or as if I had anything of my own, or rather as if I belonged to another?

Thou art what I am. Thou art what I do. Thou art what I say. Thou art all things, and there is nothing which thou art not.

Thou art all that is made and all that is not made.

Thou art the mind that understandeth all things; thou art the good that doest all things; Thou art the Father that makest all things; Thou art Thyself.

Of matter, the most subtle portion is the air; of air, the most subtle part is the soul; of the soul, the most subtle part is the mind; of the mind, the most subtle part is God.

What is truth, through me, praises Truth. What is good, through me, sings praises to the Good.

O All! receive a rational homage from all things. Thou art God.

Thy Messenger, by the fire, by the air, by the earth, by the water, by the spirit, by all things, proclaimeth these things concerning Thee.

FOUND IN THE TALMUD

If you commit a sin twice, you will think it allowable.

He who marries for money, it shall be a curse to him.

The true reward is not of this world.

The world is saved by the breath of the school children.

Jerusalem was destroyed because the instruction of the young was neglected.

He who has more learning than good works, is like a tree with many branches but few roots. The first wind throws it on its face.

It is woman through whom God's blessings are vouchsafed to a house. She teaches the children, speeds the husband to the house of worship, and welcomes him when he returns.

These four shall not enter into Paradise: The scoffer, the liar, the hypocrite and the slanderer. To slander is to commit murder.

Says an idolator: If God hates idolatry, why does he not destroy it? And someone answered: Men worship the sun, the moon, the stars; would you ask him to destroy these because men are foolish?

If misfortune come upon a man, let him not cry to Michael or Gabriel, but unto Me let him cry, and I will answer him; as it is written, Everyone who calls upon the Lord shall be saved.

What is Common to All

All religions believe in a Supreme Being, be he a person or a cosmic Force.

Divine incarnation is believed in by Hinduism, Buddhism, Christianity, and others.

Divine revelation is claimed by all.

All have sacred writings.

An Arabian Rhyme

On parents' knees a naked, newborn child, Weeping thou satst, while all around thee smiled; So live that, sinking in thy long, last sleep, Thou then mayest smile while all around thee weep.

---
Notas:
[^1] A man robed in white, a messenger from our Heavenly Father, takes Lehi, in a dream, through a dark and dreary wilderness, to a large and spacious field. (1 Ne. 8:5-9)
[^2] In this spacious field he sees a tree, bearing sweet and delicious fruit, the eating of which filled his soul with joy. (vv. 10-12)
[^3] In looking about for his family, Lehi sees a "river of water" running close to the tree. At the head of this water, Sariah, Sam and Nephi were standing, uncertain where to go. He called them, and they came to him. Soon he discovered Laman and Lemuel, and called them too; but "they would not come." (vv. 12-18)
