Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 18

SC1 Ne 18 11 Ne 18 21 Ne 18 31 Ne 18 4VERSES 1-4

SC1 Ne 18 11 Ne 18 21 Ne 18 31 Ne 18 4The ship completed. Nephi and his brethren and other members of the colony now applied themselves to the work of construction of the ship, in accordance with the instructions Nephi received from time to time of the Lord.

SC1 Ne 18 11 Ne 18 21 Ne 18 31 Ne 18 4Like all Hebrews of that time, they were, no doubt, somewhat familiar with ships and ship building. There was a navigable lake in Palestine, the Sea of Galilee. Smaller boats and larger craft were constantly plying its sometimes turbulent waves. They were familiar with the extensive Phoenician shipping. Hiram, king of Tyre, delivered at the port of Jaffa the timber that was cut in the Lebanon mountains for the temple of Solomon. (2 Chron. 2:16) And it is on record that Solomon established stations at Ezion-geber and Elath, where he built ships for which the king of Tyre furnished navigators and crews, and that these ships were dispatched to the land of Ophir, whence they returned with costly cargoes, especially gold and precious stones. [^1] (1 Kings 9:28, 10, 11)

SC1 Ne 18 11 Ne 18 21 Ne 18 31 Ne 18 4In the account by Luke of the voyage of St. Paul to Rome (Acts 27 and 28) there is some interesting information concerning ancient ships and navigation. Some ships must have been quite large. The vessel which was wrecked on the coast of Malta (Melite) had 276 souls on board, among whom Paul was one. It also had a cargo of wheat. It has been calculated that it must have been a ship of more than 500 tons' capacity. The large vessels had sails and were steered by means of an oar in the stern. On the prow stood the insignia by which the ship was known, as for instance, "Castor and Pollux," on the ship which carried Paul from Malta. The vessels were frail, at best. In stormy seas they were, therefore, girded with cables, called "helps" (Acts 27:17), to keep them from being broken up. They were equipped with anchors, and a boat for communication with the shore, when at anchor. Also with sounding lines. Navigation consisted mostly in following the shores, or, at night, the stars. The captain was the navigator, and the officer who had charge of the steering apparatus was called the "governor."

1 Ne 18 2VERSE 2

1 Ne 18 2Not after the manner of men. But the ship that Nephi built was different from the common types.

1 Ne 18 3VERSE 3

1 Ne 18 3I did pray oft. The ship was built according with instructions from heaven, and they were given in answer to prayer. It is the praying soul that hears God speak. Moses is an illustration of this truth: "And when Moses was gone into the Tabernacle of the congregation to speak with Him, then he heard the voice of One speaking unto him from off the mercy seat that was upon the ark of testimony from between the two cherubim, and He spake unto him." (Num. 7:89.) The life and work of the Prophet Joseph Smith is another illustration of the same truth.

1 Ne 18 4VERSE 4

1 Ne 18 4It was good, and the workmanship ... exceeding fine. Even the brothers of Nephi acknowledged that. It was a good ship. In all probability they would not have to depend on cables to keep it together in a storm. It was exceedingly fine. It was so nicely put together that it did not leak. The men who had said that a ship in which to cross the ocean could not be built by them, now humbled themselves and acknowledged their error.

1 Ne 18 5VERSE 5

1 Ne 18 5The voice of the Lord came to my father. We notice that the communications from God came through Lehi, who was the head of the colony, whenever the entire community was concerned.

1 Ne 18 6VERSE 6

1 Ne 18 6Prepared all things. This included fruit and meat from the wilderness, and honey, and other provisions.

1 Ne 18 6Just what kind of fruits they had we are not told. Palestine, anciently, produced a great variety of trees, shrubs and vegetables. Among many others, these are mentioned in the Scriptures: Almonds, wild and cultivated; apple, probably the quince, or the lemon; calamus, a sweet cane; figs, "husks," (Luke 15), the pods of the carob-tree, also known as the St. John's tree, which pods were often fed to pigs; the mandrake, the mulberry, which was a kind of fig; nuts of many varieties; olives, pomegranates, sycamore, a kind of fig; beans, millet, a small grain; lentils, and the grapevine, known in history ever since the days of Noah; also, cucumbers, garlic, leeks, melons, onions, anise, or dill; bay-tree, cassia, a kind of cinnamon; coriander, yielding a fruit (called "seed"), the size of a pepper corn; mustard, saffron, and flax. All these are mentioned in the Scriptures. Lehi, undoubtedly, had been instructed to take with him in the ship whatever fruit and vegetables were needed for food during the voyage, and for agricultural purposes in the promised land.

1 Ne 18 6The "honey in abundance" may have been both the product of the bee, and the syrup made of dates, which the Hebrews called "honey" ("debash," Gen. 43:11).

1 Ne 18 7VERSE 7

1 Ne 18 7Two Sons. We are here informed that two sons, Jacob and Joseph, were born to Lehi in the wilderness. How many more were born during the journey to the sea we know not. But they were eight years in the wilderness. (See 1 Ne. 17:20.) Those that entered the ship were, Lehi and Sariah, his wife; Laman and his wife; Lemuel and his wife; Sam and his wife; Nephi and his wife; Ishmael's wife (Ishmael having passed away at Nahom); two sons of Ishmael and their families (1 Ne. 7:6); Zoram and his wife (1 Ne. 16:7); Jacob and Joseph and others who may have been born in the wilderness. Elder George Reynolds ("Story of the Book of Mormon," p. 44) estimates the entire number that landed in the land of promise at from 60 to 80 souls.

1 Ne 18 8VERSE 8

1 Ne 18 8Driven forth before the wind. The ship was a sailing-vessel, and the start was made with a favorable wind.

1 Ne 18 9VERSE 9

1 Ne 18 9Merriment and rudeness. After many days of sailing, a most extraordinary thing happened. The monotony of the daily routine was broken by merry-making. The brothers of Nephi and the sons of Ishmael and their wives "began to make themselves merry." From merryment they proceeded to dancing, singing and indecent language. The next step was utter disregard of their divine mission, and unseemly behavior. "They were lifted up unto exceeding rudeness."

1 Ne 18 9"Rude" (from the Latin, "rudis") means "rough," and it is synonomous with "barbarous"; "vulgar," and "impudent." I can account for their behavior, only on the supposition that they were intoxicated. In their stock of provisions they undoubtedly had preserved grapes and grape juice, as well as honey and certain spices. They could easily make an alcoholic mixture, the wine ("mesech"), of which we read in Prov. 23:29-34: "At the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder. Thine eyes shall behold strange women and thine heart shall utter perverse things." That, it seems to me, is what happened.

1 Ne 18 10VERSE 10

1 Ne 18 10Nephi began to speak to them with much soberness. To Nephi, who was sober, their conduct was not merely offensive but alarming. He foresaw the possibility of failure and death in the deep. He, therefore, implored them to repent. But their reaction to his anxiety was drunken revelers' usual defence—anger. "We will not," they said, "have this youngster to rule over us."

1 Ne 18 10Youth, of and by itself, is, of course, no virtue that can legitimately claim either adoration or submission. It is an advantage. And it is beautiful. But courageous, adventurous, strong youth full of faith in God, inspired by his Holy Spirit, is the best possible medium of leadership, when supported by the experience of age, ripened in the service of God. Israel needed both Samuel and David. Our colony in the ship needed both Lehi and Nephi.

1 Ne 18 11VERSE 11

1 Ne 18 11The Lord did suffer it. Laman and Lemuel, who seemed to be the leaders of the opposition, resorted to violence. They bound their brother with cords and treated him "harshly,"—with physical violence. But why did not the others interfere, meeting violence with violence? The answer to that question is given in the sentence beginning this paragraph. It was the conviction of Nephi and his friends, that, "The Lord did suffer it, that he might show forth his power." To have met violence with violence would have been to interfere with God's plan. Under the law of retaliation (lex talionis) they would have been justified in meeting force with force, as long as they did not exact any more than an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth; but the object the Lord had in view was their conversion and not vengeance; hence his patience and long-suffering. Nephi understood this by the Spirit within him. (See v. 16.) Non-resistance was his duty at this time.

SC1 Ne 18 121 Ne 18 131 Ne 18 141 Ne 18 151 Ne 18 161 Ne 18 171 Ne 18 181 Ne 18 191 Ne 18 20VERSES 12-20

SC1 Ne 18 121 Ne 18 131 Ne 18 141 Ne 18 151 Ne 18 161 Ne 18 171 Ne 18 181 Ne 18 191 Ne 18 20The Lord showing his power. First the "compass" ceased to work. They lost their course. (v. 12). Then a storm arose, which is characterized as a "great and terrible tempest." (v. 13.) For three days the ship was driven about. tossed hither and thither, up and down, shipping waves, pounding, rolling, the wind whistling in the rigging, howling, roaring, and the clouds hanging like a dark pall from the sky, ready for the funeral. The persecutors now were cowed, but not sufficiently to repent of their evil deeds. They hoped for an abatement of the tempest. But the fourth day came without any change for the better. The tempest increased in violence (v. 14). Then they began to relent. They acknowledged the hand of God in the storm, and set Nephi free (v. 15).

SC1 Ne 18 121 Ne 18 131 Ne 18 141 Ne 18 151 Ne 18 161 Ne 18 171 Ne 18 181 Ne 18 191 Ne 18 20During the storm, Lehi and Sariah, now well advanced in years, unable to endure the anguish caused by the wickedness of their sons, and the physical discomforts of the uncontrolled vessel, became sick and were apparently brought near to death's door (vv. 17, 18). Jacob and Joseph, and, of course, the other children, were suffering a great deal during those four days, for in such weather on board a ship, little food is prepared: Little children are not attended to as usual. But the sickness of their parents and the tears of the children did not move the hearts of the rebels. It was the power of God to destroy that finally softened them (vv. 19, 20). As soon as Nephi had been set free, the storm abated, the compass worked, and the ship resumed its course (vv. 21, 22).

SC1 Ne 18 121 Ne 18 131 Ne 18 141 Ne 18 151 Ne 18 161 Ne 18 171 Ne 18 181 Ne 18 191 Ne 18 20The "compass" (vv. 12 and 21) is the round ball of curious workmanship described in 1 Ne. 16:10. Some have assumed that the term was meant to convey the idea that Lehi, more than 500 years B. C. had the mariners' instrument which is supposed to have been unknown in the western world until the 12th century A. D., and that "compass" therefore, is an anachronism which furnishes evidence of the very human origin of the Book of Mormon. But that reasoning disregards two facts: First that the "compass" in question was not the magnetic instrument of the mariner, but a special contrivance which pointed the way they were to go, and that only in response to the faith of the sailor; secondly, that the word "compass" is a good English word, meaning not only the mariners' instrument but a circle or a globe in general, a round, a circuit. In Num. 34:5 and Joshua 15:13 it refers to the bend in the southern boundary line of the land of Israel, "from Azmon unto the river of Egypt" and from there to the sea. Luke, in Acts 28:13 uses the term for the course steered by the ship from Syracuse to Rhegium. In Ex. 27:5 and 38:4 it means the inside rim of the altar to which a metal net, or grate, was fastened, evidently in order to protect the wood work of the altar. In 2 Sam. 5:23 and 2 Kings 3:9, to "fetch a compass" means to surround a portion of the army of an enemy. In prov. 8:23, "compass" refers to the circular horizon, and in Isaiah 44:13 to the compasses of a sculptor. It is clear from these references that the term as applied in the Book of Mormon to the little round ball of Lehi is correct. It is not an anachronism. [^2]

1 Ne 18 23VERSE 23

1 Ne 18 23The Promised Land. This was the first name given to America, on the landing of Lehi and his colony. It was one of the names by which Palestine was known in the Old Testament, because of God's promise to Abraham: "In the same day the Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates." (Gen. 15:18) It was applied to America by the Lord himself, when he said to Nephi: "And insomuch as ye shall keep my commandments, ye shall prosper, and shall be led to a land of promise; yea, even a land which I have prepared for you." (1 Ne. 2:20) The very name was a constant reminder to the descendants of Lehi of their obligation to keep the commandments of God.

1 Ne 18 24VERSE 24

1 Ne 18 24We did begin to till the earth. As soon as the colony had landed, they prepared the soil for the seed they had brought with them. So did the pioneers that first came to Salt Lake valley for permanent settlement. Perhaps they found in this account of the Book of Mormon a needed inspiration. The soil was fertile, and they had an abundant harvest.

1 Ne 18 25VERSE 25

1 Ne 18 25As we journeyed in the wilderness. I understand this to mean that as soon as Lehi and his company had taken care of their first harvest they continued their journey "in the wilderness," which in this case would mean the bench land, or the mountain regions. If they landed in South America, this "wilderness" would be some part of the famous Cordillera of the Andes, or copper mountains which might well have been called "Gold mountains." Of these we read:

1 Ne 18 25"Arranged sometimes in a single line, though more frequently in two or three lines running parallel or obliquely to each other, they seem to the voyager on the ocean but one continuous chain; while the huge volcanoes, which to the inhabitants of the tableland look like solitary and independent masses, appear to him only like so many peaks of the same vast and magnificent range. So immense is the scale on which nature works in these regions that it is only when viewed from a great distance that the spectator can in any degree comprehend the relation of the several parts to the stupendous whole. Few of the works of nature, indeed, are calculated to produce impressions of higher sublimity than the aspect of this coast, as it is gradually unfolded to the eye of the mariner sailing on the distant waters of the Pacific." ("Peru," by Wm. H. Prescott, Vol. 1, p. 28.)

1 Ne 18 25Beasts in the forest. Nephi informs us: "There were beasts in the forests of every kind, both the cow and the ox, and the ass and the horse, and the goat and the wild goat, and all manner of wild animals."

1 Ne 18 25This is one of the passages in the Book of Mormon, which has very generally been relied on by adverse critics to prove that the volume is but clumsy fiction. Even as painstaking an historian and keen reasoner as John Fiske pauses long enough in his masterly review of the story of the discovery of America, [^3] to give vent to his sentiment in a cynical sneer at Nephi—"the veracious chronicler"; thereby justifying the doubtful compliment paid to himself, among others, by Dr. W. H. Holmes [^4] in the following line: "The compilations of a Bancroft, a Winsor, or a Fiske, illumined as they are by exceptional genius, could not always rise above the vitiated records upon which they drew." But notwithstanding the cocksure criticism of the passage in the record of Nephi, I consider it one of the strong, irrefutable proofs of the authenticity of that book.

1 Ne 18 25Let us remember that, when Lehi and those with him came to this side of the world, no matter where they landed, they saw here animals unlike any they had ever seen before, and yet bearing some resemblance to creatures familiar to them. If they landed in South America—and we may, for the time being, take that for granted for the sake of this argument—they saw, probably, the ancestor of the llama, an animal resembling the camel but smaller and without the hump. They saw the alpaca, an animal so closely related to the llama, that some have regarded the two as variations of the same species. Both bear a strong resemblance to sheep. The llama is about three feet high at the shoulder. It is not found wild any more.

1 Ne 18 25They must have seen the huanacu, which some have classed as a variety of the llama, but which Dr. von Tschudi regards as an entirely different animal. The huanacus are about the same size as the llamas. They live in small herds and are very shy. They saw, probably, the vicua, an animal somewhat smaller than the llama, being about two and a half feet high at the shoulder, and having a long, slender neck. Then they must have seen the tapir, an animal that has been compared to a pig, and also to a rhinoceros, although it has no horn.

1 Ne 18 25It must also be remembered that none of the strange animals, peculiar to this continent, when first seen by the colonists of Lehi, had a name, known to them. How, then, was Nephi to mention them in his record? To be sure, he could have given them arbitrary names, but what useful purpose would that have served? He did exactly what any historian would have done in his place. He compared the strange animals he saw with animals he had known in his homeland, and gave to them familiar names, expressive of the peculiar qualities for which those names stood in his day. And that is the obvious reason why he called them "cows," "oxen," "asses," "horses," "goats," and "wild goats." The names were not meant to express "blood relationship" with the old-world animals known by these names, but resemblance in some characteristic or other.

1 Ne 18 25The Spaniards, on their arrival here, encountered a difficulty similar to that which Nephi must have experienced. "The resemblance," says Prescott, "of the different species to those in the Old World, with which no one of them, however, was identical, led to a perpetual confusion in the nomenclature of the Spaniards, as it has since done in that of better instructed naturalists." [^5] And yet, the Spaniards had one advantage. When they arrived on the scene, all the animals had names, and they could learn these of the Indians, as they, of course, did, when they were able to make themselves understood.

1 Ne 18 25Garcilasso Inca de la Vega, who wrote his delightful Royal Commentaries in the 16th or beginning of the 17th century, uses almost the same phraseology as Nephi, although he was a native of Peru and knew the Indian names for all the animals. He says: [^6]

1 Ne 18 25"There are other animals in the Antis, which are like cows. They are the size of a very small cow, and have no horns."

1 Ne 18 25He refers to the tapir, which is so much like a cow that when European cattle were introduced into Brazil, the natives called them "tapyra." It is an animal about four feet from nose to tail, and the Spaniards used to call it gran bestia. But hear Garcilasso again:

1 Ne 18 25"The male huanacu is always on the watch on some high hill, while the females browse in the low ground, and when he sees any man, he gives a neigh like that of a horse, to warn the others.

1 Ne 18 25"The vicuna stands higher than the highest goat. They are swift, and a grey-hound cannot come near them."

1 Ne 18 25In addition to the animals mentioned, the colonists must have seen deer and stags, the roe and the fallow deer, and such "wild animals" as foxes, lions, tigers, rabbits, etc. But the point to note is that the Inca, when describing the strange animals to his Spanish readers, compares them with "horses," "cows," "goats," just as the Prophet did twenty centuries before him, in his record. That I take to be a strong proof of its authenticity.

1 Ne 18 25Hebrew Classification of Animals. Nephi was a Hebrew, and the expression of his thoughts, naturally, conformed to the idioms of his mother tongue. The Hebrews did not always classify objects as we do. For instance, observing that the animal we call "horse" had a peculiar way of "leaping" or galloping, they gave him a name expressive of that characteristic and called him sus, from a root, meaning "to leap." The horse was the "leaper." But presently they noticed the flight of a certain bird and fancied there was some resemblance between that mode of traveling and the leaping of a horse. Then they called the bird also sus or sis, and the swallow, as far as the name was concerned, was put in one class with the horse. For the same reason of classification a moth was called sas from the same root as the horse and the swallow. Again, they had at least six words for "ox." One of them was aluph, from a root meaning to be "tame," "gentle." It was used for both "ox" and "cow," because either could be "tame." For the same reason it might mean a "friend," and sometimes it meant the "head" of a family, or a tribe. Another word for "ox" was teo, translated "wild ox" on account of its swiftness, but the word also stands for a species of gazelle.

1 Ne 18 25The enumeration by Nephi of "cow" and "ox," "ass," and "horse," "goat" and "wild goat," and all manner of "wild animals," meaning the strange specimens met with in the New World, conforms strictly to what might be expected of a Hebrew. The passage, therefore, as has already been said, is a strong proof of the truth of the record.

1 Ne 18 25This method of naming strange objects was not confined to the Hebrews alone. It seems that all people entering a strange land adopted the same practice.

1 Ne 18 25The English when they first came to America found the aborigines growing and cultivating a strange plant. They had never seen it before. It resembled, most closely, a plant familiar to them, which was corn. Now corn to them is what we, in America, call wheat. But it was not (wheat) corn, it was a plant indigenous to America. However, we would not think their historian false, let alone a liar, when he says that they found the Indians growing corn. This same procedure was characteristic of the Scandinavians and of other races.

1 Ne 18 25All manner of ore. This would not have been found on the low, sandy coast strip, but in the mountains.

GENERAL NOTES

The Landing Place. The question, Where did Lehi land? is discussed in, "An Introduction to the Study of the Book of Mormon," pp. 92-95 and 411-432. Several views are given.

If we accept the commonly held view, which has been stated by Elder George Reynolds, among others, that the landing place was on the coast of Chile, at about 30 degrees south latitude, we may suppose that Lehi and his colony embarked somewhere on the coast of the present sultanate of Oman in Arabia, and that their course was set nearly southeasterly. At first they might have encountered adverse trade winds and perhaps a turbulent sea, but as they reached the 30th parallel the trade wind would have been favorable for a course south of Australia, between that continent and Tasmania, and then north of New Zealand toward the coast of Chile. The nearest harbor in the northward path of the trade wind would be the place where Coquimbo now is located, not far from Valparaiso. (See a recent map of the World, published by the National Geographic Magazine.)

Coquimbo has one of the finest harbors in Chile. It is situated on the river that has the same name. And it is not very far from the Andes mountains. The population of the port was (in 1920) estimated at 160,256. Its latitude is 30 degrees south.

Rowing or dancing. In his Ancient Monuments of Mexico, Brasseur de Bourbourg gives a little bit of tradition that may be of interest to readers of this chapter. He quotes the native account of the settlement of Mexico thus:

"Here is the beginning of the accounts of the arrival of the Mexicans from the place named Aztlan. It was through the midst of the water that they made their way to this locality, being four tribes. And in coming they were rowing in their ships. In coming they placed their huts on piles in a place called The Cave of Quinevayan. It is from there that the eight tribes came to go out."

It appears very much as if we in this tradition had traces of both Jaredite and Lehite immigration. But the most interesting part of it is that the learned abbe and archaeologist informs us that the word which he has translated "rowing" does not mean "rowing" but "dancing"; the native story is, then, that the people, in coming over the sea, on some occasion were "dancing." The author says the word translated "rowing" is not so translated anywhere. But, he says, they did certainly not dance in the ship. This, he adds, is how I analyze the word, "macevaya": "Ma" means, the hand, the arm; "ceua" or "cehua" means, to unite or interlace, "ce," being the root. In the labor of rowing, the arms moved in unison and seemed to be interlaced, which is the sense in which I understand the verb, to "row."

This may be ingenious, but it is not worthy of an historian. The Book of Mormon statement that there was a dance on the ship, which came very near being disastrous to the entire company, receives confirmation in the tradition, fragmentary though the evidence may be. [^7]

---
Notas:
[^1] From Jerusalem to the Valley of Lemuel. Lehi leaves Jerusalem and goes into the wilderness (1 Ne. 2:4).
[^2] He proceeds for three days in the wilderness near the Red Sea, and comes to the valley which he names Lemuel (1 Ne. 2:6, 8, 14).
[^3] From the Valley of Lemuel to Shazer. Having crossed the river Laman in the valley of Lemuel, Lehi continues in a nearly south-southeasterly direction to a place which he gives the name of Shazer. Here the travellers replenish their supply of provisions (1 Ne. 16:13).
[^4] From Shazer to an Unnamed Camp. After a successful hunting expedition Lehi proceeds in the same direction as before, "for the space of many days," and then camps at some convenient resting place, not named. Here the steel bow of Nephi is broken by accident, and new bows and arrows are made of wood. The brothers of Nephi murmur and their father sides with them. (1 Ne. 16:14, 17, 20, 23)
[^5] From the unnamed camp to Nahom. From this station the journey is continued, still in nearly the same direction as before, and after "many days" they arrive at a place which they call Nahom. Here Ishmael passed away. They remained here for "many days." (1 Ne. 16:33, 34)
[^6] From Nahom to Irreantum. After having rested "many days" at Nahom, Lehi and his company change their course from nearly south southeast to nearly "eastward from that time forth." By following this new course, they finally arrive at a locality which they call Bountiful, situated at the sea shore. The sea they call "Irreantum." The entire time consumed in the wilderness is eight years. (1 Ne. 17:1, 4, 5) After many days Nephi is commanded to build a ship (c. 8). The ship is built (1 Ne. 18:4).
[^7] Beginning of the Voyage. Lehi began the voyage favored by the wind. (1 Ne. 18:8). "After many days" there is mutiny in the ship and a terrible storm is encountered (vv. 9-13). On the fourth day, the storm, instead of abating, increases in fury (v. 14). That is the end of the mutiny. The voyage is resumed (vv. 15-22).
