Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 19

1 Ne 19 1VERSE 1

1 Ne 19 1I did make plates of ore. In accordance with divine instructions, Nephi made two sets of plates, (a) The Larger Plates which contained "the record of my father; also our journeyings in the wilderness," and prophecies of Lehi and Nephi; (b) The Smaller Plates.

1 Ne 19 2VERSE 2

1 Ne 19 2The first plates. When Nephi made the first plates, he knew not that he would be required to make another set, wherefore he gave on the first plates the genealogy of his father and ancestors and an account of the journey in the wilderness in great detail.

1 Ne 19 3VERSE 3

1 Ne 19 3The second plates. But he received instructions to make another set in addition to the first. On this second set he was to record their ministry, and the plain and precious parts of the prophecies; while the first plates were to be kept "for the instruction of my people, who should possess the land, and also for other wise purposes."

1 Ne 19 4VERSE 4

1 Ne 19 4Upon the other plates. That is, the first, a greater account is given "of the wars and contentions and destructions of my people."

1 Ne 19 5VERSE 5

1 Ne 19 5These plates. Comp. 1 Ne. 9:4-6; 2 Ne. 5:30,D. and C. Sec. 10.

1 Ne 19 6VERSE 6

1 Ne 19 6If I do err. The aim of Nephi is to preserve in writing, for the benefit of posterity, only that which he considers "sacred." He acknowledges that he may err in the selection of subject matter; for all men err.

1 Ne 19 6Weakness ... according to the flesh. Nephi is aware of the fact that the "flesh," i. e. the mortal body, notwithstanding its marvelous construction, its endurance and recuperative, almost creative, powers, has its limitations and even imperfections. It is weak. It was owing to this characteristic of the "flesh" that Peter, James and John, during the hour of agony of our Lord in Gethsemane, were unable to keep awake with him, wherefore Jesus admonished them, "Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak." ( Matt. 26:41) Even the body of the Lord himself, the Holy One, the Sinless One, was subject to this condition. Otherwise he could not have died. This St. Paul states thus: "For though he was crucified through weakness, yet he liveth by the power of God." (2 Cor. 13:4)

1 Ne 19 6This weakness, be it remembered, is not a moral but a physical condition. It is not sinful. But there is a weakness of the flesh, which is immoral and therefore sin.

1 Ne 19 6St. Paul explains this at some length in his letter to the Romans (7:14-25). He there represents himself as he was before the Gospel of Jesus had made a new creature of him, and as many others are in their lives. He was, he says (v. 14), "sold" under sin. He was a slave of sin. "What I hate, that do I." (v. 15) But, he adds, it is not really I but the sin that dwelleth in me that is the active force: "For I know that in me (that is in my flesh) dwelleth no good thing: for to will is present with me; but how to perform that which is good I find not" (v. 18). That is to say, in other words—and this seems to be the doctrine of Paul—if a man or woman tampers with that which is wrong and becomes an habitual sinner, a slave of sin, then sin becomes a force within that man or woman, stronger than their understanding, their reason, and even their will. A human being may be endowed with intelligence by which he may become proficient in business, in the arts and sciences—even theology—but this is not enough to make him know, love and honor God by submission to his will. This is the work of the Holy Spirit in the human mind.

1 Ne 19 6It may be interesting to recall that this doctrine of Paul is also the conclusion arrived at by philosophy. Ovid exclaims:

1 Ne 19 6"My reason this, my passion that persuades; I see the right, and I approve it, too: Condemn the wrong and yet the wrong pursue."

1 Ne 19 6Another philosopher: "—but I am overcome by sin, and I well understand the evil which I presume to commit. Passion, however, is more powerful than my reason, which is the cause of the greatest evils to mortal men." (Dr. Adam Clarke, in Commentary on Rom. 7:15)

1 Ne 19 6Human will is, even by nature, inclined toward that which is right and good. It is, however, often too weak to overcome the evil influences. But if the will surrenders so completely to the evil powers, that it no longer urges man on in the right direction, that man is lost, indeed, as a ship without a propelling force and without a rudder.

THE REJECTION OF THE MESSIAH

Nephi, in this section, mentions by name three prophets of the Old dispensation, not elsewhere recorded among the prophets, viz., Zenock, Neum, and Zenos.

In contemplating the ever present possibility of man's falling into error, because of the weakness of the flesh, Nephi recalls the rejection of the Messiah, by the children of Israel, as an illustration of that fact, awful in its consequences, because, in setting him aside, they deliberately sinned against the light they had received. An angel, a messenger from heaven, had predicted his advent, and even stated the exact time when he would come (v. 8). Zenock and Neum had predicted his death by crucifixion, and Zenos had told them that his entrance into the realm of the dead would be signalized to the world, and especially to the House of Israel, by three days of darkness (vv. 10-12). And yet, notwithstanding these specific prophecies the people would refuse to accept him (v. 13). As a consequence they would be "scourged," rendered homeless, and be made a "hiss and a byword," the object of hatred among all nations. (v. 14) This is, indeed, an illustration of the truth everywhere apparent, that man, when not following the lead of the Holy Spirit, is liable to assume a wrong attitude, although well aware of the impropriety and also the dreadful consequences thereof.

1 Ne 19 7VERSE 7

1 Ne 19 7The very God of Israel. "Jehovah," or, as most scholars now believe, "Jahveh," is his name. (Ex. 6:2, 3)

1 Ne 19 7Concerning the meaning of that sacred name, the opinions are divided. Some derive it from a form of the Hebrew verb "hajah," which would mean, "One who calls things into being," i. e., the Creator. The objection to this interpretation is chiefly that the form suggested does not appear anywhere but is merely assumed. Others point out that the verb "hajah," which is generally rendered "to be," "to exist," really means, "to become," "to come forth," and that the name therefore signifies, "One through whom God is coming forth," i. e. "revealing" himself. (See Gesenius, Hebr. und Aram. HandwÃ¶erbuch. This agrees with Ex. 33:19, 20; Matt. 11:27; John 1:18; Heb. 11:3; 1 Tim. 6:16.)

1 Ne 19 7Some have understood Ex. 6:2, 3 to mean that the sacred name Jehovah was unknown before revealed to Moses, but that cannot be the true meaning of those verses. According to Ex. 3:13, 16,Moses said: "Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them?"

1 Ne 19 7The Lord answered this question thus:

1 Ne 19 7"I am that I am: and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me."

1 Ne 19 7Further:

1 Ne 19 7"The Lord God [Jehovah Elohim] of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob, appeared unto me," etc.

1 Ne 19 7This shows clearly that the Israelites in Egypt knew that Jehovah was the God of their fathers. For, otherwise the mention of his name would have had no effect.

1 Ne 19 7In the Book of Abraham, Pearl of Great Price, the question is settled beyond a doubt. There we read:

1 Ne 19 7"And his voice was unto me: Abraham, Abraham, behold, my name is Jehovah, and I have heard thee and have come down to deliver thee, and to take thee away from thy father's house, and from all thy kinsfolk ... I will take thee, to put upon thee my name, even the Priesthood of thy father, and my power shall be over thee. As it was with Noah so shall it be with thee; but through thy ministry my name shall be known in the earth for ever, for I am thy God." (Pearl of Great Price, p. 30, vv. 16-19)

1 Ne 19 7Note (1) that the sacred name was revealed to Abraham while he was in the city of Ur of the Chaldees; (2) that when the Lord puts his name upon a chosen servant, he confers upon him the Priesthood; (3) that the father of Abraham had the Priesthood, and therefore must have known the name of the divine Head; and (4) that as the knowledge of the name had come from Noah, so, through Abraham, it should be made known in all the world.

1 Ne 19 7There is every reason to believe that the sacred name was well known to our first ancestors, Adam and Eve, from the early days of their existence on earth, first in the Garden of Eden, and then after the exodus from that paradise. This belief grows, as we read the second and third chapters of Genesis, and it becomes a certainty when, in the fourth chapter (v. 1) we hear the joyful exclamation of Eve at the birth of Cain, "I have gotten a man from Jehovah."

1 Ne 19 7And then again, in Gen. 5:29, we learn that Lamech, the father of Noah, knew the sacred name. For, in naming his illustrious son, he said:

1 Ne 19 7"This same shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord [Jehovah] has cursed."

1 Ne 19 7The name was known all through the ages before the flood, and then to the patriarchs after the flood, but it had, undoubtedly, been dimmed in the consciousness of the Israelites in their wretched condition in Egypt, and therefore it was again revealed through Moses.

1 Ne 19 7"It [Jehovah] is certainly not a new name that is introduced; on the contrary, the 'I am that I am' would be unintelligible, if the name itself were not presupposed as already known. The old name of antiquity, whose precious significance had been forgotten and neglected by the children of Israel, here, as it were, rises again to life, and is again brought home to the consciousness of the people." (Smith, Bible Dictionary)

1 Ne 19 7In reading the Scriptures about the various manifestations of Jehovah, it is important to remember that a messenger authorized to represent Jehovah always speaks or acts as if he were the divine Person he represents. He stands, literally, in his stead. For instance:

1 Ne 19 7We remember the account in Exodus of the rebellion of Israel, in consequence of which the Lord decreed to send an angel to go before the people in his stead. The account is, briefly, this: The Lord instructed Moses to break camp and cause the people to proceed on their way to Canaan. But, he said, "I will not go up in the midst of thee; for thou art a stiffnecked people: lest I consume thee in the way" (Ex. 33:3). "And I will send an angel before thee" (v. 2). The Lord, however, would again be with the people when they should take possession of the land, for, he says, "I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, etc." Now Moses was anxious to know more about the angel who was to be their guide. So he said to the Lord: "See, thou sayest unto me, Bring up this people; and thou hast not let me know whom thou wilt send with me." (v. 12) Then the Lord said, "My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest" (v. 14). From Isaiah 63:9 we learn that "presence" here stands for, "The angel of his presence." Isaiah says: "In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel of his Presence saved them." That, then, was the name of the messenger who was to represent Jehovah. Of this messenger we read in Ex. 23:20-23: "Behold I send an angel before thee ... Beware of him, and obey his voice; provoke him not, for he will not pardon your transgressions: for my name is in him. But if thou shalt indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak; then I will be an enemy unto thine enemies ... For mine angel shall go before thee, and bring thee in unto the Amorites and the Hittites ... and I will cut them off." Thus, the Angel of the Presence of the Lord occupied completely the position of the Lord himself during the entire journey through the wilderness.

1 Ne 19 7Moses may have known who the Angel of the Presence was. Isaiah may have known. We do not. But we do know, according to the Scriptures, that Michael is the "first of the chief princes" (Dan. 10:13); and that he is specially the prince of the people of Daniel (v. 21), that is to say, the Hebrews. And we know, further, that it is Michael who, during the last days of unprecedented trouble, when the children of Israel are to be delivered a second time, shall "stand up" for them. (Dan. 12:1) May it not then have been Michael who was the Angel of the Presence in the wilderness? We also know that Adam is "Michael, the Prince, the Archangel" (D. and C. 107:54).

1 Ne 19 7In the Doctrine and Covenants the important truth is revealed that Jesus Christ, our Redeemer, is Jehovah. We read, "Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ, your Redeemer, the Great I AM, whose arm of mercy hath atoned for your sins." (29:1) "I AM," as we have seen, is the same as "JEHOVAH."

1 Ne 19 7Again:

1 Ne 19 7"Thus saith the Lord, your God, even Jesus Christ, the great I AM, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the same which looked upon the wide expanse of eternity, and all the seraphic hosts of heaven, before the world was made; the same which knoweth all things, for all things are present before mine eyes; I am the same which spake, and the world was made, and all things came by me." (38:1-3; comp. 109:34, 68; 110:4)

1 Ne 19 7This truth is definitely stated in "A Doctrinal Exposition," signed by the First Presidency and the Twelve Apostles of the Church, June 30, 1916. We read:

1 Ne 19 7"A fourth reason for applying the title 'Father' to Jesus Christ is found in the fact that in all his dealings with the human family Jesus the Son has represented and yet represents Elohim, his Father, in power and authority. This is true of Christ in his pre-existent, antemortal, or unembodied state, in which he was known as Jehovah; also during his embodiment in the flesh; and during his labors as a disembodied spirit in the realm of the dead; and since that period in his resurrected state." ("Articles of Faith," James E. Talmage, p. 471)

JEHOVAH

One description of the Deity is that found in the so-called Athanasian Creed. There we read:

"The Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God. And yet, they are not three Gods but one God. So likewise the Father is Lord, the Son Lord, and the Holy Ghost Lord. And yet not three Lords but one Lord.... And in this Trinity none is afore or after another, none is greater or less than another, but the whole three Persons are eternal together and co-equal."

To those who find in this creed a sufficient and adequate presentation of their concept of the Deity, the question, "Who is Jehovah?" is not even likely to occur. But if they should meet it, they would probably answer something like this: "The Father is Jehovah, the Son is Jehovah, and the Holy Ghost is Jehovah. And yet, they are not three Jehovahs but One." In other words, Jehovah would to them stand sometimes for the Trinity, and sometimes for each of the three Divine persons.

But all Christians do not accept the Athanasian representation. Some of us understand that the Persons in the Godhead are three distinct Entities, or Beings, each possessing in the highest degree of perfection all the qualities that constitute what we call a "person," an individual, and that they are one in the same sense that the disciples of Christ are one, though separate beings, each living his own individual life. To those who so understand the Deity, the question stated is important as having a bearing on the divine nature of Jesus. Who is Jehovah?

If we endeavor to find the answer to that question, we must search the Scriptures. There is no other source of reliable information on that point. Philosophy cannot help us. Our own logic leads us nowhere. Our only concern in this inquiry is: "What is written in the law? How readest thou?" (Luke 10:26)

If we, then, first turn to the Doctrine and Covenants, this remarkable volume of revelations that largely pertain to our own dispensation, we learn that Jehovah is the Second Person in the Godhead, the Son, who, in his human manifestation became known as Jesus Christ, or Jesus, the Christ. There can be no controversy, or doubt, as to that.

Section 29 contains a revelation given in September 1830, consequently only a few months after the foundation of the Church. It is one of the outstanding revelations, given in the presence of six Elders; it reveals the doctrine of gathering, makes the important announcement that the coming of Christ is near, makes known the position of the first apostles in the Millennial kingdom, speaks of the first resurrection and the signs preceding the second advent, and of the general resurrection, and, finally, gives revelations concerning the creation, the fall, and the innocence of little children. And who is the divine personage that gives this important revelation? We read: "Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ, your Redeemer, the Great I Am, whose arm of mercy has atoned for your sins." (v. 1.) It is Jesus Christ, the Redeemer, who speaks, and it is he whose name is "The Great I Am."

That name is the English for Jehovah, as is clear from Exodus 3:14. Moses asks the divine personage who manifests himself to him for information as to his name: "When they (the children of Israel) shall say to me, "What is his name? what shall I say unto them?" And he said: "Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I Am hath sent me unto you." It was Jehovah who spoke to Moses, either in person or through his "angel" who represented him. (See verse 7, where the Lord is Jehovah)

The word Jehovah is derived from the Hebrew verb "to be" or "to cause to be," and means, therefore, the One who is, or who creates.

This truth is further confirmed in Section 110, which contains the account of the glorious appearance of Jehovah to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Elder Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland temple on April 3, 1836. They saw our Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, as they rose from prayer, and they heard him speak. The Prophet says: "We saw the Lord ... and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying: 'I am the first and the last, I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain, I am your advocate with the Father.' " Here we learn that Jehovah is "the first and the last," "he who was slain" and "your advocate with the Father"; that is to say, the Son, Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God, our Mediator.

Note that Jehovah, according to his own word, is "our Advocate with the Father"; he is not our Father, the first Person in the Godhead, but one who represents us before the Father. In one sense, he is the father of the human race, because, as our representative, he stands at the head of the children of men, in the plan of redemption. He is the second Adam, and in that sense he is the Father, "Everlasting Father" (Is. 9:5) and he is also the Son (Mosiah 15:2-4), but that is figuratively speaking or rather, speaking with the law of adoption in view, as Abraham, figuratively speaking, is the "Father" of "all them that believe." (Rom. 4:11; Gal. 3:7)

Jehovah is, then, Jesus Christ, our Lord and Redeemer.

In the old Testament, Jehovah is one of the Elohim. This is very clear from numerous passages. Note that it was "the Lord God" who made the earth and the heavens. (Gen. 2:4) "The Lord God" is the English of "Jehovah Elohim," or, as I think we should understand it, "Jehovah, the Elohim." It was Jehovah Elohim who "planted a garden" (Gen. 2:8), who "took the man and put him into the garden" (Gen. 2:15), who commanded man concerning the tree (Gen. 2:16), and who appeared in the story of the fall and promise of redemption. It is Jehovah who has promised to create "new heavens and a new earth" (Is. 85:17).

It was Jehovah who spoke to Abraham, concerning Sodom and Gomorrah. (Gen. 18) Jehovah seems to have been one of the three men who stood before him, as he sat in the tent door. It may have been Jehovah in person, or it may have been one who was his representative, his "angel," having authority to speak in his name. Jehovah was the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. (Gen. 28:13 and many other passages.) He, probably, it was who wrestled with Jacob (Gen. 32:24-30). For, although he did not tell his name, he conferred upon Jacob, in blessing him, the authority of a "prince"—a title bestowed upon our Father, Adam, at Adam-ondi-Ahman (Doc. and Cov. 107:54)—and Jacob felt impressed with the fact that he had seen Elohim "face to face."

It was "the angel," or messenger of Jehovah, who first appeared to Moses in the burning bush (Ex. 3:2), but later, as soon as the attention of Moses had been attracted to the miraculous manifestation and he drew near to investigate, then, it seems, Jehovah Elohim addressed him (v. 4-17).

At the exodus from Egypt, the Angel of Elohim [^1] went before the camp of Israel, and when the Egyptians pursued, this divine Personage "removed and went behind them," so that he stood in the fiery cloud between Israel and the pursuers. (Ex. 14:19, 20) This Angel of Elohim was Jehovah, for so we read: "And Jehovah went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way." (Ex. 13:21)

Jehovah, the great Angel, or Messenger, of Elohim,—the representative, in other words, of the great Council of Elohim, in which this plan of salvation was accepted, and on account of which he was afterwards known as the "Wonderful Counselor," (Is. 9:6), but when Israel, after the many manifestations of his power, turned to the golden calf, possibly with ceremonies of which obscene practices formed a part (Ex. 32:25), then he threatened to withdraw entirely. At this critical juncture of the history of Israel, Moses went up on the mountain and plead before Jehovah for Israel, whereupon Jehovah, in answer to the prayers of his faithful servant, gave him the promise that he would send his Angel with him. From this time Jehovah withdrew, and left one of his angels, or representatives, in charge.

Who this angel of Jehovah is, we are not expressly informed, but since Daniel says that "the great prince which standeth for the children of thy people" is Michael (Dan. 12:1; 10:13 and 21), there can be no harm in the suggestion that Michael, our venerable ancestor, possibly was the angel of Jehovah, who had already at this time performed the mission, of which Daniel speaks. But be this as it may, Jehovah withdrew, and as a sign of this, the tent in which religious ordinances were performed and which hitherto had stood in the center of the camp, was now removed a long distance from it. The cloudy pillar, in which the angel of Jehovah manifested his presence, rested there.

A remarkable interview between Moses and Jehovah took place at that tent, away from the camp. Moses reminded Jehovah, that although he had commanded him to be the visible leader of the people, he had not instructed him regarding the journey. "Show me now," he said, "thy way." Jehovah answered, "My presence shall go with thee." (Ex. 33:14) That is to say, Jehovah would not entirely abandon the people. He would be near, just as Jesus promised to be near his apostles, even after he had departed. In the same sense Jehovah would be present and manifest himself from time to time, as circumstances required. This promise was fulfilled throughout the entire journey in the wilderness.

After having obtained this promise, Moses said, "I beseech thee, show me thy glory." In answer to that prayer, Jehovah explained to him that he could not see his face, but that he (Jehovah) would show him all his goodness and proclaim, or explain, his name to him, and also permit him to see his back as he was passing by a certain place.

This last expression is in all probability a misunderstanding by the translators of the Hebrew word. The word may here mean "behind" in point of time, "afterwards," and in that case we may understand the meaning to be Moses was given the privilege of seeing Jehovah in the form in which he "afterwards" would appear in the flesh. This human form, we know was his "glory," for John says: "The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory (his body) as of the only begotten of the Father." If we understand the text in Exodus the same way, it is clear. Moses saw Jehovah just as John saw the bodily form of the Word, all but his face. (Ex. 33:20-23)

This agrees perfectly with the beautiful narrative in the Book of Ether concerning the interview of the Brother of Jared with our Lord. The Lord showed himself unto him in "the body of his spirit," in the likeness of which he, Jesus Christ, had created man (Ether 3:14-16), and he says: "The time cometh that I shall glorify my name in the flesh." (v. 21) That was his "glory," and that was, we may feel sure, the glory which Moses, as well as the Brother of Jared, saw.

1 Ne 19 8VERSE 8

1 Ne 19 8Six hundred years. The messenger who brought the word of the Lord to Lehi concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, and the commandment to leave the city, (1 Ne. 10:4), told him that the Messiah would come six hundred years from the exodus of himself and family. This is one of the few divine predictions on record in which a definite time is set for the fulfilment of a divine decree.

1 Ne 19 8Another prophecy of that class is the word of the Lord delivered by the angel Gabriel to the Prophet Daniel in Babylon (Dan. 9:24-27). This is one of the grandest predictions on record. The angel Gabriel declares that seventy "weeks"—490 years—"are determined upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to finish"—or rather, to "restrain"—"the transgression," etc. That is, in 490 years the Mosaic dispensation would come to an end. The chronology from this time is at best uncertain, but the following is worthy of consideration:

1 Ne 19 8"That the seventy weeks mentioned by Daniel denote weeks of years is agreed by almost every commentator, but not the time when these seventy weeks, or 490 years, began. It is plain they began from an edict or warrant to build the city of Jerusalem, and not from an edict to rebuild the temple; they could not therefore begin at the edict of Cyrus, or Darius ... but at the edict of Artaxerxes Longimanus, ... either in the seventh year of his reign, when he gave Ezra his commission (Ezra 7 and 8), or in the twentieth year of it, when he gave Nehemiah his (Neh. 2). The edict in the seventh year ... appears to have been just 490 years before our Savior's death, by which he finished transgression, and made an end of sin, by his complete atonement. Of these, seven weeks or forty-nine years, were spent in rebuilding the city and its walls and these ended about the [time of the] death of Nehemiah. Sixty-two more weeks, or 434 years, elapsed, before the ministry of John or Christ began.... Jesus, in the last half of the seventieth week, that is, at the end of it, made the sacrifice and oblation." (The Popular and Critical Bible Encyclopedia, Dr. Samuel Fallows, Editor, Vol. 2, p. 1558.)

1 Ne 19 8It was Gabriel who communicated this message to Daniel. The matter, he said, had been "determined." (Dan. 9:24) Undoubtedly in a divine council meeting at which he had been present. There is no reason why we may not surmise that Gabriel perhaps was the angel who had visited Lehi, as he now visited Daniel. Lehi and Daniel were contemporary. But the latter, while still a young boy, was carried to Babylon. The vision in Chapter 9 is supposed to have been given in the year 538 B. C., in the first year of Darius the Mede.

1 Ne 19 8A word of explanation may be called for here: Why read 490 "years" instead of seventy "weeks"? Why forty-nine "years" instead of seven "weeks"?

1 Ne 19 8The answer is that the original text does not say seven "weeks," or seventy "weeks," but seven "sevenths," and, seventy "sevenths." The question, therefore, is, What does "sevenths," not "weeks," mean?

1 Ne 19 8But the Jews had "sevens," (i.e. weeks) of years as well as "sevens" (or weeks) of days; for, every seventh year was a Sabbath year, and every period of years from Sabbath to Sabbath was a "seven" (or "week") of years. Now, inasmuch as the vision of Daniel was historical, necessarily referring to years and not to days, the "sevenths" mentioned must be "weeks" of years.

1 Ne 19 10VERSE 10

1 Ne 19 10To be lifted up. Refers to the death of our Lord on the cross. (See v. 13) Also the following: "And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me. This he said, signifying what death he should die." (John 12:32, 33)

1 Ne 19 10Zenock. Possibly the Hebrew, tsinok, (Jer. 29:26), translated "stocks." If so, the name may be an allusion to persecution which he may have suffered at the hands of his countrymen. He was a Hebrew prophet. (See Alma 33:15; 34:7; Hel. 8:20; 3 Ne. 10:16)

1 Ne 19 10Neum. Among those who returned from Babylon with Zerubbabel was one Nehum (Heb., Nechum), one of the chiefs of the Jewish community. It is probably the same name as Nahum. Another, but longer, form of this name is, Nehemiah (Nehem-jah), which means, "Jehovah is full of consolation." The name was not uncommon among the Hebrews. The Neum referred to by Nephi prophesied of the crucifixion of our Lord.

1 Ne 19 10Zenos. A Hebrew prophet, who prophesied of the death of Christ and the darkness that would be a sign to the house of Israel of his descent into the realm of the dead. (See also Jac. 5:1; 6:1; Alma 33:3, 13, 15; 34:7)

SC1 Ne 19 111 Ne 19 121 Ne 19 131 Ne 19 141 Ne 19 151 Ne 19 161 Ne 19 17VERSES 11-17

SC1 Ne 19 111 Ne 19 121 Ne 19 131 Ne 19 141 Ne 19 151 Ne 19 161 Ne 19 17Thus spake the prophet. These verses contain a synopsis by Nephi of the predictions of Zenos on two important subjects: (1) the convulsions in nature by which all Israel might know that the great sacrifice of atonement had been made; (2) what the consequences would be to the House of Judah, of the rejection of this sacrifice of the Messiah.

1 Ne 19 11VERSE 11

1 Ne 19 11The thunderings and the lightnings of his power, by tempest, etc. The best commentary on these verses (11 and 12) is found in 3 Ne. 8:5-10:17. The storm and the earthquake lasted about three hours, and the effects were felt both in the land southward and to the land northward. The darkness lasted for three days. (See 3 Ne. 8:19 and 10:9) And during all this time, nature was "groaning," while adjusting itself to the changes caused by the violent commotion.

1 Ne 19 13VERSE 13

1 Ne 19 13And so for those who are at Jerusalem. The prophet Zenos predicts that the Jews would be "scourged by all people," and that they would be dispersed among the nations, yet hated by all; they would become a "hiss and a by-word," because of their rejection of the "God of Israel," also called, the "Holy One of Israel."

1 Ne 19 13Note the peculiarity of this prediction. The Jews would be dispersed among, but never assimilated with, other nations. Other peoples, or parts of other peoples, have been dispersed and made friends among the peoples of the world, while the Jews, in the dispersion (the "diaspora," as they call it) remain strangers, even when they acquire a new citizenship. History shows this to have been the rule, although there, of course, are many notable individual exceptions.

1 Ne 19 13Dr. Keith, in his dissertations on the evidence for the truth of the Christian religion, calls attention to the fact that the Jews have always, since the crucifixion, been a suffering people. In the fifth century they were exiled from Alexandria, where they for centuries had had great influence. The emperor Justinian deprived them of their synagogues, and prohibited their use of any place whatever for religious purposes. He denied them the right to testify in court, and to dispose of any property they might have, by a will or testament. In Spain, at one time, they were given the choice between apostasy, imprisonment and exile. The same conditions were imposed on them in France. In Mohammedan countries they found equally bitter enemies. The head of the Roman Catholic world has, at sundry times, cursed all who befriended the Jews, as well as the Jews themselves. Christian holidays were sometimes made occasions of persecution. During the crusades, the hatred of the Jews increased. At Verdun, TrÃ¨ves, Mainz, Speier and Worms thousands of Jews were robbed and murdered. At York, in England, it is said, on one occasion, 1500 Jews, including women and children, were captured, and when they were not permitted to ransom themselves, they murdered each other, in order to escape the fate prepared for them by the mob. In some countries the burning at the stake of a Jew was considered a great and noble "show." Even the women rejoiced when they witnessed the agony of the victim in the flames. For, was not the death of a Jew a victory of the faith? Neither high nor low, neither sex nor age, was spared when the flames of persecution were burning. Among the victims who perished in the flames was the great Portuguese dramatist, Antonio Joseph de Silvia, whose only crime was that he was a Jew.

1 Ne 19 13The so-called "pogroms" of 1881, 1903 and 1905 are recent history. And the Jewish problem of the present day in some countries indicates that the prophetic word is still in force.

1 Ne 19 15VERSE 15

1 Ne 19 15When ... they no more turn aside their hearts against the Holy One of Israel. This is the other side of the prophecy. It is a promise that, whenever the day comes that the Jews will accept Jesus as their Messiah, then the Lord will remember the covenants made with the fathers. Then He will gather them in, and all the earth will see the salvation of the Lord (v. 17).

1 Ne 19 15That the Jews still are a numerous people is one of the miracles of history. At present they are estimated at about fifteen and a half millions. Of these, there are 9,290,000 in Europe, 4,380,000 in North America, 200,000 in South America, 942,000 in Africa and 1,850,000 in Palestine. [^2]

1 Ne 19 22VERSE 22

1 Ne 19 22Engraven upon the plates of brass. These were the records of which Laban was the custodian (1 Ne. 3:3; 3 Ne. 10:16, 17). Whether they were private property or records to which Lehi had as much legal right as he had, we are not informed. All we know is that he had them, and that the Lord commanded Lehi to claim them.

1 Ne 19 23VERSE 23

1 Ne 19 23I did read many things to them. Nephi read "in the book of Moses," and "that which was written by the prophet Isaiah."

1 Ne 19 23The Book of Moses. Special attention is called to this phrase. Why does not Nephi say, "The books of Moses"? Or, even, "The five books of Moses"? For the simple reason that, to the Jews of his day, what we know as the five books of Moses were one volume which they called, "the Law," (Torah). The division into five parts took place centuries after the time of Nephi, probably in Alexandria, in Egypt. The title "Pentateuch" [^3] means in Alexandrian Greek, "The five volumes." Origen is said to use it in that sense. It was introduced to the western world by Jerome (d. A. D. 418) and his contemporary, Rufinus. To the Jews it was, "Five Fifths of the Law." It was, "The Book of Moses." The term, "The book of Moses" in this place, is therefore remarkable evidence of the genuineness of the record, which a well-informed student of the Book of Mormon will appreciate.

1 Ne 19 23I did read unto them. Reading of the Scriptures is an indispensable part of spiritual training. Nephi was in daily communication with God and received wonderful revelations in dreams and visions and by means of the Liahona, but although he was thus favored, he found it necessary to read and study the Scriptures, and to understand them so he could explain and expound them to his brothers and fellow-travelers. He realized that it was necessary for him to know something "concerning the doings of the Lord in other lands, among people of old." (v. 22)

1 Ne 19 23I did liken all scriptures unto us. This I take to mean that Nephi, in his sermons explained the Scriptures and applied their teachings to their own needs and circumstances. That is the correct way of reading the Scriptures.

1 Ne 19 23In reading, for instance, the story of Abraham and Isaac on the mountain of Moriah, he would probably point out how the Lord rewards his faithful servants, who trust in him to the utmost and obey his commandments. He would, no doubt, draw a lesson from this solemn declaration of the Lord:

1 Ne 19 23"And the Angel of the Lord called unto Abraham out of heaven a second time and said, By myself have I sworn, saith the Lord, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son: That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice." (Gen. 22:15-18)

1 Ne 19 23The reward of faith is a lesson offered in this Scripture, which is applicable to all times and all generations.

1 Ne 19 23Or, in reading the story of the passage of Israel through the Red Sea, he might draw the lesson from it that God, who was mighty to take the Children of Israel across that sea, would also be able to take his father's company safely across the ocean to the land of promise.

1 Ne 19 23That kind of reading is the most profitable literary exercise imaginable.

1 Ne 19 23In reading any of the standard works of the Church it is well to ascertain the literal meaning of the passage read first, and the lesson it was intended to convey to those to whom it was first communicated. And then it might be well to ask, What lesson does it convey to my time and age? To my nation? My community? My family? Or to myself?

1 Ne 19 24VERSE 24

1 Ne 19 24Hear ye the words of the prophet.

1 Ne 19 24A prophet of the Lord is one who speaks on behalf of the Lord, or in his name, whether he predicts future events, or unfolds the past, or gives commandments and rules for present conduct. To hear the words of the prophet is to consider them carefully and to do readily whatever the Lord, through his prophet, requests or commands.

1 Ne 19 24The Lord said to his people concerning the Law, when all was prepared:

1 Ne 19 24"For this commandment which I command thee this day, it is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off. It is not in heaven, that thou shouldst say, Who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it and do it? Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou shouldst say, Who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it and do it? But the word is very nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it." (Deut. 30:11-14)

1 Ne 19 24Which is as much as to say that the Lord does not require anything strange and exceptional of his people. What he demands is that they do that which they know in their hearts to be true, and which perhaps they confess and proclaim with their lips as the word of the Lord.

1 Ne 19 24The explanation of this chapter and the next, as given by Nephi in his discourse to his fellow travelers, is found in Chapter 22.

---
Notas:
[^1] From Jerusalem to the Valley of Lemuel. Lehi leaves Jerusalem and goes into the wilderness (1 Ne. 2:4).
[^2] He proceeds for three days in the wilderness near the Red Sea, and comes to the valley which he names Lemuel (1 Ne. 2:6, 8, 14).
[^3] From the Valley of Lemuel to Shazer. Having crossed the river Laman in the valley of Lemuel, Lehi continues in a nearly south-southeasterly direction to a place which he gives the name of Shazer. Here the travellers replenish their supply of provisions (1 Ne. 16:13).
