Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 20

1 Ne 20 1VERSE 1

1 Ne 20 1The waters of Judah. This phrase in Isaiah has given commentators considerable trouble. "Hear ye ... which are come forth out of the waters of Judah." What can the "waters of Judah" mean? Some read, "From the bowels of Judah"; others, "From the fountains of Jacob"; others, "From the days of Judah." From "the waters of baptism" is the true meaning. Whether this simple and obvious explanation came from the prophet Isaiah himself and had been engraved on the plates of Laban; or whether they are a gloss inserted by the prophet Nephi in his copy of the text, does not matter. In either case, it is an inspired explanation of an admittedly difficult passage.

1 Ne 20 1Baptism was by no means unknown among the Jews at the time of Isaiah. When Jacob, returning from Haran, was about to re-enter the land of Canaan and build an altar to Jehovah at Bethel, he called his household together and said to them, "Put away the strange gods that are among you, and be clean, and change your garments." (Gen. 35:2) The word translated, "be clean," does not refer to the removal of dust and other impurities from the body, but to cleansing from sin, and in this case more particularly from the sin of worshiping "strange gods." It is the same word that is used in 2 Kings 5:14, where we read that Naaman, after having dipped himself in the Jordan, according to the word of the Lord, was cured of leprosy, "and he was clean." He was cleansed, not only of his sickness but of the contamination of paganism, for he exclaimed, "Behold, now I know that there is no God in all the earth, but in Israel." In other words, he was a new man, spiritually as well as physically.

1 Ne 20 1From the Writings of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price we know that Adam was baptized. And when he had received the Holy Spirit, he heard a voice out of heaven, saying: "Thou art baptized with fire, and with the Holy Ghost. This is the record of the Father, and of the Son, from henceforth and forever." (Chapter 6:64-66)

1 Ne 20 1Baptism being a known ordinance among the Jews, the prophet could properly refer to it as the "waters of Judah."

1 Ne 20 1Swear by the name of the Lord. Just how the custom of swearing by the divine Name originated is not known. It was common at the time of Moses, and became part of his law as a useful ceremony in the interest of peace and justice. In Ex. 22:11 an oath is ordered as an end of disputes concerning property rights. (Comp. Heb. 6:16) Instances of oaths in the Book of Mormon are found in 1 Ne. 4:33, 35 and 37, where Nephi and Zoram make a covenant with each other; also in Alma 52:39, where the son of Nephihah binds himself with an oath to judge in righteousness. Moroni regretted that he had sworn not to lead his people because of their wickedness, and he did not keep his oath. (Mormon 5:1) Evil and secret oaths are noted and condemned.

1 Ne 20 1Our Lord, as is well known, condemns swearing in the daily intercourse between man and man. Whatever is beyond the mere affirmation, or negation, "cometh of evil." (Matt. 5:37) And the Apostle James reiterates this word of the Lord. (James 5:12). Yet, our Lord, when, during the legal proceedings against him, he was challenged under oath to say whether he was the Christ, the Son of God, he unhesitatingly replied in the affirmative; that is, as we should say, He testified under oath, not only that he was the Christ, the Son of God, but also that:

1 Ne 20 1"Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and in the clouds of heaven." (Matt. 26:63, 64)

1 Ne 20 6VERSE 6

1 Ne 20 6Thou hast seen and heard all this. Our authorized version has, "Thou hast heard, see all this," which is anything but clear. "Thou hast seen and heard all this" is intelligible. The Lord had not only spoken, or "declared," "things from the beginning," but he had also "shown" them before they came to pass (vv. 3, 5). Consequently, they had both "seen" and "heard." [^1]

1 Ne 20 9VERSE 9

1 Ne 20 9For my praise. Means, "For the sake of my praise." The particle "for—sake" refers to both "my name" and "my praise." The longsuffering and mercy of God add to the honor and glory of his holy name.

1 Ne 20 10VERSE 10

1 Ne 20 10I have refined thee. The authorized version, in accordance with the Hebrew text, adds, "But not with silver." That sounds like an addition by a copyist. The plain meaning of the verse is that the Lord saw his people in the flames of affliction and chose them then, and undertook to refine them.

1 Ne 20 11VERSE 11

1 Ne 20 11For mine own sake. The repetition of this phrase gives emphasis to the fact that the selection of the children of Israel to be the people of God in a peculiar sense, was a divine act of sovereignty in no way merited by the people themselves. They have nothing to be proud of. Man is the clay. God is the artist. There is, perhaps, no truth more difficult to accept than that. And yet, there is no other way than perfect surrender to the Lord, that leads to eternal life and glory.

1 Ne 20 12VERSE 12

1 Ne 20 12I am the first and the last. Refers to Jehovah. Comp. Isa. 41:4; Rev. 1:8; 21:6; 22:13. The following comments from the Hebrew Daily Prayer Book, p. 3, are pertinent:

1 Ne 20 12"He is the Lord of the universe, who reigned ere any creature yet was formed: At the time when all things were made by his desire, then was his name proclaimed king. And after all things shall have had an end, he alone, the dreaded one, shall reign Who was, who is, and who will be in glory."

1 Ne 20 12Only, there will never be a time when all things shall have an end in the sense that they shall no longer exist. "Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end." (Is. 9:7)

1 Ne 20 13VERSE 13

1 Ne 20 13They stand up together. When the Creator calls to the inhabitants of the heavens or the earth, they stand up. It is a mark of respect. They stand at attention, to listen, and to comprehend his commands. This is not yet the case on earth at all times. But the time will come when the majesty of the Lord will be thus recognized.

1 Ne 20 14VERSE 14

1 Ne 20 14Who among them hath declared these things? Which of the gods of the nations had declared beforehand what was about to happen? The Lord had previously announced, through his prophet, that he would raise up a "shepherd," "his anointed" i.e. his Messiah, to cause Jerusalem and the temple to be rebuilt, and Babylon to fall (Isa. 44:28; 45:1-4). He even gives his name, Cyrus (Heb. Koresh), and now he asks, Has any god thus lifted the veil of the future? True prophecy is strong evidence of the truth of the prophet and his religion.

1 Ne 20 14The Lord hath loved him. Refers to Cyrus, and his conquest of Babylon.

1 Ne 20 15VERSE 15

1 Ne 20 15He shall make his way prosperous. The Lord would be on the side of Cyrus. The Chaldeans had had their opportunity. Through the prophet Daniel and other captives of Judah, the Lord had demonstrated his power so forcibly that Nebuchadnezzar proclaimed the God of Israel to be the only true God. He said: "Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honor the King of heaven, all whose works are truth, and his ways judgment: and those that walk in pride he is able to abase." (Dan. 4:37) But the people fell back to the worship of idols and debauchery judgment.

1 Ne 20 16VERSE 16

1 Ne 20 16Come ye near unto me. The Lord now addresses the nations of the world.

1 Ne 20 16From the time that it was declared. From the time the decree concerning Cyrus was determined on, the prophet had spoken of it, as the Lord God and his Spirit sent him to do. Note the three persons in the Godhead. In this verse we learn that the prophet was sent by "The Lord God" (Elohim) and his Spirit; in the next verse Jehovah, "the Holy One of Israel," speaks.

1 Ne 20 18VERSE 18

1 Ne 20 18O that thou hadst hearkened! A nation that will enjoy peace and righteousness, and not be torn by strife and crime waves, must, according to the word of God, hearken to his voice. That is applicable to all people in all ages.

1 Ne 20 19VERSE 19

1 Ne 20 19Like the gravel thereof. Some commentators understand that "gravel" here refers to the fishes in the sea.

1 Ne 20 20VERSE 20

1 Ne 20 20Go ye forth from Babylon. The prophet predicts the return from Babylon, and that the people would come home with songs of joy.

1 Ne 20 21VERSE 21

1 Ne 20 21They thirsted not. The miracles here recounted—water from the rock, the cleaving of the rock—did take place when the Israelites came from Egypt, under Moses, and the captives on their way home from Babylon under Ezra and Nehemiah sang songs of this earlier deliverance, as the Latter-day Saints still are singing of the miraculous experiences of their fathers and mothers in the western deserts of their land of Zion.

1 Ne 20 22VERSE 22

1 Ne 20 22No peace, saith the Lord, unto the wicked. "Peace is the gift of God to those who repent of their sins and become reconciled to Him through the acceptance of the plan of salvation, whether they are far off or near—whether they be gentiles or Jews—but the wicked are like the troubled sea, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. Therefore they have no peace."

---
Notas:
[^1] From Jerusalem to the Valley of Lemuel. Lehi leaves Jerusalem and goes into the wilderness (1 Ne. 2:4).
