Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 22

1 Ne 22 1VERSE 1

2 Ne 1 11 Ne 22 1What meaneth these things? When Nephi had finished reading, his brothers desired to know the true meaning of the words they had heard. Are they to be understood spiritually and not literally? This question may not appear to be important today, but it is one that has come down to us through many centuries. Is the Bible to be read literally, as any other book, or, has it a mystic sense, understood only by the initiated?

1 Ne 22 1Philo, (20 B.C. to 40 A.D.) the Jewish Alexandrian philosopher, a contemporary of our Lord, was the great advocate in his day of the allegorical interpretation of the Scriptures, and he exerted an altogether remarkable influence upon the early church fathers and, through them, on the whole church. His philosophy was the Platonic, according to which all the things which our senses tell us exist are mere passing shadows, while the ideas in our minds are the realities. That is to say, an individual man, a horse, a book, etc. are only ephemeral phenomena, while the genus man or horse, or the class of objects we call books are the lasting things in the universe.

1 Ne 22 1But Plato was also a Jew, and he believed in the literal inspiration of the Scriptures. How could this theory of the Bible be reconciled with his platonic philosophy? He found his solution in the "allegorical" interpretation of the Bible, which, by the way, is no interpretation at all but a re-writing of the text.

1 Ne 22 1Clement of Alexandria (Circa 150-215 A.D.), recognized four ways of interpreting the Scriptures, viz., The literal, the mystical, the moral and the prophetic. In his mystical system, the various details of the uniform of the high priest, for instance, had each a special meaning. The mitre signified the royal authority of our Lord. The breastplate of the ephod was a symbol of good works. The 360 bells on the priestly robe signified a year, viz., "the acceptable year of our Lord," and so on.

1 Ne 22 1Origen, the most famous of the Alexandrian church fathers (185-253 A.D.), undertook the impossible task of harmonizing the Platonian philosophy of Philo with Christianity, as this great Jew had endeavored to do for said philosophy and Judahism. He, therefore, found in the words of the Scriptures a three-fold meaning, corresponding to the body, soul, and spirit of man. To him the letter was the "body." But, in addition to the literal sense, there was a moral and also a spiritual sense. In speaking of the Mosaic story of the creation, for instance, he asked if anyone can believe that the first three days were without sun, moon and stars, and the first day without a sky, even. These things, he suggests, are said figuratively by means of history, which is not to be understood literally, but as significant of certain "mysteries."

1 Ne 22 1Some of these church fathers were so anxious to get a standing among the worldly wise of their day that they willingly reconstructed their theology in order to get room in it for pagan philosophy. [^1]

1 Ne 22 3VERSE 3

1 Ne 22 3Things both temporal and spiritual. Nephi, realizing the importance of the question, perhaps even more than we do, explained to his brothers, that the prophecies were given by the Spirit, and that they pertained to both temporal and spiritual things, but that they were to be interpreted literally. Israel would be scattered (v. 3); some of the tribes would be lost to view to the rest of the world (v. 4); but they were to be "nursed by the gentiles" and again be remembered under the covenant with the fathers (v. 6). This is all to be understood literally.

1 Ne 22 3Thus the question is completely and intelligently answered by Nephi. The words of the prophets, although referring to things both spiritual and temporal, are to be understood literally; unless, I think we may add, they are clearly shown to be used allegorically or figuratively, as for instance the "tree" and the "iron rod," etc., in the dream of Lehi. But let us note that the literal meaning of the word is that which it had at the time of the author, and as it was used by him and understood by his contemporaries, not as it is used and understood in our day, if the meaning has changed, as may be the case.

1 Ne 22 3As an illustration: We read in Acts 21:15 that Paul and his companions took up their "carriages" and went up to Jerusalem. The literal meaning of the word "carriages" at the time when the Bible translators wrote that, was, that which the traveler carried, that is to say, their baggage: In our day "carriages" does not mean baggage but a vehicle in which baggage is carried. The literal meaning of the word has changed. "Conversation" is another such word. When we read (Phil. 3:20), "Our conversation is in heaven," it is necessary to remember that when the translation was made, "conversation" meant, association, and not only an interchange of words. [^2] To us, "conversation" does not convey any meaning in this connection. "Leasing" (Ps. 4:2) means, in modern English, "lying." To "let," (2 Thess. 2:7; Rom. 1:13) means "hinder." It is therefore clear that to understand even a translation not older than the authorized English version, it is necessary to be sure of the meaning of the words used at the time of the translation. This is just as important, and a great deal more difficult, when the question is of the original manuscripts.

1 Ne 22 4VERSE 4

1 Ne 22 4Isles of the sea. See 1 Ne. 21:8.

SC1 Ne 22 71 Ne 22 81 Ne 22 91 Ne 22 101 Ne 22 111 Ne 22 12VERSES 7-12

SC1 Ne 22 71 Ne 22 81 Ne 22 91 Ne 22 101 Ne 22 111 Ne 22 12This section refers to the dispersion and gathering of Israel, as predicted by the prophet in the previous chapter (vv. 8-23). The Lord addresses the "isles of the sea," (see 1 Ne. 21:8) and promises to give them "his servant," that is, Israel, "for a covenant." They are then in a position to liberate the captives and restore them to their lands (v. 12).

SC1 Ne 22 71 Ne 22 81 Ne 22 91 Ne 22 101 Ne 22 111 Ne 22 12But how is this to be accomplished?

1 Ne 22 7VERSE 7

2 Ne 1 11 Ne 22 7A mighty nation. Nephi says God is to raise up a mighty nation among the Gentiles in "this land," referring, probably, to the United States. For Nephi delivered this discourse somewhere on this side of the Ocean. This mighty nation would disperse the descendants of Lehi.

1 Ne 22 8VERSE 8

1 Ne 22 8A marvelous work. After the dispersion of the remnant, a marvelous work would be done among the Gentiles, of special value to them and to the remnant.

1 Ne 22 9VERSE 9

1 Ne 22 9Making the covenants with Abraham known. The marvelous work would consist more especially in making the covenants with Abraham known to all the world.

1 Ne 22 11VERSE 11

1 Ne 22 11The Gospel to be proclaimed. The covenants will be known by their fulfilment "in the eyes of all the nations," and the preaching of the Gospel to the house of Israel.

1 Ne 22 12VERSE 12

1 Ne 22 12He will bring them out of captivity. The covenant people will again be brought out of captivity and be gathered in the lands of their inheritance. According to the law of God, the lands once allotted to his people can never be held, legally, by aliens. They are to revert, every fifth year, to the original heirs.

1 Ne 22 12All this, according to Nephi, is predicted in the preceding chapters of the Prophet Isaiah.

1 Ne 22 12America, and especially the United States of America, is God's great "melting pot." Here, the nations have met around the Constitution and under the aegis of the Starry Banner. Here the Lord, by his own processes of melting and alloying has demonstrated the possibility of producing a super-nation, as a pattern and a standard-bearer to all the world. Here, during the last one hundred years, more than thirty-seven millions of God's children have met. They have come as immigrants from all parts of the world. And now, the United States is the grandest possible monument in human history to the creative and regenerative power, to the honor and glory of the Redeemer of Man, the Mighty One of Israel.

1 Ne 22 12The central thought of this part of the discourse of Nephi is the second coming of our Lord. He enumerates some of the events that are to precede his advent and the Millennium. (1) Certain nations connected with the "abominable church" are to be cursed with "war among themselves," until they are "drunken with their own blood." (v. 13) (2) Nations will war against the house of Israel, or against Zion, shall be turned one against another and be destroyed. (vv. 14, and 19) (3) Satan shall have no power over the hearts of men. (v. 15) (4) The fulness of wrath is to be poured out upon the wicked. (vv. 16 and 18) (5) Then, a prophet, like Moses, viz., the Holy One of Israel, will be raised up. (vv. 20-23) (6) The Lord will reign. (vv. 24-28) All this is to be understood "according to the flesh," that is to say, literally. (v. 27)

1 Ne 22 13VERSE 13

1 Ne 22 13That great and abominable church. The Book of Mormon, in several places, mentions an organization which it characterizes as an "abominable" church. It is also called the "church of the devil." (1 Ne. 14:17)

1 Ne 22 13In the language of the Scriptures, any object or custom, that is detested or disliked for religious reasons, is called an abomination. That was the case in Egypt. (Gen. 43:32) Among the Hebrews, idols and idolatry were especially referred to as an "abomination" (Deut. 7:25, 26.) The "abominations" of which Daniel speaks (9:27) may refer to the altar (and probably the statue of the god Zeus) which Antiochus Epiphanes, in 168 B.C. set up in the temple as an insult to the Jews. [^3] It was this blasphemy and the other outrages connected with it that drove the Maccabees out into the mountains, and prompted them to instigate the most heroic war of the entire history of the Jewish nation.

1 Ne 22 13Our Lord, according to Matthew (24:15) and also Mark (13:14), quoted this prophecy of Daniel and predicted another profanation of the sanctuary, and left with the disciples the instruction that those who were in Judea at that time would better flee to the mountains, as the Maccabees had done in their day. [^4]

1 Ne 22 14VERSE 14

1 Ne 22 14Great shall be the fall. They that fight against Zion shall be destroyed, and the abominable church shall fall. I understand this to mean that the system of idolatry and falsehood on which antichristian governments and organizations are built will be destroyed, not the individuals who may have been deceived by the advocates of such a system, unless they harden their hearts against the influence of the Spirit of the Lord. (Comp. v. 18)

1 Ne 22 15VERSE 15

1 Ne 22 15Satan shall have no more power. The inference from this is that, as soon as the adversary is bound, error will have no attraction to the children of men.

1 Ne 22 20VERSE 20

1 Ne 22 20A prophet ... like unto me. This prophet is the Holy One of Israel (v. 21). He will execute judgment in righteousness. Our Lord will, himself, have charge of the preparations for his second advent.

1 Ne 22 23VERSE 23

1 Ne 22 23Churches ... to be consumed as stubble. Five characteristics are here given, by which an honest inquirer may be guided if he has a desire to find the Church of God, and avoid the church of the adversary. He must avoid—

1 Ne 22 23(1) All churches which are built up to get gain. A church operated for the purpose of "making money" is not God's church.

1 Ne 22 23(2) All churches that are built up to get power over the flesh; that is, over fellowmen. Churches not governed in accordance with the recognition of the free agency of man and the law of common consent, are not of God.

1 Ne 22 23(3) All churches which are built up to become popular in the eyes of the world are to be shunned. The "world" in this passage stands for such persons in the world whose interests are only worldly; who are seeking nothing but worldly pleasures, and who are dead to spiritual things. To become popular in such circles is to be outside the true church.

1 Ne 22 23(4) All churches that seek the lusts of the flesh and the things of the world. The Apostle James had something like this in view, when he wrote:

1 Ne 22 23"Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts. Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? Whosoever therefore, will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God. (James 4:3, 4)

1 Ne 22 23(5) All churches that do all manner of iniquity. It is not only what is generally looked upon as immorality that disqualifies the church that tolerates and condones it; all manner of iniquities have the same effect.

1 Ne 22 23"For I the Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance." (D. and C. 1:31)

1 Ne 22 23All such churches are to be consumed.

1 Ne 22 27VERSE 27

1 Ne 22 27All these things must come according to the flesh. That is to say, they must be understood literally, and not as figurative expressions of something else.

1 Ne 22 30VERSE 30

1 Ne 22 30Obedient to the commandments of God. Obedience is the characteristic of the members of the true Church.

1 Ne 22 31VERSE 31

1 Ne 22 31Salvation at the last day is their reward.

GENERAL NOTES

Note the 24th verse of this chapter. It gives us some idea of the character of the Millennial reign of the Holy One of Israel. During this time, the righteous must be led up as "calves of the stall."

The prophet Malachi makes use of this simile, as follows: "But unto you that fear my name shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth, and grow up as calves of the stall." (4:2) Which is as much as to say that, when the Millennial day dawns; when the Sun of righteousness arises, or, when the Son of God is revealed in glory his people will be taken care of spiritually. They will be fed and nourished in order that they may abound in grace and good works.

The prophet Hosea also uses the same expression: "Take with you words [words of repentance] and turn to the Lord: say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously: so will we render the calves of our lips." (14:2) And the apostle Paul (Heb. 14:15) interprets this verse thus: "By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips giving thanks to his name."

Furthermore, during that blessed time to come, our Lord will actually reign. Not as a figure head, subject to the dicta of scheming statesmen, or the shifting winds and currents of misguided public opinion. No. He will reign—

(1) In dominion. That is, he will exercise sovereign prerogatives.

(2) In might. He will have ability to do that which his sovereign will dictates. His resources will be unlimited, as they were in the days of the creation of our universe.

(3) In power. Might and power are about synonymous, but power may mean that he is empowered to exercise his might, or strength, as a sovereign, He has the authority. See the vision of Daniel (7:13, 14):

"Behold, one like a son of man * came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him. And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him; his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed."

This is his authority. The prophet saw in his vision that the Son of God, having become "like a son of man," received this commission of our common ancestor, the great patriarch and head of the human race, whose authority the Son of God, as a member of the human race, acknowledged and honored.

(4) In great glory. The reign of the Lord will be in splendor. He will bring with him the effulgence of the rising "Sun of righteousness," the glory of the presence of God, in the eternal mansions.

What is a church? The Hebrews of old had a representative assembly, or congregation, which is called "kahal," a word translated "ecclesia" (church) by the Seventy. This kahal, or Hebrew church, consisted of the elders and officers of the people, as is evident from Deut.: "Gather me all the elders of your tribes and your officers that I may speak these words in their ears ... and Moses spake in the ears of all the congregation of Israel (all the "kahal" of Israel; that is, the entire assembly of elders and officers summoned to hear) the words of this song," etc. (Deut. 31:28-30)

Moses could, of course, not speak to the entire nation in one meeting. When he had a message to the people, he delivered it to a representative assembly, and they spoke to the people in their various subdivisions. That assembly was their "kahal," their "church." Comp. Num. 16:3, where it appears that the rebellion of Korah, Dathan and Abiram was a rising in the "congregation of the Lord" (literally, the "kahal of Jehovah"). See also Ex. 16:1-3. The entire congregation of the children of Israel (The Heb. here is "adath" for congregation) came to the wilderness of Sin. The whole congregation of the children of Israel (the Heb is again, "adath") murmured. But their complaint was undoubtedly voiced in the representative assembly; for they said to Moses and Aaron, Ye have brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill this whole assembly (Heb. "this kahal") with hunger.

There is a clear distinction between the entire people of Israel and the church of Israel.

The Greeks, and especially the Athenians, of old had their ecclesia. That was their legislative assembly, consisting of citizens, summoned to meet to transact public affairs. At Athens ordinary assemblies were held in each "prytaneia" (presidency"), [^5] which would be about once a week. These assemblies were called "kyria ecclesia." Extraordinary assemblies were called whenever they were thought necessary. Note that "ecclesia" is the term by which the Church of our Lord is named in the famous passage, Matt. 16:18: "Upon this rock I will build my church" (ecclesia). Note also that the Greek term "kyria ecclesia," in a contracted form, has become the Scotch "kirk," the English "church," the German "Kirche," the Scandinavian "kyrka," and "Kirke"; the French have kept the same term in their "eglise."

The Church of the Firstborn. "Let me explain what the Church of the Firstborn is. It is the first Church that ever was raised up upon this earth; that is, the firstborn Church. That is what I mean; and when God, our Father, organized that church, he organized it just as his Father organized the church on the earth where he dwelt; and that same order is organized here in the city of Great Salt Lake; and it is that order that Joseph Smith, the prophet of God, organized in the beginning in Kirtland, Ohio. Brother Brigham Young, myself, and others were present when that was done; and when those officers received their endowments, they were together in one place. They were organized and received their endowments and blessings, and those keys were placed upon them, and that kingdom will stand for ever." (Heber C. Kimball, J. of D., vol. 5, p. 129)

LIAHONA

This interesting word is Hebrew with an Egyptian ending. It is the name which Lehi gave to the ball or director he found outside his tent the very day he began his journey through the "wilderness," after his little company had rested for some time in the Valley of Lemuel. (I Ne. 16:10; Alma 37:38)

L is a Hebrew preposition meaning "to," and sometimes used to express the possessive case. Iah is a Hebrew abbreviated form of "Jehovah," common in Hebrew names. On is the Hebrew name of the Egyptian "City of the Sun," also known as Memphis and Heliopolis. L-iah-on means, therefore, literally, "To God is Light"; or, "of God is Light." That is to say, God gives light, as does the Sun. The final a reminds us that the Egyptian form of the Hebrew name On is Annu, and that seems to be the form Lehi used.

Lehi had just received the divine command to begin his perilous journey. The question uppermost in his mind, after having received that call, must have been how to find the way. That must have been quite a problem. But he arose early in the morning, determined to carry out the command given. Undoubtedly he had prayed all night for light and guidance. And now, standing in the opening of the tent, perhaps as the first rays of the sun broke through the morning mists, his attention is attracted by a metal ball "of curious workmanship." He picks it up and examines it. And then, as he realizes that it is the guide for which he had been praying, he exclaims in ecstasy, L-iah-on-a! Which is as much to say, This is God's light; it has come from him! And that became the name of the curious instrument. This was not a compass. It was a miraculously formed instrument which served both as compass and octant.

Now, the fact is that this manner of giving names was an ancient Semitic custom. Hagar, when her son was perishing in the wilderness and she beheld the angel by the life-giving spring, exclaimed, Beer-lachai-roi! which means, literally, "Well, to live, to see." That is to say, "the well of him that liveth and seeth me," for that was the thought that came to her mind. (Gen. 16:13, 14) And that became the name of the well. In the same way, Abraham called the place where he had offered Isaac on the altar, Jehovah-jireh, "the Lord will provide"; because the Lord did provide for himself a ram instead of Isaac, as Abraham had assured his son the Lord would do. (Gen. 22:7-14) And that became the name of the Mount "to this day."

Lehi gave the metal ball a name commemorative of one of the great experiences of his life, just as these Old-Testament worthies had done. And, furthermore, he gave it a name that no one but a devout Hebrew influenced by Egyptian culture would have thought of. Is that not the strongest possible evidence of the truth of the historic part of the Book of Mormon?

Footnotes

Egyptian: Septuagint:

First dynasty 263 years Adam 230 years

Second dynasty 302 years Seth 205 years

Third dynasty 214 years Enos 190 years

Fourth dynasty 284 years Kenan 170 years

Fifth dynasty 165 years Mahalaleel 165 years

Sixth dynasty 198 years Jared 162 years

Seventh dynasty 53(?) years Enoch 165 years

Eighth dynasty 146 years Methuselah 187 years

Ninth dynasty 409 years Lamech 188 years

Tenth dynasty 185 years Noah 600 years

Eleventh dynasty 43 years

________________ ________________

Total 2262 years Total 2262 years

Twelfth dynasty 160 years Shem 102 years

Thirteenth dynasty 453 years Arphaxad 135 years

Fourteenth dynasty 184 years Kenan 130 years

Fifteenth dynasty 284 years Selah 130 years

Sixteenth dynasty 511 years Heber 134 years

Seventeenth dynasty 151 years Peleg 130 years

Eighteenth dynasty 34 years Regu 132 years

Serug 130 years

Nahor 179 years

Terah 70 years

Till Exodus of Abraham 75 years

Till Jacob goes to Egypt 215 years

Till Exodus 215 years

________________ ________________

Total 1777 years Total 1777 years

These tables illustrate, I believe, the futility of solving the problem of the Hebrew chronological data, even with the aid of Egyptian time tables.

"The Phoenicians were employed about a thousand years before the Christian era, by Solomon, king of the Jews, and Hiram, king of Tyre, to navigate their fleets to Ophir and Tarshish. They returned, by way of the Mediterranean, to the port of Joppa, after a three year's voyage, laden with gold, silver, precious stones, ivory, cedar, apes and peacocks. Several authors have believed that they had two distinct fleets, one of which went to a land since known as America, and the other to India. Huet, bishop of Avranches, and other authors, are persuaded that Ophir was the modern Sofala ... According to Arius Montanus, Genebrardus, Vatable, and other writers, Ophir is the island of Hispaniola. It is said that Christopher Columbus was induced to adopt this idea by the immense caverns which he found there, from which he supposed that Solomon must have obtained his gold. Postel and others have believed that Ophir was Peru. Horn claims that the Phoenicians made three remarkable voyages to America; the first, under the direction of Altas, son of Neptune; the second, when they were driven from the coast of Africa to the most remote parts of the Atlantic Ocean, and arrived at a large island to the west of Libya; and the third, in the time of Solomon, when the Tyrians went to Ophir to seek for gold.

"According to those who believe that there were two distinct fleets, that of Solomon and that of Hiram, the first set out from Ezion-geber, sailed down the Red Sea, doubled Cape Comorin, and went to Taproban (Ceylon), or some other part of India; this voyage occupied one year. The other fleet passed through the Mediterranean, stopping at the various ports along the coasts of Europe and Africa, and finally, passing out through the straits of Gades, continued its voyage as far as America and returned after three years to its starting place, laden with gold." (Native Races, vol. 5, pp. 64-65) This may not be considered as historic. It may be rejected as mere surmises. But the Mayas had a Votan tradition, similar to the Odin or Wuotan-saga of the Aesir. If there never was any communication anciently between Asia and America, that fact, as others, is an insolvable mystery.

"Ils ramaent, macevaya, verbe a l'imparfait, de maceva, traduit, d'ordinaire, par dancer, faire penitence, etc., mais nulle part par le mot ramer que j'adopt ici. Ils ne dansaint certainment pas dans leurs bateaux, en voyageant. Voila pour qurquoi j'ai decompose le mot; ma signifie la main, le bras, et ceua ou cehua, unir ou entrelacer; ce, un, etant le radical. Dans le travail de rameurs, les bras vont a l'unison et semblent s'entrelacer, d'ou le sens du verbe ramer que j'ai pris."

The famous apocryphal author who writes under the name of Barnabas, possibly as early as the close of the first century, explained the Mosaic law concerning clean and unclean animals by saying that when Moses, for instance, prohibits the eating of swine flesh he does not mean what he says, but that we must not associate with people who, like swine, squander their time on pleasure and forget God, and then again call on him when they are in distress. For a sow, he says, does not know her owner when her belly is full, but when she is hungry, she makes a noise, and then keeps still again when she is fed. Then again, Moses says we must not eat the flesh of an hyena. That means, Be not an adulterer, or a seducer of others, and do not associate with such. But why? Because this animal changes sex every year, and is sometimes male and sometimes female. But why could they eat that which divideth the hoofs? That means that they must associate with the righteous, who live in the world but are expecting the world to come. That is the divided hoof! But let us quote:

"When Moses spoke about food, he gave the people three great commandments in a spiritual sense of the prescripts. But on account of the lusts of the flesh they understood him as if he had meant this of natural food." From this we may gather what the brothers of Nephi may have had in view when they asked for an explanation of the meaning of the text read.

---
Notas:
[^1] "Lo khezuranu Zuram." (Not as our rock is their rock. Deut. 32:31.)
[^2] A better translation of these last lines would be: "The sin of necromancy, rebellion and even idolatry and wrongdoing (come from) stubbornness."
[^3] A Greek historian who lived during the times of Julius Caesar and Augustus, author of a work on the history of the world from creation to the wars of Julius Caesar.
[^4] See Notes.
[^5] The other texts are, the Septuagint, the Samaritan, the translation of Aquila, the early Syriac and the Latin Vulgate.
