Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

THE SECOND BOOK OF NEPHI

An Introduction

Where written. In the First Book of Nephi we have the account of the entire journey of Father Lehi and his company from Jerusalem to the Land of Bountiful, in Asia, and the voyage across the ocean to the Land of Promise. That is, America.

From the place of the first landing in America, after a bounteous harvest had been gathered in, the journey was continued in the wilderness. Judging from the fact that the company now traveled through a country where various specimens of animals were roaming, and where an abundance of ore, both precious and useful, was found (1 Ne. 18:25), they must have left the sea shore and continued their journey through the mountainous regions.

If we assume that the landing took place in South America, say, at thirty degrees south, where the city of Coquimbo, not far from Valparaiso, Chile, now is located, we may also assume that the colonists, in due time, may have come as far north as the Valley of Cusco, Peru, by way of the region around Lake Titicaca, Bolivia. As has been noted in a previous chapter, the Incas of Peru had a tradition according to which they had come into the valley after a journey that had lasted for eight years, and it is by no means impossible that future research will find the true connection between that tradition and the records of Nephi.

It was after the first more permanent settlement of Lehi in the Land of Promise, that Nephi was commanded to make the plates upon which the record was to be kept. (1 Ne. 19:1) Nephi did as commanded, and the beginning of the record was made in that first settlement. Later, after Nephi had founded the new settlement, which was called the Land of Nephi, he was instructed to make another set of plates on which to record a more condensed account of the history of the people (2 Ne. 5:29-33). It is a translation of the contents of this second set of plates that we now have in the Book of Mormon. The writing was done in the Land of Nephi.

The Contents. The main historical events noted in this book are:

Exhortations and prophecies:

CHAPTER 1

2 Ne 1 4VERSE 4

2 Ne 1 4I have seen a vision ... Jerusalem is destroyed. While Lehi and his company were still wanderers in the Arabian wilderness, the Lord gave him the promise that he would receive word of the destruction of Jerusalem. (1 Ne. 17:14) Now, after their arrival in America, the Lord gave them a vision in which the fate of that city was revealed.

2 Ne 1 4The Prophet Ezekiel, who at that time was in Babylonia, among the exiles, also had a vision of the destruction of the holy city. He writes, "In the ninth year, in the tenth day of the month, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, write the name of the day, even of this selfsame day; the king of Babylon drew close unto Jerusalem this selfsame day." (Ezek. 24:1, 2) That is, Nebuchadnezzar, on that day began the siege which was to end in the capture of the city. The siege lasted a year and a half, and two years after the beginning of it, the news of the fall of the city reached Tel Abib in Babylon, where the prophet lived, and where many of the Jewish exiles were concentrated.

2 Ne 1 4We note the fact that the Lord communicated the news of the calamity to his people, both in Asia and America, through his prophets. Did he also, by some means or other, reveal it to the so-called lost tribes? Who knows?

2 Ne 1 6VERSE 6

2 Ne 1 6There shall none come into this land save ... by the hand of the Lord. America has, by divine Providence, been set apart to be a "city of refuge" to men and women of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, who should believe in the Gospel. (D. & C. 10:50-1) It was discovered and settled under the special direction of the Lord. In a special sense this may refer to the United States, but in a general way it is true of the entire country of Zion, North and South. (Alma 46:17)

2 Ne 1 6When we read of the savagery that marked the first contact of some European conquerers of America with the natives, after the marvelous discovery of the country by Columbus, it may not be easy to recognize the hand of the Lord in the entire history of that time. But I think we may say that God directed the conquerors in the same way that he led the Assyrians under Sennacherib, or the Chaldeans under Nebuchadnezzar, or the Romans under Vespasian and Titus, and for very much the same reason, to overrun Palestine at various times.

2 Ne 1 6The Aztec confederacy, which was broken up by Cortez, through his exploits in Mexico, was, in fact a "plunderbund" whose armed forces were maintained mainly for the purpose of robbing more or less defenseless communities, and carrying away corn and gold and other valuables, and especially human beings for slaves and cruel sacrifices; their worship was mostly revolting idolatry. Montezuma II, who was made a prisoner by Cortez, and who was killed while entitled to protection by the Spaniards, was really a despot, hated and feared even by some of his pretended allies. That is evident from the fact that thousands of the people of Tlascala joined Cortez in his march upon Tenochtitlan. That is perhaps also proved by the fact that a most efficient guide and pilot of the little army of Cortez was a young, brilliant woman, Marina, from Tabasco, who, by her loyalty to the invaders and her linguistic knowledge, saved the expedition from destruction at Cholula, and rendered valuable service at all times. Montezuma can not have been greatly beloved by the common people.

2 Ne 1 6In Peru, the Incas, at the time of the arrival of Pizarro, who caused Atahualpa to accept "baptism" and then to be choked to death with a bow-string, and who burned the Chieftain Chalcuchima at the stake, were despots, who seemed to aim at the conquest of the world. Atahualpa himself had no legitimate claim to the position of ruler of Peru. Only a short time before the arrival of the Spaniards, he left Quito, where he was the governor, and marched upon Cuzco. His war was characterized by the utmost barbarity. He caused the family of the ruling Inca to be massacred, and the ruler himself, Inca Huascar, to be finally, murdered.

2 Ne 1 6The culture of the Peruvians, although altogether remarkable and, in some respects superior to that of the Mayas and Nahuas, was nevertheless rigid, communistic despotism, made possible by the strangling of individual liberty and the establishment of superstitious class distinction. It rested on the falsehood that the Incas alone were the children of the Almighty, while the common people were their servants. The weakness of the system was seen clearly, when a handful of Spaniards could overthrow the structure, as easily as a child with the sweep of a hand destroys a house of cards.

2 Ne 1 6If we remember that the Lord, according to the Book of Mormon, repeatedly cautioned the people here against despotism, which leads to destruction (see 2 Ne. 5:18; 10:11-14), we can see the hand of God even in the appearance of the executioners on the scene. [^1] (See vv. 10-12)

2 Ne 1 6However, it is only justice to say that not all the Spaniards were in the class referred to. There were men, such as Las Casas, for instance, and many others, who gladly gave themselves and all they had in the unselfish service of the natives, to the best of their ability and the understanding they had.

2 Ne 1 7VERSE 7

2 Ne 1 7This land is consecrated. The information is here given (1) that this land is a consecrated land, a holy land, to all those whom the Lord shall bring here, as the land of Canaan was to the Hebrews; (2) that if the people will serve God, they will enjoy the blessed gift of liberty, but that (3) if they become steeped in iniquity, the land itself will be cursed by that condition. It is only to the righteous—that is, the righteous people—that, "it shall be blessed forever."

2 Ne 1 7And here it might be said that when Lehi speaks of a "righteous" people, he does not mean a nation consisting exclusively of righteous individuals. Such a people has not existed on earth since the days of Enoch. Sinners we have always with us. A righteous people is one which acknowledges the sovereignty of the Lord; a people whose legislators aim at making only just and equitable laws; whose judges judge in righteousness, and whose executives apply the laws in impartial warfare upon the unrighteous. That is a righteous people—a people that has the promises of divine blessings in the land of Zion.

2 Ne 1 8VERSE 8

2 Ne 1 8This land should be kept as yet from the knowledge of other nations. The reason given for this is that if not, many nations would overrun the land, and there would be no place for an inheritance. [^2]

2 Ne 1 8We recognize the hand of the Lord in the discovery of America by Columbus, and its subsequent settlement by so many people of all races. We also see the hand of Providence in the fact that detailed knowledge of this country was for centuries withheld from the rest of the world, notwithstanding the marvelous civilizations and millions of people who lived here. At sundry times it looked as if a discovery might have been made. Diodorus Siculus, a Greek historian, who lived during the time of Julius Csar (102-44 B.C.), relates that the Phoenicians discovered a large island in the Atlantic, several days' journey from the coast of Africa. Tyrians wanted to colonize the island, hearing of its wonderful clime and resources, but they were prevented by a decree of the senate at Carthage. Homer, Plutarch, and others are said to mention this "island." And yet, it remained, practically, an unknown land. Clement, supposedly a disciple of the Apostle Peter, wrote epistles to the Saints at Corinth, which have been preserved among the apocrypha of the New Testament. In the first of these letters (9:12-16) he says:

2 Ne 1 8"The ocean, inaccessible to the human race, and the worlds beyond, are governed through the same laws of their grand master. Spring and summer, autumn and winter, peacefully succeed one another. The particular directions of the winds fulfil their work at all times without offending each other. The fountains, always flowing, made for pleasure and for health, always offer their bosoms, to sustain the life of man, and the smallest creatures are living together in peace and harmony."

2 Ne 1 8"Worlds that are beyond" the ocean can refer only to countries on the American side of the globe, and the reference to its seasons, its directions of the wind, its fountains and its living creatures prove a rather astonishing information of this country, at that time. Without actual knowledge, how could Clement, or anybody, know that the natural laws operated here as in the Old World, and not in some other way?

2 Ne 1 8Then, there is the myth about Votan, who is said to have conducted seven families from his country to America. According to Cabrera, quoted by Bancroft in Native Races (vol. 5, p. 69):

2 Ne 1 8"Votan asserts that he is a descendant of Imox, of the race of Chan, and derives his origin from Chivim. He states that he conducted seven families from Valum Votan to this continent and assigned lands to them; that he is the third of the Votans; that, having determined to travel until he arrived at the root of heaven, in order to discover his relations to the Culebras (Serpents), and make himself known to them, he made four voyages to Chivim; that he arrived in Spain, and that he went to Rome; that he saw the great house of God building; that he went by the road which his brethren the Culebras had bored; that he marked it, and that he passed by houses of the thirteen Culebras. He relates that in returning from one of his voyages, he found seven other families of the Tzekil nation, who had joined the first inhabitants, and recognized in them the same origin as his own, that is, of the Culebras."

2 Ne 1 8This is, of course, myth; but even a myth must have an historical basis, be it ever so weak; otherwise it would be mere Munchausenian balderdash. This historical basis of the Votan-myth is, no doubt, actual intercourse between the Old World and the New in the dim past of the history of mankind. Some students of American history believe that Tyrians, after their city had been destroyed by Alexander the Great, went to the Fortunate Island and from there to the coast of Florida; further, to the Gulf of Mexico around Yucatan and into the bay of Honduras, where they ascended a river, and, finally, founded the city of Copan. Garcia, Kingsborough, and many others, favor the theory that the Indians are of Jewish origin, a theory that we know, from the Book of Mormon, to be true as far as some of them are concerned.

2 Ne 1 8When we come down to historical times, we find Greenland, geographically considered, a part of America, settled toward the end of the 10th century, and afterwards the North American coasts explored by Leif Ericson and other Icelanders, some of whom penetrated to the interior, how far is not yet fully known. But the route to America was again closed, as if by a Supernatural power, and history lost all knowledge of this part of the world.

2 Ne 1 8Just how the intercourse was broken off, may not be fully known. But we know that during the 14th century, "black death" carried off twenty-five million people in Europe, and almost as many in China and other parts of Asia, and that, during the fifteenth century, Greenland was devastated, presumably by Indians from the mainland, who left only the ruins on the sites of numerous settlements. No wonder if, after such devastations, the children of men for a long time lost all ambition to explore and colonize unknown lands.

2 Ne 1 11VERSE 11

2 Ne 1 11He will bring other nations unto them. See notes on v. 6

SC2 Ne 1 132 Ne 1 142 Ne 1 152 Ne 1 162 Ne 1 172 Ne 1 182 Ne 1 192 Ne 1 202 Ne 1 212 Ne 1 222 Ne 1 232 Ne 1 242 Ne 1 252 Ne 1 262 Ne 1 272 Ne 1 282 Ne 1 292 Ne 1 302 Ne 1 312 Ne 1 32VERSES 13-32

SC2 Ne 1 132 Ne 1 142 Ne 1 152 Ne 1 162 Ne 1 172 Ne 1 182 Ne 1 192 Ne 1 202 Ne 1 212 Ne 1 222 Ne 1 232 Ne 1 242 Ne 1 252 Ne 1 262 Ne 1 272 Ne 1 282 Ne 1 292 Ne 1 302 Ne 1 312 Ne 1 32In these verses Lehi addresses specially Laman, Lemuel, Sam, the sons of Ishmael, and Zoram.

2 Ne 1 13VERSE 13

2 Ne 1 13O that ye would awake! Lehi considers the opponents of Nephi as spiritually "asleep," and bound with chains, and that they had been reduced to that condition by influences from hell. Their opposition was a kind of hypnotic influence from the infernal regions, but their condition was voluntary on their part. He, therefore, exhorts them to awake and shake off the chains. No one needs to be held in bondage by the adversary against his own will.

2 Ne 1 14VERSE 14

2 Ne 1 12 Ne 1 14Grave from whence no traveler can return. Critics of the Book of Mormon have without reason asserted that this is plagiarism from Shakespeare. There is not the slightest ground for that assumption. To compare the grave (the Hebrew Sheol) with a country from which a traveler could not return, was but natural to one who as Lehi, had spent so many years traveling and now was nearing the grave. The simile is at once striking and simple and original.

2 Ne 1 14The lines from Shakespeare which have been mentioned as plagiarized are the following, which the immortal bard credits to Hamlet in Act I, scene 3:

2 Ne 1 14... "Who would fardels bear, To grunt and sweat under a weary life; But that the dread of something after death, The undiscovered country, from whose bourn No traveler returns—puzzles the will; And makes us rather bear those ills we have, Than fly others that we know not of,"

2 Ne 1 14Shakespeare, it will be observed, considers that our ignorance of the world beyond, on account of absence of communication between the two worlds, keeps some of us from committing suicide, because we prefer battling with the evils with which we are familiar to venturing out against unknown evils. That thought is as far from the expression of Lehi as the east is from the west.

2 Ne 1 14The probability is that Shakespeare borrowed his line from Job and misunderstood it, and therefore gave it a meaning which Job never intended it to have.

2 Ne 1 14Job, speaking of the days of man as few and full of trouble says, in part,

2 Ne 1 14"Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months are with thee, thou hast appointed his bounds that he cannot pass." (Job 14:5; 16:22)

2 Ne 1 14The idea that Job expresses is this that the days and months of man on earth are determined by the Lord, and that no living man can pass those boundaries set for his life. Like the grass and the flowers, man flourishes in the time determined, and then the harvester comes and cuts him down. Job is not speaking of the boundaries between this life and the life hereafter; he is speaking of the days and months which the Almighty, as he understood it, had determined for him on earth. He considered himself as a hireling, who had a certain task to perform before he was entitled to a rest. (See v. 6) The question of the status of the dead in Sheol is not involved in this passage of the Book of Job, although he had wonderfully clear ideas on this subject, as on the subject of the resurrection. (See Job 16:22; 19:23-27)

2 Ne 1 15VERSE 15

2 Ne 1 15The Lord hath redeemed my soul. As the Lord had redeemed his soul, so he would redeem the soul of his rebellious children, if they would turn to him, repentant and prayerful.

2 Ne 1 16VERSE 16

2 Ne 1 16Observe the statutes and judgments of the Lord. Rebellion is slavery. Obedience is the price for liberty.

2 Ne 1 16Statutes and judgments. A statute is a legislative enactment; any authoritatively declared rule, ordinance, decree or law.

2 Ne 1 16A judgment may be a sentence pronounced by God as the Supreme Judge. Or, it may be a ruling, when a statute needs an explanation. Such rulings may come through the inspired word of the Lord, either written or spoken by his authorized servants.

2 Ne 1 24VERSE 24

2 Ne 1 24Rebel no more. The great weakness of Laman was his pride. He was a man with a strong personality, capable of impressing others as a leader. He, no doubt, had as much education as his younger brothers. He was skilled in oratory, and he had the legal advantage of being the firstborn. But with all these qualifications he was weak, because he lacked humility.

2 Ne 1 24Laman had his chance. But he did not stand the test. We have seen how he failed. When the question of obtaining the brass plates from Laban came up, the Lord gave Laman the opportunity to lead. Boldly he went to Laban with his request, but at the first sign of danger he fled. Not so Nephi. He relied on the Lord and succeeded.

2 Ne 1 24Then Laman again showed his weakness in anger and acts of violence. Read the account again in 1 Ne. 3:10-14, 28-31. At length he became a rebel and a leader of rebellion against the Lord, (vv. 25, 26).

2 Ne 1 27VERSE 27

2 Ne 1 27Ye must obey. Lehi here defines the principles of divine authority. It is the voice of God through his inspired servant. "It was not he ... it was the Spirit of the Lord ... which opened his mouth to utterance, that he could not shut it." Divine authority must not be assumed, no matter how great faith we may have. It cannot be acquired by study—not even of theology. It is given by God and received—by faith, yes! But faith is only the hand that receives. It is God that puts the gift into the hand. Until that is done, the hand is empty.

2 Ne 1 28VERSE 28

2 Ne 1 28My first blessing. This promise is given especially to Laman, Lemuel, Sam, and the sons of Ishmael. If they would hearken to Nephi, the blessing of his father would be theirs. See vv. 7, 20, 22.

2 Ne 1 29VERSE 29

2 Ne 1 29Zoram. His special blessing was, no doubt, deserved. He was very much attached to Nephi, from their first acquaintance. And when Nephi sought a place of gathering away from Laman, Zoram went with him. (2 Ne. 5:6) How he came to join the company of Lehi is related in 1 Ne. 4:20-38. He was at that time a trusted servant of Laban. Later he took the eldest daughter of Ishmael for wife. (1 Ne. 16:7) One of his descendants was Ammoron, who called himself a bold Lamanite (Alma 54:23), and engaged in a war of revenge on account of supposed wrongs committed centuries before he was born. It is not impossible that the name "Ammoron" still survives in the Aymara linguistic stock in South America, which some students consider a member of the Kechua stock, while Dr. Brinton treats it as a distinct linguistic stock. ("The American Race," p. 216)

2 Ne 1 29The name Zoram is, probably from the Hebrew, "Zur," a rock, [^3] signifying a trustworthy, reliable character. It is perpetuated throughout Book of Mormon history. There was a righteous, God-fearing Nephite general by that name in the days of the judges (Alma 16:5-7). Also an apostate by the same name (Alma 30:59; 31:1). There was also, at one time, an apostate sect, Zoramites, in the country of Antionum.

---
Notas:
[^1] Death of Lehi, 4:12. Lehi addresses the people on the Land of Promise—A land blessed to the righteous, but cursed to the wicked, 1:4, 7-12; exhortations, 1:28-32.
[^2] Rebellion, 5:2-4. Lehi addresses his son, Jacob, on Redemption through the Messiah, 2:6-8; on opposition necessary in all things, 2:11-14; the forbidden fruit and the tree of life, 15; Adam fell that men might be, 25; the redemption of mankind, 2:28-30.
[^3] Nephi, Sam, Jacob, Joseph, Zoram and their friends emigrate to a new location, 5:5-8. Lehi addresses his son Joseph on the prophecy of Joseph in Egypt, 3:5-16; on the mission of Moses, 17-22; the seed of Joseph not to be destroyed, 23-25.
