Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 2

2 Ne 2 1VERSE 1

2 Ne 2 1Jacob. The first of two sons born to Lehi in the wilderness before the travelers arrived in the Land of Bountiful, about 595 B.C. The name is derived from a verb which means, "to overreach," "to circumvent." The name of the second son was Joseph. In due time these two brethren were made priests and teachers in the Land of Nephi. (2 Ne. 5:26)

2 Ne 2 1In the day of my tribulation. This refers to the journey from Nahom to Bountiful in Arabia, during which time children were born and miraculously sustained. (1 Ne. 17:1-6)

2 Ne 2 2VERSE 2

2 Ne 2 2He shall consecrate thy afflictions for thy gain. Lehi reminds his son of the great truth that trials and afflictions are necessary in the preparation for the reception of special blessings. That is a difficult lesson to learn. Especially in days of pleasure hunting, who wants to hear that afflictions are necessary for purification and glorification; that, to the followers of the Captain of our salvation, the road to victory goes over Calvary? Who can truthfully say, with the poet:

2 Ne 2 2"We take with solemn thankfulness Our burden up, nor ask it less, And count it joy that even we May suffer, serve, or wait for thee, Whose will be done?"

2 Ne 2 2—John G. Whittier.

2 Ne 2 3VERSE 3

2 Ne 2 3Thy days shall be spent in the service of thy God. The greatest blessing a human being can receive: To belong to the entourage of the King of kings!

2 Ne 2 3Thou art redeemed. Not because of the afflictions suffered, but, "because of the righteousness of thy Redeemer." It is the righteousness of the Redeemer that is the foundation of the redemption of man, and Lehi repeats this again and again. (See vv. 6, 8, 26, 28) A slave, who is bought and set free, is redeemed.

2 Ne 2 4VERSE 4

2 Ne 2 4And thou hast beheld in thy youth. Most of the great men of God have been called in their childhood. The age of youth is the age of vision.

2 Ne 2 4Youth sees, age tests, Youth soars, age rests. While Youth is out for detection, Old age is in for perfection. And both are one, as flower and pod, Both serving well the kingdom of God.

2 Ne 2 4His glory. Jacob had beheld his coming in the flesh, his ministry, his atoning sacrifice, his resurrection, and his glorious return to the Father. All this constituted his glory. Jacob, therefore, knew the plan of salvation by revelation, just as we know it by the inspired proclamation of the Gospel. He could look forward toward Calvary, as we are looking backward in history to that central place of interest both in heaven and on earth. (See Pearl of Great Price, Mos. 5:4-9)

2 Ne 2 4Salvation is free. "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." (John 3:16) And that reminds me of a twice-told tale.

2 Ne 2 4A young missionary had preached a powerful sermon on "free salvation." He felt sure that the audience had been impressed with his explanations and exhortations. Consequently, at the close of his effort, he turned to a woman who seemed especially moved upon by the good spirit and asked her if she had enjoyed his talk. "Well," she said, "to be frank, I remember only the text. What a wonderful text! The Spirit of God was filling my heart so full of the love of God, while you were speaking, that I felt as if I were in the divine Presence all the time." That was a good missionary. A good missionary always brings the Spirit of God with him to his meetings and gives Him a chance to speak.

2 Ne 2 5VERSE 5

2 Ne 2 5Instructed sufficiently. Not only is salvation free, but sufficient knowledge has been imparted to all men in all ages, to enable them to do that which brings salvation and to shun the opposite. "For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required: and to whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more." (Luke 12:48) It follows, that to him whom little is given, little will be required. See notes under verse 14.

SC2 Ne 2 62 Ne 2 72 Ne 2 82 Ne 2 92 Ne 2 10VERSES 6-10

SC2 Ne 2 62 Ne 2 72 Ne 2 82 Ne 2 92 Ne 2 10Redemption through Christ. He answers the ends of the law for the benefit of all who have a broken heart and a contrite spirit. That is to say, when the law, as the accuser, urges the penalty of separation of the transgressor from God and all that is good, the Holy Messiah, as the Defender, replies that the accused is his, by virtue of his sacrifice for sin. The law has no further claim on him. Christ rose from the dead by the power of the Spirit, for the purpose of bringing a general resurrection to pass; and he rose first in order to make intercession for all men, and save those who believe in him. Through his intercession all will be resurrected; the believers will be saved.

SC2 Ne 2 62 Ne 2 72 Ne 2 82 Ne 2 92 Ne 2 10Furthermore, through his intercession for all men, they will be judged in accordance with divine principles of truth and holiness. There can be no mistake. Even those who are under condemnation will acknowledge the justice of the decrees of God.

SC2 Ne 2 62 Ne 2 72 Ne 2 82 Ne 2 92 Ne 2 10"Even so, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments."

SC2 Ne 2 62 Ne 2 72 Ne 2 82 Ne 2 92 Ne 2 10On the subject of the law, see Rom. 2:19-25; 3:20-26.

2 Ne 2 10VERSE 10

2 Ne 2 10Holy One. This is the Messiah, and we are here told that the resurrected dead, as a consequence of his intercession, will be judged by the law which he has given. Paul, in his letter to the Romans, expresses the same thought: "In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my gospel." (Rom. 2:12-16. Compare Words of Mormon, v. 11) The title, "the Holy One," and particularly, "the Holy One of Israel," is frequently applied by Isaiah to our Savior. It occurs 25 times in the book that bears his name, and only six times elsewhere in the Old Testament. In Is. 29:23 the title is, "the Holy One of Jacob," followed by this explanation, "the God of Israel." Jacob and Israel were two names of the same patriarchal ancestor.

2 Ne 2 10There is a reason why the Prophet Isaiah prefers this title. When he was called to the prophetic office, he saw, in a vision, the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and he heard the attendant seraphim crying, one to another, "Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts; the whole earth is full of his glory." (Is. 6:1-4) To Isaiah our Lord after that was "The Holy One," or, "The Holy One of Israel," or "Jacob." The use of this title by Lehi in an address to his son Jacob, who was named after the patriarch, is appropriate and full of meaning. In Luke 4:34 an evil spirit refers to our Lord as "The Holy One of God." Holiness is a divine quality without which no one can please God (Rom. 8:1-8); nor abide in his presence. It should be noted that this title is found in the latter part of Isaiah, from chapter 40 to chapter 60, and not only in the first part; which should go far to prove the unity of the book, both in design and authorship.

2 Ne 2 10Opposition in all Things. Here the prophet seems to refute the theory of monists who maintain that all existences may be considered as ultimately belonging to only one category. They find in this view an escape from what appears to be contradictions, conflict, war and confusion between the natural forces of the universe; for, they argue, if there is but one fundamental essence, one principle, there can be no fundamental conflict. But Lehi teaches that there is an opposition in all things. If not, he says, there would be neither righteousness nor wickedness; neither good nor bad; and, consequently, no responsibility, and neither rewards nor punishment.

2 Ne 2 10Were there no law, there would be no sin, no virtue, no happiness and even no God. But, if there were no God, we ourselves would not exist, for there would have been none that could have given us existence.

2 Ne 2 10That is an inevitable conclusion from the premises of an absurd philosophy.

2 Ne 2 14VERSE 14

2 Ne 2 14My Sons. Lehi calls special attention to what he now is about to say. He is speaking of the existence of God, the creation, the fall of man, free agency and the atonement.

2 Ne 2 14There is a God. Only a "fool"—that is, one who is deficient in moral qualities (see Rom. 1:22)—contradicts this self-evident truth, and his negation is determined by the heart rather than the intellect; that is to say, he wishes that there were no God, and he talks accordingly. "The fool has said in his heart, There is no God." (Psalm 14:1) That is his wish, his desire.

2 Ne 2 14Such an individual may, perhaps, find comfort in the conclusion of Kant, that the existence of God, a First Cause, cannot be proved by any argument known to logic, since every cause seems to require a previous cause to account for it, wherefore a First Cause can never be located. But St. Paul does not agree with this conclusion. His assertion is that all that which can be known by mortal man concerning God has been made manifest by our Lord himself, for "God has showed it unto them." Paul is also of the opinion that his eternal power and Godhead "are clearly seen in the creation." (Rom. 1:19, 20) The Hebrew poet expresses the same thought:

2 Ne 2 14"The heavens declare the Glory of God, And the firmament showeth his handiwork. Day unto day poureth forth speech, And night unto night showeth knowledge. There is no speech nor language; Their voice cannot be heard. Their sound is gone out through all the earth, And their words to the end of the World."

—Psalm 19:1-3.

2 Ne 2 14There is absolutely no excuse for the assertion that there is no God, even in the form of a wish.

2 Ne 2 14He hath created all things. Not only is there a God, but he has created all things. All that human senses can contact and human understanding can comprehend; all that divine revelation can unveil to a soul quickened by the Holy Spirit—all is created, and God is the Creator.

2 Ne 2 14As is well known, after the publication of the Darwinian hypothesis of natural selection and "Origin of Species" during the years 1858 and 1859, the theory of evolution became fashionable as a substitute for the doctrine of creation. It was hailed by many as a new discovery and as the very key of the universe.

2 Ne 2 14But this attitude toward it has begun to undergo a notable change.

2 Ne 2 14It is being recalled that surmises regarding evolution are not new; that, in fact, some ancient Greek philosophers in the dim past dreamed of evolution, and that Descartes, the famous French mathematician (1596-1650), and after him Leibnitz, considered it possible that higher forms of existences had originated in lower. Stripped of its assumed character of an ultra-modern scientific discovery, the theory has lost some of its prestige.

2 Ne 2 14The soundness of it is also being doubted, notwithstanding the seemingly strong support of intellectual giants, such as Kant (1724-1804), La Place (1749-1829), Lyell (1830) and many others. Dr. Henry Fairfield Osborn has been quoted in a magazine, May 15, 1932, as having made the sweeping statement, that man lived on the earth not 50,000 years ago, as Darwinists assume, but at least 50 million years ago, and that he was never anything but a man.

2 Ne 2 14Shortly afterwards Dr. Austin H. Clark, of the U.S. National Museum, Washington, is said to have declared, by the same publication:

2 Ne 2 14"Applying our knowledge of embryology, we may assume without possibility of contradiction that all major groups of animals were formed at the same time. There is no evidence which leads us to suppose that any major group was derived from another."

2 Ne 2 14The argument for evolution which compares that process with the growth of a plant from the seed may be ornamental, but it is not logical. The development of plants from the seed, one generation after another of the same kind, is a wonderful illustration of the resurrection (1 Cor. 15:35-49), but not of evolution. When our Lord (Mark 4:28) compares the kingdom of God with a plant that bears fruit, "first the blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the ear," he is not speaking of evolution, for no plant evolves from the blade, it grows, blade and all, from the seed (vv. 26, 27). The plant thus illustrates the gradual growth of the kingdom from a small beginning, but not evolution.

2 Ne 2 14The arguments for evolution which at one time seemed justified by the Mendelian law have been shattered by the discovery that hybrids return to their original characteristics after two or three generations, if not subject to special care. Here, again, nature presents to our view the wonderful picture of a circular movement, from seed to seed, but not evolution.

2 Ne 2 14The gravest indictment against the Darwinian theory is its tendency to develop agnosticism, or even infidelity. Darwin himself became an agnostic. He rejected the Bible's conception of God and of Christ, and said, as quoted by his son: "I for one must be content to remain an Agnostic." (Quoted by Wm. Jennings Bryan in his great speech before the judge in the Scopes' trial, July 21, 1925.) That the theory of evolution leads to infidelity is admitted by the best informed evolutionists. Arthur Cushman McGiffert, in his, "The Rise of Modern Religious Thought," declares that it has had this effect upon "many," but he finds comfort in the fact that it has given us the idea of the immanence of God in everything as a substitute—a poor compensation, I must say, for the loss of the personal God of the Revelations, the Father and Governor of us all!

2 Ne 2 14If we are justified in judging of the attributes of a tree from the quality of the fruit, we must conclude that a theory that produces infidelity cannot be true, not from God.

SC2 Ne 2 152 Ne 2 16VERSES 15-16

SC2 Ne 2 152 Ne 2 16Forbidden fruit. We are here taught that something forbidden was necessary in man's experience on earth. Man had been endowed with free agency, but unless there had been something not lawful to do, there could not have been freedom of choice. Man could have willed only that which was lawful, there being nothing unlawful. Kant puts this thought fairly well when he says that to act in response to duty is to give a law to oneself, and that is to be autonomous, or free. Hence I say, the very prohibition made man free, as long as he was at liberty to choose between obedience and disobedience, with a clear understanding of the consequences.

2 Ne 2 17VERSE 17

2 Ne 2 17Fallen from Heaven. The record of the story of the fall of man on earth begins properly with an account of the rebellion of Lucifer in heaven.

2 Ne 2 17According to the Book of Abraham (3:22-28), when the proposition to arrange a dwelling place in which the noble intelligences embodied, might have an opportunity of proving themselves worthy of advancement, and the question of leadership came up, one like unto the Son of Man said,

2 Ne 2 17"Here am I, send me."

2 Ne 2 17And another said, "Here am I, send me."

2 Ne 2 17God said, "I will send the first."

2 Ne 2 17Then the second became angry and rebelled, and many followed after him.

2 Ne 2 17In the Book of Moses we read (4:1-4) that the fallen angel, later, repeated his proposition. He offered to redeem all mankind, provided God would make him his Son and give him his glory. Not a soul would be lost.

2 Ne 2 17When this amended proposition came before the Son, he replied humbly, "Father, thy will be done and the glory be thine for ever."

2 Ne 2 17God, then, confirmed the first decision, and gave the Son authority to cast the rebels out of heaven. There was war in heaven. (Rev. 12:7, 8) Michael, our Father Adam, fought against the "dragon" and his angels, until these were cast out. It was then that our Lord (Luke 10:18) "beheld satan fall from heaven as lightning."

2 Ne 2 17He Became a Devil. This word is from the Greek "diabolos," which means "calumniator," or "accuser." Here it stands for the Hebrew "satan," which means an enemy, an adversary. Cast out of heaven, the enemy became an accuser, he became satan, yea, even the devil, the father of lies, to deceive and to blind men. (Mos. 4:4)

2 Ne 2 17In the New Testament "devil" often signifies a "demon," a spirit, whether good or evil. See, for ex., 2 Tim 4:1, where "doctrines of devils," might better be rendered, "doctrines concerning spirits,"—referring, perhaps, to the practices of certain so-called spiritists.

2 Ne 2 18VERSE 18

2 Ne 2 18Partake of the Forbidden Fruit. Adam came to this earth as innocent and devoid of worldly knowledge and experience as a babe. The Garden had been prepared for him by his heavenly Father, to be his first home. There, under divine care and tuition, he became capable of performing his mission on earth.

2 Ne 2 18When he was sent out of the Garden, he knew how to take care of trees and cultivate the soil. He knew the different animals, for he had named them according to their characteristics. He could observe some of the heavenly constellation, which, like a celestial timepiece, indicated not only day and night, but also seasons, particular days and years, and, we may add, cycles. (Gen. 1:4)

2 Ne 2 18Our first parents began their career outside the Garden of Eden with a high degree of culture. That is the picture presented by sacred history; also by profane history. It is corroborated by archeology, for, no matter how deep scientists dig in the earth, wherever they find human remains, they unearth evidence of culture.

2 Ne 2 18Adam and Eve lived as happy as children in the Garden until they came in contact with a temptor, who prevailed upon them to eat the forbidden fruit. In the Pearl of Great Price (Mos. 4:5-7) two agents appear in this plot against man, Satan and the Serpent. We read: "And Satan put it into the heart of the Serpent ... to beguile Eve, for he knew not the mind of God." In the D. & C. 29:40 we read that "it came to pass that the devil tempted Adam, and he partook of the forbidden fruit and transgressed the commandment, wherein he became subject to the will of the devil, because he yielded unto temptation." St. Paul (1 Tim. 2:14) says, "Adam was not deceived," which is understood to mean that he voluntarily and deliberately ate of the fruit, in order not to be separated from Eve.

2 Ne 2 18There is not necessarily any discrepancy between these three accounts. Satan inspired the Serpent to tempt Eve. The chief of the fallen angels then turned to Adam, who, probably, had already made up his mind what to do.

2 Ne 2 18But who was the serpent? It may have been a reptile in the Garden. Dr. Adam Clark, in his great work on the Bible, maintains that the "serpent" was a baboon, supposed by some to have been the monkey to which honors were paid in Egypt under the name of Anubis. But his arguments are not convincing. It is more probable that it was one of the fallen angels who were expelled from heaven together with Satan, and who was known as the "serpent."

2 Ne 2 18"The devil had truth in his mouth as well as lies when he came to Mother Eve ... She did eat, her eyes were opened, and she saw good and evil. She gave of the fruit to her husband, and he ate, too. What would have been the consequence if he had not done so? They would have been separated, and where would we have been? I am glad he did eat." (Brigham Young, Jour. of Dis., Vol. 12, p. 70)

2 Ne 2 25VERSE 25

2 Ne 2 25Men are that they might have joy. Brigham Young: "When I look at the economy of heaven, my heart leaps for joy, and if I had the tongue of an angel, or the tongues of the whole human family combined, I would praise God in the Highest for his great wisdom and condescension in suffering the children of men to fall into the very sin into which they have fallen, for he did it that they, like Jesus, might descend below all things and then press forward and rise above all." (Jour. of Dis., Vol. 13, p. 145)

REDEMPTION

2 Ne 2 26VERSE 26

2 Ne 2 26The Messiah Cometh. The great purpose of the advent of the Messiah in the fulness of time was to redeem the children of men from certain consequences of the fall. For, although that experience was necessary in the development of man, and was, as has been said, a "fall upwards," it had certain consequences that called for redemption. One of these was death, from which there would have been no resurrection but for the redemption. See v. 27.

2 Ne 2 26To redeem property, or a person, was, under the Mosaic law, to pay a legal ransom, and thereby to procure freedom for the land attached, or the servant in bondage. Any near relative could act as the redeemer. (See Lev. 25:25-28; 47-52) The Messiah is our Redeemer. (Gal. 3:13.)

2 Ne 2 26Man by setting aside the commandment of God and doing the will of Satan, in the matter of the forbidden tree, became, as it were, his property, his bondservant. That appears from the word of our Lord, "No man can serve two masters ... ye cannot serve God and mammon" (Matt. 6:24). Note that it cannot be done. We belong either to one or the other. And St. Paul says expressly, "Know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness?" (Rom. 6:16.) If mankind had not had a Redeemer, it would have been in thraldom; because of the redemption, "they have become free for ever."

2 Ne 2 26In the Fulness of Time. This meant, anciently, the time when the child became of age. St. Paul gives that explanation. The heir, he says, as long as he is a child, is under tutors and governors until the time appointed by the father; even so we, "but when the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his Son ... to redeem those that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons, ... and the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba, Father." (Gal. 4:4-6.) "Abba" is the Aramaic for "father," the word used by Jesus in his prayers in Gethsemane. It has been compared to our, "daddy," which, when used as a term of endearment is rather pretty and indicates intimate comradeship in the family.

2 Ne 2 28VERSE 28

2 Ne 2 28Look to the Great Mediator. Study the character and work of the Messiah, who by his atonement became the Mediator and Redeemer.

2 Ne 2 28During the Mosaic dispensation, one day of the year was devoted to that great theme. It was part of the Temple service. The day was called, "the day of atonement." It was a general fast day, a day of repentance and prayer.

2 Ne 2 28On this day Aaron attired in priestly vestments offered a sin offering for himself and his house. Blood of this offering was sprinkled on the covering of the ark in the Holy of Holies.

2 Ne 2 28Then two goats were presented before the Lord on behalf of the people. The high priest selected by lot one of these for Jehovah as a sin offering. The other was to belong to Azazel, who by some has been supposed to be one of the fallen angels, who led the "sons of God" in the wickedness that brought the flood upon the race. (Gen. 6:1-4.) The high priest laid his hands upon this goat, confessed the sins of the people, thereby conferring them symbolically on the animal, which then was set free in the wilderness for the fallen angel. The burnt offering for the High priest and the people ended the solemn ceremonies. It was thus that the Lord, during the Old dispensation; impressed the people with the seriousness of transgression and the necessity of atonement and a Mediator.

2 Ne 2 28It has been stated that on this day, perhaps at sunset, when the day ended, the young maidens used to meet in the vineyards and dance and sing, and give the young men an opportunity to form an idea of their future wives, whom the mothers, I believe, generally selected for them.

NOTES

The atonement of Christ is not limited to his death on the cross. His entire life was a sacrifice.

It is efficacious as regards man, in so far as man, in accepting his teachings and obeying his commandments becomes able and worthy, morally, intellectually and physically, to be associated with God. Faith, repentance and baptism are the first steps back to the house of the Father.

The humiliation and sufferings of Christ should be an object lesson to all of the nature and consequences of sin. If we contemplate the infinite love of Jesus for humanity, the purity of his life, and his holiness, and then gaze on the picture of his sufferings—then, we should be able to form some faint idea of what a loath-some thing sin is; also of the need of a Mediator.

The heavens hid their face in darkness, and the earth shook and trembled with fear, when the Holy One of Israel ended his mortal career on the cross; but his cry of victory penetrated the veil and went ringing through all creation:

"IT IS FINISHED"
