Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 4

2 Ne 4 1VERSE 1

2 Ne 1 12 Ne 4 1Joseph in Egypt a Prophet. The information is here given that Joseph, the son of Jacob, prophesied concerning the descendants of Lehi, and that these prophecies were recorded on the plates of brass which once were in the custody of Laban. (1 Ne. 3:3.) Joseph may, therefore, properly be called a great prophet.

2 Ne 1 12 Ne 4 1This is also evident from the accounts of his dreams (Gen. 37:5-11); his interpretation of the dreams of the butler and the baker (Gen. 40:5-19); and the pharaoh (Gen. 41:25-36) and also from his address to his brothers (Gen. 45:3-14).

2 Ne 1 12 Ne 4 1To the ordinary reader of the Bible it would perhaps not occur to regard Joseph in Egypt as a prophet, but to the Hebrews anciently one who spoke for God, whether about things present, past or future, was a prophet. Abraham was a prophet (Gen. 20:7). Aaron was called the prophet of Moses, because he spoke for his brother (Ex. 7:1). Many prophets are mentioned in the Old Testament. Among these are Samuel, Nathan, Gad (1 Chron. 29:29), and Ahijah and Iddo (2 Chron. 9:29). The Hebrew Bible includes the authors of the books Joshua, Judges, Samuel and Kings among the prophets. The Hebrews had also prophetesses. Among these were Deborah, (Judges 4:4.), Huldah (2 Kings 22:14) and Miriam (Ex. 15:20). Among the New Testament prophetesses can be mentioned, Anna, (Luke 2:36) and the four daughters of Philip, the evangelist. (Acts 21:9)

2 Ne 4 1No details are given concerning the visit of Paul and Luke in the home in Caesarea, but as Philip was one of the first seven bishops in Jerusalem (Acts 6:5), it is evident that Luke, the historian, could get much valuable information from him concerning the earliest days of the church, for the book of the Acts he was writing at that time.

2 Ne 4 1The last of the prophets of the Old Dispensation was John the Baptist, the greatest of them all (Matt. 11:9-11; Luke 16:16), because with him the dispensation covered by the Law and the Prophets (Acts 13:15) was completed. But the prophetic gift remained one of the great characteristics of the New dispensation. (1 Cor. 14:1, 3, 5, 22, 31, 32.)

2 Ne 4 1Only a Jew, I believe, educated as Nephi was, would have regarded Joseph, the son of Jacob, as a prophet, as Nephi does. Another evidence of the authenticity of the Book of Mormon!

2 Ne 4 4VERSE 4

2 Ne 4 4Ye shall prosper in the land. On one condition: Inasmuch as ye shall keep my commandments. Special favors from God produce a special obligation to keep his laws.

2 Ne 4 4Recent researches furnish evidence of the prosperity that once was enjoyed at least by some of the former inhabitants of America.

2 Ne 4 4Excavations in burial grounds in Panama under the direction of H. B. Roberts and S. K. Lathrop, Peabody archeologists, during the years 1930, 1931 and 1933, have revealed that, in the province of Cocle, there once lived a people which in wealth rivaled the Incas of Peru. Numerous objects of gold in the form of rich adornments were found. Also pottery and implements of copper, stone and bone.

2 Ne 1 12 Ne 4 4The wealth of the Incas was fabulous. Atahualpa, when a prisoner of the Spaniards, piled up gold to the value of more than fifteen million dollars as ransom, although to no avail. According to Prescott, after Sarmiento, the interior of the temple at Cuzco was, literally, a mine of gold. On the western wall was a representation of the Deity, consisting of a human countenance looking forth from amidst innumerable rays of light, in the same manner as the sun is often personified. The figure was engraved on a massive plate of gold of enormous dimensions, thickly powdered with emeralds and precious stones. It was so situated that the rays of the morning sun fell upon it, lighting up the apartment with an effulgence that seemed more than natural, and which was reflected back from the golden ornaments on the walls and ceiling. The cornices which surrounded the walls were of gold, and a broad frieze of the same costly material, let into the stone work, encompassed the whole exterior of the edifice. (Prescott, Peru, Vol. I, p.89)

2 Ne 4 4In Yucatan, where the Maya civilization at one time rivaled the culture of Egypt in the days of King Tut, priceless relics of jade and gold have been recovered in recent years.

2 Ne 4 4In Panama, Mr. John Q. Critchlow, of Salt Lake City, for many years a resident of the South American republic, ascended the mountain El Volcan, a short distance from the settlement Divala in the province of Chiriqui. The mountain rises to an elevation of about 11,000 feet above the sea level, and from the top an observer can see the Pacific on one hand and the Atlantic on the other. It was in May, 1922, that Mr. Critchlow made the ascent. According to the published reports, it was his good fortune to discover, on this excursion, in the ruins of an ancient pueblo, " wonders of ancient art, enormous workings in solid gold, examples of excellence attained in pottery, and the strange carvings of hieroglyphics." The report accepts this as evidence that, a nation of Maya people lived and flourished in Panama long before Caesar made his journey to the British Isles, and that their civilization was topped only by that of ancient Rome.

2 Ne 4 4Julius Caesar invaded Britain in the year 54 B.C.

2 Ne 4 4The tombs at Monte Alban, in the state of Oaxaca, Mexico, where rich archeological finds have been made, have also furnished evidence that the ancient Zapotecs were experts in relief painting. In November, 1932, Dr. Alfonso Caso, government archaeologist, announced that remarkable works of ancient art had been found on the floor and door jamb of a tomb. The paintings were done in brilliant greens, reds, and yellows, and the colors were well preserved. Among objects unearthed were incense burners, two translucent green axes, ear ornaments, bits of jade and hollow engraved bones.

2 Ne 4 5VERSE 5

2 Ne 4 5If ye are brought up in the way ye should go ye will not depart from it. Here Lehi teaches his household the principle taught long before his time, "Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart from it." (Prov. 22:6) To bring up a child does not mean only to teach him the right way, but to train him in walking in it. Training, says Layman Abbott, is the production of habit. Actions oft repeated become a habit; long continued becomes a second nature. When a child is trained in telling the truth and doing what is right, he will do so, even at the cost of his life, because it has become his nature.

2 Ne 4 6VERSE 6

2 Ne 4 6Your Parents. On the duty of parents toward their children, see D. and C. 68:28, 29; and D. and C. Commentary pp. 515, 518, 737, and 738. Children are gifts of God; parents are responsible for their proper care. "Ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath: but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. (Eph. 6:4)

2 Ne 4 8VERSE 8

2 Ne 1 12 Ne 4 8Lemuel, the second son of Lehi. (1 Ne. 2:5) The name means, "devoted," or, "dedicated," to God. It is found in Proverbs 31:1, where it may refer to King Solomon.

2 Ne 4 9VERSE 9

2 Ne 4 9Not Utterly Destroyed. Lehi gave Lemuel the same blessing that the firstborn received (vv. 4-7), including the promise that his descendants would not be exterminated.

2 Ne 4 10VERSE 10

2 Ne 4 10The Sons of Ishmael. Lehi blessed the household of Ishmael, who died and was buried in the Old Country, at a place which they called Nahom (1 Ne. 16:34). The name Ishmael means, "[Whom] God Hears." The blessing bestowed upon the house of Ishmael is not recorded.

2 Ne 4 10"Ishmael was of the lineage of Ephraim, and his sons married into Lehi's family, and Lehi's sons married Ishmael's daughters, thus fulfilling the words of Jacob upon Ephraim and Manasseh in the 48th chapter of Genesis which says: 'And let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the Earth.' Thus these descendants of Manasseh and Ephraim grew together upon this American continent, with a sprinkling from the house of Judah, from Mulek descended ... thus making an intermixture of Ephraim and Manasseh with the remnants of Judah, and for aught we know, the remnants of some other tribes that may have accompanied Mulek." (Apostle Erastus Snow, Jour. of Dis., Vol. 23, pp. 184-5)

2 Ne 4 10Apostle Snow says that the Prophet Joseph informed the Saints that the genealogical record of Lehi was contained on the 116 pages first translated and subsequently lost, and that Ishmael was, as stated, of the lineage of Ephraim.

2 Ne 4 10In the history of Israel in America, Lehi, a descendant of Manasseh, the firstborn of Joseph, took the lead over the descendants of Ephraim, although Jacob, in his blessing gave him the first place. It was different in the historic development in Palestine. There Ephraim was in the front ranks. Joshua, the successor of Moses, was an Ephraimite. To this day, when a Hebrew blesses his son, he repeats the very words of the dying Patriarch and says, "God make thee as Ephraim and Manasseh,"—Ephraim first. But Jacob predicted also that a people would come from Manasseh, and that he, too, would be great. (Gen. 48:19) The Nephites are the literal fulfilment of this prophecy. And, if, as I surmise, the Nahuas of American ethnology are the Nephites of the Book of Mormon, the fulfilment is a matter of history. (See Introduction to the Study of the Book of Mormon, Sjodahl, pp. 146 and 367)

2 Ne 4 10The Nahuas, according to Dr. Daniel Brinton, "occupied the Pacific coast from about the Rio del Fuerte in Sinaloa, N. lat. 26 degrees, to the frontiers of Guatemala, except a portion at the isthmus of Tehuantepec ... On the borders of the lakes in the valley of Mexico were the three important states, Tezcuco, Tlacopan and Tenochtitlan, who at the time of the conquest were formed into a confederacy of wide sway. The last mentioned, Tenochtitlan, had its chief town where the city of Mexico now stands, and its inhabitants were the Aztecs." (The American Race, p. 128)

2 Ne 4 10If my theory is sound, the history of the Nahuas should be studied in the light of the blessings given Joseph by his father, Jacob, in Egypt.

2 Ne 4 11VERSE 11

2 Ne 1 12 Ne 4 11Sam. Lehi blesses his third son. His name is Egyptian. It was the name of the chief priest of the priesthood of Ptah, at Memphis, the primordial god who, according to Egyptian ideas, furnished Ra the elements out of which the world was organized. (Paul Pierret, Dictionaire d'Archeologie Egyptienne, Paris, 1875, p. 490) Lehi, in his blessing, links him and his descendants to Nephi and the offspring of this younger brother.

2 Ne 4 12VERSE 12

2 Ne 4 12He Waxed Old. This is perfectly good English, although now archaic. It means, "he became exhausted," "tried out." (See Deut. 29:5; Heb. 8:13)

2 Ne 4 12He Died and was Buried. Lehi's last act in mortality was to bless his posterity. And, let no one regard this as a mere formality. A father's blessing by the power of the Priesthood, is a draft on the unlimited resources of heaven, which our Eternal Father has obligated himself to honor, according to the words of our Savior: "Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven." (Matt. 18:18) That is the value of a father's, or a patriarchal, blessing.

2 Ne 4 12Lehi died. Tenderly the angel of death pressed a kiss on the dimming eyes, and he fell asleep, surrounded by his devoted children and household.

2 Ne 1 12 Ne 4 12Reader, pause a while at Lehi's grave, Honor here a hero, faithful, brave. O'er Arabia's shifting, burning sand, Irreantum's turbulent expanse, Where the windstorms howled and whirled in dance, Led by faith and Liahona's hand, Lehi came to Joseph's hallowed land. 'Midst sorrows and turmoil and strife He gather'd no wealth, no renown; He gave to his God all his life, God gave him a heavenly crown

2 Ne 4 12Death is sometimes spoken of as the separation of soul and body. It would be more correct to say, that the separation of the soul—or, rather, the spirit—and the body is one of the effects of death. Death itself, like life, is a mystery. The spirit clings, as long as possible, to the body, even when this is sick, or tortured, but when they are separated, the body must be disposed of. In the words of Abraham, at the death of Sarah: "Give me a possession of a buryingplace with you, that I may bury my dead out of my sight." (Gen. 23:4)

2 Ne 4 12"What of friends that have gone beyond the veil—are they dead? No, they live, and they move in a more exalted sphere. Did they fight for the kingdom of God when here? Yes, they did. Are they battling for it now? Yes; and the time is approaching when the wicked nations have to be destroyed; and the time is near when every creature is to be heard saying, 'Honor and power and might and majesty and dominion be ascribed to him that sitteth upon the throne, and to the Lamb, for ever and ever.' We have got to bring this about, whether we do it in this world, or that which is to come." (John Taylor, J. of D., vol. 5, p. 191)

2 Ne 4 13VERSE 13

2 Ne 4 13Angry with me. Nephi, after the death of Lehi, naturally, felt it his duty to admonish his brethren and associates, as his father had done. Undoubtedly, they held services at regular times, similar to our fast meetings, where all had an opportunity to bear testimony, or to admonish and teach. It must have been on such occasions that Laman, Lemuel and the sons of Ishmael became angry. The brothers were jealous of the greater gifts and influence of Nephi, the youngest of the four. The sons of Ishmael thought, perhaps, that they, as belonging to the lineage of Ephraim should not be subordinate to a son of Manasseh. But whatever the cause, the old hatred broke out again.

2 Ne 4 13Lest this experience of Nephi should be regarded as a refutation of the truth of the principle stated in the 5th verse of this chapter, let it be said that a very important part of training is the will of the person to be trained. There must be co-operation on his, or her, part; otherwise the object in view will not be attained. No one can be trained to become a great musician, a painter, a runner, an orator, a linguist, or what not and certainly not a good Latter-day Saint against his, or her will. The principle is true, but it does not destroy the free agency of man. Our heavenly Father himself exclaims, through the Prophet Isaiah (1:2): "I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me."

2 Ne 4 14VERSE 14

2 Ne 4 14Mine Own Plates. As is well known, Nephi was the author of two volumes of plates—the larger and the smaller. In the first of these he preserved the history of the kings and the wars and contentions of his people. (1 Ne. 9:2-6) It was a political history. The second, or smaller, volume was chiefly a history of the ministry. (1 Ne. 19:1-7; Jac. 1:1-4; Words of Morm. 3-8) It was a brief ecclesiastical history.

2 Ne 4 15VERSE 15

2 Ne 4 15My Soul Delighteth in the Scriptures. Who can truthfully say, with Nephi, that he finds real pleasure in reading and studying the sacred scriptures? Or, with the Psalmist: "O how love I thy law! it is my meditation all the day." (Psalm 119:97) Many, I am afraid, forget the Author of the Scriptures and lay them aside as antiquated and not up to date.

2 Ne 4 15Let me tell a little story. A young man in the American forces in France during the World war, had the misfortune of becoming a prisoner of war. He was reported as dead, and connection with his home was interrupted for years, because he was sick and unable to keep up the correspondence. When, finally, after years of isolation, he received a letter from his father, his joy was boundless. It was a precious piece of paper. But much of it was unintelligible to him. Children had grown up. Old persons had become older, and most of them had passed away. Automobiles had become common. New roads had been built. There were new business houses. As far as the letter referred to such changes, it was strange to him. But it was from his father, and he read it over and over again.

2 Ne 4 15One day this young man met another fellow who argued against the Bible on the flimsy ground that nobody can understand it. But he got the correct reply this time.

2 Ne 4 15Our friend took up his letter and said, "This is from my father. On account of my imprisonment and sickness and long absence I do not understand all of it, but, try to get it away from me! When I get home, it will all be clear to me. If you do not like the Word of God, I am afraid that you do not care for your Eternal Father or your eternal home."

A SONG OF NEPHI

The remainder of this chapter, from verse 16, is a remarkable piece of poetry composed by Nephi. It was, clearly, written at a time when he was depressed because of the death of his father and the enmity manifested towards him by his older brothers.

Hebrew ancient poetry was essentially different from modern compositions in the poetical style. It lacked rhymes and meter. It was the rhythm of thought, rather than of words, as for instance:

"Why art thou cast down, O my soul?

And why art thou disquieted within me?"—Ps. 43:5.

Two lines expressing the same thought?

The Hebrews were fond of poetry. Parts of the Bible were written in that form, although this is not apparent in the translations. Not only the Psalms, but also the book of Job and a portion of the Prophets are poetry. For instance:

"His grave was appointed with the wicked

And with the rich man was his sepulcher."—Is. 53:9.

The book of Job and the Song of Songs are dramatic poetry. In the New Testament, parts of the Revelation by John are poetry.

The song of Nephi can be divided as follows: (1) Introduction, v.16; (2) A Confession of Sin, vv.17-19; (3) Contemplation of God's Fatherly Love, vv.20-25; (4) Folly of Giving Way to Despair, vv.26-30; (5) A Prayer, vv.31-35.

2 Ne 4 16VERSE 16

2 Ne 4 16Blessed he is who can say this truthfully. See notes to v. 15.

2 Ne 4 17VERSE 17

2 Ne 4 17O Wretched Man that I Am! To one who has read the marvelous story of Nephi, as related so far, this exclamation may come as an unexpected surprise. "To what iniquities does he refer? To what sins? (v. 18) We know not. But whatever they were, Nephi had no intention to minimize, or excuse them. He had not any desire to say, with the Pharisee: "I thank thee, O God, that I am not as other men are"; nor with a young man whom I happen to remember, who, in a public prayer meeting, asked God to forgive him his "little" faults, for, he said, "If I have done anything wrong, I did not mean to." Nephi seems to have felt the solemn truth of the Scriptural doctrine that the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. (Gen.8:21) But the nobility of the character of Nephi is clearly shown in his confession. There is no word of criticism of his brothers, no prayer for retaliation, although they were plotting against him. Nephi did not assume the responsibility of an accuser, nor a judge.(See Matt. 7:1, 2)

2 Ne 4 18VERSE 18

2 Ne 4 18Beset. Nephi uses this word in the same sense the Old Testament writers which he had read used it, viz., "encompassed about," or, "surrounded by." See Judges 19:22; Ps.22:12, and Hos. 11:12. St. Paul, in his letter to the Hebrews, (12:1) compares sin to the weights and clinging garments which the contestants in a race must get rid of, if they want to win the prize, while the spectators are a "cloud" of witnesses,—for to the runners in the arena, in their swift progress toward the goal, they must have appeared just like one indistinct mass. Sin always is an obstacle to the contestants for the heavenly crown.

2 Ne 4 18From the depressing contemplation of weaknesses and shortcomings, Nephi now directs his thoughts toward God. Then the depression vanishes. He counts the many blessings God has bestowed upon him from the day he accompanied his father out of Jerusalem. This section (vv. 20-25) is in the nature of an epic.

2 Ne 4 20VERSE 20

2 Ne 4 20God hath been my support. 1 Ne. 30-32; 17:1, 2;

2 Ne 4 20He hath preserved me upon the great deep. 1 Ne.18:9-23.

2 Ne 4 21VERSE 21

2 Ne 4 21He hath filled me with his love. 1 Ne 11:22-26.

2 Ne 4 22VERSE 22

2 Ne 4 22He hath confounded mine enemies 1 Ne. 11:52.

2 Ne 4 22Causing them to quake before me. 1 Ne. 16:27.

SC2 Ne 4 232 Ne 4 24VERSES 23-24

1 Ne. 3:29-31; 11:14.

2 Ne 4 25VERSE 25

2 Ne 4 25Visions on a high mountain. 1 Ne. 11:1;

2 Ne 4 25Visions not to be written. 1 Ne. 1:14. This may be read together with 2 Cor. 12:4-9, where St. Paul relates that he, before his missionary journeys, was caught up into the third heaven, also known as Paradise, where he heard unspeakable words, "which it is not lawful for man to utter." But, lest he should feel proud on account of such visions or revelations, he was given a "thorn in the flesh"—some sickness causing excruciating pain—which he compared to a messenger of Satan, sent to buffet him.

2 Ne 4 26VERSE 26

2 Ne 4 26Why ... sorrow? Nephi is calm and composed now. He recognizes the folly of doubting God's Fatherly care, after he had been the recipient of so great mercy.

2 Ne 4 27VERSE 27

2 Ne 4 27Why am I Angry? In this paragraph Nephi further opens his heart, and makes it clear that it was anger that had "beset" him, as we have read in vv. 17-19. That was the "iniquity," the "sin," that caused his flesh to "waste away," and opened his heart to the adversary, to destroy his peace.

2 Ne 4 27Nephi is absolutely correct in his estimate of the effects of paroxysms of anger on the body and mind of those who yield to it. I may state that I remember from the early years of my life an estimable lady, a good, faithful wife and the mother of beautiful children. At intervals she suffered outbursts of wrath to such a degree, that doctors told her that, unless she conquered those attacks, they would be her death. That is just what happened. She passed away after such an unreasonable outburst of passion.

2 Ne 4 27I do not believe that Nephi suffered in a similar manner in any degree. I am rather inclined to the belief that he composed this song for the benefit of his brothers. They were angry with him. He may also have felt anger. They refused to listen to his sermons. Hence he may have hoped to reach them with a piece of poetry, as the Prophet Nathan had reached King David with a rebuke. Nathan had a little composition which he humbly submitted to the criticism of the king, the greatest writer of fiction at the time, in Israel. And it was not until the royal poet had given his opinion of the conduct of the hero of Nathan's story that the Prophet let the thunderbolt fall: "Thou art the man!" (2 Sam. 12:1-14) In the case of David it had the desired effect.

2 Ne 4 27Anger, like fire, may be good, if kept under proper control. And some commentators tell us that is what the Apostle had in mind when he wrote to the Ephesians (4:26), "Be ye angry and sin not." Perhaps it is. I am not prepared to say it is not. But I have a suspicion that the negation belongs to both clauses of the sentence, and that the true meaning is, "Be [not] angry, and sin not." For, in the same chapter he says: "Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all bitterness." (v. 31)

2 Ne 4 30VERSE 30

2 Ne 4 30Rejoice, O my Heart. This section closes with a shout of joy, which may be rendered thus, in the form of modern blank verse:

2 Ne 4 30Rejoice, my heart, cry out to God, and say, O Lord, I praise thee now and ever. My soul, my heart, rejoice in thee, my God, Who art the Rock of my salvation.

2 Ne 4 31VERSE. 31. Redeem my Soul. Nephi prays for deliverance from the hands of his enemies who were plotting against him, and from the bondage of sin. His desire was that he might be made to fear even the appearance of sin. He, evidently, realized the importance of the principle which the Apostle expressed thus: "Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling" (Phil. 2:12); and which Soeren Kierkegaard, the eccentric Danish philosopher, (1813-1855) gave the form of a striking paradox: "If you fear, then fear not; but if you do not fear, then fear."

2 Ne 4 32VERSE 32

2 Ne 4 32Gates of Hell. Nephi prays that these may be closed to him continually. To the Hebrews, "hell" was either merely the grave; or a region of gloom and misery where the spirits of evil-doers were awaiting the resurrection and final judgment. The gates of hell were the entrance to this region. The spirits of the righteous were in Paradise. But "gates" was also a figurative expression for a town (Gen. 22:17; Ps. 87:2, 3). In Ps. 24:7, 9, "Lift up your heads, O ye gates and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors." "Gates" also means kingdoms or empires, and I believe that Nephi uses the word in that sense. There are on earth two great kingdoms: One is the kingdom of hell, or evil; the other is the kingdom of righteousness. And now he prays that the entrance to the first of these may be closed to him for ever, while he may always have free entrance to the other.

2 Ne 4 32The special lesson of this prayer is that it is safer to keep out of the way of temptation than to rely on one's will power to resist it. "Blessed the man who walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful." (Ps. 1:1, 2)

2 Ne 4 35VERSE 35

2 Ne 4 35Amiss. This means "wrong," or "improper." (2 Chron. 6:37) To ask "not amiss" is, therefore, to ask for that which is right and proper. "Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts," (James 4:3).

2 Ne 4 35The prayer ends with an expression of perfect confidence in God:—

2 Ne 4 35I will lift up unto thee, O God, my cry, Thou wilt my humble petitions not deny. Therefore my voice shall forevermore ascend God, Everlasting, to thee, worlds without end.

GENERAL NOTES

In his prayer, Nephi asks God fervently for deliverance from the hands of his enemies (v. 31). "Wilt thou," he prays, "make a way for mine escape before mine enemies" (v. 34), and, he adds, "I will trust in thee for ever."

The Lord heard this prayer; for, shortly after it had been uttered, he directed Nephi to form a company of faithful friends and lead them to another part of the country. (2 Ne. 5:5-8) Nephi did so. and they became exceedingly prosperous. (vv. 13-17)

The Nephites, as the colonists were called (v. 9), in all probability, became the founders of the great Nahua civilization which flourished in Mexico and Central America, while the Peruvian civilization in South America developed out of seeds planted by Laman and his followers; the older civilizations of which monuments have been left in Yucatan (so named, perhaps from Joktan, the brother of Peleg, in whose days the earth was divided); and in Bolivia, at Lake Titicaca, were, perhaps the work of the Jaredites, of whom the Lord said that they would become a great nation: "And there shall be none greater than the nation which I will raise up unto me of thy seed, upon all the face of the earth." (Ether 1:43)

When I say that I regard this passage (vv. 16-35) as poetry, I do not have the modern form, with rhymes and meters, in mind, but ancient Hebrew poetry, such as we find in Job, the Psalms, the Proverbs and some of the Prophets.

I am aware that some have affirmed, on the authority of Josephus, and others, that the Psalms were originally composed in meter, but I believe that is an open question which we need not discuss here.

The chief characteristic of the ancient Hebrew poetry has been called "parallelism," because of a certain correspondence as to thought and language or both, between two or more lines which form a period, or stanza.

For example:—

"Keep not thou silence, O God; Hold not thy peace, and be not still, O God." (Ps. 83:1) "My soul longeth, yea even fainteth for the courts of the Lord; My heart and my flesh crieth out for the living God." (Ps. 84:2) "For the Lord hath chosen Zion; He hath desired it for his habitation." (Ps. 132:13)

Sometimes the form is antithetical, rather than parallel, strictly speaking:—

"The memory of the just is blessed, But the name of the wicked shall rot." (Prov. 10:7) Sometimes it is a double antithetical form: "The bricks are fallen down But we will build them with hewn stones; The sycamores are cut down, But we will change them into cedars." (Isa. 9:10)

Sometimes there is a gradual extension of the thought, thus:—

"Blessed is the man That walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, Nor standeth in the way of sinners, Nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful." (Ps. 1:1)

The Lamentations of Jeremiah, a book which in our Bibles has been placed between Jeremiah and Ezekiel, but in the Hebrew canon between Ruth and Ecclesiastes, furnishes an illustration of another form of ancient poetry. It consists of five songs, each of 22 periods, or stanzas, corresponding to the number of letters in the Hebrew alphabet. In four of the songs, each line, or stanza, begins with a letter of that alphabet, all placed in alphabetical order, from the first (Aleph) to the last (Tau). Other acrobatics of this kind are Psalms 111, 112, 119 and 145; but it is evident that we cannot look for similar arrangements in the Book of Mormon, because we know nothing of the alphabet in which it was engraved.

Students of this subject will find that the parallelism is less strict in the Psalms than in the Book of Job. In this composition there is, besides, a very effective musical cadence.

The song of Nephi arranged in parallel lines, might look somewhat like this:

A SONG OF LAMENTATION BY NEPHI, THE SON OF LEHI

Behold, my soul delighteth in the things of the Lord; And my heart pondereth continually upon the things which I have seen and heard. Nevertheless, notwithstanding the great goodness of the Lord, in showing me his great and marvelous works, my heart exclaimeth: O, wretched man that I am! Yea, my heart sorroweth because of my flesh; My soul grieveth because of mine iniquities. I am encompassed about, Because of the temptations and the sins Which do so easily beset me. And when I desire to rejoice, my heart groaneth because of my sins

Nevertheless, I know in whom I have trusted. My God hath been my support. He hath led me through mine afflictions in the wilderness; And he hath preserved me upon the waters of the great deep. He hath filled me with his love, Even unto the consuming of my flesh, He hath confounded mine enemies, Unto the causing of them to quake before me. Behold, he hath heard my cry by day, And he hath given me knowledge by visions in the night-time. And by day have I waxed bold in mighty prayer before him; Yea, my voice have I sent up on high, And angels came down and ministered unto me. And upon the wings of his spirit hath my body been carried away upon exceeding high mountains. And mine eyes have beheld great things, yea, even too great for man; therefore I was bidden that I should not write them. O then, if I have seen so great things, If the Lord in his condescension unto the children of men hath visited men in so much mercy, Why should my heart weep and my soul linger in the Valley of Sorrow, And my flesh waste away, and my strength slacken, because of mine afflictions? And why should I yield to sin because of my flesh? Yea, why should I give way to temptations that the evil one have place in my heart to destroy my peace and afflict my soul? Why am I angry because of mine enemy? Awake my soul! No longer droop in sin. Rejoice O my heart, and give place no more for the enemy of my soul, Do not anger again because of mine enemies. Do not slacken my strength because of mine afflictions. Rejoice, O my heart, and cry unto the Lord and say: O Lord, I will praise thee forever; Yea, my soul will rejoice in thee, my God, and the Rock of my salvation. O Lord, wilt thou redeem my soul? Wilt thou deliver me out of the hands of mine enemies? Wilt thou make me that I may shake at the appearance of sin? May the gates of hell be shut continually before me, Because that my heart is broken and my spirit is contrite! O Lord, wilt thou not shut the gates of righteousness before me, that I may walk in the path of the low valley, That I may be strict in the plain road! O Lord, wilt thou encircle me around in the robe of thy righteousness!

O Lord, wilt thou make a way, for mine escape before mine enemies! Wilt thou make my path straight before me! Wilt thou not place a stumbling block in my way. But that thou wouldst clear my way before me, And hedge not up my way, but the ways of mine enemy. O Lord, I have trusted in thee, And will trust in thee for ever. I will not put my trust in the arm of flesh; For I know that, Cursed is he that putteth his trust in the arm of flesh. Yea, cursed is he that putteth his trust in man Or maketh flesh his arm. Yea, I know that God will give liberally to him that asketh Yea, my God will give me, if I ask not amiss. Therefore I will lift up my voice unto thee; Yea, I will cry unto thee, my God, the rock of my righteousness. Behold, my voice shall forever ascend up unto thee, My rock and mine everlasting God. Amen.

(2 Nephi 4:16-35)
