Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 6

2 Ne 6 1VERSE 1

2 Ne 6 1The Words of Jacob. Jacob, the brother of Nephi, begins a discourse, in which he, at the request of his brother, quotes at length from the prophet Isaiah. It is, perhaps, his first public discourse after he had been appointed a priest and teacher. (2 Ne. 5:26)

2 Ne 6 1For various reasons it is an important sermon. It proves that the latter part of Isaiah, which some modern critics like to consider as the work of a "second" Isaiah, was accepted as genuine at the time of Nephi, as it was in the days of our Lord. It shows us that the Nephites held meetings for worship and instruction, as is done in our days, and that they based their addresses on the holy Scriptures, as we do.

2 Ne 6 2VERSE 2

2 Ne 6 2His Authority. Jacob was "called" of God. He was "ordained" after the manner of his holy order, and he was "consecrated" by his brother.

2 Ne 6 2King. Nephi was regarded as a king, but not as a despot. As a "protector." As a king he was the servant of the people. But he was also a prophet, and as such, he spoke and acted for the Lord.

2 Ne 6 3VERSE 3

2 Ne 6 3The Words of my Father. Jacob had spoken to the people before. He had given them the same instructions that his father had given him. And he had spoken concerning "all things which are written, from the creation of the world." He had evidently told the people the story of the world, as we have it in Genesis, and of the dealings of God with his people, as recorded in other Scriptures. Those are the proper subjects of discourses at all times, in religious meetings. The Bible contains the word of God to man, as do the other sacred Scriptures.

2 Ne 6 4VERSE 4

2 Ne 6 4The Words of Isaiah. Jacob is about to deliver an address on the present and the future, and begins by quoting a section of the Prophet Isaiah, commencing with chapt. 49:22. The Prophet Mormon (8:23) exhorts the people to, "Search the prophecies of Isaiah." His name signifies, "The Salvation of God," and he has been called the evangelical prophet, because his chief theme is the advent of the Savior, the first and second, his character and work, and the extension of his kingdom. He is, moreover, worth studying for the real excellency of his style, which is simple, clear, elegant and dignified.

2 Ne 6 6VERSE 6

2 Ne 6 6Lift up mine hand to the Gentiles. Signifies to "beckon them" to come.

2 Ne 6 6Set up my Standard. During the journey of Israel from Egypt, each tribe was marching under some standard. On the east side of the Tabernacle were Judah, Issachar and Sebulon under the standard of Judah. On the south side were Reuben, Simeon and Gad under the standard of Reuben. On the west side were Ephraim, Manasseh and Benjamin under the standard of Ephraim. On the north side were Dan, Asher and Naphtali under the standard of Dan. (Numb, chap. 2) Now the Lord has another standard, under which both Jews and Gentiles may unite on their way to the Land of Promise. That standard is the Everlasting Gospel. Comp. Is. 13:2:

2 Ne 6 6"Lift ye up a banner upon the high mountains, Exalt the voice unto them; Shake the hand that they may go Into the gates of the nobles."

2 Ne 6 6On their Shoulders. The palanquins in which the wealthy Orientals traveled were carried on the shoulders of men.

2 Ne 6 7VERSE 7

2 Ne 6 7Kings ... Nursing Fathers. This prediction was literally fulfilled when, in November, 1917, Lord Balfour declared that the British government would look with favor upon the restoration of Palestine as the Jewish homeland, a declaration that was ratified later by a conference of statesmen at San Remo, and, on July 22, 1922, by the League of Nations, when that world organization assigned to Great Britain the mandate for the country.

2 Ne 6 7Lick up the dust. A figure of speech which signifies humble submission.

2 Ne 6 7The interpretation of Jacob may be stated briefly.

2 Ne 6 7Jerusalem had fallen. Some of the inhabitants had been slain; others had been carried away into captivity. Jacob had seen this, probably in a vision, (v. 8) as had Nephi. (2 Ne. 1:4) But he had also seen that "they shall return." (v. 9) He had seen that the Messiah would come at the appointed time, and that he would be rejected and slain on a cross. (v. 9) Then the people would be ripe for the judgments of God. They would be scattered and hated, but on account of the prayers of those who are faithful, they would be gathered when they accept the Crucified One as their Redeemer. (v. 11)

2 Ne 6 7Now the Gentiles that have befriended Zion and not fought against the covenant people, nor joined the abominable church "shall be saved" (vv. 12, 13); for the Messiah will come a second time and recover his people. He will manifest himself in "fire, tempests, earthquakes, bloodshed, pestilence and famine," and thus demonstrate that the Lord—that is, Jesus Christ—"is God, the Holy One of Israel." (vv. 14, 15)

2 Ne 6 8VERSE 8

2 Ne 6 8Carried Away. Bible scholars recognize two great deportations. The first took place in the year 596 B.C., four years after the departure of Lehi from Jerusalem. Lehi was then about half way through the desert journey, which lasted eight years in all, and Jacob must have been a baby, since he was born in the desert. Lehi may have had a vision of this deportation. If so, he would certainly have related that vision to his family many times.

2 Ne 6 8On this occasion Nebuchadnezzar carried away King Jehoiachin and family, the Prophet Ezekiel and thousands of nobles and craftsmen. He destroyed the sacred vessels in the temple and looted the treasuries. And, finally, he appointed an uncle of Jehoiachin, Zedekiah, king in Jerusalem. (2 Kings 24:10-14)

2 Ne 6 8The second deportation took place in the year 586 B.C., ten years after the first. On that occasion all monumental and otherwise valuable buildings in Jerusalem were destroyed by fire. Everything of value was carried to Babylon. Some of the children of Zedekiah were cruelly butchered before his eyes, and that was the last thing he saw, before his eyes were put out. Gedaliah was made ruler in Jerusalem.

2 Ne 6 8As near as can be judged from Book of Mormon chronology, Lehi had passed away at that time. The Nephites had established themselves as an independent colony, and Jacob and Joseph had been appointed priests and teachers. (See 2 Ne. 5:28) It is more than probable that the Lord gave Jacob a vision of this second deportation shortly after it had taken place in the year 586 B.C., as he gave Lehi a vision of the first deportation. The Prophet Ezekiel and the captives in Babylon were notified by a special messenger of the epochal event. (Ex. 33:21)

2 Ne 6 9VERSE 9

2 Ne 6 9They Should Return. They did return under Zerubbabel in 537 B.C. The rebuilding of the temple was begun in 520 B.C., and in 444 B.C., Ezra read the law in Jerusalem.

2 Ne 6 11VERSE 11

2 Ne 6 11Gathered Again. Jacob had seen that, after they had rejected the Messiah, they would be scattered and subjected to many sufferings, but also gathered for a second time. In the year 70 A.D. Titus destroyed Jerusalem. Our Lord had said (Luke 21:24) that Jerusalem should be trodden down by the Gentiles "until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled." Emperor Julian (331-63 A.D.), in order to discredit the prophecies and please the Jews, encouraged these to rebuild the city and the temple. But the work was interrupted by earthquakes and flames of fire—remarkable phenomena for which even the famous Gibbon has found it difficult to account. Furthermore, during the so-called Crusades a series of "holy" wars, started by Pope Urban II, begun in 1096 and lasting, off and on, until 1272 A.D., all western Europe was united in efforts at rescuing the Holy Land from the domination of the Gentiles. But it was all in vain. Romans, Greeks, Persians, Turks and Arabs continued to trample Jerusalem under foot.

2 Ne 6 16VERSE 16

2 Ne 6 16The Mighty. Refers to Nebuchadnezzar and others who held Judah captive. The skeptic would ask whether anyone would be able to rescue the Jews from the power of the mighty world conquerors. God answers in vv. 17 and 18.

2 Ne 6 18VERSE 18

2 Ne 6 18Their own Flesh ... their own Blood. Signifies internal wars. And they will go on, until all shall know that Jesus Christ is their Savior and Redeemer.

GENERAL NOTES

Alma, the valiant defender of the martyr Abinadi, and the preacher of repentance at the Waters of Mormon, ordained priests—one to each fifty members, "to preach unto them, and to teach them concerning the things pertaining to the kingdom of God." (Mosiah 18:18-22) They were instructed to preach and teach what he, Alma, had taught them, and especially repentance and faith on the Lord. He was a High Priest. (Mos. 23:16; 26:7; 29:42)

Alma, the son of Alma the First, also consecrated "teachers and priests and elders over the church." (Alma 4:7)

Priests and Elders were ordained by Alma, in Zarahemla, "by laying on his hands according to the order of God, to preside and watch over the church." (Alma 6:1) In Moroni, Chap. 3, we have the words spoken by the elders when they ordained priests and teachers. They were undoubtedly given to them by our Lord himself.

Jacob was called of God. "No man"—not even the Son of God—"taketh this honor unto himself," but he must be called by God, as was Aaron. (Heb. 5:4-10)

Concerning the consecration of Aaron we read in Exodus 28th and 29th chapters. Special garments were made for him, "for glory and for beauty," consisting of a breastplate, an ephod, a robe, an embroidered coat, a mitre and a girdle. The breastplate was a pocket worn on the chest, made of fine linen and embroidered with gold, blue, purple and scarlet yarn. Some of the other pieces were made of the same kind of material and similarly ornamented. In the breastplate, Aaron carried the urim and thummim, wherefore it became known as the "breastplate of judgment." On his shoulders Aaron had two onyx stones, on which the names of the twelve tribes of Israel were engraved, six names on each stone, "for a memorial before the Lord," and on the mitre there was a gold plate, on which the words, "Holiness to the Lord" were engraved.
