Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 7

2 Ne 7 1VERSE 1

2 Ne 7 1To Whom Have 1 Put Thee Away? Our Lord is still discussing the question in the preceding chapter, paragraph 16: "Shall the prey be taken from the mighty?" In this passage he sees Israel, the nation, as a mother of many children, the individual Israelites, all absent from their home, but not through any act of his. He had not given her a bill of divorcement. He had not sold the children to satisfy any creditor. In either case he might not have a legal right to reclaim them. But, they had given themselves away by their iniquities and transgressions. They had "sold" themselves.

SC2 Ne 7 22 Ne 7 3VERSES 2 and 3

SC2 Ne 7 22 Ne 7 3An Empty House. And so, the Lord says, when I came home, there was no man to take care of my carriage and animals; when I called, there was no one to answer.

SC2 Ne 7 22 Ne 7 3The Lord now reminds Israel of his omnipotence, as a warning of what they may expect as a consequence of their desertion to a strange master.

"SERVANT POEMS"

Some commentators recognize in the Prophet Isaiah four pieces of poetry to which they have given the name of "Servant Poems," because they refer to israel, the nation, as the servant of the Lord, and its mission in the world.

In the first of these, Is. 42:1-4, God says he has sent his Spirit to his "servant," enabling him to bring justice to the world, and that the isles are waiting for the revelation of the law of God. In the second, Is. 49:1-6, Israel, the servant, says he was called to his mission, even before he was born. In the third, Is. 50:4-10, the servant relates his sufferings and expresses implicit faith in God. In the fourth, Isaiah 52:13-53:12, the author predicts future glory of the servant, after a period of sufferings and humiliation.

Note the last verse:

"Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, And he shall divide the spoil with the strong; Because he has poured out his soul unto death, And he was numbered with the transgressors, And he bare the sins of many, And made intercession for the transgressors."

If we understand this to refer to Israel, the nation, it was fulfilled, partly, when Palestine, after World War I, was recognized as the homeland of the Jews. They certainly, at that time, received a portion of the spoil with the great and strong nations of the world. If we understand it to refer more particularly to the Messiah, as it certainly does, it has also been fulfilled in part, by the preponderance of the Christian civilization in the world. Our Lord has, if only nominally a large portion in the distribution of the earth among the strong and mighty. But the greatest glory is yet to come. (See Is. 54)

2 Ne 7 4VERSE 4

2 Ne 7 4The Tongue of the Learned. It is the "Servant" who is speaking. God, he says, had inspired him to speak with the tongue of a scholar, to encourage the weary. The prophets of old did not speak except by divine guidance. Com. Ezekiel 33:22, where the prophet says that the Lord opened his mouth, so that he was no longer silent as to prophesying concerning Israel, as he had been for about three years. (Ez. 24:1, 27)

2 Ne 7 5VERSE 5

2 Ne 7 5Opened mine Ear. Part of the ceremony of consecration of Aaron, in the Mosaic dispensation, was the application of a drop of sacrificial blood to the right ear, to signify his willingness to hear and obey the laws of God (Ex. 29:20). A similar ceremony, with the same import, was part of the healing of a leper. (Lev. 14:14) The "servant" in this paragraph, therefore, says that the Lord had healed him, giving him the Priesthood, and made him willing to obey. This is particularly true in our day when the restored Gospel is received chiefly by those in whose veins the blood of Israel is flowing.

2 Ne 7 6VERSE 6

2 Ne 7 6The Smiter. The persecutor. The history of the Jews in the dispersion is a most marvelous section of human annals. With the ascendency of the religion of the professedly Christian world, the persecution of the Jews assumed, at times, cruel and decidedly unchristian forms. In some countries they were taxed exorbitantly, and yet prohibited from making a decent living. They were driven from pillar to post, and at times exiled, although there was no place of refuge for them. The 11th-15th centuries were a dark period. In 1290 they were driven from England. In 1395, from France. In Germany they were at times, regarded as the property of the sovereigns, who considered themselves at liberty to buy them and sell them at will. And yet, the Jews, notwithstanding all persecution and suffering, have multiplied until today they number over fifteen million souls in all parts of the world. They have given to the world statesmen, musicians, philosophers, writers and, of course, financiers of great eminence. It has been said with truth that there is not now one country which does not count Jews among the foremost and most brilliant representatives of its progress. In World War I Great Britain had five battalions of the Royal fusiliers, exclusively Jews, many of whom lived in the United States. They were known as "Judeans," and they served with distinction in Allenby's campaign in Palestine in 1918. The Jews, as a nation, have their peculiarities, but as a whole they have, as stated in this poem of the servant, suffered patiently, and generally returned good for evil.

SC2 Ne 7 72 Ne 7 82 Ne 7 9VERSES 7-9

SC2 Ne 7 72 Ne 7 82 Ne 7 9This is the language of perfect confidence in the protection of God. "God will help me." "The Lord is near." "He justifieth me." And the enemies will wear themselves out, until they look like old, discarded garments, destroyed by moths.

SC2 Ne 7 102 Ne 7 11VERSES 10-11

SC2 Ne 7 102 Ne 7 11Who hath no Light? In these paragraphs the prophet challenges the world to point out anyone who fears the Lord and listens to the voice of his servant and yet walks in the dark, without light. Is there any such, whether an individual or a nation?

SC2 Ne 7 102 Ne 7 11On the other hand, he claims that those who enter into an alliance with Egypt, or, in a modern theological term, "the world," are only encircling themselves with sparks, that splutter a moment and then leave them in the dark, where they are liable to stumble and fall.

SC2 Ne 7 102 Ne 7 11"And this shall ye have of my hand—Ye shall lie down in sorrow." Behold and lo, there are none to deliver you; for ye obeyed not my voice when I called to you out of the heavens; ye believed not my servants, and when they were sent unto you ye received them not. Wherefore, they sealed up the testimony and bound up the law, and ye were delivered over unto darkness." (D. and C. 133:70-72)

GENERAL NOTES

I have taken the view that the so-called "servant poems," in the first place, refer to Israel, as a nation, its world-wide mission, its sufferings because of the wickedness of its opponents, its final deliverance and restoration to glory and of happiness in the presence of the Lord. It should be added that, in the second place, it refers to the spiritual Israel, which is the church and kingdom of Christ, entrusted with the mission of bringing the message of salvation to the world, by the proclamation of the Gospel, obedience to God's laws and patient suffering. In the third place, it refers to the Messiah, the Lamb of God, who came to the children of men as their Savior and Redeemer. He was, and is, the Servant in whose life, death, and resurrection to glory these prophecies were, and will be, literally fulfilled in everything, except that he was sinless, so that his sufferings were wholly as a substitute for his brethren. They refer, in fact to every servant of the Lord, who has engaged in the work of the Master, and especially to every martyr for his cause. As the Apostle Paul says: "Now I rejoice in my sufferings for your sake and fill up on my part that which is lacking of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body's sake, which is the church." (Col. 1:24)

Every faithful martyr for Christ is a "lamb of God" slain for the benefit of the world; not in the sense of atonement for sin; but in this sense: Faithfulness that endures sufferings, and even death, for a cause, is the strongest possible evidence of truth and the value of that cause. The testimony of martyrdom brings, therefore, more converts than a mere verbal testimony. The blood of the martyrs has always been the "seed of the church." Millions have been converted to Christ by that testimony. (Comp. 2 Cor. 4:8-12)

The financial power of the Jews may be inferred from the fact that Palestine during the years 1934-36 absorbed 150,000 of that race, and that American Jews alone, during 1936, contributed $2,076,327 for colonization, immigration and improvement of the country.

This chapter is a dialogue between God and his people. In the first eight verses God speaks. In the next three, the people respond. Then God speaks again, to the end of the chapter.
