Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 8

2 Ne 8 1VERSE 1

2 Ne 8 1The Rock. Means ancestors. See next verse. Wise are the children who remember their parents and lineage, and profit by their experiences.

2 Ne 8 2VERSE 2

2 Ne 8 2Look unto Abraham and Sarah. The Lord reminds his people that he had called Abraham while he was alone—that is, without children, and blessed him.

2 Ne 8 3VERSE 3

2 Ne 8 3The Lord shall comfort Zion. He who kept his promises to Abraham and Sarah, will also keep his promises to their descendants. This concerns specially Palestine. Her wilderness will be turned into a "garden of the Lord." Joy and gladness will be found there. But it is true also of every place where Zion is established. There will be no deserts, only gardens, with thanksgiving and the voice of melody.

2 Ne 8 4VERSE 4

2 Ne 8 4Law shall Proceed from Me. The Lord here promises to give his people a new law. That means a new dispensation. See Heb. 7:11-19, where the Apostle tells us that if perfection had been obtained by means of the Levitical legislation and Priesthood, there would have been no need of another Priesthood—the Melchizedek—or other legislative enactments. But, he says, when the Priesthood is changed, there is also a change of the law. But it must come from God. "Wherefore I, the Lord, knowing the calamity which should come upon the inhabitants of the earth, called upon my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and spake unto him from heaven, and gave him commandments ... that mine everlasting covenant might be established." (D. and C. 1:17-22; see also D. and C. 22:1; 45:9; 54:4, 5)

2 Ne 8 5VERSE 5

2 Ne 8 5Mine Arm shall Judge the People. This means that the Lord will exercise the judiciary functions as well as the legislative. The isles, which refers specially to the smaller kingdoms, will rely on him.

2 Ne 8 6VERSE 6

2 Ne 8 6My Salvation for Ever. Abraham was directed to look up to heaven and count, if he could, the sparkling stars. He could not. He was then informed that his descendants would also be innumerable. (Gen. 15:5) The stars were now an evidence to him of the unlimited powers of God. His descendants are here told to behold the heavens and to remember that, although the entire universe is subject to change, and apparent destruction, as a smoke that vanishes, yet the salvation of God remains the same for ever, and his righteousness will never be abolished. Here is something permanent, not depending on changing fashions not left behind because of the progress of civilization or the increase of knowledge. What was right and good and pleasing to our heavenly Father at the beginning, is good and right and pleasing today and will remain so for ever and ever. It is interesting to note, what the sacred Scriptures say of the stars,

2 Ne 8 6"Instead of supposing a thousand, as ancient astronomers did (Hipparchus says 1022, Ptolemy 1026), they declare that they are innumerable; a declaration which modern telescopes discover to be not even a figure of speech. 'God,' says Sir John Hershel, after surveying the groups of stars and nebulae in the heavens, 'has scattered them like dust through the immensity of space.' And when the Scriptures speak of their hosts, it is as dependent, material, obedient things." (Dr. Joseph Angus)

SC2 Ne 8 72 Ne 8 8VERSES 7-8

SC2 Ne 8 72 Ne 8 8In whose Heart ... my Law. Those in whose hearts the law of God is written, so that it has become part of their nature to live accordingly, have no occasion to fear their enemies. God will destroy these like old rags eaten by moths. But the principles of salvation remain for ever.

2 Ne 8 9VERSE 9

2 Ne 8 9Rahab. Means "defiance," "pride," and refers here to Egypt, as in Psalm 87:4: "I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon to them that know me: behold Philistia, and Tyre, with Ethiopia; this was born there."

2 Ne 8 9This is a remarkable plea of the people of God before his throne. The very mention of Rahab in this place recalls the day of judgment when all nations shall be gathered before the Son of Man, and he shall separate them (the nations) as a shepherd divideth his sheep. (Matt. 25:31-3) The same thought is expressed in the Psalm, (87) where the text, however obscure, seems to teach that on the day of reckoning, some countries, among others, Egypt, Babylonia, Philistia, Tyre and Ethiopia, will be registered as natives, or friends, of Zion, when the Almighty (see verse 6) shall establish her. Consequently, the people of God will return to Zion, as to a country inhabited by friends.

2 Ne 8 9At present (1955 A.D.) there seem to be troubles between natives and immigrating Jews in Palestine, but we may expect that these will be settled to the satisfaction of all, in due time.

2 Ne 8 11VERSE 11

2 Ne 8 11Gladness and Joy. Not frivolity. "My soul shall be joyful in the Lord: it shall rejoice in his salvation." (Psalm 35:9)

2 Ne 8 11The Word of the Lord. In this section the Lord rebukes his people for fearing man, whose glory is but that of the grass, which, as our Lord says, "today is and tomorrow is cast into the oven." (Matt. 6:30), while forgetting the Almighty. "Awake, awake, O Jerusalem!" he says,—a call that is being heard throughout the world today. Jerusalem is awakening.

2 Ne 8 11The Lord, further, reminds Jerusalem that she has none to guide her—no inspired prophets as of old, with divine authority to speak for him. Her sons, he says, have "fainted," while desolation and destruction have clung to her as a "wild bull in a net." (verse 20) Therefore, hear now, he says, the Lord. The Lord pleads her cause. The cup of trembling will be put into the hands of the oppressor (v. 23), while Zion will clothe herself in festive garments and rejoice in her new-born liberty. (vv. 24, 25)

2 Ne 8 11The great lesson here is that the people of God must have that implicit faith in him, which is the fruit of obedience.

2 Ne 8 12VERSE 12

2 Ne 8 12The son of man. This sometimes refers to the Messiah. Christ used the title himself (Matt. 26:64), but here it means human beings generally.

2 Ne 8 13VERSE 13

2 Ne 8 13Forgetting the Lord, thy Maker. God expresses, as it were, astonishment at the possibility of this forgetfulness, since it was he that made the heavens and the earth. How can anybody, who lives in this glorious palace, forget the builder thereof?

2 Ne 8 15VERSE 15

2 Ne 8 15The Lord of Hosts. The sun is not the ruler of the planets and other stars. God is the Maker and the Lord of the sun and all the heavenly "hosts."

2 Ne 8 16VERSE 16

2 Ne 8 16Plant the Heavens. The heavens and the earth have been set up as a tent, like the tabernacle in the desert, God's dwelling, in order that he might say to Zion, Behold thou art my people. The Temple service is one connecting link between God and his people.

SC2 Ne 8 242 Ne 8 25VERSES 24-25

SC2 Ne 8 242 Ne 8 25Awake, awake! The section closes with the assurance that Jerusalem will be restored to more than her former independence, importance and glory. Note that the city is addressed as the "captive daughter of Zion." And the Lord says: "Shake thyself from the dust!" Arise from thy lowly position! Take the seat of honor! Throw off the yoke, O captive daughter of Zion!

GENERAL NOTES

Old Testament prophecies concerning countries, and particularly those referred to in the notes under verse 9, are highly instructive.

Egypt. This was at one time one of the mighty kingdoms of the world. It is stated on the authority of Herodotus, the Greek historian, that it had no less than 20,000 cities and that the number of inhabitants was incredibly large. It was the cradle of art, industry, religion and learning. Some of its monuments in stone are still so many riddles of the ages.

But prophets of the Lord declared that it would become "the basest of kingdoms"—that is to say, a kingdom with little political influence—"neither shall it exalt itself any more above the nations; for I will diminish them, that they shall no more rule over the nations." (Ezek. 29:15) Egypt, in fulfilment of this prophecy, and others, has seen its extraordinarily productive fields occupied in succession by Persians, Macedonians, Romans, Greeks, Arabs and the Ottomans. Strangers have ruled the richest of God's strip of earth, and the native inhabitants have been serfs. Isaiah (19:4-10) and Ezekiel (chaps. 30-31) predicted the complete downfall and desolation of Egypt.

But the prophets also predicted the restoration of Egypt. Isaiah (19:22-25) has this remarkable forecast:

"And they"—the Egyptians—"shall return to the Lord, and he shall be intreated of them, and shall heal them. In that day shall there be a highway out of Egypt to Assyria, and the Assyrian shall come into Egypt, and the Egyptian into Assyria, and the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians. In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with Assyria, even a blessing in the midst of the land: whom the Lord of hosts shall bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance."

The Lord also says through the Prophet Isaiah, to Israel:

"I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Savior: I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee." (Is. 43:3. Read the entire chapter)

It has been our privilege to see these prophecies, at least partly, fulfilled. Egypt now has a population of 14,213,000. Cairo, the capital, has 1,064,400, and Alexandria, 573,000 inhabitants. Her constitution, promulgated in 1930, declares Egypt an independent, sovereign state, with Islam as the state religion and Arabic the official language. A treaty of friendship with the United States was ratified by Parliament on May 26, 1930.

Babylon. If, says Dr. Keith, there ever was a city that could defy predictions of destruction, it was Babylon. For a long time it was the most famous city of the world. With its temples and palaces, its walls and hanging gardens, its dams for the control of the flood waters, its gigantic gates of copper, its artifical lake, it was the wonder of the world. The soil of the surrounding country was so rich that agriculture, according to Herodotus and others, yielded 200-fold, sometimes 300-fold. It was the center of a venerable civilization, of military power, of commerce, of arts and literature [^1] and of worldly glory. But while the city was yet on the summit of power, prophets of the Lord predicted its downfall. (See 2 Ne. 23; or Is. 13) Isaiah says:

"Come down and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground: there is no throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called tender and delicate ... desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou shalt not know." (Is. 47:1-11)

Jeremiah 50:1-3:

"Declare ye among the nations, and publish, and set up a standard; publish and conceal not; say, Babylon is taken, Bel is confounded, Merodach is broken in pieces; her idols are confounded, her images are broken in pieces. For out of the north there cometh up a nation against her, which shall make her land desolate, and none shall dwell therein: they shall remove, they shall depart, both man and beast."

These and other prophecies have all come true. During the 16th century ghostly remnants of the walls, built to last, seemingly for ever, were still marking the place whence Babylon once radiated its glory to the world; after that even these melancholy monuments of the past were buried so deeply that no trace of them could be found for centuries.

Babylonia, now resurrected in the kingdom of Irak, also spelled Iraq, is teeming with a population of Assyrians, Babylonians or Chaldeans, Arabs and Ottomans. It has a population of about three million souls. In 1932 it became an independent state under British protection. It is a limited monarchy with a parliament consisting of two chambers.

Tyre. This famous city, about 50 miles south of Beiruth, was once a mercantile world center, comparable in importance to New York, or London, of today. It was the capital of Phoenicia, the mother country of Carthage, the great rival of Rome, in the Mediterranean. Her sailors and merchants roamed all over the then known world.

But the prophets of the Lord predicted her downfall and destruction. Isaiah foretold that Tyre would fall and be utterly forgotten. (Is. 23:5, 8, 15) Ezekiel has this prediction:

"Thus saith the Lord God; Behold I am against thee, O Tyrus, and will cause many nations to come up against thee, as the sea causeth his waves to come up. And they shall destroy the walls of Tyrus, and break down her towers: I will also scrape her dust from her, and make her like the top of a rock. It shall be a place for the spreading of nets in the midst of the sea: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord God." (Ez. 26:1-6)

This has been fulfilled. Nebuchadnezzar laid siege to the city. It lasted for thirteen years, until, as Ezekiel says, "every head"—of his vast army—was made bald and every shoulder was peeled"—from carrying burdens—"yet had he no wages, nor his army." (Ez. 29:18) The time had not yet come. About 270 years later, Alexander the Great accomplished its downfall.

Tyre was built on rocks in the sea, about a mile and a half from the shore. Alexander caused a road to be constructed through the water. This gigantic task completed, he threw the city with its 150 feet high walls into the deep, and swept the rocks on which it had stood. Fishermen did actually spread their nets on these rocks, to dry in the sun.

Isaiah has a remarkable prediction that may be noted here. He says: "Howl, ye ships of Tarshish; for it (Tyre) is laid waste, so that there is no house, no entering in; from the land of Chittim it is revealed to them. ... Howl, ye ships of Tarshish: for your strength is laid waste." (Is. 23:1-14) "Ships of Tarshish" were sometimes absent on their voyages for two or three years. Imagine the consternation of the crews, when such ships came back and found no harbor in which to enter, no houses where the city had stood, only naked rocks, connected with the shore by means of a mole!

At the beginning of our era, a new Tyre was visited by the disciples of Christ. It had a temple and some churches. During the 7th century it came into the hands of the Saracenes, and then, in the 12th century, the crusaders. It was then a place of some importance. For 300 years it was ruled by the Turks. In 1834 it was visited by a destructive earthquake. Ten years later a traveler relates that when he and others came to the place and looked for a shop in which to buy some souvenirs, they found none. Fishermen were still spreading their nets on the rocks.

For a correct understanding of the movement known as Zionism, it is essential to study the prophecies concerning these and other near Oriental countries—their devastation, but also their restoration. For the convenant made with Abraham included all his descendants, and not only the Jews and the comparatively small country of Palestine. (See Gen. 15:18-21) It is a great problem, which, perhaps, only our Lord himself can solve.

The Resurrection. The doctrine of the resurrection of Jesus is the very keystone of Christianity. Peter, the Apostle, begins his First letter to the Saints thus:

"Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy hath begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead" (1 Pet. 1:3); for, it was his resurrection that brought new life to his dismayed followers, and made them willing to die for their Master. St. Paul (1 Cor. 15:17-18) argues, that if Christ be not raised, then our faith is in vain; the dead have perished, and "we are of all men most miserable." Jacob, the son of Lehi, gives us a definite understanding of this, in this sermon (2 Ne. 9:8, 9), by explaining that, if "the flesh should rise no more," our spirits would become like the fallen angel and remain with him in misery, as his slaves forever.

In view of the importance of this doctrine, we may well ask, Is there sufficient evidence of its actuality?

Paul, the Apostle, who wrote a letter to the Corinthians as early as about 22 years after the crucifixion, gives, in that epistle a list of eye-witnesses to the appearance of Jesus after his death, thus: (1) Peter, (2) the Twelve, (3) more than 500 brethren, (4) James, (5) all the Apostles, and (6) himself. This list is confined to what we should call the Church authorities, who were well known, and to a conference, presumably in Galilee. The women, whose names are given by the evangelists, and the two men on their way to Emmaus, are not referred to by Paul, as they would be less known to the Corinthians.

But, it might be said, all these were friends of the Master, and not impartial witnesses.

Not quite all. Paul was a persecutor, when Jesus appeared to him, and he became a disciple as a result of that appearance—a miracle almost as great as the resurrection itself.

But there are other witnesses.

It appears that the governors of the Roman provinces always reported important events to the emperor in Rome. Pilate, therefore, kept memoirs of Jewish affairs during his procuratorship, called Acta Pilati. Referring to this usage, Eusebius, who has been called "the Father of Church History," and who lived at the close of the third and beginning of the fourth century, says, "Our Savior's resurrection being much talked of throughout Palestine, Pilate informed the emperor of it, as likewise of his miracles, of which he had heard; and that, being raised up after he had been put to death, he was already believed by many to be a God."

Such accounts were deposited in the archives of Rome and served as a source of information to historians. Hence, Justin Martyr, about the year 140 A.D., in his first "Apology," having mentioned the crucifixion of Jesus, adds, "And that these things were so done, you may know from the Acts made in the time of Pontius Pilate."

Tertullian, a prominent church father, about 200 A.D., in his "Apology," after speaking of the crucifixion, the resurrection and ascension, proceeds thus, "Of all these things relating to Christ, Pilate, himself in his conscience already a Christian, sent an account to Tiberius, then emperor. Tertullian also relates the following: "There was an ancient decree that no one should be received for a deity, unless he was first approved by the senate. Tiberius, in whose time the Christian name had its rise, having received from Palestine an account" of Christ, proposed to the senate that he should be enrolled among the Roman gods. But the senate rejected his proposition, because the emperor had declined a similar honor for himself.

I have quoted these paragraphs from Dr. Horne's monumental work, "An Introduction to the Critical Study of the Holy Scriptures." He mentions many other Hebrew and pagan witnesses for the historic accuracy of the New Testament narratives.

The only objection worth mentioning is the one that is recorded by Matthew. He says that the soldiers, detailed to guard the tomb, were bribed to report that the disciples had "stolen" the body while they slept.

Just a line of comment on that.

According to the Mosaic law (Num. 21:22, 23), the body of a malefactor that had been hung on a tree, should not remain in that position over night, "that thy land be not defiled." Accordingly, the conspirators went to Pilate, as soon as they learned that their innocent victim had passed away, to get the body. But when they came to Pilate, probably in order to get permission to dispose of the remains in the Valley of Hinnom, also called Tophet and Gehenna, where bodies of malefactors were sometimes cremated, and where "their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched" (Mark 9:44, 46, 48), they learned that Joseph of Arimatha, who was a member of the Sanhedrin and in secret a disciple, had, by consent of Pilate, taken Jesus from the cross and laid him in his own tomb. When, immediately after the Sabbath, it was reported that Jesus had arisen and it became necessary, from their point of view, to account for the absence of the body, they naturally said, thinking of Joseph of Arimatha, that the disciples had taken it away. They had; the disciples had taken it; but only from the cross, not from the grave. God had thwarted the plan of the wicked to have the body of his beloved Son cremated in the ever burning flames in the filthy valley of Gehenna.

Resurrection is a demonstrated fact. Because he lives, we shall live. And every Sunday, our Lord's day, should be, to us, an Easter Sunday.

---
Notas:
[^1] Death of Lehi, 4:12. Lehi addresses the people on the Land of Promise—A land blessed to the righteous, but cursed to the wicked, 1:4, 7-12; exhortations, 1:28-32.
