Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 10

SC2 Ne 10 12 Ne 10 2VERSES 1-2

SC2 Ne 10 12 Ne 10 2This Righteous Branch. Jacob closed his discourse in the previous chapter by reminding the people of the promise of God that the descendants of Lehi, in the future, would become a "righteous branch" to the house of Israel. In his address in this chapter, he again refers to this promise.

SC2 Ne 10 12 Ne 10 2"Branch" has different meanings in the Scriptures, besides the literal one. The disciples of Jesus are called branches, in their relationship to the Master as the "vine." (John 15:5) Kings are called "branches" (Ezek. 17:3), of their ancestral houses, because they spring from them, as twigs from a stem, or root. In this chapter the descendants of Lehi are referred to. They are "many of our children"; and, "our children," in verse 2. Many of them will perish, because of unbelief, but not all. There will be a restoration.

SC2 Ne 10 32 Ne 10 42 Ne 10 52 Ne 10 6VERSES 3-6

SC2 Ne 10 32 Ne 10 42 Ne 10 52 Ne 10 6Christ Shall Come among the Jews (v. 3).

2 Ne 10 3VERSE 3

2 Ne 10 3Jacob, the brother of Nephi, informs us here that the sacred Name had been revealed to him, by an angel, and that it would be "Christ," and Nephi, in the same book (25:19) records that, according to the prophets, "his name shall be Jesus Christ, the Son of God." Mosiah, also, says his name shall be Jesus Christ. (Mos. 3:8)

2 Ne 10 3Such passages indicate that the early inhabitants of America long before the arrival of the Spaniards, had definite knowledge of the plan of salvation as set forth in the Hebrew Scriptures. They furnish an explanation of the origin of some traditions current among Indians at the time of the conquest and recorded by Cieza de Leon, Sarmiento, and others, according to which a white man, coming from the south, had visited their fore-fathers and taught them from a book, referred to as a "stick"—an expression which reminds us of the Biblical "stick of Ephraim," or "stick of Judah." (See The Ayar Incas, by Dr. Miles Poindexter, Vol. 2, pp. 86, 87)

2 Ne 10 3Two objections have been advanced against these and similar passages in the Book of Mormon.

2 Ne 10 3It has been said that "Christ" is not a name but a title; that we ought to say "the Christ," as we say, "John the Baptist," or "Paul the Apostle." It has also been urged that, as "Jesus Christ" is the English equivalent of two Greek words in the New Testament, their appearance in the Book of Mormon proves that volume to be the work of a plagiarist.

2 Ne 10 3To the first of these objections we need only say that the English word "Christ," from the Greek "Christos," certainly is a title, an adjective, but it has also in common usage become a proper noun, a name. A great many words descriptive of the status, occupation, or quality of a person have become names, as for instance King, Taylor, Armstrong, etc. In the same way, "Christ," the adjective, which means, "anointed" has become one of the names of our Redeemer, as the angel told Jacob would happen. Even among his contemporaries he was known as "Christ, the King of Israel." (Mark 15:32)

2 Ne 10 3The reply to the second objection is equally obvious. If the plates of the Book of Mormon were accessible and it could be shown that the Greek form of the sacred name was part of the text, the objection referred to might appear well founded, although even in that case, it might be truthfully said that a divinely inspired prophet might have had a vision of a future event and also of the name, or title, of the central hero of it, as Isaiah had of the Babylonian captivity and the name, or title (Cyrus or Kores) of the Persian ruler who was to end it and authorize the re-building of the temple. (Is. 45:1)

2 Ne 10 3But the Prophet Joseph, in a letter published in The Times and Seasons, May 15, 1843, informs us that, "There was no Greek or Latin upon the plates from which I, through the grace of the Lord, translated the Book of Mormon." That disposes of the objection under consideration. The Greek form of the names did not appear on the plates.

2 Ne 10 3The probability is that the Hebrew form was the one that the Prophet Joseph found in those records. The Hebrew equivalent of the two sacred names is, "Jehoshuah Hammashiach." The Prophet, in his translation, naturally rendered these words by their English equivalents, "Jesus Christ," which names, in their various forms, are known all over the world.

2 Ne 10 3These names, however, have a much greater meaning than at first may be apparent. They mean that our Redeemer has been anointed by his Father, to a position of Ruler in the universe. As Paul, the Apostle says: "Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name. That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the glory of God the Father." (Phil. 2:9-11)

2 Ne 10 5VERSE 5

2 Ne 10 5Priestcrafts. The rejection of the Messiah and the consequent dispersion of the people are traced to the existence of priestcrafts and iniquities. The meaning of the first of these words is not merely such subtlety as is ascribed to the serpent in the Garden (Gen. 3:1), or such wickedness as generally originates in the realm of Lucifer. It has a special meaning which should be carefully noted. It means, according to 2 Ne. 26:29, the practice of religion for worldly gain and the praise of men. The Lord says: "Priestcrafts are that men preach and set themselves up for a light unto the world, that they may get gain and praise of the world."

2 Ne 10 5To preach for pay,

2 Ne 10 5For gold to pray

2 Ne 10 5is to turn religion into an industrial craft, and that is "priestcraft."

2 Ne 10 6VERSE 6

2 Ne 10 6Scattered among All Nations. The dispersion and restoration of the descendants of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob was a subject in which all well informed Israelites were interested and with which they were familiar. It was a subject which was impressed upon the people by Moses, before they entered Canaan. (See Deut. 28:16-68) This was partly fulfilled at the time of the destruction of the city and the temple of Nebuchadnezzar. According to Josephus, the most revolting features foretold in this prophecy actually took place during the siege. Other prophets dwelt on the same subject.

2 Ne 10 6Some of the last discourses of our Lord in Jerusalem concerned the signs that would precede the end of the Mosaic dispensation and the subsequent dispersion of the Jews. These signs are definitely and clearly stated (See Matt. 24, Mark 13, and Luke 21:6-33.)

2 Ne 10 6Dr. Alexander Keith points out the following, in his Testimony to the Truth of the Christian Religion:

2 Ne 10 61. Many shall come in my name and say, I am Christ. Simon Magus claimed authority. The Samaritan, Dositheus, claimed authority. Theudas deceived many (Acts 5:36). The country was full of deceivers who tried to induce people to follow them.

2 Ne 10 62. They were to hear of wars and rumors of war. The Jews refused to give the Romans permission to unveil a statue of Emperor Caligula in the Temple, and as a consequence they were seized by fear of their masters to such a degree that they neglected their fields and vineyards. In Caesarea Jews and Syrians fought for possession of the city. Twenty thousand Jews were massacred, the others were scattered. In Alexandria 50,000 Jews were slain, and in Damascus, 10,000. Italy was shaken to its foundations, by internal wars about the throne. Four emperors, Nero, Galba, Otho and Vitellius perished in two years.

2 Ne 10 63. Famines, pestilences and earthquakes. (Matt. 4:7) During the reign of Emperor Claudius (41-54 A.D.) famine was frequent. The distress lasted for years in Palestine. Then came pestilence. Earthquakes visited Rome, Crete and other places. During the reign of Nero there were destructive seismic disturbances in Campania, Laodicea, Hierapolis and Colosse. All nature was in commotion and, as Josephus remarks, it was generally felt that the disaster foreshadowed was not a common occurrence.

2 Ne 10 64. Fearful sights and great signs shall there be from heaven. (Luke 21:11) Josephus and Tacitus both mention such signs. Tacitus is quoted to the effect that hosts in shining armour appeared battling in the sky, and that a fiery cloud enveloped the temple; also, that, suddenly the gates to the sanctuary were opened, and that a loud voice was heard, causing exceeding commotion.

2 Ne 10 65. The disciples were to be persecuted. (Mark 13:9; Luke 21:12) Peter, Paul, Matthew, Thomas, Mark, Luke, and many other prominent disciples suffered martyrdom in different places and by different means of torture. The very name "Christian" became the object of hatred in the pagan world.

2 Ne 10 66. The disciples were to be betrayed by parents, brethren, kinsfolk and friends. (Luke 21:16) That happened. St. Paul had that experience. (See 2 Cor. 11:13-15, 26, 27; Gal. 2:4; 2 Tim. 3:1-5.) Tacitus avers that many martyrs suffered death, having been betrayed by so-called fellow-Christians, which themselves had been delivered to the authorities by alleged brethren. And Paul expressly states that at the beginning of his trial in Rome, "no man stood with me, but all forsook me." (2 Tim. 4:16)

2 Ne 10 67. The Gospel shall be preached in all the world. (Matt. 24:14) We know that Christianity had been made known in almost every part of the vast Roman empire before the destruction of Jerusalem, through the missionary efforts of the chief Apostles, the Apostle Paul and others. We know that it had been brought to Ethiopia, in Africa, by the Ethiopian secretary of state under Queen Candace. (Acts 8:27-39) We know not in how many directions the first Christian missionaries traveled, but we may safely assume that Christianity, from the first, followed the main trade routes to the principal parts of the world. Mr. Bancroft ("The Native Races," Vol. 5, p. 25) says that St. Thomas has been identified with Topiltzin Quetzalcoatl, the two names having the same meaning in Greek (Didymos), and Nahua respectively. But that is, of course, mere speculation. [^1]

2 Ne 10 68. The end of the dispensation and the dispersion of the people were attended by great tribulation, "such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be." (Matt. 24:21) Jacob was familiar with the terrible scenes to be expected at the end of the Mosaic dispensation, for Moses as stated in a previous paragraph had described them with soul stirring realism, before his departure. (Deut. 28:49-68) He said the country would be invaded by foreign barbarians who would spare neither women nor men, neither young nor old. There would be famine, until, "Thou shalt eat the fruit of thine own body." "The tender and delicate woman ... her eye shall be evil toward the husband of her bosom ... and toward the children which she shall bear; for she shall eat them for want of all things, secretly, in the siege and straitness, wherewith thine enemy shall distress thee in thy gates." All this was fulfilled literally. The altar, the temple, the walls and the entire city were destroyed by greedy soldiers who plowed up the very ground, digging for buried treasures. Josephus is authority for the statement that one million three hundred thousand Jews perished in this war and that ninety-seven thousand fell into captivity. Of these 2,500 were sacrificed in the arena in honor of the birthday of the Emperor Domitian. [^2] Others perished in different ways. No wonder that the prophets of the Nephites spoke about this time so earnestly. No wonder that our Savior wept (Luke 19:41), when contemplating the winding-up scenes.

2 Ne 10 6Such were the signs of the approach of the end of the Mosaic dispensation. Similar signs precede every change broad enough to be called the end of an epoch, or the coming of the Lord to judgment. They infallibly warn us of what is to come, as the falling leaves and the first frost tell us that winter is near.

2 Ne 10 7VERSE 7

2 Ne 10 7They Shall Be Restored. On this Condition: when "they shall believe in me, that I am Christ." The Hebrews have certainly not yet, as a whole, accepted Jesus of Nazareth as the Messiah, although many individuals have done so; but the ancient prejudices and inherited hatred have been greatly allayed among the educated classes. The Lord, apparently anxious to fulfil his promises to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, has, therefore, already begun the gathering of their descendants in the Land of Promise. In 1896, Dr. Theodore Herzl was prompted to issue his famous pamphlet, "The Jewish State," which became the foundation stone of modern Zionism. In November 1917 Lord Balfour declared that "the British government would look with favor upon the restoration of Palestine as the Jewish homeland." This declaration may at first have been intended as a statement of the British policy only, and it may have been chiefly a bid for the support of the fifteen million Jews in the world for the cause of the allies in the world war. A Hebrew battalion was also organized against the Turks in Palestine, and Zionism obtained a recognized status in the world. After the great war, in 1922, the Balfour declaration was ratified by the League of Nations, and since then the gathering has proceeded rapidly. According to Mr. Gedaliah Bublick, a noted newspaper editor in Tel Aviv, Palestine, there were in 1920 only 55,000 Jews in the country. Sixteen years later there were 400,000, of whom ten thousand were immigrants from America. Owing to the antiSemitic pressure in many countries, Zionism is one of the most important movements, at present.

2 Ne 10 7During the month of August, 1929, sporadic attacks were made by Arabs on Jewish settlements, which were vigorously repulsed by the Jews. A royal British commission found, after inquiry, that the Arabs had very little reason for complaint, the Palestinian government having favored them in the matter of employment, taxation and budgetary allotments. But the discontent continued.

2 Ne 10 7During the summer of 1936 an American commission, unofficial, consisting of U. S. Senators Copeland, Austin and Hastings, went to Palestine to investigate the cause of Arab outbreaks. During the month of December, that year, they reported the existence in the country of a political conflict between Jewish and Arab aspirations. Certain agitators, they found, were seeking to establish an Arabian state, and they feared that the Jews nourished similar plans. But the Balfour declaration did not contemplate anything but a Palestinian state, in which Jews and Arabs would have equal rights. The commission found no ground for prohibition of Jewish immigration. There is room for hundreds of thousands more settlers in Palestine, and if the Trans-Jordan is opened to the Jews, millions can find refuge in the land promised to Abraham and his descendants. (Gen. 15:18-21)

2 Ne 10 7Zionism is a question of more than academic interest to the United States. For, on December 3, 1924, Great Britain and the United States, represented by the late Lord Balfour and the then Secretary of State, Charles Evans Hughes, resp., entered into a treaty by which the United States consented to the mandate of Great Britain over the Holy Land, as given by the League of Nations, and stipulated that the consent of the United States would be required to any change in that mandate.

2 Ne 10 9VERSE 9

2 Ne 10 9Kings Shall Be Nursing Fathers. See notes under verse 7.

2 Ne 10 10VERSE 10

2 Ne 10 10This Land Shall Be ... Thine Inheritance. The important truth here stated would not be known but for the Book of Mormon. True, Jacob, the patriarch, foretold in his dying blessing that Joseph, as a fruitful bough, would send his branches over the wall, and that his blessings would include the "utmost bound of the everlasting hills." In the Book of Mormon it is shown how this was fulfilled.

SC2 Ne 10 112 Ne 10 122 Ne 10 132 Ne 10 14VERSES 11-14

SC2 Ne 10 112 Ne 10 122 Ne 10 132 Ne 10 14No Kings Upon This Land. See Mosiah 29:25-40; Deut. 17:14-17; 1 Sam. 9:17. Mosiah (29:13) explains that if it were possible to have kings always who would establish the laws of God and judge the people according to his commandments, there would be no objection to the title, as such, but (v. 16), "because all men are not just it is not expedient that ye should have a king or kings to rule over you." It is better to have officials that can be dismissed without revolutions.

2 Ne 10 15VERSE 15

2 Ne 10 15Secret Works of Darkness. Transgressions and plots planned in secret, and carried out under the cover of darkness. They are in the same class as murder and abominations. They are to be destroyed. But there is also another class of secret works. Our Lord says: "Take heed that ye do not your alms before men. ... But when thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth." Again: "And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites ... but pray to thy Father in secret; and the Father which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly." (Matt. 6:1-18)

2 Ne 10 16VERSE 16

2 Ne 10 16He That Fighteth Against Zion. Fighting against Zion is one of the deeds that bring destruction upon the guilty individuals, be they Jews or Gentiles, bond or free, male or female.

2 Ne 10 16They Are They Who Are the Whore of All the Earth. This is an exceedingly important revelation. In some Protestant circles it has been customary to regard a certain religious body as alone deserving that opprobrious epithet; but here we learn that it does not refer to any religious body in particular, but that everyone who engages in hostility against the people of God is a member of the abominable multitude, no matter what the religion, race or sex may be. Compare Rev. 17:14, where we read that the woman, arrayed in purple and scarlet and sitting on a scarlet colored beast "shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them;" both the woman and the beast; "for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings: and they that are with him are called, and chosen, and faithful."

2 Ne 10 17VERSE 17

2 Ne 10 17I Will Fulfil My Promises. The promises given to Noah, to Abraham and his descendants; to David, and many others, concerning his kingdom on earth. (See Pearl of Great Price, Moses 7:43-65; Gen. 17:16, 19; Ps. 46:9, 10; 76:2, 10) Secret works of darkness must be destroyed, if the promises are to be fulfilled.

2 Ne 10 18VERSE 18

2 Ne 10 18Gentiles to be Blessed. The prediction is here made that the descendants of Lehi would first be afflicted by Gentiles, but later treated kindly by the same class of people; wherefore these would be "numbered" among the children of Israel and become partakers of their blessings. (Comp. Rom. 9:4-8)

2 Ne 10 19VERSE 19

2 Ne 10 19I Will Consecrate This Land. For an inheritance of the descendants of Lehi and also the children of those who are numbered among them. A solemn warning is added. God will that all who live here shall worship him, this being a "choice" land, above all others; a consecrated land. Where the laws of God are enforced, none but those who really love and worship God will care to live.

2 Ne 10 20VERSE 20

2 Ne 10 20We Are Upon An Isle of the Sea. Comp. v. 8. For the comments of George Reynolds on this, see "Story of the Book of Mormon," p. 253, fifth edition; quoted in, "An Introduction to the Study of the Book of Mormon," p. 223. Dr. Brinton, "Library of Aboriginal American Literature," vol. 5, p. 134, says:

2 Ne 10 20"The Indians almost universally believed the dry land they knew, to be part of a great island, everywhere surrounded by wide waters whose limits were unknown. Many tribes had vague myths of a journey from beyond this sea; many placed beyond it the home of the sun and of light, and the happy hunting grounds of the departed souls."

2 Ne 10 20The Prophet Isaiah, speaking of the restoration of Israel, mentions "the Islands of the Sea" among the countries from which the people are to be gathered. (2 Ne. 21:11) Assyria, Elam, Pathros, Egypt, Cush, Shinar and Hamath are known. But where is the country he calls, "The Islands of the Sea?" Here is the answer. Read also verses 21 and 22.

2 Ne 10 22VERSE 22

2 Ne 10 22God has Led Away from Time to Time from the House of Israel, According to His Will and Pleasure. Modern research inclines to the view that immigration from Asia across the Pacific ocean and Islands in the south, and the Bering Strait in the north, furnished America with a mixed population thousands of years ago, and that a lively commerce was carried on between North and South America many centuries before the discovery by Columbus and subsequent adventurers. (See the Preface to "The Ayar Incas" by Dr. Miles Poindexter.) The evidence in favor of this opinion is also a testimony to the authenticity of the record in the Book of Mormon of the voyage of Lehi, and the information that "The Lord did bring Mulek into the land North" (Hel. 6:10), and this further revelation that the Lord has, from time to time, led colonies of Israelites from their main home to distant parts of the world.

2 Ne 10 25VERSE 25

2 Ne 10 25By the Power of the Atonement. Note that Jacob, closes his sermon with a final testimony that it is through the Atonement of Christ alone that man can gain an entrance into the eternal kingdom of God, there to praise him for his grace divine. That is the sum and substance of the sermon. And it is stated in sentences which, through their beauty of literary style bear the marks of divine inspiration in every word.

2 Ne 10 25Christ died: His love and his atoning death we preach. Christ rose, and thus broke down the awful gates of hell. Christ went to heav'nly glory, as the Scriptures teach; The universal choir soon sings that, "All is Well."

NOTES

"We are upon an isle of the sea." The statement refers to the American continents. Could the Prophet Isaiah possibly have had any knowledge of America? I am inclined to believe that he had.

King Solomon, about two hundred years before the time of the prophet, when the kingdom of Israel had attained its greatest height of glory in power, wealth, influence and fame, had two mercantile navies. One was stationed at Ezion-geber, on the Red Sea, in the land of Edom. (I Kings 9:26) The other was anchored at Tyre, the Liverpool of antiquity, where King Hiram harbored his own vessels between voyages. By means of these two fleets, one in the Mediterranean, and one in the Red Sea, Palestine was undoubtedly connected with the rest of the world along the usual sea routes to a much greater extent than now generally believed. That the ships of Solomon went on very long voyages is clear from 1 Kings 1:22, where it is stated that they made one voyage in three years. They would hardly need three years for a trip to the British Isles and return. It is more probable that they sometimes went out as far as Iceland, and from there to America.

---
Notas:
[^1] Death of Lehi, 4:12. Lehi addresses the people on the Land of Promise—A land blessed to the righteous, but cursed to the wicked, 1:4, 7-12; exhortations, 1:28-32.
[^2] Rebellion, 5:2-4. Lehi addresses his son, Jacob, on Redemption through the Messiah, 2:6-8; on opposition necessary in all things, 2:11-14; the forbidden fruit and the tree of life, 15; Adam fell that men might be, 25; the redemption of mankind, 2:28-30.
