Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 11

2 Ne 11 2VERSE 2

2 Ne 11 2My Soul Delighteth in his Words. This chapter may be considered an introduction by Nephi to the excerpts he is about to make from the records of the Prophet Isaiah. There are twelve chapters from this book, from 2 to 13, inclusive, besides the paragraphs quoted by Jacob. (2 Ne. 7 and 8) Nephi states the reason why he reads and quotes that portion of the Old Testament. His soul delighteth in it. The Prophet had seen the Redeemer and his testimony of that fact was a strong corroboration of the testimony of Nephi, who also said he had seen our divine Savior. In addition, Isaiah spoke of the gathering of Israel and Judah, and that must have been a gospel of infinite consolation to the cxiles on the Islands of the Sea.

2 Ne 11 3VERSE 3

2 Ne 11 3Jacob, too, had seen the Savior. Three witnesses were fully competent to establish the fact itself of the existence of Jesus, even before his birth in the flesh.

2 Ne 11 4VERSE 4

2 Ne 11 4The Coming of Christ. Isaiah has been called "The Evangelical Prophet," because of his abundant predictions concerning the Messiah, his birth, his character, ministry, passion, death, his final victory and the majesty and glory of his kingdom. Nephi, who lived long before the Advent, delighted in the study of these themes. And it was necessary to study them in order to prove their truth to others.

2 Ne 11 4The Law of Moses was given for the same purpose. To explain the Gospel of Christ. Refers especially to the ceremonial law. The dedication of the firstborn (Ex. 12:2); the distinction between clean and unclean food; the rules for purification; lawful and unlawful marriages; the laws regarding priestly orders, holy places, times of holding services; the Sabbath, the sabbatical year (every 7th); the year of jubilee; passover; the feast of weeks; of tabernacles of trumpets, and the day of atonement. All such precepts were given for the purpose of teaching the children of Israel the first principles of the Gospel.

2 Ne 11 5VERSE 5

2 Ne 11 5The Covenants of the Lord. See notes 2 Ne. 10:17.

2 Ne 11 5In his Grace, Justice, Power, and Mercy, in the plan of deliverance from death. Grace means the love of God, which is the source of all the benefits we receive from him. But it means also, in a secondary sense, the benefits themselves which we receive, among all of which the Gospel of Jesus Christ is the greatest. When John, in his Gospel, says: "The Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ (John 1:17); he means to say that, as the Old Mosaic dispensation came through Moses, so the New Gospel dispensation has come through Jesus Christ. Paul uses the word, grace, in the same sense: "As sin has reigned unto death, even so, might grace"—the Gospel—"reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ, our Lord." (Rom. 5:21.)

2 Ne 11 5Mercy. Justice does not exclude mercy. Sometimes what we call "justice" may be rank injustice, because we do never know for certain what mitigating circumsances, due to heredity or environment, are responsible in a case of transgression. Sometimes mercy is justice. In the Old dispensation the tables of law were covered by the "Mercy Seat," a most wonderful type of the government of God, who has said: "I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men." (D. and C. 64:10.)

2 Ne 11 6VERSE 6

2 Ne 11 6Save Christ Should Come All Men Must Perish. Nephi says he delights in proving this truth. His argument here takes the form of a compound syllogism, known as "sorites," of which we have had several examples in this book.
