Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 12

2 Ne 12 1VERSE 1

2 Ne 12 1The Word that Isaiah, the Son of Amoz, Saw. That is all we know about the authorship of this prophetic word. It is almost identical with Micah 4:1-3. Either of these prophets may be the author, or, they may be quoting from a common source. It is one of the sure words of prophecy, of which the Apostle Peter says: "Whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place." It is a "word" of more than common importance; otherwise it would not have been incorporated in the texts of two great Old Testament Prophets, and then in the record of Nephi.

2 Ne 12 1Concerning Judah and Jerusalem. Judah and Jerusalem are concerned, as being the immediate objects of the prophecy, but, as the context shows, it concerns the entire world. God has so ordained it, that the blessings of light and life are to come to mankind through one chosen family, the descendants of Abraham. They are the wires by means of which the power from the central, Divine Source has been, and will continue to be, diffused to all the world. So, the Apostle Paul: "If the casting away of them"—their dispersion—"be the reconciling of the world, what shall the receiving of them"—their gathering—"be but life from the dead?" (Rom. 11:15)

2 Ne 12 2VERSE 2

2 Ne 12 2In the Last Days. Refers clearly to the Millennium. See D. and C. 29:11, 22, 23; 43:30, 31.

2 Ne 12 2Mountain of the Lord's House. The word "mountain" is used in the Scriptures in different allegorical, or figurative, meanings, besides the literal sense. Here it stands for the Church of God, which, as the fifth kingdom, is destined to grow from the size of a stone to that of a mountain and fill the world. (Dan. 2:35, 45) The meaning is, therefore, that when the Church of God shall be established in the top of the mountains and be exalted above the hills, then all nations shall flow unto it.

2 Ne 12 3VERSE 3

2 Ne 12 3Many People. When the Church shall be thus established and exalted, then "many people"—not everybody, for even during the Millennium there will be different creeds and modes of worship (Micah 4:5)—but many people shall come and join the Church, enter the house of the Lord, to learn his will, accept his instructions and walk in his paths.

2 Ne 12 4VERSE 4

2 Ne 12 4Then the Earth will have Peace. The result will be as stated in this verse. National affairs will be regulated by divine law, and international differences will be adjusted by divinely inspired arbitration. Peace will reign, and temple work will go on undisturbed.

2 Ne 12 4"He shall judge among the Nations." That is the explanation of the expression in the previous verse: "The word of the Lord from Jerusalem."

2 Ne 12 5VERSE 5

2 Ne 12 5The Light of the Lord. The light of revelation. They had gone astray from that light.

2 Ne 12 6VERSE 6

2 Ne 12 6Replenished from the East. As the darkness around became more and more intense in the progress away from the light, and the minds became more and more empty as regards divine impressions, they tried to "replenish"—refill—them with Oriental superstitions, "soothsaying"—fortunetelling, which is the poorest possible substitute for the divine word of prophecy.

2 Ne 12 6One Consequence. This led to intimate association with strnagers, the adoption of their social habits and forms of devotion.

2 Ne 12 7VERSE 7

2 Ne 12 7Other Consequences. They accumulated enormous wealth, gold and silver. But also an enormous military organization, horses and chariots.

2 Ne 12 8VERSE 8

2 Ne 12 8Idolatry. Great prosperity and militarism are a combination incompatible with the worship of God. Devotion to the Maker of the heavens and the earth, revealed in the Prince of Peace, naturally makes a worshiper abhor an institution of which the archenemy of God and man is the originator and the perpetuator.

2 Ne 12 8Their Own Hands—Made. To worship the conceptions of one's own mind—the creations of one's own hands—indicates ignorance and simplicity.

2 Ne 12 9VERSE 9

2 Ne 12 9Forgive him not. The meaning of this verse is: Although the people are simple-minded and ignorant, yet, both the common and the outstanding individuals are too proud to be humble; therefore God cannot forgive them.

2 Ne 12 9The previous section closes (v. 9) with the observation that, since neither the common people nor the outstanding individuals humble themselves before the Lord, there can not be any forgiveness. In this section the consequences of pride are enumerated.

2 Ne 12 12VERSE 12

2 Ne 12 12The Day of the Lord of Hosts Soon Cometh. The day of the Lord, also called the day of judgment and the coming of the Lord, sometimes stands for any period of time during which nations, or countries, are visited with great calamities. (Is. 63:4; 2 Pet. 3:12:13; Ps. 36:13-15)

2 Ne 12 12"Jesus has been upon the earth a great many more times than you are aware of. When Jesus makes his next appearance upon the earth, but few of this Church will be prepared to receive him and see him face to face and converse with him; but he will come to his temple. Will he remain and dwell upon the earth a thousand years, without returning? He will come here and return to his mansions where he dwells with his Father, and come again to the earth, and again return to his Father, according to my understanding. Then angels will come and begin to resurrect the dead, and the Savior will also raise the dead, and they will receive the keys of the resurrection, and will begin to assist in that work. Will the wicked know of it? They will know just as much about that as they now know about 'Mormonism' and no more." (Brigham Young, Discourses, Selected and Arranged by Dr. John A. Widtsoe, p. 176.)

2 Ne 12 16VERSE 16

2 Ne 12 16Upon All Pleasant Pictures. "Pleasant Pictures" refers to the standards or figure heads of the ships. The prophet has, in the previous verses of this section, emphasized the fact that humiliation would be the consequence of pride. All that was high and exalted in its own estimation would be debased and humiliated. (vv. 12. Comp. v. 17.) He enumerates: The cedars of Lebanon, the oaks of Bashan, the mountains and hills, the nations and people, the towers and walls and, finally, the ships of the sea, even the largest, the Tarshish ships, with their proud standards of figure heads. All shall be made low, and the Lord alone shall be exalted. (v. 17)

SC2 Ne 12 182 Ne 12 192 Ne 12 20VERSES 18-20

SC2 Ne 12 182 Ne 12 192 Ne 12 20Idols. In verse 8 the prophet notes that the land is full of idols. Here he predicts the destruction of all images that are being worshiped, be they ever so costly. Idols of gold and silver shall be thrown into the dark and dusty corners infested by "moles and bats."

2 Ne 12 22VERSE 22

2 Ne 12 22Cease Ye from Man. The meaning seems to be: Do not rely on man whose mortal existence is but as a breath of air. Rely on God.

GENERAL NOTES

In Acts 28:11 the student will find an illustration of the meaning of the expression, "pleasant pictures." There we are informed that the ship in which Paul traveled from Malta to Rome had Castor and Pollux for a "sign." Those mythical twin sons of Zeus were the supposed protectors of the ship, and their images were painted, or sculptured in a prominent place on the ship. Others had different protectors and therefore different images and standards. But idols, whether on land or sea will be utterly destroyed in the wrath of the day of the Lord.
