Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 14

2 Ne 14 1VERSE 1

2 Ne 14 1In that Day. That is, when a large part of the male population shall have been exterminated by war and its concomitants, seven women shall offer themselves to one man, as here stated.

2 Ne 14 1To Take Away our Reproach. In the old times a woman, as a rule, considered it unfortunate not to have the privilege of motherhood. See the story of Rachel in the Old Testament, Gen. 30:33; or, in the New Testament, Elisabeth, the mother of John the Baptist, Luke, 1:25. The misfortune must have been felt more keenly at a time when the population had been practically decimated. A plurality of wives in one household, under the protection of one man may, according to this prophetic utterance, be a more desirable arrangement than one by which six women of every seven are excluded from the joys and responsibilities of a mother. It is no defense of lawlessness to say that under similar circumstances the same remedy might be applied again. But only by divine revelation through the Prophet authorized to speak for the Lord. (See Jacob 2:27-30; D. and C. 43:2-6.)

2 Ne 14 2VERSE 2

2 Ne 14 2The Branch. This is generally understood to refer to the Messiah. But see 2 Ne. 3:5; 10:1; Is. 60:21; 61:3.

2 Ne 14 3VERSE 3

2 Ne 14 3Holiness has been defined as "conformity to the nature and the will of God, whereby a Saint is distinguished from the unrenewed world; and is not actuated by their principles and precepts, nor governed by their maxims and customs." (Cruden's Concordance under "Holiness.") Israel was commanded to be a "holy nation, a sanctified nation, a nation of saints." (Ex. 19:6) The followers of our Savior are in the New Testament often referred to as "saints," which indicates that they were regarded as sanctified, separated from the "world" by their purer faith and more perfect practices. In this remarkable prophecy the prediction is made that, in the latter days, when Israel and Judah (v. 4) are being gathered in from the dispersion, those who remain after having passed through the fiery trials, whether in Zion or Jerusalem, will be known as "holy,"—that is, as "Saints."

2 Ne 14 3Written Among the Living. Mme. Lydia M. von Finkelstein Mountford, in her little gem of a book, "Jesus Christ in His Homeland," explains that the book of the living in the Roman empire, at the time our Savior was born, was a volume in which property owners were registered as living, when they had fulfilled their duties, as required of them. The book was Caesar's "Book of Life." Mme. Mountford tells an incident to which she was an eyewitness during the late reign of the Turks in her homeland, Palestine. The occasion was one of registration of tax payers. A man brought up, she says, weak and feeble. In fact, he was carried on a stretcher. The tax gatherer asked the secretary to ascertain his name and to write it down, if he was worthy. Then he asked:

2 Ne 14 3"Hast thou written it?"

2 Ne 14 3The Secretary: "Yes, my lord, for it is worthy to be written in the Book of Life."

2 Ne 14 3"Then," the narrator says, that man raised himself up on his elbow, and he looked at us with wondrous eyes and said: "Praise and thanks unto God, my name is written in the Book of Life." Whereupon he again reclined upon the stretcher and passed away, peacefully and happy. This may help us to understand, better, this expression, "written among the living," and also, "The Book of Life," and, "The Lamb's Book of Life," in Rev. 20:12 and 21:27.

2 Ne 14 4VERSE 4

2 Ne 14 4Spirit of Burning. The divine punishment is like a fire which separates the good from the evil, and then consumes the bad element while it purifies that which is good.

2 Ne 14 5VERSE 5

2 Ne 14 5A Defense. A protecting cover. But even so, the expression needs explanation. Perhaps a question might help. Suppose the prophet, seven hundred years before our era, had been carried away, in the spirit, to Ensign Peak and been permitted to see Salt Lake valley, as it is today, first at noon, then at sunset with its indescribable beauty of colors; then, let us suppose that he had seen the shadows of night fall, and, all of a sudden, the entire valley, as by a miracle, lit up by thousands of lights, the Temple radiant among all the glittering little stars; how would he have described this vision to a public not aware of electricity, and he, himself, just as ignorant in that particular as his hearers, except by saying just what he did say, that the Lord had created upon every dwelling place on Mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night; and that this marvelous beauty, this evidence of progress and prosperity, would be the protection of the glory of Zion? Or, suppose that the prophet had been standing on the Mount of Olives in Palestine, at a future day, viewing the New Jerusalem and the new temple across the Valley of Kedron, and the thousands of homes that will be there, even more wonderfully illuminated, as scientific marvels are multiplied; what could he have said in a description? That the modern glory of Zion reminded him of the cloud and the fire by which God anciently manifested his glory to Israel is certain. (See Ex. 13:21; 33:18; Numb. 9:15; 2 Chron. 5:13, 14 14. See also Ezek. 11:22, 23; 43:1-5)

2 Ne 14 6VERSE 6

2 Ne 14 6Shadow. An explanation of the "cloud" in the preceding verse.

2 Ne 14 6Covert. Means "shelter," the same as "defense."

GENERAL NOTES

Some scholars regard the first verse of this chapter as belonging to the preceding chapter. It might be well, therefore, to remember that the division of the Bible into chapters and verses is not part of the original arrangement of the sacred volume.

"The present division of the Scriptures into chapters and verses ... are not of divine origin, nor are they of great antiquity. The Vulgate was the first version divided into chapters: a work undertaken by Cardinal Hugo, in the 13th century, or, as Jahn thinks, by Langton, archbishop of Canterbury, 1227. He introduced the division into chapters only. The Hebrew Scriptures were similarly divided by Mordecai Nathan, in 1445, and in 1661 Athias added in his printed text, the division into verses. The New Testament was divided in the same way by Robert Stephens, who is said to have completed it in the year 1551, during a journey (inter equitandum), from Paris to Lyons.

"As might be expected, these divisions are very imperfect, and even when not inaccurate, they tend to break the sense and to obscure the meaning." (Bible Handbook, by Dr. Joseph Angus, p. 60)

Modern Jews use the present division of the Old Testament, but anciently, when referring to their sacred scriptures, they mentioned the subject of the paragraph, as, for instance "in Elias" (Rom. 11:2), which is 1 Kings 17:19. "The Bow" in 2 Sam. 1:18 refers to a poem so called, in the Book of Jasher, and, in "The Bush" (Mark 12:26, and other places), may refer to Exodus 3.

The Israelites had a yearly festival, at the end of their year, called the feast of ingathering (Ex. 23:16; 34:22), because on that occasion the people were required to give thanks especially for the harvest of fields and vineyards. It has been suggested that this song, or poem, was composed and recited on such an occasion. It contains a parable in which Israel is represented as a vineyard (as in Is. 3:14), and the consequences of the neglect of unfaithful keepers. (Matt. 21:33-41) As a literary composition, no less than as a prophetic utterance, it is regarded as an outstanding piece of sacred reading.
