Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 22

2 Ne 22 1VERSE 1

2 Ne 22 1Thine Anger is Turned Away. In this song we learn the important truth that the anger of God is not an ever burning flame, but that he is ready to comfort his children when they flee him.

2 Ne 22 3VERSE 3

2 Ne 22 3Wells of Salvation. Has reference to the feast of tabernacles, or tents, celebrated by the Jews at the close of the year in grateful remembrance of the goodness of God to their fathers in the wilderness, and to themselves, as evidenced by abundant harvests and other blessings in the land of Rest. (Lev. 23:34) The observance lasted for seven days. A libation was an important part of the services every day. It was at the close of such a festival that our Lord stood on the temple ground and invited the people to come unto him. It was the last day. The water was perhaps flowing gently in the trench. But the crowd was about to disperse. Each one had to go to his own home and leave the life-giving stream for, perhaps, less pleasant water containers. Then Jesus cried with a loud voice: "If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his innermost parts shall flow rivers of living water." You need not thirst, because you cannot always stay by this stream. (John 7:37, 38. Comp. John 4:14) Jesus spoke of the spirit which they that believe on him should receive. (John 7:39)

SC2 Ne 22 42 Ne 22 52 Ne 22 6VERSES 4-6

SC2 Ne 22 42 Ne 22 52 Ne 22 6Declare His Doings. The people are called upon to praise the Lord by proclaiming the greatness of his Name (4), which means his character; his works (5), in creation, and salvation, and his leadership in Zion (6).

GENERAL NOTES

This is called The Song of Moses and the Lamb. It was sung by Moses and the Children of Israel on the shore of the Red Sea, when the people had passed safely through the deep in which Pharaoh's armies had found a watery grave. (Ex. 15:1-18)

Compare Rev. 15:1-18. In the vision here recorded, John sees the transfigured throng at the shore of a sea of molten, fiery glass. They have overcome the "beast," his "image," his "mark," and "the number of his name." To the sweet accompaniment of harps, their harmonies are rolling out over the illimitable expanse:

"Great and marvelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, Just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints. Who shall not fear Thee, Lord, and glorify thy Name, And worship before thee? For thy judgments are made manifest."
