Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 25

2 Ne 25 1VERSE 1

2 Ne 25 1My People. Nephi realizes that the Prophet Isaiah, as, indeed, all the prophets, are difficult to understand, without special instruction. His people, he says, had not had the information needed because their works were works of darkness and abomination. (v. 2) We note that righteous living is necessary to a correct understanding of the Word of God, and especially the prophetic word.

2 Ne 25 1The Prophetic Language. We may here note some peculiarities of the prophetic language, "the manner of prophesying among the Jews."

2 Ne 25 1The prophets sometimes speak of future events as present, because they are present to them in their visions. For instance, "Unto us a Child is born." (Isa. 9:6)

2 Ne 25 1Similarly, they sometimes speak of future as already past. For instance: "He hath borne our grief and carried our sorrows; yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted." (Is. 53:4)

2 Ne 25 1Another peculiarity is that the prophets sometimes group together future events very much as one combines stars into constellations in the wide expanse, according to their apparent position to an observer on earth, rather than their actual distance from each other. We have seen an example of this in the prophecies (see Is. 10 and 11), where the prophet speaks of the deliverance from Assyrian captivity and the deliverance by the Messiah, still future, as closely following, one upon the other. This peculiarity is very striking in the prophecies of our Lord concerning the destruction of Jerusalem and the "end of the world."

2 Ne 25 1Nephi claimed to understand the prophecies, not only because he, himself, had the Spirit of prophecy (v. 4), but because he had lived in Jerusalem and was familiar with the religious observances of the Jews, their national customs, habits and history (v. 5), and the topographical surroundings of Jerusalem (v. 6). Without this knowledge the prophetic word is to a large extent unintelligible.

2 Ne 25 1Prophecies are often uttered in figurative, or symbolic, terms. Some examples are here offered:

2 Ne 25 1Arm means strength, or power, and arms made bare, power manifested. (Is. 52:40)

2 Ne 25 1Babylon stands for an idolatrous, persecuting enemy of the people of God. (Is. 47-12; Rev. 17, 18)

2 Ne 25 1Beast means a worldly power, especially a tyrannical, usurping government. (Dan. 7:3; Ezek. 34:28)

2 Ne 25 1Dragon (Job 7:12 "Whale," should probably be crocodile) is often a symbol of Egypt (Is. 27-1, 51:9, Ezek. 19:3) and therefore in Rev. 12:3 and 13:1 refers to some oppressive worldly power.

2 Ne 25 1Book, received, is the symbol of inauguration (2 Kings 11:12, "testimony,"); a book written within and without is a list of a long series of events; sealed is said of what is not yet revealed; to eat a book is to study it closely (Jer. 15:16; Rev. 10:9) The Book of Life, see Ezra 2:62; Rev. 3:5.

2 Ne 25 1Breastplate is a symbol of something that is a protection for a vital part of the body, and which, at the same time, strikes terror into the breast of an adversary, (Is. 59:17; 1 Thess. 5:8; Rev. 9:9).

2 Ne 25 1Crowns, symbol of delegated authority (Rev. 19:12, here, literally, "diadems.").

2 Ne 25 1Earthquakes, violent agitations (Joel 2:10; Hag. 21:22; Rev. 6:12).

2 Ne 25 1Forehead, written on, was the mark of a priest (Lev. 19:28); or a servant or a soldier (Rev. 22:4). Priests of idols wore a mark, a name or a number (Rev. 13:16-18).

2 Ne 25 1Harp, a symbol of praise and joy (Ps. 33:2; Rev. 14:3).

2 Ne 25 1Heaven and Earth, has a threefold sense. It means the material world, perceptible to our senses; sometimes it refers to the moral invisible world, and sometimes to the political organizations of the world. When used in this sense, heaven is the symbol of rulers and earth of subjects (Matt. 24:29).

2 Ne 25 1Horn, stands for Power and regal dignity. (Dan. 8:9; Rev. 13:1)

2 Ne 25 1Virgins (Rev. 14:4) stands for faithful worshipers, not corrupted by false doctrines and empty ceremonies. As the "woman" in Rev. 12, clothed with the Sun, having the moon under her feet and on her head a crown of twelve stars, undoubtedly refers to the Church of Christ, which is represented as adorned with the righteousness of which our Redeemer is the Author; standing on the Mosaic dispensation with its reflected light, and sustaining, as a crown of stars, the rule of the twelve Apostles; so "women" here (Rev. 14:4) is the symbol of anti-christian churches, and they who are not polluted by the doctrines and practices of such organizations, are "virgins."

2 Ne 25 1These few examples, chiefly from Dr. Angus' Bible Handbook, illustrate the nature of the symbolic terms used by the Prophets. They are, as it were, hieroglyphs made audible by means of the spoken word. The student should be cautioned, however, against the not uncommon mistake of regarding as hieroglyphic, or figurative, terms which are used in their literal sense. He needs the constant guidance of the Spirit of the Lord not to err in this respect.

2 Ne 25 1In this introduction Nephi explains that he has not been prompted to teach his people many things concerning the manners of the Jews, including, of course, the prophetic terms (v. 2), because their works were the works of darkness. That he refers to his people in the Land of Nephi, and not to the Jews in Palestine, must be inferred from the fact that he, in verse 5, makes this statement, "I know that the Jews do understand the things of the prophets." He, therefore speaks of another class of people, gathered around him in his new American settlement.

2 Ne 25 3VERSE 3

2 Ne 25 3My People. This surmise is strengthened by this verse, in which he regards all "that shall receive hereafter these things which I write," as his people.

2 Ne 25 4VERSE 4

2 Ne 25 4My People, which are of the House of Israel. Here again a distinction seems to be made between his people, which were the descendants of Jacob, the Patriarch, whose other name was Israel (Gen. 32:28), and those of some other origin. But who could they be?

2 Ne 25 4It would not be wise to speak categorically on a subject of which Revelation is silent and the sciences still are groping in the dark. But it is not to anticipate revelation, nor to assume scientific superiority, to call attention to the promise of the Lord to the Brother of Jared, when he instructed him to cross over to the western world: "There,"—in what to us is America—"I will raise up unto me of thy seed, and the seed of thy brother, and they who shall go with thee, a great nation. And there shall be no greater nation than the nation which I will raise up unto me of thy seed, upon all the face of the earth." (Ether 1:43) Nor would it be unreasonable to suppose, in view of this marvelous divine promise, that the Jaredites, although a vast number of them were destroyed at Ramah, were scattered, at that time, 19 hundred years after their arrival here, all over the American continents, as were the Indians at the time of the discovery, in the 15th century. If this assumption is correct—and there can be little doubt about that—we may also assume that some of them joined the Nephites in their settlements and the Lamanites in theirs, as well as the Mulekites, as these joined the people of Mosiah (Omni 19). Others may have rejected the message of Nephi and remained idolators. Conditions in the first settlements of both the Nephites and the Lamanites may have developed during the first fifty years very much as they did during the first few decades in Utah after the colonization by President Brigham Young and the Pioneers. That would explain some difficult passages in the Book of Mormon.

2 Ne 25 4But, whoever they were, neither they nor the descendants of Nephi and his followers, had been instructed sufficiently to understand the prophets (vv. 4 and 6). For that reason Nephi wrote this discourse, this "prophecy," (v. 7), for the benefit of future generations. (v. 8)

2 Ne 25 7VERSE 7

2 Ne 25 7Men Shall Know of a Surety. At the time when a prophecy is fulfilled, it is understood perfectly, and the time is made known by the fulfillment. Nephi here enunciates a principle recognized by Bible students, viz., that it is the fulfilment of a prophecy that is the evidence of its divine inspiration and origin. Were this not so, every reader of future generations would, undoubtedly, be deprived of the strongest possible evidence of the divine inspiration of the Word of God. (Comp. Is. 42-26; 43:9)

2 Ne 25 9VERSE 9

2 Ne 25 9Destroyed. We note, "destroyed from generation to generation." "Destroyed" is sometimes read, as if it could only mean "exterminated." But it is evident that a race cannot be exterminated more than once, and not from generation unto generation. "Destroyed," however, also means "brought to ruin," "overthrown," or even very much "damaged," as a dress torn or hopelessly soiled. In this sense we may say that a race can be "destroyed" from generation to generation, although it does not cease to exist. We note especially "destroyed" in verse 10.

2 Ne 25 10VERSE 10

2 Ne 25 10"The Land of Jerusalem." Palestine. Note again, that although they were to be "destroyed," they "shall be restored again to the land of their inheritance." They were never to be exterminated.

2 Ne 25 12VERSE 12

2 Ne 25 12Heaven and Earth. If this expression is to be understood in its figurative, prophetic meaning, it stands for all mankind, both rulers and subjects. (Notes under v. 1)

2 Ne 25 12They will Reject Him. Nephi ascribes the rejection of Jesus by the leaders of the people to their iniquities, their hardness of heart, and their pride (stiff necks).

2 Ne 25 12(1) Their Iniquities. Caiaphas was the high priest at the time of the crucifixion, and presided over the sanhedrin, the Jewish tribunal that condemned Jesus to death. This Caiaphas was the son-in-law of Annas, who had been the high priest but had been deposed by the Roman authorities for conduct unbecoming his exalted office. But the Jews generally did not recognize the authority of the Romans to depose the high priest. He was, therefore, considered the actual head of the council, and influenced its decisions. These men were Sadducees. As such they virtually denied a life after this and the obligation to conform to moral standards. They were tolerant enough in questions of doctrine, and indifferent to the opposition encountered by the Pharisees from time to time; but they were financially interested in the cattle market and the tables of the money changers by which the temple grounds were desecrated. When Jesus, possibly for the second time (comp. Matt. 21:12, 13, Mark 11:15-18, Luke 19:45, 46, with John 2:13-17), drove the cattle and cattle vendors from the temple grounds and spilled their money all over the place, they gladly paid Judas a pittance for delivering him into their hands secretly, so as not to risk a popular demonstration in his favor such as that which had stirred up the people of Jerusalem at his triumphant entrance into the city a few days previously. (2) Hardness of Heart. This was an conspicuous as their iniquity. For although they had no convicting proof of their accusations, and were told so repeatedly, they insisted on the death of Jesus as a blasphemer. When Pilate suggested that he be set free on the strength of a humane holiday custom, they seemed panic-stricken and clamored for the liberation of a real criminal. Their hearts were hard as flint against the Holy One of Israel. And not only did they demand his death. They wanted to make sure that his end would be the most degrading and painful imaginable. We can hear Pilate, trying to calm the raving mob, crying that Jesus was innocent, and telling their leaders that if they wanted an innocent man crucified, they would have to do it themselves. (John 19:6.) They might have put our Lord to death by stoning, as, later Stephen suffered martyrdom. But stoning was, comparitively speaking, a humane mode of capital punishment. It was crucifixion they wanted, and they finally obtained their object by intimating to Pilate that he might be accused in Rome of disloyalty to Caesar, if he should set Jesus free. (John 19:8-16.) (3) Pride. The officials, both Sadducees and Pharisees, were deeply wounded in their pride by the appearance of Jesus on the temple grounds, in the power and spirit of Elijah of old; previously he had broken off all connection with the Pharisees as a sect, by denouncing them publicly as usurpers of the "seat of Moses," by their additions to his law. He had accused them of love of adultation and flattery, of hypocrisy, folly and blindness, of the teaching of false doctrines, and of being the cause of the destruction of Jerusalem and the temple, now near at hand, by their persecution of the messengers of God. (Matt. 23) Their besetting sin was vanity and pride, as noted by Nephi. Wherefore Jesus says, in part: "Be not ye called Rabbi, for one is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are brethren. And call no man your father upon the earth; for one is your Father, which is in heaven. Neither be ye called masters; for One is your Master, even Christ. But he that is greatest among you shall be your servant. And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased, and he that shall humble himself shall be exalted. (Matt. 23:8-12)

2 Ne 25 13VERSE 13

2 Ne 25 13For the Space of Three Days. The commonly accepted understanding is that Jesus died on the cross on Friday, the 14th of Abib, shortly after 3 p.m., and that, as soon as the necessary permission had been obtained, he was hurriedly wrapped in a shroud and laid in the tomb of Joseph of Arimathaea. Saturday, Abib the 15th which began Friday at sunset and ended at sunset Saturday, was the Sabbath. All were then resting. But when the Sabbath ended, some of the women brought the necessary ingredients for the preparation of the body. (Luke 24:1-8) Sunday, Abib the 16th, began at sunset Saturday. Early Sunday morning about sunrise, Mary of Magdala came to the tomb and found it empty. Shortly afterwards the other women came with the ointment and also found that the Master was not there. (John 20:1-16; Luke 24:1-10) According to this account, the body of Jesus was in the tomb part of Friday, all Saturday and about half of the Sunday. This would, it is argued, in Hebrew colloquialism, be three days-and-nights.

2 Ne 25 13There may be a difference of opinion as to the day of the crucifixion and burial, but that our Lord rose on the first day of the week, our Sunday, is the universal opinion, founded both on tradition and history. Sunday was the day on which the first Christians came together for Christian worship. (Acts 20:7; 1 Cor. 16:2) The resurrection of Christ was their only known reason for so doing. The day was, therefore, called the "Lord's Day." (Rev. 1:10) Pliny, in the first or beginning of the second century, reported to the emperor, Trajan, that the Christians had a certain day on which they sang a hymn to Christ as a God. That could not have been on the Mosaic Sabbath. Justin Martyr (140 A. D.) states positively that the Christians had the custom of assembling the first day of the week, because on that day our Lord rose from the dead, and Tertullian (200 A. D.) speaks of Sunday as the day of resurrection of our Lord (die Domini resurrexionis.—Critical and popular Bible Encyclopaedia, Lord's Day).

2 Ne 25 13The change from the seventhday to the firstday Sabbath at the end of the old dispensation was as natural as it was inevitable. As good Jews, the first Christians kept the established day of rest. But that day ended at sunset, at six p.m., say, and the first day began at the same hour. They, therefore, had ample time, on the first day, before retiring, to gather in the homes, for Christian worship, for love feasts, for testimonies concerning the crucified and resurrected Savior. And that is just what happened. Thus, the day after the Sabbath became, naturally, the Lord's day, and the Christian Sabbath, from the very first day of the resurrection.

2 Ne 25 13The Mosiac Sabbath was instituted in commemoration of the work of God in creation (Ex. 31:15-17); the Lord's day, similarly, is a remainder to us that the resurrection of Jesus was the beginning of a new creation, affecting the entire universe, (Rom. 8:19-23)—the beginning of new heavens and a new earth (Is. 65:17-25; 2 Pet. 3:13, 14; Rev. 21:1-5).

2 Ne 25 14VERSE 14

2 Ne 25 14Jerusalem Shall be Destroyed. This was done by the Romans under Titus, 70 A. D., Jesus, who foresaw what the consequences of Hebrew politics would be, wept when he took a last look at the city, before his passion. And well might he weep. The city at the time of the destruction, was overfilled with visitors who had come to celebrate a yearly festival. Suddenly the gates were closed and the multitudes were trapped. Food supplies were consumed. A difference of opinion between the dominant parties, concerning the defense, developed into a civil war. Pharisees, Sadducees and Zealots fought each other, with sword and fire. The Zealots took charge of the temple grounds and massacred the priests at the altars. When the food supplies were finished, famine added horrors to the situation. Cases of cannibalism were observed under heart-rendering circumstances, as when mothers were slaying their own children. When, finally, the Roman soldiers gained an entrance into the city, they strewed the streets with corpses. It is estimated that 1,100,000 perished in this insane conflict. When Titus was lauded for his victory, he disclaimed all honor for it. He was, he said, only an instrument of divine retribution.

2 Ne 25 15VERSE 15

2 Ne 25 15The Jews Shall be Scattered. Although the city and the temple had been destroyed and thousands of the inhabitants were driven into foreign lands, some of the exiles returned sixty years later, led by a pretender to Messianic authority. These tried again to defy Rome. A war began which lasted two years. It is claimed that 580,000 of the people fell in this conflict, besides those who perished by famine, pestilence and fire. At that time, it is said, fifty cities were totally destroyed, and Judaea was left a desert. From that time Jews have been a foreign element in nearly every country on earth, in Asia, in Europe, in Africa and America. According to a decree of Emperor Hadrian, Jews were prohibited, on the pain of death, to enter Jerusalem.

2 Ne 25 17VERSE 17

2 Ne 25 17The Second Time. The restoration from the servitude in Egypt was the first.

2 Ne 25 17Marvelous Work and Wonder. (Isa. 29:13, 14) Refers to the restoration of the Church previous to the restoration of Israel in the latter days.

2 Ne 25 18VERSE 18

2 Ne 25 18He Shall Bring Forth His Words. The Book of Mormon and the Latter-day revelations. One of the great objects of the Book of Mormon is to convince the Children of Israel that Jesus, whom their ancestors rejected, is the promised Messiah. It should not be difficult for well-informed, intelligent descendants of Abraham to accept Jesus as their Messiah, their deliverer; for, wherever his principles have been accepted and his divine authority acknowledged, liberty, religious and civil, has prevailed. In 1654 A. D. the first Jews in the United States, 23 in number, arrived in what was then New Netherlands. They came from Brazil, to escape persecution there, and found a warm welcome and perfect freedom here. And since then, wherever American democracy has prevailed over autocracy, the Jews have been on an equal level with other citizens. War on the American democracy is, therefore, in many places, also an attack on the Jews and the Messiah, the divine Author of human freedom.

2 Ne 25 19VERSE 19

2 Ne 25 19In Six Hundred Years. We are here informed that prophets had stated that the Messiah would come 600 years from the exodus of Lehi (comp. 1 Ne. 10:4; 19:8). This, however, does not furnish a clue to the actual year of the birth of Jesus, counting, for instance from the year of the foundation of Rome, which is generally given as 753B. C. The popular view is that the Nativity occurred 4 years, but some scholars place it as much as from 5 to 7 years, before Christ.

2 Ne 25 19His Name Shall Be Jesus Christ. See Article on "The Sacred Name," 2 Ne. 10.

2 Ne 25 20VERSE 20

2 Ne 25 20Heal the Nations. Refers to the incident related in Numbers 21:4-9, where we read that Moses, under divine instruction, had a serpent made of "brass," also translated "copper," on which repentant Israelites, bitten by poisonous serpents as a punishment for rebellion against Moses, might "look and live." The serpent was a type of Jesus (John 3:14, 15). It was kept for at least seven hundred years, as a national relic, and was destroyed by Hezekiah, king of Judah, because it had become an object of idoltry. (2 Kings 18:4) And when he had it broken up, he called it, in derision, "nehushtan," a "thing made of brass."

2 Ne 25 20Nephi, commenting on this incident in the wilderness, refers to the twelve tribes as "nations." To his prophetic eye the tribes represented the nations of the world, and the serpent was the picture of their crucified Savior. (See notes on "the prophetic language" under verse 1) But the expression is also literally correct. For the tribes of Israel were, in fact, so many little republics, each independent of the rest, except as common interests dictated cooperation. The book of Judges gives ample evidence for this proposition. (See 8:1-3; 12:1-3; 18:1-12 and chapter 20)

2 Ne 25 20None Other Name. Comp. Phil. 2:9-12. There is only one Savior, one Mediator between man and God. That is Jesus Christ. And the testimony of St. Paul is that the day will come when every tongue shall "confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the glory of God the Father." And this, he says, applies to everything, in heaven, on earth and under the earth. (Phil 2:10)

SC2 Ne 25 212 Ne 25 22VERSES 21-22

SC2 Ne 25 212 Ne 25 22These Things. Refers to the Book of Mormon. Nephi discloses important information in these paragraphs.

SC2 Ne 25 212 Ne 25 22First, he says God has promised him that his writings would be preserved and handed down to his seed, from generation to generation, in fulfilment of a promise given to Joseph, that "his seed should never perish as long as the earth should stand." Just when Joseph received that promise is not stated, but see the blessings of Ephraim and Manasseh (Gen. 48:15, 16) and of Joseph (Gen. 49:22-26). Jacob said to Joseph, in part:

SC2 Ne 25 212 Ne 25 22"The blessings of thy father have prevailed Above the blessings of my progenitors, Unto the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills, They shall be on the head of Joseph."

SC2 Ne 25 212 Ne 25 22It is evident that Nephi did not expect that his descendants would ever be exterminated, and they never were. He believed that the promise to Joseph would be fulfilled in his descendants, to the end of days.

SC2 Ne 25 212 Ne 25 22Secondly, Nephi tells us that his writings would be distributed from generation to generation, as long as the earth shall stand, and that the distribution would be under the special direction of God. This is a natural deduction, since He alone knows for certain where the descendants of Joseph would be from generation to generation.

SC2 Ne 25 212 Ne 25 22Third, Nephi tells us that the nations, to whom these writings become known, will be judged according to the moral and ethical standards they reveal. This is one reason why the statesmen of the world would do well to study the Book of Mormon. For a day will come, when the Lord shall return in glory, at the beginning of the Millennium. Then he will summon the nations before him. Their records will be scrutinized, and a place will be assigned to each in accordance with the treatment accorded "one of the least" of these. For there is a national, as well as an individual, day of Judgment. (Matt. 25:31-46)

2 Ne 25 23VERSE 23

2 Ne 25 23By Grace We are Saved. The doctrine here stated is, salvation is freely given and cannot be "earned." We find the same thought in the Doctrine and Covenants (6:13): "There is no gift greater than the gift of salvation." And the Apostle Paul recognizes the difference between earnings and favors, when he says that the "wages of sin" is death, but the "gift" of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. (Rom. 6:23) We can earn death, but we must receive life as a gift, or not at all.

2 Ne 25 23The Prophet Joseph explains that to be saved is to be placed beyond the reach of all enemies, even death, and that this can be done only through the Priesthood. (Hist. of the Church, Vol. 5, p. 403)

2 Ne 25 23A seemingly hopeless discussion has been carried on by philosophers, as well as theologians, on the question of the ability of man to earn salvation, and his responsibility in case of failure to do so. Great thinkers, such as Kant, Schleiermacher, Hegel, Ritschi, and many others, have contributed their conclusions on the all-important problems presented. The old notion that human history is but a marionette show in which the strings are being pulled by some one behind a screen to make the dolls move, has been abandoned long ago, for the only rational concept presented by the revelations of God, that the human family is his children, being fostered under his care and gradually educated for their eternal testing. God, because of his love, has provided this course for us, and, as the Apostle says (1 John, 4:19): "We love God, because he first loved us"; but where there is genuine mutual love, the question of "wages" is far in the background. Love engenders love, but if our love of God is real, it finds expression in unselfish service of our fellowmen. (1 John 3:17; 4:20, 21) In recent years the gospel doctrine of the Fatherhood of God, with the infinite love and the immeasurable responsibility of a Divine Father, possessing unlimited power and wisdom, has replaced the contradictory notions of God of former ages.

SC2 Ne 25 242 Ne 25 252 Ne 25 262 Ne 25 27VERSES 24-27

SC2 Ne 25 242 Ne 25 252 Ne 25 262 Ne 25 27The Law of Moses. Nephi here explains that he and his people are keeping the Law of Moses, while, at the same time, they are looking forward to the coming of Christ, with faith, as the true Source of the remission of sins and life eternal. He argues that the very purpose of the Law is to prepare the people for the coming of Christ to fulfil its requirements, in his life and death.

2 Ne 25 26VERSE 26

2 Ne 25 26We Talk of Christ. The central truth in the Mosaic dispensation was the doctrine of the Messiah, the Christ, as it is in the new dispensation, the Gospel. Hence Nephi: We talk of, we rejoice in, we preach and prophesy of Christ, and we write according to our prophecies for the instruction of our children concerning to what Source "they may look for a remission of their sins."

2 Ne 25 26From this point of view we may regard the Old and New covenants as grades of the same school, the second being the more advanced of the two. Or, we may say that the Law is the Gospel foreshadowed, promised, and that the Gospel is the Law substantiated, realized, fulfilled.

2 Ne 25 26The tabernacle (and, later, the temple) with its dividing veil, furniture and Glory of the Lord, represented the entire universe, visible and invisible, and was the palace of the King, the center of the divine government.

2 Ne 25 26The sacrifices were the visible representations of the first and chief principle of true religion and worship, the doctrine of the atonement. They were impressive lessons on the holiness, Fatherly love, justice, and responsibility of God in the government of his children; and of the obligations of man to him, as members of his household.

2 Ne 25 26The festivals, weekly, monthly, yearly and cyclic, were further reminders of the duty to serve God by taking care of his children. They were sermons on true worship, as expressed in human fellowship and brotherly love. (See 1 John 3:14-28)

2 Ne 25 26The education furnished by these two grades, is necessary for the advancement of man to the next dispensation—the Millennial reign of the Son of God on earth.

2 Ne 25 26But although the Law and the Gospel are parts of the same divine educational system, and therefore one, they present marked differences. It is the differences between Moses and Jesus, Sinai and Calvary; or, the destructive forces of nature that passed before Elijah at Mt. Horeb, and the still small voice in which the prophet immediately recognized the presence of God. (I Kings 19:9-18)

2 Ne 25 26A more detailed review of the Mosaic dispensation may be offered here.

2 Ne 25 26The Tabernacle. This was the temple of Israel in the wilderness, the sanctuary of Jehovah, as their God, and his palace as their King. Here he dwelt, here he manifested himself. It was a rectangular structure, representing heaven in the "holy of holies," and earth in the "holy place." (Heb. 19-18) In the holy of holies were the ark of the covenant, surmounted by cherubim with outstretched wings, and on this throne, the Shekina, the Glory of God, rested. Near the ark were the tables of stone with the ten commandments, a pot of manna, and the rod of Aaron. In the holy place were the golden altar of incense, the golden candlestick, and a table on which bread was placed daily. (Ex. 25)

2 Ne 25 26The Temple. Later, the temple of Solomon was built according to the same pattern. It was similarly furnished, and, in addition, it had a great baptismal font resting on twelve oxen of copper. This was placed in the court of the priests "on the right side of the east end, over against the south," near the altar of burnt offering.

2 Ne 25 26The Priests. All the priests were the descendants of Levi, and they were all devoted to the public service. (Num. 4:1-20) During the reign of David they were divided into three divisions, of which one assisted the priests, another furnished the singing and music, and the third acted as porters and guards of the temple.

2 Ne 25 26Sacrifices formed one of the chief parts of the divine service under the Mosaic Law. From the vegetable kingdom were offered flour, cakes, parched corn, frankincense, and wine for drink offering. The animals offered were oxen, sheep, goats, and, in some cases, doves, but never fishes. Human sacrifices were expressly forbidden. (Lev. 18:21; 20-25)

2 Ne 25 26Sacrifices were either an expression of gratitude for blessings received, or an expiation for sin. There were, therefore, thank-offerings, sin- or trespass offerings and burnt-offerings. The latter were offered in atonement for sin in general. They were consumed by fire and were presented daily. Sin-offerings were atoning for sins of commission, and trespass-offerings for sins of omission. (Lev. 7:1-10) In all these the principle of vicarious suffering is illustrated. The life of the victim was substituted for the life of the offender. In the thank-offering a bull, a sheep, or a goat was slain. The blood was sprinkled around the altar. The breast and shoulder belonged to the officiating priest. The rest appeared on the festive table in the circle of the family and their friends. (Lev. 6:1-17; 1 Cor. 10:18) Sacrifices for special favors were called "sacrifices of praise."

2 Ne 25 26By all this shedding of blood, God impressed upon the minds of the people his abhorrence of sin and his demand for holiness in his worshipers.

2 Ne 25 26The Festivals of the Mosaic dispensation were equally significant. The weekly Sabbath—one day of every seven—was devoted to rest, worship and instruction. (Lev. 24:8; Num. 28:9) The day of the new moon was also a festival. (Num. 28:9) Three annual festivals were observed, when all the men were required to appear at the sanctuary. (Ex. 23:14-17) These were: (1) The Passover, in remembrance of the exodus from Egypt. This began on the 14th of Abib in the evening and lasted till the 21st of the month. It was during the beginning of this festival, the 14th of Abib, that our Lord instituted the Sacrament of the Supper. (Matt. 26:20-28; Mark 14:12-25; Luke 22:14-38; John 13:1-30; 1 Cor. 10:16-18, 11:23-29) (2) The fiftieth day after the second day of the passover week was Pentecost, the festival of weeks. (Ex. 23:16; Lev. 23:9-21) During this festival Jews came to Jerusalem from many countries. (Acts 2:2-11) (3) In the autumn, from the 15th to 23rd of the seventh month (Tisri, October) the feast of Tabernacles was celebrated. This was a festival of great joy. (Lev. 23:33-37)

2 Ne 25 26The Day of Atonement. The tenth day of this month was the day of Atonement, which was a day of fasting and confession of sins. It was on this day that the high priest entered the Holy of Holies and sprinkled the atoning blood before the Lord. (Lev. 23:26-32)

2 Ne 25 26The Sabbath Year and Year of Jubilee. Every seventh year was a sabbath year, a year of rest, as every seventh day of the week was a day of rest. (Ex. 23:10-11; Lev. 23:5-7; Deut. 31:10-13) and the year after every seven Sabbatic years, that is to say, every fiftieth year in the cycle of years was the year of jubilee. (Lev. 25:8-17) Then two Sabbath years, the 49th and the 50th, came together. (Lev. 25:8-17)

2 Ne 25 26Double Sabbaths. The weekly Sabbaths were similarly arranged. Once a year two Sabbaths came together, the 49th and the 50th day after the first offering of the first fruit of the harvest as a wave offering. The harvest was then completed, and bread made of the new flour, as well as new grain, were offered as a second first fruit. Many burnt offerings were also presented at this time. This festival was the "feast of weeks," also called Pentecost. (Lev. 23:15-21)

2 Ne 25 27VERSE 27

2 Ne 25 27Deadness of the Law. St. Paul uses this term in Rom. 4:19, 20, where he refers to the natural lack of physical vigor of Abraham and Sarah, at the time when they were promised a son and heir in their advanced age. The Apostle says the patriarch "staggered" not through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving glory to God. Further, "For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh"—that is, on account of the weakness of human nature—"God, sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh." (Rom. 8:3) And again: "For I through the Law am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God." (Gal. 2:19)

2 Ne 25 28VERSE 28

2 Ne 25 28The Prophets and the Law. To Nephi, as to the Apostle Paul, Christ is all in all. (Eph. 1:23; Col. 3:11) Whosoever denies Christ, denies also the Prophets and the Law. That is, the entire Scriptures. For anciently the Hebrews classed Joshua, Judges and Ruth, Samuel 1 and 2, Kings 1 and 2, Chronicles 1 and 2, Daniel, Ezra and Nehemiah, Esther and Job among the Prophets. Nephi was acquainted with some of these books, the socalled Nebiim Reshonim, as well as with the Law, the Torah. He, therefore, refers to the Scriptures as "The Prophets and the Law."
