Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 26

2 Ne 26 1VERSE 1

2 Ne 26 1He Shall Show Himself Unto You. This promise was fulfilled. See 3 Nephi 4:8-11.

2 Ne 26 1The Law which ye Shall Do. The story of the appearance of Jesus in the land of Bountiful, his ministrations and sermons, is recorded in 3 Ne. 11:1-27:12. This is the Law of the Gospel. It is the "fulness of the Gospel." It is a story that should be studied diligently and intelligently.

SC2 Ne 26 32 Ne 26 42 Ne 26 52 Ne 26 62 Ne 26 7VRESES 3-7. A Sign of the Birth of Jesus. The descendants of Nephi are here promised to receive notice of the birth of the Messiah, by unmistakable signs in the heavens. Comp. Alma 6:20; Hel. 14:3-13.

SC2 Ne 26 32 Ne 26 42 Ne 26 52 Ne 26 62 Ne 26 7Also of his Death and Resurrection. Hel. 14:14, 20-29. These signs were given in order that believers might have a strong foundation for their faith, and that doubters would have no excuse for their rejection of the Messiah. (Hel. 14:29)

SC2 Ne 26 32 Ne 26 42 Ne 26 52 Ne 26 62 Ne 26 7The Wicked Shall Perish. Persecutors are here referred to. To reject the prophets who came with a divine message, and to slay the Saints because they live righteous live, is wickedness in the last degree. The sinners are being warned even by the voice of nature, as heard in earthquakes, rolling thunders, lightnings, storm-winds and destruction. (v. 5-7)

SC2 Ne 26 32 Ne 26 42 Ne 26 52 Ne 26 62 Ne 26 7On the other hand, the righteous shall not perish with the wicked. Those who believe on Christ will be preserved. (v. 8) And not only that, but, for their sake, the destruction will be postponed for three generations and part of the fourth (v. 9), during which time the Son of Righteousness will heal them and cause them to live in peace. But, after that, when pride and foolishness and crime again abound, the destruction will no longer be postponed, but will come suddenly (v. 10). For, when the Spirit of the Lord ceases to "strive"; that is, to struggle, to argue with men, their fate is sealed. (v. 11)

SC2 Ne 26 122 Ne 26 13VRESES 12-13. What All Must Believe. That Jesus is the Christ. To regard him as a great Teacher, an incomparable Reformer, a perfect Man, is not to have faith in salvation. Both Jews and Gentiles must be convinced (1) that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God (v. 12); (2) that he manifest himself by the Power of the Holy Ghost (v. 13); that, in other words, he still is in the midst of those who worship him, an ever present Savior and Redeemer, according to his promise: "Lo, I am with you alway even unto the end of the world." (Matt. 28:20)

2 Ne 26 14VERSE 14

2 Ne 26 14The Last Days. The "latter days" is an expression which, in the parlance of the Old Testament prophets, refers to the reign of the Messiah. Here Nephi says he is speaking of the "last days," meaning the time after the bringing forth of "these things,"—the Book of Mormon—"unto the children of men." This makes the date of the appearance of the Book of Mormon an epochal date in history. The plates were delivered to the Prophet Joseph on September 22, 1827. In June, 1829, the translation was finished, and in the spring of 1830, the first printed edition was ready for distribution. Nephi, if I understand him correctly, regards this as the beginning of the last days of the Old, and the dawn of a new dispensation.

SC2 Ne 26 152 Ne 26 162 Ne 26 172 Ne 26 18VERSES 15-18

SC2 Ne 26 152 Ne 26 162 Ne 26 172 Ne 26 18The Sermon Out of the Ground. Nephi, in these paragraphs, as in the following chapter, applies the prophecy of Isaiah 29 to the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, giving us, probably, another illustration of the double application of a prophecy. (See notes on the prophetic language in the previous chapter). Also a hasty sketch of the history of his descendants in America—their dwindling in unbelief and their sufferings at the hands of gentiles, until they are brought down low into the dust (v. 15); yet, he says, their testimony will not be silenced; for the words of the righteous and the prayers of the faithful, on endurable records, will speak out of the ground. And although the voice will be weak, like a whisper from the grave, yet the Lord will give unto "him"—that is, unto the "righteous" (v. 15)—power to bring about a sudden change in the affairs of the children of men, by his testimony. (v. 16) The "book sealed up," refers clearly to the Book of Mormon.

2 Ne 26 19VERSE 19

2 Ne 26 19Smitten by the hand of the Gentiles. The story of the invasion of America by Europeans in the 16th century, is a tragic illustration of the truth of this prophecy. Witness the appearance in Mexico of Cortez with his 450 Spaniards and 1000 Tlascalan allies. From the very first of his contact with the natives, strife and slaughter ensued. Cortez, having occasion to leave Tenoctlican—the ancient name of the city of Mexico—left Pedro de Alvarado in charge. The Aztecs celebrated their May festival with the sacrifice of a handsome youth, as was their custom. This was, we may say, their pentecost. But the sacrifice was too horrible to Alvarado. Under the impression that the Aztecs were cowards, he fell upon the crowds of worshipers and massacred 600 of them, among whom were prominent chiefs. When Cortez returned, he found the people excited. Montezuma, practically a prisoner among the Spaniards, had been deposed, and his brother, Cuitlahuatzin, had been elected ruler in his stead. They now attacked the Spaniards. Spanish cannon swept the streets with terrible effects. Some idea of the losses of the Aztecs can be formed from the fact that the battle and the retreat cost Cortez 750 of his 1250 white soldiers and 4000 of his 6000 Tlascalan allies.

2 Ne 26 19But Cortez came back. On April 28, 1521, he began a siege of the city, which Dr. John Fiske compares to the siege of Jerusalem by Titus, on a smaller scale, of course. On August 18, Cortez was master of the situation. But then the city was a ruin. A new era had been inaugurated, in which the natives lost their culture, their literature, and arts, and were, practically, buried in the "dust."

2 Ne 26 19The first contact of the natives of Peru with the Spaniards under Pizarro and Almargro—both of whom were finally murdered in a feud between themselves—was a duplicate of the so-called conquest of Cortez. We shall not here repeat the almost incredible stories of cruelties perpetrated on the Indians by some of the early invaders. Suffice it to say that this prophecy was literally fulfilled. The Indians were everywhere sorely "smitten by the hands of the Gentiles."

SC2 Ne 26 202 Ne 26 212 Ne 26 222 Ne 26 23VERSES 20-23

SC2 Ne 26 202 Ne 26 212 Ne 26 222 Ne 26 23Churches and Secret Combinations. Gentiles, Nephi says, are "lifted up in their pride." They are, as it were, not looking where they are going; they lack humility, and as a consequence, they are stumbling. They are building up "churches," and combinations, in which they are preaching human wisdom for gain, and even committing works of darkness (vv. 21, 22). But, says Nephi, the "Lord God," is not working in the dark (v. 23). The result of the multiplication of churches and secret societies is envy, strife, and malice. (v. 21) Never progress.

SC2 Ne 26 242 Ne 26 252 Ne 26 262 Ne 26 272 Ne 26 282 Ne 26 29VERSES 24-29

SC2 Ne 26 242 Ne 26 252 Ne 26 262 Ne 26 272 Ne 26 282 Ne 26 29God Loveth the World. The substance of these paragraphs is this: Our Lord God never does anything but that which will benefit his children (v. 24). He loveth the world. He invites all to come unto him and get "milk and honey" freely. (v. 25; comp. Isa. 55:1, 2.) In other words, salvation is offered freely to all (vv. 27, 28); there shall be no "priestcrafts"—no preaching for money and fame, but only for the welfare of Zion. (v. 29; comp. 2 Ne. 10:5; 3 Ne. 16:10-20)

2 Ne 26 30VERSE 30

2 Ne 26 30All Men Should have Charity. See Moroni 7:47, 48. In Moroni 8:26 the word "love" is, probably, the same as "charity" here.

2 Ne 26 30Special attention is called to the brief but important explanatory note: "Charity is Love." That is the exact meaning of the Hebrew "ahabah." The word translated "charity" in I Cor. 13 is "agape," which also means "love" It is so rendered in Luke 11:42 and Rom. 5:5, 8. Why the authorized version has "charity" instead of "love" is not clear, unless the translators were anxious to avoid a word which, in their judgment, might be misunderstood by some readers. The version revised by the Anglo-American Bible Commission translates "love," as required by the original. Nephi, probably, uses the Hebrew word "ahabah."

2 Ne 26 31VERSE 31

2 Ne 26 31If They Labor for Money They shall Perish. That seems to be a difficult assertion, since our Lord himself (Luke 10:7) teaches that "the laborer is worthy of his hire," and James, the Apostle and (probably) brother of our Lord, in his epistle (5:4, 5) severely rebukes the wealthy property owners for withholding the wages due the laborers, contrary to the Mosaic law (Deut. 24:14 5), which prescribes that servants be paid promptly.

2 Ne 26 31"Thou shalt not oppress an hired servant that is poor and needy, whether he be of thy brethren or of thy strangers that are in the land within thy gates; at his day thou shalt give him his hire, neither shall the sun go down upon it; for he is poor and setteth his heart upon it; lest he cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee."

2 Ne 26 31Our Lord does certainly not condemn the wage system, either in Zion or elsewhere, if it is practised in righteousness, for the benefit of his people. But he puts the mark of disapproval upon the sordid materialism that has no higher aim than the making and hoarding of money for selfish purposes. We can, I believe, safely read: "If they labor for money"—only—"they shall perish."

2 Ne 26 32VERSE 32

2 Ne 26 32Men Should Not Murder. In the light of Christian ethics, as expounded by our Lord himself in his Sermon on the Mount (Matt. 5:21, 22; 3 Ne. 12:21, 23), this commandment prohibits not only the slaying of a fellow-being but the anger and hatred in which manslaughter originates. Our Lord says: "Whosoever is angry with his brother without cause shall be in danger of the judgment ... but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire." And John, the Apostle, in his First Epistle (3:15) explains this further: "Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer: and ye know that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in him."

2 Ne 26 32They Should Not Lie. There is, perhaps, no crime more common among men. In this paragraph, prevarication, as it is sometimes called, politely, is placed where it rightly belongs, between murder and stealing. Good old Wm. Paley, in his Philosophy, justly condemns even so-called "white lies," thus: "They always introduce others of a darker complexion." I have, he says further, "seldom known anyone who deserted truth in trifles, that could be trusted in matters of importance!" The habit of lying, he adds, "is easily extended to serve the designs of malice or interest; like all habits, it spreads indeed of itself."

2 Ne 26 32In other words, there may be harmless "white lies," as there are guns "not loaded"; but neither white lies nor guns are safe toys to play with.

2 Ne 26 32They Should Not Steal. All acts of dishonesty in the dealings of a person with God, with society in its entirety or in smaller lawful organizations, or with individuals, are theft. They are prohibited because they are an injury to our neighbor, or neighbors, or (in the case of stealing from God) to ourselves. Opinions may differ as to how far it may be permissible to go in the furtherance of personal interests, but our Lord has given us the well known, perfect, "golden" rule: "All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the Law and the Prophets." (Matt. 7:12; Luke 6:31, 3 Ne. 14:12)

2 Ne 26 32The following sentiments in the apocryphal book of Tobit may be interesting as showing the influence of the Mosaic law on the popular consciousness of the Israelites even before the Christian era:

2 Ne 26 32"Let not the wages of any man, which hath wrought for thee, tarry with thee, but give it him out of hand: for if thou serve God, he will also repay thee." "Do that to no man which thou hatest." "Give of thy bread to the hungry, and of thy garments to them that are naked. And according to thine abundance give him; and let not thine eye be envious, when thou givest alms." (Tob. 4:14, 16)

2 Ne 26 32The divine prohibition of theft is an endorsement of private property rights, and, under present conditions, no other arrangement seems desirable. Whatever may happen when the world is more advanced in civilization, moral and spiritual, is another question. Under present conditions, if there were no private property rights, enabling a person to lay by for future use such articles as he does not need immediately, everyone would have to be his own farmer, hunter, carpenter, tailor, shoemaker, etc., etc. Progress in any one line would be out of the question. But when everyone can devote himself to at least one line of pursuit and save, as his property, the results of his endeavors, and exchange them for the results of the labors of his neighbors, then a way is opened up out of barbarious primitivity to desirable civilization, with all its complex problems and responsibilities.

2 Ne 26 32They Should Not Take the Name of the Lord Their God in Vain. The Jews anciently interpreted this commandment in the Decalogue so literally that they ceased to pronounce the sacred Name entirely. Where it occurred in the inspired writings, they read "Adonai" (Lord), or "Elohim" (God) instead. But, as they, originally, did not have vowel points to indicate the correct pronunciation, this, in course of time, was entirely forgotten. Vowel points came into use in the early part of the sixteenth century, but at that time no one could tell for certain what points to put under the letters YHVH, which represented the sacred Name. This is still a debated question, but it is quite generally supposed that "YAVETH" best represents the original pronunciation. The meaning of the name is given by the Divine representative who spoke to Moses in the flaming bush, as "I AM"; i. e. "The Existent One" (Ex. 3:14). This conception of God, I understand, was expressed in an inscription in an Isis temple at Sais, Egypt, thus: "I am all that has been, that is, and that will be." (Smith's Bible Dictionary, under "Jah.") When, therefore, Moses came to the Pharaoh of the oppression in the Name of "I AM," that potentate had no excuse for pretending ignorance of the authority of the messenger (Ex. 5:1, 2).

2 Ne 26 32They Should Not Envy. "Envy" has been described as a disposition to grieve and fret at the supposed success of others. Asaph, the Hebrew poet, confesses: But as for me, my feet were almost gone; my steps had well nigh slipped. For I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked." (Ps. 73:3, 4) The seriousness of this sin may be realized when we reflect on some of its consequences. It was envy that caused Lucifer to fall. Because of envy Joseph was sold into Egypt. Envy caused almost perpetual strife between Ephraim and Judah. St. Paul (Rom. 1:29) says that when God gives rebellious trangressors over to a "reprobate mind," they become "full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity." Envy prepares the human heart as a dwelling place for evil impulses.

2 Ne 26 32They Should Not Have Malice. "Malice" is defined as a disposition to injure another. In law it is a wilfully formed plan to do damage to another. The Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 5:8) compares "malice" and "wickedness" to a leaven, and mentions as their opposites, "sincerity" and "truth." Malice, then, is a hideous sin. As all sin it is contagious. It has an influence for evil on all who come in close contact with the sinner.

2 Ne 26 32They Should Not Contend One With Another. In the language of the Scriptures to "contend" signifies to strive to reclaim a person from his evil ways, as in Prov. 29:9; or, to manifest an ardent zeal for the truth, as in Jude 3. It is the duty of a true Christian to "contend" for the faith, in this sense of the word. But it also signifies to "dispute," as in Acts 11:2, where we read that some church members "contended" with Peter, accusing him of having broken the Mosaic ceremonial law. It means even to "fight" in battle, as in Deut. 2:9. In this sense of the word it stands for an evil to be avoided. For "Contention" see Acts 13:39; Phil. 1:16, 1 Cor. 1:11; Tit. 3:9.

2 Ne 26 32They Should Not Commit Whoredoms. The marriage is of divine origin. The home is, of necessity, prior to any other organization on earth. As a matter of fact, all other social structures, including church and state, exist, or should exist, for the benefit of the home, and home life.

2 Ne 26 32There is no greater physical comfort to a man, or a woman, or to children who are growing up, than a well regulated home; no stronger stimulant to intellectual endeavors or spiritual achievements than the atmosphere of pure love, in which husband and wife, parents and children, live, in a home dedicated to the lord. Such a home is a true "Bethel," in which God's children communicate with their heavenly home, even in their pure dreams, as Jacob on his way to Pandan-Aram. No matter, if the pillow is but a stone, the presence of heavenly messengers make it the "gate," the entrance to heaven. (Gen. 28:17)

2 Ne 26 32The object of this commandment is to safeguard the home by the preservation of chastity, the foundation of it. Irregular indulgence against the commandment of God is destructive of the home. It depraves and corrupts the mind more readily and thoroughly than any other vice, and prepares the mind of the morally weakened individual for the commission of other crimes, even against the protests of conscience. Let us not forget the solemn warning of our Lord: "For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies." (Matt. 15:19) Our Lord places sins of lust among the greatest crimes known to man. He also places under this prohibition all acts that are calculated to inflame the mind, when he says: "Whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart." (Matt. 5:28, 3 Ne. 12:28) This is, by inference, a condemnation of filthy literature, pictures, conversation, indecent dances or gestures. Hear St. Paul on this subject: "Let no corrupt conversation proceed out of your mouth." (Eph. 4:29) Again: "Marriage is honorable in all, and let the bed be undefiled: for fornicators and adulterers God will judge. (Heb. 13:4)

GENERAL NOTES.

The commandments in this chapter (vv. 30-32) we may call the Decalogue as taught to the Nephites. The student of the Book of Mormon may wish to compare this summary with versions presented in the Exodus and the Deuteronomy. A comparison will bring out the important truth that the fundamental principles of morality are essentially the same in all ages.

THE DECALOGUE OF THE NEPHITES.

Conclusion. They should do none of these things; for whoso doeth them shall perish.

THE DECALOGUE OF THE EXODUS.

Commentators have displayed a vast amount of learning and ingenuity in attempting to prove that the narrative in Exodus concerning the giving of the Law is a mixture of but poorly connected fragments of various texts, and that parts of it, therefore, are now almost unintelligible. We need not feel alarmed at this proposition. The information offered in Exodus may have originated in different documents. That is neither improbable nor destructive of the historical value. But that the editing was careless, or that there appears to be impassable breaks in the text is not admitted.

Let us read the account in Exodus:

The First Interview of Moses with the Lord. In the Third month, the same day (the third), Israel arrived at Mount Sinai and camped there. Moses proceeded up on the mount, and was commissioned to take the message to the representatives of the people, that if they would obey God and keep his covenant he would make them his people before all others. Moses delivered this message.

Second Interview. The people agreed. Moses reported this fact, whereupon the Lord instructed him to "sanctify" them—that is, prepare them for a solemn meeting—and let them draw near to the mountain, but not too near. The assembly convened, all attired in their holiday raiments. The Lord descended. The mountain seemed to be afire. Lightnings struck, thunders rolled. Smoke rose as from a furnace. A trumpet sounded louder and louder, and the entire mountain shook, as if trembling in awe and fear. Moses and Aaron, who had been instructed to come up closer to the divine Presence, did so. Then the Lord spoke the "Words" in Ex. 20:1-17, and the two brothers, after some further instructions, went to the camp.

TWO TEXTS

No. 1

God's Spoken Decalogue

Introduction:

I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me;

And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments.

Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work:

But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor the stranger that is within thy gates:

For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.

No. 2

God's Written Decalogue

Introduction:

I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.

Thou shalt not bow down thyself unto them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me,

And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments.

Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work:

But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thine ox, nor thine ass, nor any of thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates; that thy manservant and thy maidservant may rest as well as thou.

And remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence through a mighty hand and by a stretched out arm: therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the sabbath day.

TWO TEXTS (Continued)

No. 1

God's Spoken Decalogue

—Ex. 20:2-17

God's Written Decalogue

No. 2

—Deut. 5:6-21

A Third Interview. Some time afterwards Moses was commanded to come to the mountain, accompanied by Aaron, Nadab, Abihu and seventy Elders. Moses recorded the Words of the Lord—the Ten commandments given orally during the second interview—built an altar, offered a peace offering and read the record to the people. Then he and the companions selected went to the mountain, where they were favored with a glorious vision of God. (Ex. 24:1-11)

After this manifestation Moses was called to come nearer, but alone. He was then privileged to remain in the divine Presence forty days and forty nights. It was during this time that he received the two tables of stone, a law, and commandments, which, the Lord says, I have written that thou mayest teach them. (v. 12) However, Moses destroyed these tables, when, on his way to the camp, he found that the people had returned to the indecent idolatry of the Egyptians. (Ex. 32:19, 25)

The Fourth Interview. After a humble and most patriotic intercession, Moses was directed to make another set of tables, on which, the Lord said, I will write the same Words which were upon the first set. Again the Lord descended and met his servant. Again Moses remained forty days and forty nights in the divine Presence. Again he received the Ten Commandments, this time on the stone tables he had brought with him. And this time, when he descended, his countenance shone, reflecting the glory of the divine Presence. (Ex. 34.)

These tablets were carefully guarded. They were deposited in the ark (Deut. 10:2-6; Heb. 9:4), where no profane hands could touch them.

Shortly before his death, Moses incorporated a copy of these commandments in the book known as the Deuteronomy. (Deut. 5:1-21; see also "God's Written Decalogue" above)

Two Texts or One? It is generally believed that the version of the Decalogue, proclaimed in the hearing of Israel during the 2nd interview with Moses is identically the same as that which was handed to him on the stone tables during the third and fourth interviews. Opinions are divided on that point. But it appears that there is a fundamental discrepancy in the two versions in the reasons given for the observance of the Sabbath. In the first text (see above) the motive emphasized for keeping the weekly Sabbath is of general application to mankind, wherever men live. God, we read, after 6 days of creation work, "rested" on the 7th day, wherefore he blessed that day and sanctified it, to be a day of godly rest. (Gen. 2:2, 3) The explanation in the second text is entirely different. It is chiefly of national application. The people are there enjoined to keep the seventh day holy, remembering that they had been in bondage in Egypt, undoubtedly overworked by hard taskmasters, and that they had been delivered by the mighty power of Jehovah, their God. The Decalogue, and more particularly the Sabbath commandment, was to be a reminder of the covenant between God and Israel. The tables of stone were therefore the "tables of testimony." (Ex. 34:29) In this view the version in Ex. 20 is identical with the law given to our first parents in the garden of Eden, when "God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it." (Gen. 2:3) It was the version that was proclaimed orally to Israel on the mountain. The other version, it is supposed, is the one that was engraved on the stone tables by the finger of God. It is of this version that Moses says: "These words God spoke unto all your assembly in the mount out of the midst of the fire ... and he added no more. And he wrote them on two tables of stone, and delivered to me." (Deut. 4:13; 5: 22. Comp. Neh. 9:13, 14)

If we understand that there are two decalogues in the Pentateuch, one for the guidance of the human race under the Patriarchal era, and one for the special guidance of Israel under the Mosaic era, we can also understand the attitude of St. Paul to the Mosaic Sabbath law. (See Rom. 14:5, 6; Gal. 4:9, 10) Although the Mosaic law came to an end, the Patriarchal law remained.

The Nephite Decalogue. The Ten Commandments as recorded in a condensed form in this chapter, are the substance of the Patriarchal version of the Law. They are arranged differently, and some are epitomized, but they are all there.

"All men should have charity." This is the first and second commandments in one brief sentence. "Charity" means "love," and he who loves God will have no other gods before him; nor will he make and revere images instead of God.

It will be remembered that our Lord on one occasion was asked by a lawyer: "Which is the great commandment in the Law? Jesus answered: "Thou shalt love the Lord, thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment." (Matt. 22:35-38) It is also the first and foremost in the Nephite version of the Law. Comp.: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God." (Deut. 5:6)

The Sabbath commandment comes next in the synopsis of Nephi. But it is condensed in one brief sentence: "Laborers in Zion shall labor for Zion." That means that laborers, whether engaged in physical and mental activities, or spiritual endeavors, will gladly give one day of every seven days to the Lord. That is, they will keep the Sabbath, if they work for Zion. If they labor for selfish ends, for money and fame, they will not have time to give God his day.

The fourth commandment is not specially mentioned in this brief synopsis of the Law by Nephi. But it is included in the Law of love. Our Lord, in his conversation with the lawyer, says, after having recited a second commandment from Lev. 19:18: "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself," that "On these two commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets. (Matt. 22:39, 40) And St. Paul (Rom. 13:10) says "Love is the fulfilling of the Law." We may well consider that the fourth commandment is included in the first: that love of God also means love and reverence of parents, who are the representatives of God in the family on earth.
