Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 27

2 Ne 27 1VERSE 1

2 Ne 27 1The Last Days. See 2 Ne. 26:14.

2 Ne 27 1Drunken with Iniquity. That is one of the signs of the last days. Comp. 2 Thess. 2:7-12, where the Apostle reminds the Saints that the "mystery of iniquity" was already then at work, and that when "he that letteth," which at that time was the imperial Roman power, "that Wicked" would be revealed, "whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming." St. Paul adds that God would send the followers of the wicked one, strong delusion, "that they should believe a lie," and thus perish.

2 Ne 27 2VERSE 2

2 Ne 27 2They Shall be Visited of the Lord of Hosts. Another sign is here given. There will be disturbances in nature, in the form of thunder, earthquakes, "noise," tempests, fire.

2 Ne 27 3VERSE 3

2 Ne 27 3Nations That Fight Against Zion. This seems to indicate that one of the signs of the end is war on Zion and persecution of her people, not only by hostile armies invading the countries known as Zion, but also by the stirring up of strife and rebellion against the heaven-inspired principles of government given for the protection of human liberty. All nations, we are told here, that fight against Zion, whether by open warfare or "undeclared war," will be as sleepers who feast in their dreams. They will awake as hungry and thirsty as ever. See 2 Ne. 26:15, 16 and notes.

2 Ne 27 6VERSE 6

2 Ne 27 6The Words of a Book. Nephi, in these paragraphs, describes the Book of Mormon and its coming forth in the latter days in the language of the Prophet Isaiah 29:9-12. It is the words of those that slumbered (v. 6). It is sealed. (v. 7 Comp. 2 Ne. 18:16) It is a revelation from God on the history of the world, from the beginning to the end thereof (v. 7). But the sealed part is not to be published in the "day of wickedness."

SC2 Ne 27 92 Ne 27 10VERSES 9 and 10

SC2 Ne 27 92 Ne 27 10In these paragraphs Nephi describes his vision of the interview of Martin Harris with learned men concerning the Book of Mormon. The Prophet Joseph was living on his little farm near Harmony, Pa. Here he studied the characters on the plates, and between December 1827 and February 1828 he had copied and translated some of them by the aid of the urim and thummim. Martin Harris visited the Prophet at this time and obtained a transcript of the glyphs with the translation. These he submitted first to Professor Anthon, New York, and then to Professor Samuel Mitchell. When he returned, he was more than ever convinced of the inspiration of Joseph Smith and his divine calling. (See Essentials in Church History, Joseph Fielding Smith, pp 62-64; also Introduction to the Study of the Book of Mormon, pp. 10-14.)

2 Ne 27 11VERSE 11

2 Ne 27 11The Sealed Part of the Book. Nephi has told us (v. 10) that the sealed part of the Book will come forth in the due time of the Lord, and that then the entire story of the world will be revealed. Here he adds some notable particulars. (1) The words of the book "which were sealed shall be read upon the housetops." An evident allusion to the radio, by means of which, in our day, the last days, the Gospel in word and song is proclaimed all around the world. (2) "They shall be read by the power of Christ." Compare the D. and C. 88:5-13, where we are told that the light of Christ is the light of the sun, and the power thereof, by which it was made; that this light also is in the moon and the stars, and the earth: "which light proceedeth forth from the immensity of space. The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things: which is the law by which all things are governed; even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things."

2 Ne 27 11It is a question whether this ubiquitous force, this omnipresent power of Christ, this cosmic light, manifested in the flashing lightnings and rolling thunders of Sinai, in the remarkable phenomenon that was a cloud at day and a flame at night, and which rested on the mercy seat in the Tabernacle and, later, in the Temple, was not the same mysterious forces which we now know as electricity, or atomic.

2 Ne 27 12VERSE 12

2 Ne 27 12Three Witnesses. The best commentary on this section is early Church history. In June, 1829, the translation of the Book of Mormon had been finished. Martin Harris had been promised, on condition of obedient faith, the privilege of being one of the three witnesses mentioned in this paragraph, as in 2 Ne. 11:3 and Ether 5:1-4 D. and C.see 5). Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer, naturally, hoped to be the other two.

2 Ne 27 12The translation finished, Joseph invited his parents to come to him for a visit. They gladly came. Martin Harris accompanied them. The evening of the day on which they arrived at the home of the Whitmers, was spent in reading portions of the translation. Shortly before the manifestation the Prophet and his three friends, in answer to fervent prayers, received the revelation in the D. and C. sec. 17, in which the Lord instructed them to have faith, and, after they had seen the plates, to testify thereof to the world, "that my servant Joseph Smith, Jr., may not be destroyed, that I may bring about my righteous purposes unto the children of men in this work." When the day came, Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris went out into the woods to engage in prayer. While they were so engaged, a heavenly messenger appeared, to Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer and showed them the plates, and gave them this assurance: "These plates have been revealed by the power of God, and they have been translated by the power of God. The translation of them which you have seen is correct, and I command you to bear record of what you now see here."

2 Ne 27 12Martin Harris, who had left his companions for private prayer, now was joined by the Prophet, and while the two were praying, the heavenly messenger again appeared with the volume and turned the leaves, whereupon Martin Harris arose and full of joy exclaimed: " 'Tis enough! 'Tis enough! Hosannah!"

2 Ne 27 12On some other occasion, before the plates had been finally delivered to the heavenly messenger, the Prophet Joseph had shown them to Christian, Jacob, Peter, Jr. and John Whitmer, Hiram Page, Joseph Smith, Sr., Hyrum and Samuel Smith, and they had handled as many plates as he had translated, and examined the engravings. They so testify.

2 Ne 27 12There are those who tell us that all this is deceit. What is their supposition? They pretend to believe—and they expect the rest of us to believe—that the Prophet Joseph, knowing that he had fabricated a story of three witnesses, succeeded in persuading his friends, in their full senses, that they were, actually and really, those three fictitious characters, and that they retained that conviction until death silenced their lips. Can any sane person believe that? Can anyone believe that it would have been possible for Cervantes to persuade one of his associates that he was actually Don Quixote, and another that he was Sancho Panza? If not, why should we suppose that the Prophet Joseph might have convinced Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris that they were three persons existing nowhere except in the imagination of the prophet? (For a detailed account of the witnesses, see Essent. of Church Hist., Joseph Fielding Smith, pp. 72-81.)

2 Ne 27 21VERSE 21

2 Ne 27 21Touch not the Things which are Sealed may indicate that the volume was divided into two parts, of which the Prophet, during the translation, needed to handle only the smaller.

2 Ne 27 24VERSE 24

2 Ne 27 24Him That Shall Read the Words. Refers to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Comp. vv. 12 and 15.

2 Ne 27 25VERSE 25

2 Ne 27 25Their Fear Towards Me. Their worship, which is but a repetition of precepts of mere human origin.

2 Ne 27 26VERSE 26

2 Ne 27 26A Marvelous Work and Wonder. Isaiah says that the Lord, because of the emptiness of the worship, would perform a "marvelous work and wonder," by means of which the wisdom of their wise and the understanding of their prudent would perish and be hid; and Nephi applies this language to the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, as the beginning of a marvelous work and wonder, the effects of which would be the humiliation of the wisdom and learning of the world.

2 Ne 27 27VERSE 27

2 Ne 27 27Wo unto Them That Seek Deep to Hide Their Counsel from the Lord. Some of the Jews, at the time covered by the prophecy of Isaiah, were planning an alliance with Egypt, hoping to hide their conspiracy from the prophet, and even from the Lord. "Who seeth us? Who knoweth us?" they asked. The Prophet answered that God does see and know their secret work, although done in the dark. Nephi applies this prophecy on the conditions prevalent during the last days, when men would have similar ideas about the indifference of the Almighty to human affairs. Nephi says he is not indifferent. He knows "all their works."

2 Ne 27 28VERSE 28

2 Ne 27 28Lebanon Shall Be Turned into a Fruitful Field. As a proof of the Divine power and interest in human affairs, Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field; and the fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest. That is to say, the fertility and productiveness of the country will be so great, with the blessings of God, that there will seem to be no difference between a natural forest and an artificial park. All will have the appearance of a well cultivated garden.

2 Ne 27 28This has been corroborated in our own day. In less than 25 years, the actual development of Palestine, agriculturally, commercially and intellectually, is the marvel of history. The Jews in Palestine, as the Latter-day Saints in America, have, literally, turned a desert into a garden. They have brought money, knowledge, idealism, and the type of people settled there is the best human material available for the building up of a country. Of the 400,000 Jews in Palestine about 10,000 are said to be immigrants from America. They have contributed much, particularly through investments, toward development of the orange groves, shipping and commercial companies and industries.

2 Ne 27 29VERSE 29

2 Ne 27 29The Deaf Shall Hear the Words of the Book. The blind shall see out of darkness. Those who pretended not to hear and not to see the inspiration of the Book of Mormon, will awake to the effects of it on the world. They will realize that outside the revelation of God there is spiritual darkness.

2 Ne 27 30VERSE 30

2 Ne 27 30The Meek Shall Increase. The humble, the lowly among men, shall feel strong under the conditions established by the Holy One of Israel.

SC2 Ne 27 312 Ne 27 32VERSES 31-32

SC2 Ne 27 312 Ne 27 32The Terrible One is Brought to Naught. The tyrant who has accused and persecuted men "for a word." An allusion to unjust and harassing lawsuits, if "word" (Heb. "debar") is understood to mean a legal statute.

2 Ne 27 33VERSE 33

2 Ne 27 33The Lord Who Redeemed Abraham. Commentators note that there is no reference in the Old Testament to any incident in the life of the Patriarch to which this redemption can refer specially, but that there is a tradition that he, at some time, was threatened with the fire of a burning furnace. In the Book of Abraham, Pearl of Great Price, I think, we find the story of the redemption of Abraham to which Isaiah (29:22) and Nephi here refer.

2 Ne 27 33Abraham was a native of Ur of the Chaldees. ( Gen. 11:28)

2 Ne 27 33According to the Book of Abraham, the Egyptians had an altar and a religious establishment there, just as, for instance, Americans in our day have churches and congregations in some of the principal cities of the world, such as London, Paris, etc. The paternal relatives of Abraham, it seems, had turned away from the religion of their ancestors and were worshiping pagan idols, and especially the divinities of Egypt. They even delighted in the sacrifice of children.

2 Ne 27 33Then a time came, when the priests of Pharaoh seized Abraham, intending to take his life on the altar. But when he lifted up his voice to God, the "Angel of his (God's) Presence" appeared, unloosened the bands of the intended victim, promised him the Priesthood, and declared that: "Through thy ministry my name shall be known in the earth forever, for I am thy God." Then, "the Lord broke down the altar of Elkenah and of the gods of the land, and utterly destroyed them, and smote the priest that he died." The country must have been visited by some unusual calamity, for the record says: "There was great mourning in Chaldea, and also at the court of Pharaoh." (Book of Abraham 1:5-20)

2 Ne 27 33It was thus that God redeemed Abraham by almighty power and taught him one of the lessons that enabled him to become the "father of all that believe." (Rom. 4:11)

GENERAL NOTES

In recent years the site of Ur has been explored by the eminent British archaeologist Dr. C. Leonard Woolley. He reports that he found unmistakable evidence of trade connections between Ur and Egypt as early as about the first dynasty. He also claims to have discovered common features in the religions of the two countries—the valley of the Nile and the valley of the Tigris and the Euphrates. (The Sumerians, by C. Leonard Woolley, Oxford, 1928, pp. 46 and 186-190.)

The story of Abraham is, or might be, the common ground on which Christians, Jews and Mohammedans might meet for a final great reunion. To all these he is "the father of the faithful," and, "the friend of God."

Read from the House Tops. On Sunday, March 31, 1935, President Heber J. Grant, at 12:30 a.m. read a message from the Latter-day Saints to the people of the entire world which may well be regarded as the beginning of the literal fulfilment of this prophecy in 2 Ne. 27:11, in as much as it was broadcast by radio and consisted of a masterly resume of the essence of "Mormonism." President Grant said, in part:

"What the world needs today more than anything else is an implicit faith in God, our Father, and in Jesus Christ, his Son, as the Redeemer of the world. The message of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to the world is that God lives, that Jesus Christ is his Son, and that they appeared to the boy Joseph Smith, and promised him that he should be an instrument in the hands of the Lord in restoring the true Gospel to the world. I quote from a Vision given to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon:

"And this is the Gospel, the glad tidings, which the voice of the heavens bore record unto us—

"That he came into the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the world, and to bear the sins of the world, and to sanctify the world, and to cleanse it from all unrighteousness;

"That through him all might be saved whom the Father had put into his power and made by him.

"Who glorifies the Father, and saves all the works of his hands, except those sons of perdition who deny the Son after the Father has revealed him.

"And again from the same Vision:

"And we beheld the glory of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and received of his fulness;

"And saw the holy angels, and them who are sanctified before his throne worshiping God, and the Lamb, who worship him forever and ever.

"And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives!

"For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—

"That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God.

"It has been my great privilege to bear this testimony in England, Ireland, Scotland, Wales, Germany, France, Holland, Belgium, Switzerland, Italy, Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Canada, Mexico, in the Hawaiian Islands and in far-off Japan, and to lift up my voice declaring that our Heavenly Father and his beloved Son have again spoken from the heavens, that the Gospel of our Redeemer has been restored to the earth, and to bear witness that I know that God lives, that I know that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God and the Redeemer of mankind, and that I know that Joseph Smith was the instrument in the hands of the Lord in restoring the everlasting Gospel.

"My appeal to all members of the Church who possess this same testimony is so to live that other men seeing their good deeds shall be inspired to investigate the Gospel of our Redeemer.

"Words fail me in expressing my heartfelt gratitude to God for the radio, which gives me this opportunity of bearing my testimony to all the people of the world of the restoration of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. I pray the Lord to bless all mankind in these troublous times, that wisdom may be given to men in every land so to live that peace may come to the peoples of the world." President Heber J. Grant, Annual Conference Report, April, 1935, pp. 9, 10.
