Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 29

2 Ne 29 1VERSE 1

2 Ne 29 1A Marvelous Work. See 2 Ne. 25:17.

2 Ne 29 1The Second Time. 2Ne. 6:14.

2 Ne 29 2VERSE 2

2 Ne 29 2Promises Which I have Made. 2 Ne. 3:21-25.

2 Ne 29 2Hiss Forth. 2 Ne. 15:26.

2 Ne 29 2Standard. Or ensign, 2 Ne. 15:26.

2 Ne 29 3VERSE 3

2 Ne 29 3A Bible! If "Bible" (biblion, or, biblon) means "book," and the plural (biblia), "books," and more particularly inspired, and, therefore, sacred books, the Book of Mormon is a Bible. It is not a substitute for the Old and New Testaments, commonly so known; it is a corroborative witness for the same divine cause.

2 Ne 29 3Quite a few years ago, a prominent clergyman in Salt Lake City criticized the Church for, as he thought, trying to impose a Fifth Gospel on the public, referring more especially to the Third Book of Nephi. I remember that President B. H. Roberts, in replying, expressed regret that the recognition of that book as a fifth Gospel had come first from an outsider. Little did that clergyman realize that he was fulfilling prophecy by raising an objection against the Book of Mormon, on the assumed ground that it is too much like the Bible.

2 Ne 29 5VERSE 5

2 Ne 29 5Have Ye Remembered the Jews? It is the Lord who asks. How have the Jews, through whom the Bible came, been received? History answers by turning its blood-stained pages to the light, one by one, seemingly for endless ages.

2 Ne 29 5We, who have reached an advanced age, remember a time when the brilliant rays of civilization seemed about to break through the mists and give hope of the early dawn of a better day. Already Napoleon I, in 1806, summoned a Sanhedrin of Jews, to learn the qualifications of their people for citizenship. And during the so-called Victorian era, the freedom of the Hebrews grew with the ever increasing influence of democracy.

2 Ne 29 5The World War made a great change. During those dark years, the world was easily pushed back a century, or more, in some parts of the world, and with this recession of civilization, barbarism has gained ground, and with it, persecution of the Jews.

2 Ne 29 5According to newspaper clippings:

2 Ne 29 5At the beginning of 1938, the unfortunate Jews in Germany appealed to the ruler of that nation for the mercy of salvation from destitution and extermination, they being forcibly scattered and then persecuted for not having visible means of support, or passports.

2 Ne 29 5In Bucharest, about the same time, a Rumanian government official is said to have announced that plans were being laid for a world-wide anti-Semitic congress, which would, of course, mean world-wide persecution.

2 Ne 29 5In Italy, the ruler is said to have informed the Jews (Feb. 16, 1938) that they would not be permitted to play a more important part in the national life than their individual abilities merit.

2 Ne 29 5In Austria, in Jan. 1938, the state council considered measures for the closing of the country to refugees from Poland and Rumania, somewhat after the pattern of the old slave legislation in the United States before the Civil War.

2 Ne 29 5Austrian Jews. On March, 1938, the situation of the Jewish population in Austria had become so critical that Jewish World congress in Geneva petitioned the League of Nations to consider the problem of the "Martyrdom of Austrian Jews." The congress showed that the Jewish death rate in Austria had risen from an average of 4 a day to 140. If the Jews ever were in need of a Messiah, they are now. Meanwhile agitation in Palestine has been rife between Jews and Arabs, until the strongholds seem to have been in the hands of the opponent of the Prince of Peace.

2 Ne 29 5I Have Not Forgotten My People. That is the promise of the Lord. The settlement of 200,000 Jews in recent years (this was written in 1955) is regarded as one of the miracles of history. Rabbi Samuel H. Gordon, Salt Lake City, is quoted as having said in a recent address that the spectacle of Palestine of today, is one of "a race of agriculturally astute people becoming wedded to the soil after centuries of being confined to commercial activities." The land which 20 years ago could feed only 700,000 people now supports a population of about 1,500,000, and has an orange export business of $18,000,000 a year, two-thirds of it produced by Jews, he said. Industrial development in Palestine also is being stimulated by the Jewish migration, he said. (Salt Lake Trib., Feb. 5, 1938.)

2 Ne 29 5God has not forgotten his people.

2 Ne 29 7VERSE 7

2 Ne 29 7The Isles of the Sea. See 2 Ne. 10:22-24.

2 Ne 29 9VERSE 9

2 Ne 29 9Yesterday, Today and Forever. One of the attributes of God is indicated here. He is not subject to changes as we are. He works in accordance with eternal laws, or rules. If he has caused inspired writings to be given to men at any time, he will do so again, when necessary for their guidance. We may expect "bibles" in different ages and localities. Comp. Heb. 13:4: "Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today and forever."

SC2 Ne 29 112 Ne 29 12VERSES 11-12

SC2 Ne 29 112 Ne 29 12I Command All Men ... That They Shall Write. In view of this statement and the following in verse 12: "And I shall also speak to all the nations of the earth, and they shall write it," the utter indifference to all sacred literature, except the Bible, is rather unfortunate. As Latter-day Saints we have accepted the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price as inspired guides to eternal life. But we also acknowledge our obligation to accept truth from whatever source it comes. All the sacred writings will some day be gathered together. (v. 13)

2 Ne 29 14VERSE 14

2 Ne 29 14The Lands of Their Possessions. The promise is here repeated that the descendants of Abraham, and especially the house of Israel, will be gathered. Note the plural. I take "lands of their possessions" to mean all the countries in which their possessions once were allotted to them—the entire region between the River of Egypt and the Euphrates, once inhabited by Kenires, Kenizzites, Kadmonites, Hittites, Perizzites Rephaims, Canaanites, Girganites and Jebusites. (Gen. 15:18-21) According to the Mosaic law, land possessions returned automatically every fiftieth year to the original owner: "In the year of the jubilee the field shall return to him of whom it was bought, even to him to whom the possession did belong." (Numb. 27:24) The original covenant was made with the descendants of Abraham, and this fact may have to be considered in the solution of what now seems to be a difficult problem, involving perfect justice between Hebrews and Arabs.

GENERAL NOTES

Tel Aviv. This is the name of a city on the Mediterranean near the city of Jaffa. It was founded in 1909. In 1913 it had only 908 inhabitants. In 1930 there were 40,000. In Tel Aviv, the ancient Hebrew language, for centuries regarded as dead, has been revived. Newspapers are printed in pure Hebrew. Theaters and even signboards use that tongue. The streets are thronged with well-dressed people, with shiny motor cars, mostly of American manufacture, and motor buses. The traffic policemen are dressed much like the American policemen in summer uniform. The shops are bright and modern. The homes are either of the

California bungalow type or flat buildings. There are Jews from South Africa, from Argentina and Brazil, from the United States, from Yemen in central Arabia, from Russia in large numbers, from Poland, Austria, England and many other countries. There they are adapting and building up a new civilization in a purely Jewish atmosphere.

The Jews of the United States have furnished a large part of the means for experiment. Statistics show that the Keren Hayesod, an organization engaged in asisting immigration received more than 2,000,000 pounds sterling from the United States of a total of 3,774,000 pounds. And in 1923 there was floated in the United States a Tel Aviv municipal loan of 75,000 pounds sterling.

Tel Aviv is only one of the manifestations of the establishment of the Jewish home. More than 100 villages and agricultural colonies have been established in various parts of Palestine, with a population of more than 100,000.

Concerning the Book of Mormon. Only recently in Los Angeles I called upon a gentleman, now in his seventy-first year, an eminent geologist who devotes a great deal of time to the study of American archaeology. He said to me: "Dr. Merrill, Joseph Smith knew more about the ancient inhabitants of America than all the scholars that have lived." He had read the Book of Mormon because it came into his possession, because he was reading everything that had come to his notice concerning ancient America, and he had been examining the results of every archaeological investigation, and that was his testimony to me. He said: "I would like, if I had the strength, to devote my time to writing a book that would prove to my associate scientists the validity of that book."

Anyhow, our testimony is that the Book of Mormon is genuine. As I said, the divinity of the establishment of this Church stands or falls with the validity of that book. I say this, of course, in perfect confidence that no matter what discoveries may be made, the validity of that book will never be impeached—Extract from a sermon in the Tabernacle, Salt Lake City, by Dr. Joseph L. Merrill, Jan. 13, 1929. Deseret News, Jan. 19, that year.

Northern Myths. As a sample of pre-Christian literature, the following rendition of a few paragraphs of the Icelandic poem "Voeluspa" (the Oracles of the Wolf) is offered. They are from the Danish edition of the Older Edda, by Frederik W. Horn, Copenhagen, 1869. According to this poem, Oden visited Neji, a Northern seeress, in search of knowledge. He paid her costly rings, an ancient medium of exchange, indicating the high age of the composition. She took her runic wand. Then:

Far and wide around her, Through the worlds existing, Went the searching eyes.

She said she remembered nine worlds—a plausible allusion to the generations between Adam and Noah. Then:

That was time's beginning. Yme was the builder. Cooling waves there were not, Neither sand nor sea. Land existed nowhere, Nor the vaulted heaven, Or the fragrant flowers, Nothing but expanse.

The sons of Bure, somehow, made land. The sun shone. The rocks became warm. Vegetation sprouted. The moon appeared. But:

Little knew the Sun-king Where to find his palace;

Little knew the new moon All the power it wielded; Stars had not been given Their allotted place. Then the Mighty Powers Took their seats in council And the gods, the holy, Asked for good advice. Night and light they named, And to reckon seasons, They gave Morning, and Mid-day, Forenoon, Ev'ning, names. On the field of Ida All the Aesir gathered. There they timbered temples, Rising t'ward the sky. There they strength exerted, There they allthing started. There they made their smithies, Forged their tongs of iron, And their tools for labor, Worked the noble ore.

They did not lack gold. They were happy, until giant damsels appeared among them. These brought misfortune.

Again the mighty Powers gathered in council.

Prophecies describing the latter-day conditions of the world are quite remarkable:

Brothers will, in battle, Slaughter one another. Kindred will be tearing Friendship's dearest ties. Earth is full of evil, Unclean lusts are ruling, Swords and battle-axes, Useless are the shields. Wolves and whirling stormwinds Shall appear together, Ere the world shall perish, Ere the Ragnaroek. Crash! go rolling thunders Giants shall be flying, No one cares for any Other than himself. Then the sun is darkened, Waves the earth engulfing. Brilliant stars of heaven Pale, give no more light. Flames 'gainst flames are raging Crashing, thundering, sparkling; Towards heaven's arches Reach the greedy fires.

That is Ragnaroek. But it is not the end. The seeress continues:

Now I see a landscape O'er the sea arising, On the lofty hill sides Eagles catching fish. Wild, in frothy freshets, Water rushes downward, Green is earth, and glorious, Fair, as ne'er before. On the field of Ida Aesir meet together, Tell again the saga Of the Midgard Snake. Great things they remembered, All they had experienced, Runes they had been given By the Highest God. Now the Strong is coming, He who is the Ruler Over things existing, Judgment to dispense. Everything he judges, Every feud he settles, Tells what things are sacred Here upon the earth. Fairer than the sunshine Now I see a castle, Walls with gold all covered, Gimle is its name. There shall all the righteous Live in joy and happy, All eternity.

Other Sacred Books. The bibles of the Brahmnists and Buddhists, the Vedas, are thought to have originated as early as 2000 B. C. Those books recognize one God, Brahmah, "almighty, eternal, omnipresent, the great Soul, of whom all other gods are parts. They are concerned with prayers and ceremonies. Brahmahnism is said to hold that there is no essential difference between gods and men; that the gods are only farther advanced, and that men, by means of transmigration of souls, are coming after as fast as possible.

Buddhism. This is claimed to be "reformed" Brahmahnism. Protestantism in the world of paganism! It is named after Gautama Buddha, whose birth year is given as 568 B.C. Buddhism now claims 150 million followers in Burma, Nepal, Ceylon, Siam, Tibet, China and Japan, and about 180,000 in America, besides some in European countries. According to Buddhism, salvation from the evils of existence can be attained by right faith, right judgment, right language, right purpose, right practice, right effort, right thinking, and meditation.

It is not improbable that these and other Asiatic religions have a common origin, viz., the Patriarchal faith of Noah, which, in the course of time, degenerated, just as various systems of Christianity have done, although they have the same historical origin.

Zoroastrianism. The bible of this religion is the Zend Avesta. The founder or rather, reformer was Zoroaster, whose birth is placed about 600 B.C., or, as others hold, 1000 B.C. According to Zoroaster, the realm of good is ruled by Ormazd and six attendant spirits. They represent good thoughts, righteousness, wishedfor kingdom, harmony on earth, salvation, immortality. Next to these stand the angels who guide the forces of nature, chief of whom is Mithra. Atar, the fire, Apo, the waters, and others representing the sun, the moon, stars, etc., are carrying out the divine decrees regarding the universe. On the other hand, Ahriman is the leader of a rabble of archfiends, demons and evil spirits, who are at war with the good spirits and seeking to destroy the soul of man. Cyrus, who played such an important part in the history of Israel, and to whom God, through the prophet Isaiah, referred as "my servant" (Is. 44:28), may have been an adherent of the creed of the great Oriental reformer. The Magi, who came to Bethlehem and worshiped at the manger, leaving there their costly gifts of gold, frankincense and myrrh (Matt. 2:11), may have been Zoroastrian priests, possibly with royal blood in their veins.

During the 7th century, the worshipers of Zoroaster were driven to India by the Mohammedan invasion of Persia. There they became known as Parsees (Persians). There is still a remnant of them, with headquarters at Bombay. They are noted for generosity, have a priesthood, and revere fire as an emblem of purity.

Islam. Founded by Mohammed about 600 A. D. Its "bible" is the Koran, a word meaning, "reading." It contains readings concerning religious, social, civil, legal and many other subjects, all of which, it is claimed, was revealed to the prophet by the angel Gabriel. The book professes to be "a guide for those who believe in the mysteries of faith, who pray, give alms, and believe in revelations given to the prophets." Its main doctrines are that God is one; that there is but one true religion, and that there is a day of judgment. Mohammedans recognize Moses and Jesus as great prophets, but to them Mohammed is the prophet.

Some Figures. According to a recent census, there are 331 million Roman Catholics in the world; 206 million Protestants and 144 million Orthodcx Catholics. On the other hand there are said to be 230 million Hindus, 209 million Mohammedans and 150 million Buddhists. The entire number of non-Christians is given as 1,167,100,000 to 689,000,000 Christians.
