Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 32

2 Ne 31 2VERSE 2

2 Ne 31 2Doctrine of Christ. Nephi refers to baptism. He proposes to discuss that ordinance as taught by our Lord himself.

2 Ne 31 4VERSE 4

2 Ne 31 4That prophet which the Lord showed unto me. John the Baptist. See 1 Ne. 10:7-10.

2 Ne 31 4The Lamb of God. The Lamb that (1), as a sacrifice, bears our iniquity (Is. 53:6, 7), or, (2) furnishes the material for protecting and ornamental covering. (v. 7), or, as in the Revelation by John, (5:6; 6:1; 14:1; 22:1), where the Lamb is the head of the entire creation, visible and invisible, who leads all that exists to victory and glory.

2 Ne 31 4The sins of the world. Attention might be called to the plural form of the first noun referring, evidently, to individual transgressors, which the Lamb taketh away on condition of repentance and obedience. The singular form, the "sin of the World," which is the term used by John the Baptist (John 1:29), is the transgression of our first parents, the evil consequences of which would have been the inheritance of all their descendants, had they not been removed. But the guilt was taken away, when Adam repented, was baptized and forgiven, through faith in the Lamb of God, who was slain "from the foundations of the world." (Rev. 13:8)

2 Ne 31 6VERSE 6

2 Ne 31 6To Fulfil all Righteousness. John, the forerunner of the Messiah, the herald of the kingdom of God, was commanded to baptize in water, (John 1:33) in fulfilment of such prophecies as Ezek. 36:25, or Zech. 13:1, 2. His baptism was, therefore, the entrance to the kingdom to be established by Jesus.

2 Ne 31 6In his divine nature, Jesus would not have had need of baptism; in fact, the ordinance would have been an empty ceremony; but Jesus, in his human existence had divested himself of every vestige of specially divine attributes, and become like his brethren in everything but sin. (Phil. 2:5-8) In his human nature he was the second Adam, (Rom. 5:17-21). As such, he passed through the entrance to the kingdom which John proclaimed. The reformation, or regeneration, he was to effect, would have to come from within and not from without. Again, as a baptism of repentance, the ceremony was a public confession of sin and regret, and an outward sign of a decision by the penitent sinner to begin a new life, as a little child. In his human nature, Jesus, as the representative of the race, carrying the sin of the world, had the same need of baptism, as other human beings had, and have. St. Luke, in his account, notes that our Lord was praying, when the heavens were opened and he heard the voice: "Thou art my beloved Son!" (Luke 3:21, 22). Luke also says the ordinance administered by John was "baptism for the remission of sins." (3:3)

SC2 Ne 31 92 Ne 31 102 Ne 31 112 Ne 31 122 Ne 31 13VERSE 9-13

SC2 Ne 31 92 Ne 31 102 Ne 31 112 Ne 31 122 Ne 31 13As an example to follow, the baptism of Jesus showed the "straightness of the path and the narrowness of the gate." When he says, "follow me," or, "come after me," (Matt. 4:19, 16:24; Luke 9:59; John 10:2, he means, "keep the commandments of the Father." But one of these is, "repent and be baptized in the name of my beloved Son." Compliance with this commandment brings the Holy Ghost.

2 Ne 31 9VERSE 9

2 Ne 31 9The Straightness of the Path. "Straightness," as applied to the road, is its quality of leading directly to the goal, as a straight line, without turnings or deviations. "Behold, the way for man is narrow, but it lieth in a straight course before him." (2 Ne. 9:41; comp. Is. 40:3, 4; 42:16)

2 Ne 31 11VERSE 11

2 Ne 31 11In the Name of my Beloved Son. Critics have found some difficulty in reconciling this shorter baptism formula, "In the Name of the Son," with the formula given by Matthew (28:19), "In the Name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost."

2 Ne 31 11In defense it has been replied that baptism in the first church was administered "in the name of Christ," meaning, by his authority, "for" him; but "into the name of the Trinity," or, into the communion with the Tri-une Godhead. It has been said that the use by the authors of the New Testament of two different particles [^1] to denote the authority by which it is performed and its object, warrants this conclusion. But I am afraid the argument can not be substantiated. For the two particles are used indiscriminately. Thus, St. Luke, in his record of the re-baptism of the Johannine disciples at Ephesus, says when they had heard St. Paul speak, "they were baptized, 'into"'—not in—"the name of the Lord Jesus" (Acts 19:4). Luke here uses the formula of Matthew, as far as the particle "into" is concerned. The inference is fair that the briefer formula, "in the name of Jesus" is the same as the longer formula, only abbreviated, but meaning the same. That, in other words, baptism in the name, or into the name, of Jesus, means in the New Testament, as here, baptism both "in" and "into" the name of the Godhead. (See vv. 12 and 13; also 21)

SC2 Ne 31 142 Ne 31 152 Ne 31 16VERSES 14-16

SC2 Ne 31 142 Ne 31 152 Ne 31 16He that Endureth to the End. The solemn truth is taught here, that repentance, baptism, and the reception of the Holy Ghost, although necessary for perfect salvation, do not save anyone, unless he continues faithful to the end. One who denies Jesus cannot be saved by ordinances. St. Paul expresses the same thought, when he writes that one who falls away, crucifying Christ anew, after having been enlightened and tasted the heavenly gift, cannot be renewed to repentance (Heb. 6:4-6). And the Apostle John (1 John 5:16, 17) says he does not even ask the Saints to pray for a deserter from the Lord. His inspired instruction is that if any man see his brother commit a sin "not to death,"—not apostasy from the Lord—he may pray for him, and God will renew his life. But, he says, "there is sin unto death: not concerning this do I say that he should make a request."

SC2 Ne 31 142 Ne 31 152 Ne 31 16Naturally. For there is but one Savior. Only One Name, in which to accept salvation. If a sinner reject him and his atoning sacrifice, there is no other, whether in heaven or on earth, by whom he can be saved. Salvation depends entirely on the acceptance of Jesus as the Savior, by keeping his commandments, and keeping on keeping them, to the end.

SC2 Ne 31 172 Ne 31 18VERSES 17-18

SC2 Ne 31 172 Ne 31 18This Straight and Narrow Path. Nephi is still speaking of endurance as a struggle forward on a straight and narrow path. He seems reluctant to leave the subject. He is delivering his farewell address, and he lays the emphasis on the necessity of being faithful to the end.

SC2 Ne 31 192 Ne 31 202 Ne 31 21VERSES 19-21

SC2 Ne 31 192 Ne 31 202 Ne 31 21Nephi, having exhorted the Saints to endurance, now calls their attention to the importance of "steadfastness in Christ," which means, firmness or solidity of faith in him, as explained in paragraph 19: having "unshaken faith in him, relying wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save." He whose faith is not shaken by every wind that blows, every adversity that arises, is steadfast. Note that steadfastness is accompanied by "perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and all men." That is the characteristic of enduring faith. (20)

2 Ne 31 21VERSE 21

2 Ne 31 21This Is the Way. Under par. 11 it was suggested that, "in the name of the Son" means, "in the name of the entire Godhead." This is certainly the meaning here:

2 Ne 31 21"This is the doctrine of Christ,"

2 Ne 31 21which statement is thus amplified:

2 Ne 31 21"And the only true doctrine of the Father, and of the Son, and of The Holy Ghost."

2 Ne 31 21Which Is One God. Doctrine and Covenants has the same testimony: "Which Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are One God, infinite and eternal without end." (20:28)

2 Ne 31 21"They are one in essence, in purpose, in spirit, in attributes, in power and glory, but they are, nevertheless, three personages.

2 Ne 31 21" 'The Scriptural facts are (a) The Father says I; The Son says I; The Spirit says I. (b) The Father says Thou to the Son, and the Son says Thou to the Father; and in like manner the Father and the Son use the pronouns He and Him in reference to the Spirit. (c) The Father loves the Son, the Son Loves the Father; the Spirit testifies of the Son. The Father, Son, and Spirit are severally subject and object. They act and are acted upon, or are the objects of action * * * The Son is of the Father, and the Spirit is of the Father and the Son. The Father sends the Son, and the Father and the Son send the Spirit.' " (Charles Hodge, D.D., Systematic Theology, Vol. 1, pp. 444-5; quoted in D. and C. Commentary, p. 144.)

THE MODE OF BAPTISM DISCUSSED

It is customary to speak of immersion, sprinkling, and affusion as so many different modes of baptism, but, as a matter of fact, there is only one mode of that ordinance, and there can be no more. Sprinkling is sprinkling and affusion is affusion, but neither is baptism, for baptism is a complete burial, or submersion, in water, such as is easily and most naturally accomplished by immersion.

No application of water which fails to entirely surround, or cover, the person who is being baptized, is baptism.

In revelations contained in the Doctrine and Covenants this is plainly taught. He who baptizes is there instructed to "immerse him or her in the water, and come forth again out of the water" (Sec. 20:74). Baptism is a "burial": "They are they who received the testimony of Jesus, and believed on his name and were baptized after the manner of his burial, being buried in the water in his name, and this according to the commandment which he has given" (Doc. and Cov. 76:51). Further: "The baptismal font was instituted as a simile of the grave, and was commanded to be in a place underneath where the living are wont to assemble, to show forth the living and the dead" (Doc. and Cov. 128:13). In the Book of Mormon we are shown how baptism was performed by Alma: "After Alma had said these words, both Alma and Helam were buried in the water; and they arose and came forth out of the water rejoicing" (Mosiah 18:14). In 3 Nephi 11:26 we read: "And then shall ye immerse them in the water, and come forth again out of the water." This is the instruction of our Lord to the Nephites, and He also declares: "And according as I have commanded you thus shall ye baptize. And there shall be no disputations among you" (3 Nephi 11:28).

This is the doctrine of the Church.

Those who hold that sprinkling and pouring are valid modes of baptism assert that "baptism is washing with water." "By washing," they say, "is meant any such application of water to the body as effects its purification. This may be done by immersion, affusion, or sprinkling." And, in proof of this proposition they argue, in the first place, that the word "baptizo" means, as inferred from its use in classical Greek, the Septuagint, and the New Testament, not only to "immerse," but to "ye," to "gild," to "wet," to "moisten," to "wash," to "pour upon"; secondly, that there is no passage in the New Testament in which "baptism" necessarily implies "immersion," while there are several in which "immersion" is necessarily excluded.

The first of these arguments is mere sophistry. Competent scholarship declares that "baptizo," and "bapto" from which "baptizo" is derived, mean to "dip, to immerse, to plunge in water." Luther: "The term baptism is a Greek word; it may be rendered by 'dipping,' as when we dip anything in water that it may be entirely covered with water." Beza: "Christ commanded us to be baptized; by which word it is certain immersion is signified." John Wesley: " 'Buried with Him,' alluding to the ancient manner of baptizing by immersion." Mosheim: "The sacrament of baptism was administered in this [the first] century without the public assemblies, in places appointed and prepared for that purpose, and was performed by immersion of the whole body in the baptismal font." Calvin: "The word 'baptize' signifies to 'immerse,' and the rite of immersion was observed by the ancient church." Vitringa: "The act of baptizing is the immersion of believers in water." Such is the testimony of scholarship, founded upon the use of the words "bapto" and "baptizo," by both secular and sacred authors. In the classics those words are employed to describe the sinking of ships in the sea; of immersion by crossing rivers, or sinking in swamps; dipping vessels or other objects in a liquid, etc. (The reader who cares to examine this subject further is referred to a paper by Elder Henry Whittal, published in volumes XXI, and XXII, of the Millennial Star.)

This, then, is the meaning of the words in question.

But human language is imperfect. No tongue has a word for every thought, or every shade of thought a man may wish to express, and, therefore, it happens that most words are employed to denote acts, or objects, akin or analogous to, or resembling in some respects those for which they stand originally. But that does not affect their original meaning. For instance, to "bathe" means to "wash by immersion," but the poet, nevertheless, speaks of bathing "in the dimples of her cheek." That, however, does not justify the conclusion that "bathing" means "looking at" an object. If a friend tells us that he "bathed" in the Dead Sea, we do not understand him to say that perhaps he merely had a look at that beautiful sheet of water, for to "bathe" does not mean that, although a poet may with propriety use the word in that sense to express his rapture. In the same way, "bapto" and "baptizo" may be used to express a number of ideas, such as to "stain," to "gild," to "glaze," to "moisten," to "temper" steel in oil, and even to "imbue," but the original meaning of the words remain, to "dip," to "immerse," to "plunge," and their use to denote the other ideas is justified only because of the resemblance, or fancied resemblance, between the original and secondary meaning. Thus, when an author says a lake, or a garment, was "baptized" in blood, meaning "stained," he conveys the idea that the stains covered a large area, as if the lake, or garment, had been dipped in blood. And when the word is used to denote "gilding," "glazing," "tempering," it is needless to say that it refers to the fact that the objects gilded, glazed, or tempered had been entirely covered, as if plunged into the liquid used in each case. For this is the meaning of the words, no matter what poetical or metaphorical purposes they are made to serve.

The second argument, or the assertion that there are passages in the New Testament in which the idea of immersion is excluded from baptism, is baseless.

For instance, we are told that the three thousand persons who were converted on the day of Pentecost at Jerusalem (Acts 2:41) could not have been baptized by immersion because there were no private baths available for that purpose, and no water close by, in which the multitude could have been baptized in that manner. The same remark is made to apply to the five thousand (Acts 4:4).

But the author of the Acts does not say that the three thousand were baptized all on one day; nor at Jerusalem. Luke says: "They that gladly received his word were baptized: and the same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls" (Acts 2:41). They may have been "added" to the disciples that day, by applying for baptism and placing their names on the records of the church. As to the time when the baptism took place, that is not stated. They were undoubtedly baptized as soon as the opportunity would permit, and if there was not a sufficient quantity of water for the purpose in Jerusalem, or the immediate vicinity, the river Jordan was less than twenty miles to the east, and that to the Jews, who were used to journeys over much longer distances, was not an obstacle. They could walk down to the Jordan in, say, five or six hours. Many of them were visitors at the capital at this time, and would return home by way of Jericho and the Jordan valley. And as for the five thousand (Acts 4:4), they were not baptized in one day. Luke says that was the total number of disciples at the time of the story of the fourth chapter of Acts. They had, of course, been baptized at various times.

There is, therefore, no argument in either of these passages against immersion, and in favor of sprinkling, or affusion.

The assertion is also made that the Ethiopian who was baptized by Philip (Acts 8:38) could not have been immersed, for "he was traveling through a desert part of the country towards Gaza, when Philip joined him," and there is no stream, it is said, in that region of sufficient depth to allow the immersion of a man. But this objection ignores the obvious fact that Philip must have traveled with the Ethiopian a considerable distance before the baptism took place. Philip joined him somewhere near Gaza, but they did not separate there. They continued the journey together, for we read: "As they went on their way they came to a certain water" (Acts 8:36). This may have been a place where the road from Gaza southward came close to the shore of the Mediterranean; or Philip may have traveled in company with the Ethiopian as far as the so-called "River of Egypt," at the southern boundary of Palestine, a distance of perhaps fifty miles. It would take that long time to explain the gospel to the Ethiopian. To say that there was no water anywhere between Gaza and Egypt in which to immerse this distinguished convert is an evidence of desperation.

It is generally alleged that the jailer at Philippi and his household were baptized in the jail (Acts 16:33), and that they could not have been immersed. But the narrative shows plainly that the baptism took place outside the building in which the jailer lived, and in one part of which the place of imprisonment perhaps was located; for he took Paul and Silas to some place where he could wash their wounds, after which he and his family were baptized, and then, as is stated, he "brought them into his house" for refreshments. Neither the washing nor the baptism took place in the house, for the simple reason that immersion was necessary for the sacred rite, if not for the washing of the wounds.

We are told that the presumption against immersion is still stronger in Mark 7:4, where it is said that the Pharisees do not eat except they "wash" (baptize) themselves, and that they "wash" cups, pots, and tables. Are we, it is asked, to believe that the Pharisees immersed themselves before each meal, when they came from the market; or that they washed their tables as well as their cups and pots by immersion?

The fact is that the Jews, who, like all Orientals, used their fingers as we use knives and forks, washed their hands before meals, and between courses, for obvious reasons; that was "washing themselves," just as we say that we wash ourselves, when we lave our hands and faces. But besides this washing they had a ceremonial cleansing. In the former, water was poured on their hands; in the latter their hands were immersed in the water. The disciples did not observe "the traditions of the elders" (Mark 7:3.) That is, they neglected the ceremonial purifications, but certainly not common cleanliness. Concerning the "washing" mentioned in the fourth verse, the following comment appears in the Cambridge Bible: " 'Wash' here implies complete immersion as contrasted with the mere washing of the hands in verse 3." It should be said, further, in this connection, that the word which in the New Testament signifies Christian baptism (baptisma) is not used for the ceremonial washings of the Jews. This word is "baptismos," and there is about the same difference between them as between "petra" (a rock) and "petros" (a piece of rock). "The very use of the two similar words seems intended to mark off the Christian rite of baptism as separate and unique" (Helps to the Study of the Bible, page 362). At all events, it is not safe to apply conclusions drawn from the ceremonial washings of the Pharisees to the baptism instituted by our Lord.

It is, finally, alleged that when New Testament writers speak about baptism of the Spirit, immersion is excluded, since the Holy Spirit is a person. But the same argument would exclude both sprinkling and pouring, since a person can neither be sprinkled nor poured out. Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Paul, all speak of baptism "in" Holy Spirit (Matt. 3:11; Mark 1:8, John 1:33; Acts 1:5, I Cor. 12:13; in all of which passages the Greek preposition is "in," not "with," or "by"). And they mean just what they say. On the day of Pentecost the Holy Spirit "filled all the house" where the disciples were assembled, and they were, consequently, immersed in it and filled with it, as completely as we are immersed in the air we breathe. It was a true baptism in Spirit. The same miracle was repeated in the house of Cornelius, and it is repeated whenever two or three come together in the name of the Lord, when the divine Presence is manifested.

The Scriptures tell us that John baptized at a place where there was "much water" (John 3:23); that those who were baptized went into the water and came up "out of the water" (Matt. 3:16; Acts 8:38, 39); that Israel passing through the Red Sea, with water on both sides and the cloud hiding the people completely, from the Egyptians, were "baptized in the cloud and the sea" (I. Cor. 10:1, 2). No clearer illustration of baptism could be given.

We have seen now that the Scriptures employ a word meaning "immersion" for "baptism," and "immerse" for "baptize"; that this is the only mode of performing that ordinance which corresponds to that which it signifies, viz., a burial and resurrection, and that the main objections to that understanding of the sacred ordinance are without basis in fact. We therefore reiterate: There is only one mode of baptism, and there can be no other, and that is complete submersion.

---
Notas:
[^1] "Intertribal warfare was perpetual, save now and then for truces of brief duration. Warfare was attended by wholesale massacre. As many prisoners as could be managed were taken home by their captors; in some cases they were adopted into the tribe of the latter as a means of increasing its fighting strength, otherwise they were put to death with lingering torments. There was nothing which afforded the red men such exquisite delight as the spectacle of live human flesh lacerated with stone knives or hissing under the touch of firebrands, and for ingenuity in devising tortures they have never been equalled. Cannibalism was quite commonly practiced.
