Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 32

2 Ne 32 2VERSE 2

2 Ne 32 2The Tongue of Angels. One who has received the Holy Ghost can speak "with the tongue of angels." For, after all, angels, too, speak the words of Christ, as dictated to them by the Holy Ghost. In 2 Ne. 31:14 the "tongue of angels" is called a "new" tongue, and so it is, because it is different from the speech of one who is not guided by the holy Spirit. Men and women of the world are known by their conversation, and so are the Saints. In 1 Cor. 13:1 "tongues of angels seems to mean superhuman eloquence, but "tongues" the Apostle says, are but "sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal," if they are without love.

SC2 Ne 32 42 Ne 32 5VERSES 4-5

SC2 Ne 32 42 Ne 32 5The Holy Ghost Will Show You All Things. This is the special mission of the Holy Spirit. (John 16:13-15; 1 Ne. 10:17-19.)

2 Ne 32 6VERSE 6

2 Ne 32 6The Doctrine of Christ. This, Nephi says, is the doctrine of Christ. Further revelations on this subject may be looked for when the Lord himself appears. (See 1 Ne. 12:6-8; 3 Ne. 11:3-17)

2 Ne 32 7VERSE 7

2 Ne 32 7The Spirit Stoppeth Mine Utterance. Here Nephi feels prompted to cease speaking. One who is guided by the Spirit is always conscious of the proper time to quit as well as to begin. And so Nephi brings his comments to a close by an exhortation to pray always.

2 Ne 32 9VERSE 9

2 Ne 32 9Ye Must Pray Always. Prayer has been defined as the direct approach of man to God, to make requests or to commune. Prayers, says Dr. John A. Widtsoe, the Apostle, are always heard and always answered, even if not as we expect. To arise from prayer, refreshed in spirit, is of itself an answer. Dr. Widtsoe recommends regular times of prayer in the household, if possible. It might be well, he says, to pray with the family just before the family meal, when most members of the family are present. (Program of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, p. 119.)

2 Ne 32 9Family Prayer. If there were more family prayers, there would be an increased disposition in the home to overlook and forgive such little failings as are common to weak mortals; there would be greater unity in the home and fewer divorces to curse the community; children would have more respect for the parents; the ties of love would be stronger, and there would be few prodigal sons and daughters and less crime; there would be better health, increased contentment and prosperity, because of more general observance of the Word of Wisdom and the law of tithing and fast offerings.

2 Ne 32 9Personal Prayers. But family prayers do not, and are not intended to, take the place of private devotion. As is well known, our Lord says on that subject: "But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thine inner chamber, and having shut thy door, pray to thy Father, which is in secret and thy Father which seeth in secret, shall recompense thee." Every human being is exposed to temptations and has weaknesses which should prompt to private prayer; perhaps to confession, and humble petitions for pardon, and for increased power of resistance—which can be of no possible interest to anybody else. Frequent private prayer is the telephone message to our heavenly home. It is best sent in a booth secluded from the noise and confusion of a busy world.

2 Ne 32 9Public Prayers. And then there are the meetings for public devotion. To attend them is a duty we owe to the community in which they are held. The Apostle Paul warns against the habit of "forsaking the assembling ourselves together, as the custom of some is." If that example were followed generally, public assemblies for devotion would dwindle away, and the community would lose their influence for morality and spiritual activity.

2 Ne 32 9The common excuse for lack of interest in religious meetings is that there is nothing to learn by attending them. "You hear the same thing over and over again."

2 Ne 32 9That criticism is, of course, a not infrequent estimate of the average sermon. Whether it is justified or not depends largely on the frame of mind of the critic. But the sermon is not the only part of the service. Perhaps not even the most essential. The presence of our Savior, in his Holy Spirit, as on the day of Pentecost, wherever two or three are gathered in his name; the sacrament, in which our covenants with the Lord are renewed; the inspiring songs of joy and praise, the prayers and thanksgivings and devotion, are the essential features of Christian divine services. They are as necessary to a healthy spiritual life as a pure atmosphere is to the vigor of the body. Men and women must have companionship. Frequently those who forsake the congregations of the Church join secular organizations with questionable objects and activities.

2 Ne 32 9Still, the sermon is an important part of the divine service. The speaker who accepts the call to occupy the pulpit has a great responsibility. As a messenger from God he must have a message to deliver to the congregation. He must not regard the rostrum as a place from which to exhibit real or supposed talents: still less as a platform on which to practice public speaking, which can be done more properly in the family circle, at the time of the family devotion. Enlightened by the Holy Spirit, he will regard the pulpit as a banqueting table from which to distribute the bread of life abundantly, not in the form of stale crusts nor as half-baked dough, but in delicious loaves, fresh from the glowing embers on the altar of private meditation and fervent prayers.

GENERAL NOTES

An anecdote is told about Martin Luther. It is said that he on one occasion was asked to examine a young candidate for the pulpit, to ascertain his qualifications for the ministry, and that the first question the venerable leader of Protestantism asked was: "What do you know about the devil?"

Many a shaft of sarcasm has been aimed at the immortal Wittenberg professor, ex-friar and author of, "On the Babylonish Captivity of the Church," on account of this seeming overestimation of the importance of the role of Satan in the world. But Luther was right. No one can successfully combat the evil influences at work who knows nothing about them; or who underestimates their power.

* * *

The sacred Scriptures everywhere teach the personality of the adversary of the Son of God. Here, in the Book of Nephi, he is said to be stirring up the children of men to hostility against that which is good. It is said that, unless they escape by repentance, he will drive them, as prisoner in chains, to destruction. Some he will lead enchanted with siren songs about all being well, although death lurks on either side, Scylla and Charybdis. Others he convinces that there is no personal evil angel, no place where he reigns, while he is taking them to the region from which there is no deliverance. (2 Ne. 28:22, 23)

* * *

Our Lord, during his earthly mission, recognized the existence of the adversary. He recognized his power, when he spoke of him as "the prince of this world" (John 12:31; 14:30, 16:11). Which means not only that he exists, but that he wields immense influence in the world. It means, in fact, that his power is so great that St. Paul can consistently call him, "the god of this world" (2 Cor. 4:4). That this is not merely a figure of speech appears from the fact that he is also described as the "prince of the power of the air" (Eph. 2:22), which can only mean that, if God permitted him, he could, by his intelligence and resources, engage the forces of nature to the injury of men.

The story of Job confirms this thought. In that magnificent drama, he causes not only the Sabacans to slay the servants of the patriarch (Job 1:15), but also the lightning to strike his flocks, together with the shepherds (v. 16). He makes the Chaldeans kill the camels and their keepers, and he directs a cyclone to destroy the house in which the children of Job are feasting, burying them in the debris (17-19). And, finally, Satan, having obtained divine permission, attacked Job himself with "boils" that covered the entire body (2:1-8).

In his encounter with our Lord immediately after the baptism of the Holy One, Satan claimed ownership of the world and offered it to him as a reward for joining his worshipers—a proposition which the Son of God has had rejected long before, when the great apostasy in heaven took place (Pearl of Great P., Mor. 4:1-2; or Ab. 3:27) But when he said to Jesus: "To thee will I give all this authority and the glory of them; for it hath been delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will give it." (Luke 4:1), he did not speak the truth; for no part of the earth belongs legally to him; much less the entire world. And yet, our Lord recognized his immense importance, when he said: "If Satan is divided against himself, how shall his kingdom stand?" (Luke 11:18.) Judging from Scripture passages, Satan has always endeavored to obtain control over men by means of their own organizations, religious, political and social. And so we read of his "throne" (Rev. 2:13); his "synagogue" (Rev. 3:9); and "worldrulers of darkness" (Eph. 6:12), etc. In Daniel 10:13, 20, it appears that rulers of kingdoms sometimes are on the side of Satan, and that Michael, the archangel, still is actively engaged against him.

Yes, he has great power in the world. But he can never obtain possession of anyone that does not surrender voluntarily. "Resist the devil, and he will flee from you." (James 4:7) Read the remarkable story in the Pearl of Great Price, Moses 1:18-22, where Satan is said to have fled from Moses, weeping and wailing, because he could not persuade the great prophet to join him in rebellion.

Hurl your inkstand in his face, as Luther is said to have done at Wartburg, if you have no other weapon handy. He fears and hates the written as well as spoken word of God. And so do his servants.

THE OFFICE OF THE HOLY GHOST

According to the Word of God, those who have repented and received baptism have the assurance that the gift of the Holy Ghost will be bestowed upon them. Peter, speaking on behalf of the Divine Master, said to the converts on the day of Pentecost: "Repent, and be baptized ... and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost" (Acts 2:38). Ananias was sent to Saul with the message of salvation, in order that he might be "filled with the Holy Ghost," as well as receive his sight (Acts 9:6). The apostles, though instructed and given authority to preach and baptize in the name of the Lord, were not fully equipped for the ministry until they had received the power of the Holy Spirit for themselves and to impart to those who should believe through their word. For that reason the Master commanded them to wait in Jerusalem, for the fulfilment of "the promise of the Father, which, saith he, ye have heard of me" (Acts 1:4). Then He ascended. It was, as He had previously explained to them (John 16:7), necessary that He should "go away," for, "if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you." Just why the gift of the Spirit could not be bestowed until our Lord had departed, we may not comprehend; but it was so, in accordance with the pre-arranged plan of salvation. Our Lord completed His mission by ascending to His Father, and then He sent the Comforter with power from on high.

This outpouring of the Holy Spirit was foretold by the prophets of old, for it was as necessary as the atonement for the establishment of the kingdom of God. God says through Joel: "And it shall come to pass afterward that I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh (Joel 2:28); and Zechariah undoubtedly refers to the same glorious manifestation of the divine Presence in these words: "And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications" (Zech. 12:10).

The same promises for the gift of the Spirit have been given in our day (Doc. and Cov. 33:15, 39:23, and many other places).

The pouring out of the gift of the Holy Ghost is frequently spoken of as "baptism." John the Baptist told the multitudes on the banks of the Jordan: "He that cometh after me... shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire" (Matt. 3:11; John 1:33). In the Book of Mormon the same expression occurs. For "Behold, then shall ye receive the Holy Ghost; yea, then cometh the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost (2 Ne. 31:13). "Whoso cometh unto me with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, him will I baptize with fire and with the Holy Ghost" (3 Ne. 9:20).

The question has been asked. How can the Holy Spirit be "poured out"? Or, how can baptism be performed in Holy Spirit? Who, or what, is the Holy Spirit?

The Holy Spirit, or the Holy Ghost, is, in the first place, a person, or personage, though not dwelling in a tabernacle as tangible as that of the Father, or the Son (Doc. and Cov. 130:22). As a person he is one with the Father and the Son, and the three "constitute the great, matchless, governing and supreme power over all things; by whom all things were created and made that were created and made, and these three constitute the Godhead, and are one" (Lectures on Faith 5:2). It would be inconsistent and meaningless to speak of the "outpouring" of the person of the Holy Spirit, or baptism in a person.

But the Holy Spirit is also something which we, for lack of better terms, may characterize as energy, a force, a power, an influence, which proceedeth from the Godhead and fills the universe, both the visible and invisible, as David says: "Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there. If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea; even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me; even the night shall be light about me. Yea, the darkness hideth not from thee; but the night shineth as the day: the darkness and the light are both alike to thee" (Psalm 139:7-12). This energy, this influence, can be poured out; the inner man can be immersed in it as the body in the waters of baptism.

It is necessary to make this distinction between the Holy Ghost as a person, and the omnipresent, divine Influence. Careful writers and speakers of the Church observe this difference.

The Prophet Joseph Smith says "There is a difference between the Holy Ghost and the gift of the Holy Ghost. Cornelius received the Holy Ghost before he was baptized, which was the convincing power of God unto him of the truth of the gospel, but he could not receive the gift of the Holy Ghost until after he was baptized. Had he not taken this sign, or ordinance, upon him, the Holy Ghost, which convinced him of the truth of God, would have left him" (History of the Church, Vol. 4, Page 555).

The Holy Ghost personally, as it were, opened the door through which the gospel message should be delivered to the Gentile world, by pouring out upon those in the house of Cornelius a portion of the power and influence which enabled them to accept the truth, speak with tongues, and magnify God. But the full measure of this divine gift came after baptism and the laying on of hands; otherwise, baptism in water would have been superfluous. The Prophet Joseph Smith again observes: "Until he [Cornelius] obeyed these ordinances and received the gift of the Holy Ghost, by the laying on of hands, according to the order of God, he could not have healed the sick or commanded an evil spirit to come out of a man."

Orson Pratt, speaking of the Holy Spirit, as distinct from the person of the Holy Ghost, says: "When I speak of the Holy Spirit, I speak of it as being a substance that is precisely the same in its attributes as those of the Father and Son; I speak of it as being a substance that is diffused throughout space, the same as oxygen is in pure water or air... This light, then, recollect, is so universally diffused, that it giveth light to all things. This is the same light that governs all things, and it is called 'the power of God.' ... It is this same spirit that acts in connection with the Father and Son in governing all things in the heavens and upon the earth, and through all the boundless extent of space. Cause this oneness, this union among the particles of the Spirit, to cease, and you would soon see all things go into confusion. Take away this Spirit, and you would immediately see some things going up, others down; some moving horizontally; one portion of the earth would divide from the other; one part would be flying here and another there... Portions of this Spirit, we say, exist throughout every part of space, and they perform all the work of governing and keeping that perfect harmony which we behold in all nature. All nature is by these means made to submit to the great law of oneness" (Journal of Discourses, Vol. 2, pp. 337, 339, 340, 341).

This thought is expressed in the Doctrine and Covenants as follows: "And the light which now shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlightened your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings, which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space. The light which is in all things; which giveth life to all things: which is the law by which all things are governed: even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things" (Doc. and Cov. 88:11-13). And again: "He comprehendeth all things, and all things are before him, and all things are round about him: and he is above all things, and in all things, and is through all things, and is round about all things; and all things are by him, and of him, even God, for ever and ever" (Doc. and Cov. 88:41). [^1]

When the reception of the Holy Spirit, or the gift of the Spirit, is compared to baptism, it is, as already observed, this power, this influence, this light which is meant by the term "Spirit."

Human language is but imperfect, and it is doubtful whether there is another word expressive of the true nature of this divine element. Orson Pratt calls it a "substance." We may, with Dr. Talmage, refer to it as a "power," or an influence, or as some authors do, call it "light," or couple it with the term "fire." And it is all this. But it is also much more. It is "Holy Spirit"—a substance, an influence, a power, a light, a "fire," that proceeds from the Godhead, and permeates everything; an element in which "we live, and move, and have our being" (Acts 17:28). It is the glory of God, the manifestation of the divine presence; the "fire and smoke" which made Sinai tremble and which consumed those who came near without bearing the priesthood; the glory which rested on the Mercy seat in the Tabernacle; the "wind" which filled the house on the day of Pentecost, and the flames over the heads of the disciples. It is divine intelligence, since "the glory of God is intelligence" (Doc. and Cov. 93:36). It is the force before which mountains flee and worlds perish; for, "the presence of the Lord shall be as the melting fire that burneth, and as the fire which causeth the waters to boil" (Doc. and Cov. 133:41). There is no better word for this omnipresent, divine power than "Holy Spirit."

When a person has received baptism in Holy Spirit, the presence of this divine intelligence, this energy, is manifested in various ways.

Through it the believer is enabled to know that Jesus is the Christ, the Messiah, the promised Redeemer of the world, and the Son of God, just as surely as he knows, through the testimony of his senses, that the world exists and that he is part of it. This no man can know except by the "Holy Ghost" (I Cor. 12:3); that is, except he has the baptism in "Holy Spirit," for so the verse may be rendered: "No one speaking in God's Spirit says that Jesus is accursed; and no one can say Jesus is Lord except in Holy Spirit." Truth and knowledge depend upon this divine outpouring in the soul. In the same chapter (verse 13) we read, translated literally, "For in one Spirit are we all baptized into one body ... and have been all given to drink, into one Spirit." The Spirit, therefore, becomes part of every believer, as a member of the body of the Church of Christ, just as the spirit of man is indwelling in every part of the natural body. It is a possession guaranteed by the covenant into which he has entered, and which remains with him as long as he is faithful to that covenant, for enlightenment and knowledge concerning the things of God.

Some of the effects of the Spirit may be enumerated. "The fruit of the Spirit," Paul says, "is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance" (Gal. 5:22, 23). Another effort of the gift of the Spirit is liberty; for, "Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty" (II Cor. 3:17). There is freedom from the bondage of the Mosaic laws and statutes which were enacted for the temporary guidance of the people of God during the period of minority. There is also free access to the Mercy Seat, which ancient Israel could approach only through a representative.

Through the Spirit we enter into an actual experience of divine sonship. We learn to say with full confidence, "Abba Father!" and have the testimony of the Spirit, that, "if [we are] children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ" (Rom. 8:16, 17)—not servants in the house of the Father, but heirs.

This confidence is sometimes spoken of as the "assurance" of faith, as different from the timid confession: "Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief." Because of this assurance Paul says: "We ... rejoice in hope of the glory of God. ... because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us" (Rom. 5:2-5). And John says: "He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witness in himself" (I John 5:10), which accords with Rom. 8:16: "The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God."

The Spirit enables us to pray. It "helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints according to the will of God" (Rom. 8:26, 27). "And it shall come to pass that he that asketh in Spirit shall receive in Spirit" (Doc. and Cov. 46:28).

Through the Spirit we become one with Christ and one with each other, "for intelligence cleaveth unto intelligence." (Doc. and Cov. 88:40), and our Lord prays: "That they may be one, even as we are one: I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one" (John 17:22, 23).

These are fruits of the Spirit, common to all who have been endowed with "power from on high." But there are also special gifts "For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit; to another faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing by the same Spirit; to another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another discerning of spirits; to another divers kinds of tongues; to another the interpretation of tongues; but all these worketh that one and the selfsame Spirit" (I Cor. 12:4-11). Of Bezaleel the Lord said: "I have filled him with the Spirit of God to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass" (Exodus 31:3, 4). In the like manner Moses, and after him the Judges, were qualified by special gifts of the Spirit for their work, and so were the prophets, from Samuel to Malachi. The Brother of Jared, had, in the highest degree, the gift of performing miracles. Moroni tells us that he spoke to Mount Zerin, and it was removed (Ether 12:30). Nephi, Alma, Moroni, and, in our own day and generation, the Prophet Joseph Smith, and his successors, and associates have been qualified for their work by the same Spirit.

By that Spirit man became a "living soul"—a class different from the animals. Job says, the inspiration of the Almighty giveth men understanding; that is reason and intelligence, for we read: He "teaches us more than the beasts of the earth" (Job 35-11). But it is especially the source of all spiritual life.

Finally, as this Spirit is the source of knowledge and truth, and spiritual power, so it is also the medium through which the resurrection and the quickening of our mortal bodies will be effected. Paul tells us (Rom. 8:11): "If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in you." This verse is rather obscure, but the meaning seems to be that, if we have within us the Spirit of God, who brought our Savior's body out of the grave, then He who raised up Christ, as the head and representative of His people, shall quicken our mortal bodies by His Spirit that dwelleth in us. And thus not only the saints who are dead at the coming of Christ, but also those who live at that time, shall be quickened by the Spirit (I Thess. 4:14-17), and meet the Lord in His coming.

As has been stated, laying on of hands is the ordinance by which the gift of the Holy Spirit is imparted. But it must be performed by one having authority to do so.

Nephi, standing at the border line of the great Hereafter, opens his heart to his people, as, perhaps, never before.

Imperfection Confessed. First, his own laboriously executed work passes before him, and he finds it imperfect in high degree. In all humility he confesses its defects (v. 1). At the same time he finds consolation in the fact that he has written under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit (vv. 2, 3), and that he has consecrated his work by constant prayers and supplications (v. 4), and warning against sin (v. 5). This makes him feel to sing for joy (v. 6).

This Clears the Atmosphere, and the outlook becomes brighter. He loves his people and knows that many of them will stand spotless before the judgment seat (v. 7). He loves the Jews, the people whence he came (v. 8). He loves the Gentiles who have accepted Christ as their Redeemer (v. 9). He assures all, Jews and Gentiles, that if they believe in Christ, they will also believe the words which he (Nephi) has written; for, he says, they are the words of Christ; and his prayer for all is that we may be saved in the kingdom of Christ at the last day. (vv. 10-12).

To believers in Christ he says: "Farewell until that great day shall come." (v. 13)

To unbelievers: "I bid you an everlasting Farewell, for these words shall condemn you at the last day. (v. 14) For what I seal on earth"—meaning, what he had written—"shall be brought against you at the judgment bar." (v. 15)

I do not know that we can do better than close this study with verse 6, as the last word of Nephi. They express his lovely character to perfection:

"I glory in plainness; I glory in truth; I glory in Jesus, For he hath redeemed my soul from Sheol."

THE PROPHET ISAIAH

Isaiah in the Book of Mormon. As is well known, there are no less than 18 chapters of the Book of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon. That is a considerable part of the prophetic record.

In the First Book of Nephi we have chapters 48 and 49. Part of the 49th chapter is also quoted in the Second Book of Nephi, in the account of the Teachings of Jacob (2 Nephi 6:6, 7, 16-18). Is. 50 and 51 are also quoted by Jacob (2 Ne. 7 and 8).

Is. 2 to 14 are quoted by Nephi (2 Ne. 12 to 24).

Is. 53 is quoted by Abinadi as part of his address to the priests of Noah. (Mos. 14)

Whether this order of the chapters is an indication of the order in which they appeared on the plates of Laban, which Nephi had, we have no means of knowing. It might pay scholarship to look into that question from a Book-of-Mormon point of view. That the original chronological order has been upset in the Hebrew manuscripts, is not impossible.

Who was Isaiah? He was the son of one Amoz and he is said to have prophesied during the reigns of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz and Hezekiah, kings of Judah. (Isa. 1:1) One tradition has it that he was put to death during the reign of Manasseh, son of Hezekiah. It is supposed that his prophetic activities fell during the period of 758-690 B.C. That would make him a contemporary of Hosea, Michah, and Nahum. It would bring him quite close to the time of Lehi, who left Jerusalem in the year 600 B.C.

The Policy of Isaiah. The Jews, at the time of this prophet, came in contact with questions relating to world politics, through the movements of the Assyrians toward the Mediterranean, and the countermovements of the Medes and other nations. Uzziah, following the demand of militarists, built fortresses and heaped up war implements, as a matter of safety against invaders. King Ahaz, not confident of the military strength of the kingdom, thought it better to pay tribute and trust in the generosity of the Assyrians. Others sought political expedients, as unworthy of the people of Jehovah. He assured them that the only guaranty of safety was implicit trust in God and obedience to his commandments. Hezekiah followed this sound advice, and the Lord took charge of the defense of the city of Jerusalem against the Assyrians. (Is. 37:35-38)

Fate of Isaiah. The tradition that regards the beginning of the reign of Manasseh as the time in which the prophetic activities of Isaiah came to an end, avers that the prophet was condemned to death because he rebuked the apostate king and predicted the destruction of Jerusalem and the temple by the Babylonians.

Further Particulars About Isaiah. The prophet was married to a "prophetess" and he had at least two sons, Shear-Jashub (meaning, "the remnant shall return") Is. 7:3, and Maher-shalal-hash-baz (meaning, "making speed to the spoil he hasteneth the prey") Is. 8:1. During the reign of Hezekiah, he was highly respected. That he wielded considerable influence in the state is evident from the fact that he caused Sheba, who plotted with the Egyptians, to be removed from the office he held.

As a prophet, Isaiah foresaw the apostasy of the nation and the destruction of the city and temple by the Babylonians. But to him this was not the end; it was not the ragnorok. It was rather a change of seasons. The land would not remain desolate for ever, parched by the burning sun and swept by torrid blasts. The dry season would have an end and be followed by the early rains and a complete resurrection of the apparently dead kingdom of Judah; and not only that, but he saw a new-born world, glorified under the rule of Jehovah. It is only when we understand the outlook of Isaiah upon the development of the world, that we can understand his wonderful prophecies.

The Book of Isaiah. The Prophet Isaiah, as already stated, delivered his prophecies during a period of many years. The same is true of other prophets. Each discourse was no doubt recorded in substance at the time it was delivered, by whoever performed the duties of the secretary of the prophet at the time. By and by there was a number of discourses, and when it became desirable to gather them into one volume, or roll, for the benefit of the friends of the prophet at home, or for the people abroad, as for instance those in the Assyrian captivity, or for the benefit of coming generations, or for any other purpose, the first selection, collation, arrangement and editing were, naturally, done under the direction of the prophet himself.

This is not mere assumption. The events recorded in the 36th chapter of Jeremiah, the great prophet who lived about seventy years after Isaiah, illustrate this plausible explanation of the origin of the prophetic books.

It was during the reign of King Jehoiakim, whom the Egyptian Pharaoh Necho had placed on the throne of the kingdom of Judah. The defeat of the Egyptians in Syria and the consequent fall of Judah were drawing near. Then, the Lord commanded Jeremiah to take a "roll of a book" and "write therein all the words that I have spoken unto thee against Judah, and against all the nations, from the day I spake unto thee, from the days of Josiah, even unto this day." The prophet immediately called Baruch to be his secretary, and this able scribe wrote down the words of the Lord as dictated by Jeremiah. This, then, was the procedure.

The roll as completed was presented to the king. It was meant to be a warning to him and to all the Jews. But Jehoiakim, after having heard a few pages, became enraged and threw the entire manuscript into the fire, where it was completely destroyed. Later, Jeremiah was commanded by the Lord to take another roll and "write in it all the former words that were in the first roll." He did so, "and there were added besides unto them many like words." (Jer. 36:1-4, 20-23, 27, 32)

It is evident that the prophet had the written material on hand from which he could have copies made whenever needed, and that copies were made when required. In such copies the chronological arrangement would not be observed, if some other principle of classification were considered more effective for the purpose in view. Prophecies of other prophets may have been incorporated in the text as proofs or confirmation of the truths conveyed. Diversities of style may have crept in, owing to the difference in education and natural gifts and endowments of various scribes employed.

The Unity of the Book. This is a much discussed subject. The argument started when, toward the end of the 18th century, someone expressed doubts regarding the authorship of the 50th chapter of the book. Soon learned men suggested that the entire latter section, chapters 40-66, must have been written by an unknown author whom they proposed to call the Second Isaiah, (Deutero-Isaiah). Rosenmueller, Eichhorn, Gesenius, Ewald, Delitzsch and many others were among the defenders of this view.

But the process of critical disintegration did not stop with this proposition. Presently the critics asserted that they had discovered contributions of several unknown authors, some of whom lived after the exile in Babylonia. The idea of a plurality of Isaiahs grew. Moderate skeptics, represented by such men as Drs. Driver, Davidson and others, were willing to admit that Isaiah was responsible for about 800 verses of the book, but that the remaining 492 verses must have been written by others. A more radical group would not give Isaiah credit for more than 262 verses of the 1292 comprising the book. The remaining 1030 verses, they say, are from the pens of other writers. All seem to agree in regarding the last chapters, 40-66, as belonging to the time after the Babylonian exile.

The question has an actual interest to the student of the Book of Mormon, because portions of Isaiah, which the critics say, were first composed after the exile, are quoted by Nephi as part of the plates of Laban, which record was carried out of Palestine long before the captivity. How could those plates contain predictions that were first made three or four hundred years after their removal by Lehi to America? I remember my late friend, the Right Rev. Bishop Spaulding, used to put that question as an argument, to him irrefutable, against the authenticity and genuineness of the Book of Mormon. (Episcopalian Bishop residing in Salt Lake City.)

The question sounds formidable in view of the profound learning of the advocates of a plurality of Isaiahs and the disintegration of his book.

But the truth is that every learned objection to the view that Isaiah is one author and one book, has been met and refuted by equally weighty scholarship.

Consider, for instance, the assumption that the Chaldean words in the book prove that it was written after the exile, when the Jews had learned the language of the Chaldeans. It has been shown that Chaldean words are found in Hebrew writings, just as Latin, Greek, and other foreign words are found in English literature. But what does that prove as to authorship? It has, furthermore, been shown that there are only four indisputably Chaldean words in Isaiah, and that they occur in the part that even the critics admit belongs to him.

Thus every objection has been answered. And in addition it has been shown that for a period of 2,500 years after Isaiah no one had any doubt of the genuineness of his book, but that it was accepted even by the authors of the New Testament and by our Lord Himself as the work of Isaiah, the son of Amoz. It has been shown that 47 chapters of the 66 in the book, are quoted, directly or indirectly, by our Lord and his apostles. Among the passages quoted as the words of Isaiah are parts of chapters 1, 6, 9, 10, 11, 29, 40, 42, 53, 61 and 65. And thus the Book of Mormon is amply justified in giving the writings of Isaiah as part of the contents of the plates of Laban.

A Rational View. Some modern scholars regard chapters 36-39 as the central section. The preceding discourses, they hold, relate chiefly to the Assyrian period, while the latter portion is, as it were, a preview of the Babylonian era.

This should be supplemented by the statement that through the entire book references are made to the final redemption and gathering of Israel and Judah, and the salvation of all the world in the kingdom of the Messiah. On this understanding of the origin and construction of the book, it is easily seen that it is one composition and not a patchwork of scrolls. Also, that it has one author, not many authors and still more editors. Klostermann, speaking of the two parts of Isaiah, in which it is naturally divided, observes: "Since in both, the general view of the Holy Land and Jerusalem is that of a desolate and depopulated region to be repeopled by the return of the exiled, doubtless the editor meant to convey the idea that, of both parts, the Isaiah of 36-39 is the prophetic author. It is therefore unscientific arbitrariness, instead of setting apart chapters 28-66, and employing chapters 28-39 as the key to 60-66, to break off after 35-39, and to imagine oneself in a new region. He who holds 35:3-4 does not stumble at 49:1; and only he who reads 28-29 can understand 48:3-11, and can regard the same prophet as basing a second prediction upon the fulfillment of the first." (The New Shaff-Herzog Encyclopedia.)

THE FIVE BOOKS OF MOSES

1 Nephi 5:11

The Pentateuch. As regards the first books of the Old Testament, we must suppose that Moses, or his secretaries under his supervision, recorded the chief events of the day. The notes, properly collated and edited, became the law. They were, in all probability, kept near the sacred chest, or ark, in which the stone tables, the pot of manna, and the rod of Aaron, were deposited. See Deut. 31:26, where we read, "Take this book of the law, and put it in the side of the ark of the covenant of the Lord your God, that it may be there for a witness against thee." There must also have been copies of this law in the possession of the leaders of the people, whose duty it was to expound it and to administer the ordinances.

At some time Moses wrote, or caused to be written, under his direction, the introduction to the law which we have in Genesis—the account of the creation, the flood, the building of the tower, the history of the Patriarch Abraham and his immediate descendants down to the exodus. And towards the end of his life he added the fifth book, which is called Deuteronomy, because it is a recapitulation of many things previously recorded. It contains chiefly the moral law, as promulgated by Moses just before his departure. Jesus and his first Apostles loved this book. It is quoted at least 32 times in the New Testament, and scholars have recognized about 80 references to it in the latter part of the Bible.

The Mosaic authorship of the Pentateuch cannot be successfully denied. By that I do not mean that Moses wrote everything in that volume with his own hand. But no matter who did the mechanical work, or when, the books are Mosaic. They came from him. Genesis is no doubt based upon documents and literature to which Moses had access, and which he had studied in Egypt, and in the land of Midian. The story of the expedition of Amraphel for instance, is probably based on records then existing. But besides such sources of information, revelations were given to Moses concerning the heavens and the earth, and the children of men to the last generations. (See the Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses.) He had first-hand information from the Source of all truth.

Footnotes

"Women and children joined in these fiendish atrocities." (John Fiske, "The Discovery of America," vol. 1, p. 49.)

---
Notas:
[^1] "Intertribal warfare was perpetual, save now and then for truces of brief duration. Warfare was attended by wholesale massacre. As many prisoners as could be managed were taken home by their captors; in some cases they were adopted into the tribe of the latter as a means of increasing its fighting strength, otherwise they were put to death with lingering torments. There was nothing which afforded the red men such exquisite delight as the spectacle of live human flesh lacerated with stone knives or hissing under the touch of firebrands, and for ingenuity in devising tortures they have never been equalled. Cannibalism was quite commonly practiced.
