Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

THE BOOK OF JACOB

THE BROTHER OF NEPHI

CHAPTER 1

SCJacob 1 1Jacob 1 2Jacob 1 3Jacob 1 4Jacob 1 5Jacob 1 6Jacob 1 7Jacob 1 8VERSES 1-8

SCJacob 1 1Jacob 1 2Jacob 1 3Jacob 1 4Jacob 1 5Jacob 1 6Jacob 1 7Jacob 1 8What "I should write upon these plates." Here the thread of narrative is again broken, to be resumed by Jacob. Fifteen years passed and then Jacob was instructed to take charge of the second set of plates and to hand them down to his descendants, properly completed with the history of his times.

SCJacob 1 1Jacob 1 2Jacob 1 3Jacob 1 4Jacob 1 5Jacob 1 6Jacob 1 7Jacob 1 8Readers of the Book of Mormon know that Nephi had been instructed to make a set of smaller plates for the record of sacred history, and that he did so, while the larger plates, which had been kept by Lehi were devoted to secular events, chiefly. (See 1 Ne. 6:16) This arrangement was not new, or original, in the days of Nephi. Dr. Leonard Wooley, an English archaeologist who has spent years of successful research in the land of the Near East, tells us in his little but immensely interesting book on the Sumerians, that about 2000 years B.C. scribes of that race undertook to record the glories of the past. They, he says, had at their disposal, a mass of documentary evidence and from this they compiled, on the one hand the political history of the people and on the other, their religious traditions. The original records were lost long ago but this set of duplicate tables undoubtedly facilitated the making of such excerpts and lists of kings as do exist and which enabled Berosus, the Greek historian (about 260 B.C.) to write his Babylonian-Chaldean history. Jacob was instructed by Nephi to write upon the small plates mainly that which he considered "most precious," such as "sacred preaching" or "revelations" or "prophecies."

SCJacob 1 9Jacob 1 10Jacob 1 11Jacob 1 12VERSES 9-12

SCJacob 1 9Jacob 1 10Jacob 1 11Jacob 1 12Nephi was now advanced in years. He appointed a king over the people. The people, however, decided to make nephi a title as well as a name and let their kings be known as nephis, Nephi I and Nephi II, etc. Thus the king-title was virtually set aside for the title of Nephi, which means prophet.

SCJacob 1 9Jacob 1 10Jacob 1 11Jacob 1 12Having set his house in order, Nephi passed away.

SCJacob 1 9Jacob 1 10Jacob 1 11Jacob 1 12The late President George Q. Cannon in his Story of the Life of Nephi offers this beautiful tribute to this mighty servant of God:

SCJacob 1 9Jacob 1 10Jacob 1 11Jacob 1 12"Fifty-five years from the time that Lehi left Jerusalem, Nephi gave a commandment to his brother Jacob concerning the small plates upon which he had engraved so many revelations and so much doctrine. He desired his brother to keep them and to hand them down to his children after him; and to be sure and pursue the same course with them that he had—engrave upon them sacred things which were preached and any great revelations or prophecies that might be given. Jacob did this; and they remained in the hands of his lineage until Amaleki, who was a descendant of his, placed them in the custody of King Benjamin. Jacob does not inform us, in his book that we have received, how long this was before the death of Nephi; but, as he says in the same connection, that Nephi began to be old, and saw that he must die, it is probable that it was only a short time.

SCJacob 1 9Jacob 1 10Jacob 1 11Jacob 1 12"It was then that Nephi anointed a man to be ruler and a king over his people. He was so greatly beloved by them, through his self-sacrificing and continuous labors for them and his courage in defending them; (for he had been compelled to have recourse to the sword of Laban, and to wield it in their defense against the attacks of the Lamanites); that they were desirous to retain in remembrance, his name. They, therefore, called his successors Second Nephi, Third Nephi, etc., 'let them be of whatever name they would.'

SCJacob 1 9Jacob 1 10Jacob 1 11Jacob 1 12"The government was, without doubt, more patriarchal than monarchial in its character. Upon one occasion, Nephi's brother, Jacob, in addressing the people, uses this language: 'Having been called of God, and ordained after the manner of his holy order, and having been consecrated by my brother, Nephi, unto whom ye look as a king or a protector, and on whom ye depend for safety' Yet Nephi himself informs us that his people desired that he should be their king; 'but,' he adds, 'I, Nephi, was desirous that they should have no kings; nevertheless, I did for them according to that which was in my power.' This explains the relationship which he bore to them. He taught them the will of God, administered ordinances unto them, was their leader in all civil and religious matters in repelling the attacks of their enemies and was able to teach them mechanism and the arts of manufacturing. To such a man his people would naturally look, as Jacob says, as a king or protector. Before his death, it appears that he chose his brother, Jacob—who was a man of great faith and a prophet, and who with Joseph, another brother, had been ordained a priest and teacher by him over the land of the Nephites—to take the lead in all matters and to have charge of the records upon which the more sacred things were to be kept, and anointed another to be ruler in civil affairs. Whether it was one of his own sons or not, we are not informed, neither is it stated that this office was made hereditary. From what is said subsequently in the record respecting the kings, however, it seems clear that this office did descend from father to son; but the people also had a voice in choosing the king. The brief allusion that is made to these kings by Jarom nearly two centuries after Nephi's death, shows that for that period they had been mighty and faithful men of God. Upwards of four hundred years after Nephi's departure, a glimpse is given us of the mode of life which the king led. Speaking of Mosiah, son of Benjamin, it is said, 'And King Mosiah did cause his people that they should till the earth. And he also, himself, did till the earth, that thereby he might do according to that which his father had done in all things.'

SCJacob 1 9Jacob 1 10Jacob 1 11Jacob 1 12"Such a monarchy as is here described, would be an inexpensive form of government, and it is probable that it was chiefly of this character from the beginning. We know that the two kings who preceded Mosiah II were like himself—prophets of God. He, himself, was a seer, also, as was his grandfather of the same name, and most likely his father, Benjamin; and he had in his possession the Urim and Thummim. Such men ruled the people in righteousness and as kind fathers, and kept the expense of government down to the lowest point. Whether or not there was a change of dynasty when the first Mosiah was chosen king, is not certain from what is written by Amaleki in the Book of Omni, though it does not appear improbable. Neither does it appear why the kings, Mosiah, Benjamin, and Mosiah were not called by the dynastic name of Nephi, according to the custom which prevailed through the long life-time of Jacob and probably afterwards. If a change of dynasty did occur, this custom may have been changed, though scarcely for that cause alone, as Nephi was still the revered founder of the nation; it may be that the dynastic name was omitted and their own names mentioned, for the purpose of better distinguishing them. When the record which was kept by the kings upon the other plates of Nephi shall be brought forth; we shall have the knowledge respecting the history of the Nephites covering this period of upwards of four centuries that will be of inestimable value. One thing, however, is plain from that which has come to us, that when the first Mosiah became king, in him was again united the kingly and priestly authority.

SCJacob 1 9Jacob 1 10Jacob 1 11Jacob 1 12"And it came to pass that Nephi died.' In this simple language does Jacob record the event. He leaves Nephi's works to speak for him. And their consideration cannot fail to be of profit to all who will give them attention. The example of such a life is of immense benefit to mankind; it strengthens, elevates and inspires with noble purpose all who become acquainted with it. No Latter-day Saint can read the life of Nephi, as he has given it to us in his record, without being incited to exercise greater faith, to live nearer to God and to cherish loftier aims.

SCJacob 1 9Jacob 1 10Jacob 1 11Jacob 1 12"It can be said about the writings of Nephi (and this is also true of the entire Book of Mormon and in fact of all saving truth) that they bring the conviction of their divinity to the heart of every one who reads them in the spirit in which they were written. Read in that spirit, they fill the soul with a sweet and heavenly joy which only the spirit of God can produce.

SCJacob 1 9Jacob 1 10Jacob 1 11Jacob 1 12"The career of Nephi was a most eventful one. He passed through many trials and afflictions; he was often in positions of peril: but he never yielded, never faltered, nor never shrunk from any ordeal to which he was exposed. In every relation of life he admirably performed his part. As a son, he was all a father could desire and of this Lehi bore ample testimony before he died. As a brother he did all in his power to benefit and save his kindred. What his course was with those who followed him and cast their lots with him, we can understand by reading his teachings, his labors and the love in which they held him while living and his memory when dead. He was patient, persevering, energetic and skillful; a man who was evidently born to lead. He exhibited these qualities when required to return to Jerusalem. Afterwards in the wilderness it seemed as though the company would all have perished had it not been for his good sense and capacity as a hunter. In building the ship, in its management upon the ocean, in teaching his people to work in wood and in metals of all kinds—iron, copper, brass, steel, silver and gold—he exhibited his skill as a mechanic, a miner, a seaman, chemist and metallurgist. He manufactured swords and other weapons of defense, he built houses, he cultivated the ground, he raised flocks and herds, he built a temple, which though not so costly as Solomon's, was constructed after its pattern, and the workmanship upon it was exceedingly fine; he taught his people to be skillful, industrious and how to apply their labor to the best advantage; as a statesman he organized society upon a firm and permanent basis, laid the foundation of civil and religious liberty; gave shape to the government and polity and implanted in the breasts of his people such a love for and a determination to maintain equal rights that the effects were felt, it may be said in truth, through all the generations of his race. Understanding as he did the government of the Lord, before whom there are no privileged classes, he respected the rights of the people; and while he knew there must be officers to bear responsibility and a properly organized government, he knew also that it should be based upon the consent of the people. He brought with him to this 'promised land' the broadest conceptions respecting the principle of human equality and the rights of men. Some of his views we gather from his teachings. Speaking of the Lord, he says, 'And he inviteth them all to come unto him and partake of his goodness; and he denieth none that come unto him, black and white, bond and free, male and female; and he remembereth the heathen and all are alike unto God, both Jew and Gentile.' The nobility in which he evidently believed, was the nobility of good deeds. The perfect performance of duty would enoble the poorest and the lowliest and make him the peer of the richest and the best born. While his people were true to his teachings, this sentiment always prevailed. They enjoyed the largest liberty consistent with the preservation of good order. Every man had the greatest freedom of belief. Theft, robbery, violence, adultery and murder were all punished under the law; but there was no law against a man's belief; persecution of religion, however erroneous or false the religion might be, was expressly forbidden and was made punishable. In this way the quality and free agency of the people was preserved, and they were left at liberty to choose for themselves their faith and form of worship. So far as his influence and teachings went among the people, they were free and the country was a land of liberty unto them.

SCJacob 1 9Jacob 1 10Jacob 1 11Jacob 1 12"We here close the life of Nephi. He has shown us how much a mortal man, who devotes himself to God and his work, can accomplish for himself and his fellowmortals, and how near, by the exercise of faith, man can draw to God."

SCJacob 1 13Jacob 1 14VERSES 13-14

SCJacob 1 13Jacob 1 14Nephites and Lamanites. An important change in the division of the people is noted in this connection. Hitherto, the tribal arrangement into Nephites, Jacobites, Josephites, Zoramites, Ishmaelites, Lamanites and Lemuelites had been maintained for civic and genealogical purposes. Now, Jacob says, "I, Jacob, shall not hereafter distinguish them by these names, but I shall call them Lamanites that seek to destroy the people of Nephi, and those who are friendly to Nephi I shall call Nephites, or the people of Nephi."

SCJacob 1 13Jacob 1 14The term Nephites or Lamanites is generally supposed to refer only to the literal descendants of Lehi, through Nephi and Laman, respectively. This is not strictly correct.

SCJacob 1 13Jacob 1 14A few years after this change in giving names after tribal ancestors, as indicated, was made, we read,

SCJacob 1 13Jacob 1 14"And it came to pass that whosoever would not believe in the tradition of the Lamanites, but believed those records which were brought out of the land of Jerusalem, and also in the tradition of their fathers, which were correct, who believe in the commandments of God and kept them, were called the Nephites, or the people of Nephi, from that time forth...." (Alma 3:11)

SCJacob 1 13Jacob 1 14May not the reason for this deviation from the original and obvious rule of naming the people in accordance with their lineage been necessitated by the accession to the pioneer colonies of people, those whose genealogies were not known? Descendants of the Jaredites, for instance? Or from other arrivals here, of whom the Book of Mormon has no record? It is easier to understand what follows concerning the wickedness of the people at that early day of their history and their having a temple with temple ordinances and service, if we suppose that they had been joined by other elements.

SCJacob 1 15Jacob 1 16VERSES 15-16

SCJacob 1 15Jacob 1 16Began to grow hard in their hearts. The death of Nephi was a great spiritual loss to the people. This became evident already during the reign of his successor. The people began to adopt the practices of David and Solomon regarding marriage and concubinage. They also began to prospect for gold and silver and as a consequence of worldly success, their hearts were filled with pride. Jacob reproved them severely, having obtained the Lord's will concerning these things.

SCJacob 1 17Jacob 1 18Jacob 1 19VERSES 17-19

SCJacob 1 17Jacob 1 18Jacob 1 19Jacob and Joseph ordained priests and teachers. Sometime before Nephi died, he appointed Jacob and Joseph, his brothers, to the office of priest in the Holy Order of God. At the death of Nephi, Jacob succeeded him as the leader and head of the spiritual concerns of the people. Another was appointed to rule over their civil affairs.
