Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 2

SCJacob 2 1Jacob 2 2Jacob 2 3Jacob 2 4Jacob 2 5Jacob 2 6Jacob 2 7Jacob 2 8Jacob 2 9Jacob 2 10Jacob 2 11VERSES 1-11

SCJacob 2 1Jacob 2 2Jacob 2 3Jacob 2 4Jacob 2 5Jacob 2 6Jacob 2 7Jacob 2 8Jacob 2 9Jacob 2 10Jacob 2 11Commanded of the Lord to reprove the People. In this chapter and the two which follow, a continued sermon or a series of sermons, preached by Jacob, is recorded by him. They can easily be understood by all who desire to know and understand the truth. They bear the mark so plainly seen in Jacob's addresses, that of being devoid of any attempt to minimize or to apologize for what he has to say. He realized that a truth, spoken in plainness, is more quickly recognized than one decked in apologies, pretexts, and excuses. Besides this, he knew that such a one carried with it a conviction of right which would endure, while all else, no matter how pleasant, would "sooner or later perish" and as a dream, pass from the mind. Therefore, the plainness of the Gospel of Christ.

SCJacob 2 1Jacob 2 2Jacob 2 3Jacob 2 4Jacob 2 5Jacob 2 6Jacob 2 7Jacob 2 8Jacob 2 9Jacob 2 10Jacob 2 11There are times, when as a reproof, a truth is spoken in love and kindness. It is often more painful to him who imparts it than to those who should receive it. This seems to have been so in the case of Jacob. He expresses a deep concern for those who have been made to suffer because of the wrongdoings of others. To add grief and misery to the sufferings of those who had come to the temple to be comforted by God's holy word caused him to shrink with shame before the Lord, in whose presence he must testify to them of their guilt. He says, "And also it grieveth me that I must use so much boldness of speech concerning you, before your wives and your children, many of whose feelings are exceedingly tender and chaste and delicate before God, which thing is pleasing unto God." (Verse 7)

SCJacob 2 1Jacob 2 2Jacob 2 3Jacob 2 4Jacob 2 5Jacob 2 6Jacob 2 7Jacob 2 8Jacob 2 9Jacob 2 10Jacob 2 11Jacob first tells those who have gathered there of his purpose in coming up to the temple that day. He points out the obligation he has under God "to magnify mine office with soberness" that in no way could their sins be accounted against him, "I came up to the temple this day that I might declare unto you the word of God." (Verse 2)

Jacob 2 3VERSE 3

Jacob 2 3And ye yourselves know, etc. To the end expressed in verse 2, he, as they all knew, had been most diligent. But he says, "I this day am weighed down with much more desire and anxiety for the welfare of your souls than I have hitherto been." No doubt the growing iniquities among the people had been a source of great sorrow to Jacob. The increasing pride of their hearts had come as a wedge between their duties and their pleasures. He consoles himself with the fact that they, as yet, had been obedient to the "Word of the Lord" that beforetime he had given unto them.

SCJacob 2 12Jacob 2 13Jacob 2 14Jacob 2 15Jacob 2 16Jacob 2 17Jacob 2 18Jacob 2 19VERSES 12-19

SCJacob 2 12Jacob 2 13Jacob 2 14Jacob 2 15Jacob 2 16Jacob 2 17Jacob 2 18Jacob 2 19Lifted up in pride. Many of the Saints residing in the Land of Nephi had grown exceeding rich in search for gold and silver, which, in the land where they lived, did "abound most plentifully." [^1] Some of them, more than others, obtained many riches and in the pride engendered thereby, wore costly apparel and went about with "stiff necks and high heads." They persecuted the poor and in vainglory imagined they were better than they. Jacob reproved and admonished them, saying that God did not justify them in so doing, "Let not the pride of your hearts destroy your souls." Be free with your substance and think of those who may be less fortunate than you, because, he warned them, God can destroy all your wealth and even you with one glance of his piercing eye. You will recall a previous sermon in which Jacob said, "But wo unto the rich, who are rich as to the things of the world. For because they are rich they despise the poor, and they persecute the meek, and their hearts are upon their treasures; wherefore, their treasure is their God." (2 Ne. 9:30) In any event, "Before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the kingdom of God." He assures them that after they receive a "hope in Christ" that then, if they still want riches, they will obtain them. However, he tells them that then their wants will be for a different purpose; they will seek for riches only to do good.

SCJacob 2 20Jacob 2 21Jacob 2 22VERSES 20-22

SCJacob 2 20Jacob 2 21Jacob 2 22Ye were proud in your hearts. Why be proud in your hearts and afflict your neighbor because of the things God hath given you? Jacob asks for a reason. "What say ye of it?" He wants them to ponder it in their hearts. "Do ye not suppose such things are abominable unto him who created all flesh?" One man he says, is as precious in the sight of God as is another and that, for the same reason all are created to keep His commandments and, thereby, glorify Him. There is a lesson we all may learn here. Pride, too often, leads our footsteps astray. It crowds all thoughts of God from our hearts. We are so engrossed in the world and the things thereof that we have no time or thought for other than, "What shall I eat? or what shall I drink? or wherewithal shall I be clothed?" We forget his wisdom and guidance. It is then we should remember, "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth from the mouth of God." When we recognize that great truth, all pride, envyings, hardheartedness, and deceit will be banished and in their place, love of God and our fellowmen will fill our hearts and in humility, we will recognize all men as brethren, they having one Father, and we will profit by the lessons they shall teach us.

SCJacob 2 23Jacob 2 24Jacob 2 25Jacob 2 26Jacob 2 27Jacob 2 28Jacob 2 29Jacob 2 30Jacob 2 31Jacob 2 32Jacob 2 33Jacob 2 34Jacob 2 35VERSES 23-35

SCJacob 2 23Jacob 2 24Jacob 2 25Jacob 2 26Jacob 2 27Jacob 2 28Jacob 2 29Jacob 2 30Jacob 2 31Jacob 2 32Jacob 2 33Jacob 2 34Jacob 2 35This people ... understand not the scriptures. We know but little of what occurred among the Nephites in Jacob's time. The people, however, appear in some respects to have fallen into sin. They had grown in worldly pride and devoted much time and energy to the search of wealth. By reason of their isolated position and because the Jews had abused the principle of plural marriage, the people of Lehi had been commanded that each man should have but one wife. Some of them did not heed this special law and took other wives, not only without God's sanction but entirely contrary to his express command. Indeed, they committed other grievous sins, excusing themselves therefor by quoting the actions of Kings David and Solomon, his son. At this the Lord was greatly displeased and he instructed Jacob to reprove them sharply. This, he did in the temple. He re-affirmed the law that the Nephites of that age should have only one wife, but he added, in the name of "the Lord of Hosts," that if he wanted to raise up a holy seed unto himself, he would command his people. This, we have reason to believe he did, though we find no direct statement on the matter.

SCJacob 2 23Jacob 2 24Jacob 2 25Jacob 2 26Jacob 2 27Jacob 2 28Jacob 2 29Jacob 2 30Jacob 2 31Jacob 2 32Jacob 2 33Jacob 2 34Jacob 2 35Plural marriage is wrong where the Lord does not permit it. And the Lord, who commands his people to be loyal and law-abiding, is not going to give his consent to law-breaking. Matrimony, whether single or plural, is sanctified by the commandment of God, but he will not command his people to break the laws of the land. "Let no man break the laws of the land, for he that keepeth the laws of God hath no need to break the laws of the land." (D. and C. 58:21)

GENERAL NOTES

David and Solomon. Different opinions concerning the true meaning of this text have been expressed by readers of the Book of Mormon. The reference to David and Solomon shows clearly what the Lord censored and why.

In the case of David, the Lord said through the Prophet Nathan:

"Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, I anointed thee king over Israel, and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul; and I gave thee thy master's house, and thy master's wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and Judah; and if that had been too little, I would moreover have given unto thee such and such things. Wherefore hast thou despised the commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his sight? Thou hast killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword, and hast taken his wife to be thy wife, and hast slain him with the sword of the children of Ammon. (II Sam. 12:7-9)

That was David's awful sin. He had not only taken a wife without divine sanction—another man's wife at that—but he had committed foul murder, in order to get possession of her. I fancy his sin would be no greater, had he committed murder to come in possession of houses or land, or even, as Nathan expressed it, "one little ewe lamb." Ahab and Jezebel were both sentenced to death, through the mouth of the Prophet Elijah, for the murder of Naboth for the sake of his vineyard. (I Kings 21:17-24)

In the case of Solomon we read:

"But King Solomon loved many strange women, together with the daughter of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonians, and Hittites; of the nations concerning which the Lord said to the children of Israel, Ye shall not go in to them, neither shall they come in to you: for surely they will turn away your heart after other gods: Solomon clave unto these in love.... For it came to pass, when Solomon was old, that his wives turned away his heart after other gods: and his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as was the heart of David his father." (I Kings 11:1-4)

Solomon, as is here shown, sinned in making social alliances with idolaters, contrary to the commandment of God, and in adopting features of their worship. It was this that kindled the anger of the Lord against him. (Ibid., vv. 5-11)

Now it appears that the Nephites, shortly after the death of Nephi, began to yield to the desires of depraved hearts, and sought to justify their carnal practices by what is recorded of David and Solomon. The Prophet Jacob, who had succeeded Nephi, was, therefore, directed by the Lord to explain to them the awful consequences of sexual indulgences outside the sacred precincts of divine sanction, as exemplified in the experiences of those two kings of the Jews, and to command them to have only one wife and no concubines, unless the Lord for some special purpose, should give them a different law.

---
Notas:
[^1] "Intertribal warfare was perpetual, save now and then for truces of brief duration. Warfare was attended by wholesale massacre. As many prisoners as could be managed were taken home by their captors; in some cases they were adopted into the tribe of the latter as a means of increasing its fighting strength, otherwise they were put to death with lingering torments. There was nothing which afforded the red men such exquisite delight as the spectacle of live human flesh lacerated with stone knives or hissing under the touch of firebrands, and for ingenuity in devising tortures they have never been equalled. Cannibalism was quite commonly practiced.
