Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

CHAPTER 4

SCJacob 4 1Jacob 4 2Jacob 4 3Jacob 4 4Jacob 4 5Jacob 4 6Jacob 4 7VERSES 1-7

SCJacob 4 1Jacob 4 2Jacob 4 3Jacob 4 4Jacob 4 5Jacob 4 6Jacob 4 7That they may know that we knew of Christ. Jacob, having been ordained to the Holy Priesthood by Nephi and appointed by him to a high office therein, continued to minister with much zeal among the people; teaching them by word of mouth, the wonderful things revealed to him of the glory of Christ, the Messiah, whose coming was as yet, many hundreds of years away. He labored throughout all the difficulties of engraving his words upon metal plates that their children might know that their fathers knew of Christ and had a hope of his mission centuries before his birth among the children of men. Furthermore, he says that this hope and this knowledge was had by "all the holy prophets which were before us."

SCJacob 4 1Jacob 4 2Jacob 4 3Jacob 4 4Jacob 4 5Jacob 4 6Jacob 4 7These prophecies and teachings were engraved upon plates of metal that they might endure and remain as an indestructible media of transmission; not to pass away and vanish as other means are apt to do. [^1]

Jacob 4 5VERSE 5

Jacob 4 5Behold, they believed in Christ. In this verse we see clearly, that anciently, the Jews had a knowledge of Christ. The prophets of old taught and prophesied of his mission. They worshiped the Father in the name of Christ and this, the Nephites also did. The Nephites kept the law of Moses because they understood it was symbolic of the great Sacrifice that was to be made. And it prepared them to receive the blessings attendant thereon.

Jacob 4 6VERSE 6

Jacob 4 6Wherefore, we search the prophets. To the end that they might obtain a fuller knowledge of his glory, they searched the Scriptures to find all the prophets had written concerning him. There they found much to establish, beyond any doubt, the hope in Christ which they cherished. The knowledge they thus obtained, together with the revelations they constantly received and the spirit of prophecy that was in them, raised their faith to such a pitch of reality that they did "command in the name of Jesus and the very trees obey us, or the mountains, or the waves of the sea."

Jacob 4 7VERSE 7

Jacob 4 7The Lord God showeth us our weakness. In what way their weakness was made manifest to them is not stated but, nevertheless, Jacob says it was shown to them that they might know it was by the power of God and through his grace that they did these things and not by any power they, themselves, possessed.

Jacob 4 8VERSE 8

Jacob 4 8Great and marvelous are the works of the Lord. From the heart of Jacob there comes a glorious paean in praise of the Great Creator of earth and man. In the words of the Prophet Habakkuk (629 B.C.) we can hear him say, "I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation." As we listen to his words we remember the Eighth Psalm of David, "O Lord, our God, how glorious is thy name in all the earth, whose majesty is rehearsed above the heavens. When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars which thou hast established; what is man, that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man, that thou thinkest of him? ... O Lord, our God, how glorious is thy name in all the earth." (Jewish Rendition) His thoughts were, undoubtedly, "I will exalt thy holy Name, I will exult in the works of thy Fingers." "How great," he says, "and marvelous are the works of the Lord." How far beyond man's understanding are his gracious deeds. Those, only, to whom it is revealed, know his wondrous ways. "Wherefore, brethren," he admonished, "despise not the revelations of God." Despise means scorn, disdain, disregard, spurn, or contemn. Remember, when a truth is revealed of God, it becomes at once, a solemn obligation upon each individual. It is given, as the Apostle Peter says, for us to heed. It is not to be ignored, or in any way made inconsiderable.

Jacob 4 9VERSE 9

Jacob 4 9Earth was created by the power of his word. In the first part of the Book of Moses (we call it the Book of Genesis), a copy of which was in the possession of Jacob and was thus available to the Nephites, we read of the creation of earth and man. The facts there stated were familiar to all the descendants of Nephi and were used by Jacob as a proof of his further statement that if such were the case, then it is not unreasonable nor incompatible with the truth to believe that by that same power "why not able to command the earth, or the workmanship of his hands upon the face of it, according to his will and pleasure."

Jacob 4 9You will remember that in the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. The beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea were given an abode and told to multiply and fill the earth. The Great Creator saw what he had done and pronounced it "Good." He then said, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness." (Gen. 1:26) This was done. The knowledge of the glorious creation of man was inherited by each passing generation of Israel. It lifted them to a higher plane in their estimate of mankind. That such a belief was universal is shown when Malachi proclaimed this great truth by stating in the form of a question what was an established fact in the minds of his hearers. He asked, "Have we not all one father? hath not one God created us all?" (Mal. 2:10) The thought that they were all created in the image of God, imbued every generation of ancient Israel and sanctified before him, their prayers to him and their praise of him.

Jacob 4 9To them, he was the "Majesty on High."

Jacob 4 9The Nephites, whose fathers came from the Capital City of the Jews, believed as did the Jews, in God the Father Almighty. They believed that he was the Maker and the Creator of all. They believed in a God with whom they dwelt in close relationship and one who would lead them and guide them in every experience of life. The Hebrew conception of man's relationship to God was the basis of their wisdom, and the wisdom Paul deplored, was the wisdom displayed in the pagan philosophy of Greece and Rome and of it he said that the world, by wisdom, knows not God.

Jacob 4 9This task has been left to revealed religion. It has been left to revealed religion to do that, in the attempt of which mankind has failed. It has been left to revealed religion to accomplish those things for which men have sought in all ages. Revealed religion is the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Jacob says in verse eight, "And no man knoweth of his ways save it be revealed unto him."

Jacob 4 9If you lean unto your own understanding and trust to those who are worldly wise, you may search every acre of the globe and not find it. You may follow every path of human erudition and not walk in the way of truth. A man may partake freely of all the knowledge that has accumulated since the world began, and still not know that which has been revealed to even the humblest among us, "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3) Amid trial and disappointment, when his neighbors came to mock, Job stood up and said, with a voice of thunder, the reverberations of which we still hear, "For I know that my Redeemer liveth and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth." (Job 19:25) This differs only in the use of words from the great truth revealed through the Prophet Abinadi, "I would that ye should understand that God, himself, shall come down among the children of men, and shall redeem his people." (Mosiah 15:1) This is a great mystery revealed to the pure in heart. Learning cannot find it. The power of man cannot gain it. With money, it cannot be purchased, but it is made known to those, who, without guile, seek the Kingdom of Heaven. I have seen the golden glow of money illumine the halls of the rich. I have seen great armies, on the eve of battle, prepare to inflict their might. I have seen the learned, when they say, "I do not believe." But in the hovels of the poor, in the dwellings of the meek, in homes where toil and sorrow seem to pace the struggle to endure, I have seen the strength of faith, the power of love, the light of God's Holy Word, shine more brightly than all the riches of the world, all the learning of the ages, or all the force the armies and navies of the world can muster. These first are mysteries of God, as are prayer, forgiveness of sin, etc., and as Jacob says these mysteries "Are known only to those to whom it is revealed."

Jacob 4 10VERSE 10

Jacob 4 10Seek not to counsel the Lord. There are some among us who are critical of all things. "The lot of mankind," they say, "could be better." The seasons are wrong; disease, famine, pestilence, should be banished from amongst us. All is not good that seems so. Pain and perplexity come penally and punishing. They think to "check over the plans and OK the blueprints of Creation." They would advise the maker, forgetting that he created all in wisdom, and in justice and great mercy he presideth over all things.

Jacob 4 10In the Hebrew Scriptures is this wonderful statement. "The Lord by wisdom hath founded the earth; by understanding hath he established the heavens." (Proverbs 3:19) Also you will find this beautiful piece of Hebrew poetry; in it wisdom speaks, using the personal pronoun, I.

Jacob 4 10"The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old.

Jacob 4 10"I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning or ever the earth was.

Jacob 4 10"When there were no depths, I was brought forth; when there were no fountains abounding with water.

Jacob 4 10"Before the mountains were settled, before the hills was I brought forth;

Jacob 4 10"While as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields, nor the highest part of the dust of the world.

Jacob 4 10"When he prepared the heavens, was I there: when he set a compass upon the face of the depth:

Jacob 4 10"When he established the clouds above: when he strengthened the fountains of the deep:

Jacob 4 10"When he gave to the sea his decree, that the waters should not pass his commandment: when he appointed the foundation of the earth:

Jacob 4 10"Then I was by him, as one brought up with him: and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him." (Proverbs 8:22-30)

Jacob 4 10"Wherefore, brethren, seek not to counsel the Lord, but to take counsel from his hand."

SCJacob 4 11Jacob 4 12Jacob 4 13VERSES 11-13

SCJacob 4 11Jacob 4 12Jacob 4 13He that prophesieth, let him prophesy to the understanding of men. No prophecy of God is obscure to those who desire to know the truth. By faith it may be easily understood. It need not be added to, nor taken from. It needs no interpreter. Prophecy only knows the truth. It does not speak falsely nor foolishly. "It speaketh of things as they really are, and of things as they really will be." It "is one of the most wonderful manifestations of the Spirit upon the minds of holy men." "For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man; but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." (II Peter 1:19)

SCJacob 4 11Jacob 4 12Jacob 4 13Jacob followed his hymn of praise to the Creator whose wisdom and justice controls all, by inviting his brethren to accept the Sacrifice of his Only Begotten Son as the means that "ye may obtain a resurrection" and through Christ be presented unto God as its first fruits. That through faith, they may attain a hope of Christ's glory even before he was born.

Jacob 4 14VERSE 14

Jacob 4 14The Jews were a stiffnecked people. The Jews scorned the words of the holy prophets because they spoke to them in plainness, so much so that they understand every word. (1 Ne. 13:24; 14:23) Like many today they listened to eloquent speakers although they did not know what they were talking about. They preferred the things they could not understand. They killed the prophets who testified boldly to them of the wickedness that blinded them. They were carried to depths they could not fathom and to heights they could not grasp because they so wished it.

Jacob 4 14"And because they desired it God hath done it, that they may stumble." God allowed them to chastise themselves.

Jacob 4 14When Jesus began his ministry among the Jews at Jerusalem, there were many who refused to walk in the ways of the Lord and many who had forgotten the agreement their fathers had made with the Lord at Sinai. It was an agreement to be faithful to him if he would be their God.

Jacob 4 14Through iniquity, the Jews had fallen in the place they held. They had stumbled in keeping the commandments of God. Many of the ordinances and judgments they had received were abandoned; others were perverted to meet the unholy purposes of priests and kings. Their worship was fast becoming a mere form. They had ensnared themselves in the fowler's net and privally taught doctrines that robbed them of their heritage.

Jacob 4 14The Jews were quick to condemn and harsh in treatment of their neighbors. Class and class-distinction ruled their relations one with another. There were the Scribes and the Pharisees who represented the learned. There were the Sadducees who preferred the policies of Imperial Rome. There were the despised Galileans and the Samaritans, with whom the Jews seldom spoke. Each one walked in his own way and all were in pursuit of their own happiness.

Jacob 4 14Although drawn together by a common religion and bound by age-old restraints, they were torn by strife and disappointed pride. In spite of their piety and learning, crafty men interpreted the "Law" to feed the hunger of infatuation and greed. To appear more holy than other they clothed themselves in robes of righteousness. The Savior called them "hypocrites" and said to his disciples, "Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees." He likened the Pharisees to whited sepulchres: "Beautiful to look at but were full of dead men's bones." The aristocratic Sadducees did not believe in the resurrection of the dead. John the Baptist called them "a generation of vipers."

Jacob 4 14Judaism, instead of being the worship of the "True and Living God" became the "sanctuary of fools" and of those who used it as a starting place for their own peculiar notions.

SCJacob 4 15Jacob 4 16VERSES 15-16

SCJacob 4 15Jacob 4 16And now I, Jacob, am led on by the spirit of prophesying. Because of the stumbling of the Jews, in the which, they broke the covenant made by their fathers at Sinai and in the perversion of the ordinances they had received, they were brought to reject "the stone upon which they might build and have safe foundation." Jacob saw that the Jews would reject Christ and in doing so they refused to receive the stone, which according to the Scriptures "shall become the great, and the last, and the only sure foundation, upon which the Jews can build."

SCJacob 4 17Jacob 4 18VERSES 17-18

SCJacob 4 17Jacob 4 18The head of their corner. The Jews having rejected the cornerstone, which is Christ, the question is, "How can they ever build upon that sure and firm foundation?" Jacob, being led by the spirit of prophecy promises to unfold that mystery. That Christ may become the head of their corner, the Rock of their Salvation he will make known unless in his anxiety for his brethren he is shaken in his firmness in the spirit. In other words he asks for their faith and prayers, as we do today. That the spirit of prophecy may enlighten their minds and that they may understand what is being unrolled is his prayerful wish. He then proceeds to explain this mystery by quoting the Prophet Zenos.

GENERAL NOTES

The knowledge these verses (3-5) impart should be remembered by us. It shows the depleted condition in which we presently find the Holy Scriptures; that is the part of them we refer to as the Old Testament. Jacob says, "All the holy prophets which were before us (about 550 years B.C.) had a hope of his glory." How many editors have deleted the mention of Christ in the Old Testament? How many interpreters have left out things pertaining to him, they cared not explain? How many writings of the holy prophets are not included in any modern version of the ancient Hebrew Scriptures? There are many. Neum prophesied that the Son of God should be crucified. Zenock, that he should be taken by the hands of wicked men and be lifted up. Zenos testified that Christ would be buried in a sepulchre and of "the three days of darkness" which should be "a sign given of his death unto those who should inhabit the isles of the sea, more especially given unto those who are of the house of Israel." (1 Ne. 19:10) The wonderful parable of the "Tame Olive Tree" which Zenos gave and which Jacob copied in full, is almost incomparable. These writings, with many others, are now left out of all Old Testament compilations. The Bible, itself, mentions some books now no longer extant; the Book of Nathan (Chron. 2:29); the Book of Enoch (Jude 14); the Book of Memorial (Ex. 17:14); the Book of Jasher (Joshua 10:13); the Book of Records (Ex. 4:15).

Jacob was a mighty preacher. He was trained in the language and the learning of his father, Lehi. Besides that, he was true to the Lord. He had the gift of prophecy which led him into many paths of righteousness. His gifts are evidenced by the fact that his brother, Nephi, engraved several of his sermons in great length upon the Small Plates. Read Chapters 6-11, 2 Nephi; the wisdom and knowledge shown, ranks them with some of the loftiest discourses ever made by the prophets of old. Moses had Aaron to speak for him. It may be that Nephi used Jacob as an instrument to teach the principles of truth to his ever-needing followers.

---
Notas:
[^1] The land in which Jacob wrote this was a rich mineral country. This does not agree with conditions in Guatemala, whose "silver, gold, copper, iron and lead are mined only in small quantities." Still less does it fit Yucatan. It reminds us rather of Colombia or Equador. According to the Minister of Industry, Colombia in 1929, had the world's largest production of emeralds and platinum and the largest production of gold in South America. Silver, copper, and salt are other mineral products. British Honduras, too, is an agricultural country.
