Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

THE BOOK OF JAROM

CHAPTER 1

Jarom 1 1VERSE 1

Jarom 1 1I, Jarom, write ... that our genealogy may be kept. To keep proper and correct genealogies of all our forefathers is a vital part of the Gospel plan. Every Latter-day Saints knows that in this way we may extend to our ancestors the blessings of the Gospel and thus become saviors on Mt. Zion. The Lord has enjoined his people, in every dispensation, to keep adequate records so that his purposes, in the end, will be fulfilled. The Jews and all the other tribes of Israel were vigilant in keeping in their proper order, a record of the lineage through which they sprang. The Nephites were zealous in all efforts to do this. Lehi found upon the Plates of Brass, a genealogy of his fathers and his descendants and ever afterwards preserved this divine injunction. Jarom, therefore, that the line may not be broken, writes a "few words" according to this commandment which he had received.

Jarom 1 2VERSE 2

Jarom 1 2These plates are small. Because of lack of space (there not being room left on the smaller plates to engrave all the things that had happened during the sixty years (422 to 362 B.C.) Jarom had charge of the holy things) and also because his forefathers had written many things concerning the Plan of Salvation, Jarom felt that he could add no more to what had already been placed on record. His own prophesyings and his revelations he would omit, but to keep the record in proper order he would write a little.

SCJarom 1 3Jarom 1 4Jarom 1 5Jarom 1 6Jarom 1 7Jarom 1 8Jarom 1 9Jarom 1 10Jarom 1 11Jarom 1 12Jarom 1 13VERSES 3-13

SCJarom 1 3Jarom 1 4Jarom 1 5Jarom 1 6Jarom 1 7Jarom 1 8Jarom 1 9Jarom 1 10Jarom 1 11Jarom 1 12Jarom 1 13... ye shall prosper in the land. The days of the Prophet Jarom saw the Nephites grow from a powerful tribe to a wealthy, though not as yet a very numerous nation. Indeed, their numbers were far from being equal to those of the wild and bloodthirsty Lamanites. The latter, like many of their descendants of today, spent their time almost exclusively in the chase of wild animals and in war; yet, notwithstanding the repeated and vigorous onslaughts of the Lamanites, the age of Jarom was to the Nephites a period of marked progress in the arts of peace.

SCJarom 1 3Jarom 1 4Jarom 1 5Jarom 1 6Jarom 1 7Jarom 1 8Jarom 1 9Jarom 1 10Jarom 1 11Jarom 1 12Jarom 1 13They ceased to be entirely a pastoral people. They gave much attention to the adornment of their homes and public buildings with fine and curious work in wood and metal. Agriculture and manufacture received a new impetus by the invention of various machines, implements and tools. Their safety from successful attack by the Lamanites was also measurably secured by the introduction of more perfect weapons of warfare and the development of a rude system of fortification, sufficient, however, to protect their cities and settlements from the means of attack at the command of their enemies.

SCJarom 1 3Jarom 1 4Jarom 1 5Jarom 1 6Jarom 1 7Jarom 1 8Jarom 1 9Jarom 1 10Jarom 1 11Jarom 1 12Jarom 1 13Though the Nephites of this age were stiffnecked and perverse, requiring the constant warnings of prophets to keep them from backsliding, yet, the pervading tone of their society was simple and unaffected and the people were generally industrious, honest and moral. They neither blasphemed nor profaned the Holy Name of the Deity, they strictly observed the Law of Moses and kept the Sabbath Day sacred. Their prophets, priests and teachers not only instructed them in the Law of Moses but also expounded the intent for which it was given and while so doing directed their minds to the coming of Christ, the Messiah, in whom they taught the people to believe as though he had already come. That is real faith; to believe in that which is to come, as though it had already come to pass. These pointed and constant teachings preserved the Nephites from destruction by softening their hearts and bringing them to repentance when war, wealth, or pride had exerted their baneful influences.

SCJarom 1 14Jarom 1 15VERSES 14-15

SCJarom 1 14Jarom 1 15Delivers plates "to my son, Omni." Jarom again calls attention to the plates as being small and advises that the other plates, kept by the kings and on which they engraved or caused to be engraved a record "of the wars," are available to his brethren, the Lamanites (See v. 2) and that, therefore, he will write no more.

SCJarom 1 14Jarom 1 15Shortly before Jarom died he delivered the Sacred Plates to his son, Omni.

GENERAL NOTES

JAROM

A Nephite prophet who lived in the fourth and fifth centuries before Christ. He was the son of Enos, who was the son of Jacob, the brother of Nephi and was entrusted with the care of the plates of Nephi, which he appears to have retained 59 years, or from the 180th to the 239th year of the Nephite annals. From his record we learn that during his days many of the Nephites were a stiff-necked and hard-hearted people, among whom the prophets and priesthood labored diligently, warning them of the great evils that must ultimately result to the nation if they did not repent. Their labors were blessed with measurable success. It is pleasing to learn from Jarom's writings that the Nephite kings and leaders were mighty men in the faith of the Lord, who not only led them to victory over their earthly enemies, but also instructed them in the way of eternal salvation. The laws of the land were exceedingly strict, the law of Moses was rigorously observed, the Sabbath day was kept holy unto the Lord, and profanity and blasphemy were unknown. Under the wise and righteous administration of these kings, the Nephites spread widely over the land of Nephi, which was their home and increased greatly in numbers, though they were not nearly so numerous as the Lamanites, with whom they had several wars during the time embraced in Jarom's record. The Lamanites invaded the Nephite possessions "many times." But were driven out as often as they came. During this period the arts of peace were also encouraged and the Nephites grew exceedingly rich; it also appears to have been an epoch in which manufactures took a decided step in advance. Reference is made to progress in the working of the precious metals, in the manufacture of machinery and tools as well as of weapons of war; greater attention was paid to fine workmanship in wood and to improvements in building; altogether we may consider it a very prosperous era of this people's existence. If Jarom died in the year he delivered the plates to his son, Omni, that event took place 362 years before the advent of the Messiah.
