Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 1 ( 1955)

THE BOOK OF OMNI

CHAPTER 1

SCOmni 1 1Omni 1 2Omni 1 3VERSES 1-3

SCOmni 1 1Omni 1 2Omni 1 3Shortly before Jarom died he delivered the sacred plates to his son, Omni. Omni kept them for about 44 years and then handed them to his son, Amaron, who in turn transferred them to his brother, Chemish. Chemish, when his end was near, placed them in the hands of his son, Amaleki.

SCOmni 1 1Omni 1 2Omni 1 3It is very little we know of the history of the Nephites from the death of Jarom to the time of Amaleki, a period of about 150 years. The political records of the nation were engraved on other plates, which were kept by the kings and as there was little that they felt it necessary to write beyond what Nephi and Jacob had written, their records were very short. From what little we can glean from these writings, it is evident that during this era the Nephites had frequent wars with the Lamanites in many of which they suffered severely.

SCOmni 1 1Omni 1 2Omni 1 3The Lord permitted the Lamanites to be a constant scourge to the people of Nephi when they turned away from him and we fear the seasons were not unfrequent when they had to be reminded of their duty in this terrible way.

SCOmni 1 1Omni 1 2Omni 1 3Omni records that he was a wicked man, who had not kept the commandments of God. But, he had, nevertheless, he says, fought for the Nephites; as if to say that the business of a warrior is not conducive to a life of righteousness. The history of his times, he sums up in one short paragraph, number 3.

SCOmni 1 4Omni 1 5Omni 1 6Omni 1 7Omni 1 8VERSES 4-8

SCOmni 1 4Omni 1 5Omni 1 6Omni 1 7Omni 1 8Amaron was the son of Omni and a descendant of Jacob, the younger brother of Nephi. He notes that 320 years after the exodus from Jerusalem, many Nephites had been slain because of their wickedness. "God," he says, "did visit them in great judgment." But he further says that the Lord did preserve the righteous and did deliver them out of the hands of their enemies. Amaron delivered the records to his brother, Chemish.

Omni 1 9VERSE 9

Omni 1 9Chemish testifies to the fact that his brother engraved the paragraphs credited to him, for he says that his brother wrote them, in his sight, on the day "he delivered them unto me." In this way was an unending record kept of their lineage and this was in obedience to the commands of their forefathers.

SCOmni 1 10Omni 1 11VERSES 10-11

SCOmni 1 10Omni 1 11Abinadom records that he had seen wars and contentions between Nephites and Lamanites and that he had slain many Lamanites in the defense of his people. He says, as do others, that the history of this people "is engraven upon plates which is had by the kings." He further says that he knows of no revelations nor prophecies that should be recorded as was commanded by the maker of the plates whereon he wrote.

SCOmni 1 12Omni 1 13VERSES 12-13

SCOmni 1 12Omni 1 13Amaleki, the son and successor of Abinadom, begins a new epoch in the history of the Nephites by relating the story of Mosiah.

SCOmni 1 12Omni 1 13But before we continue with the consideration of this branch of the House of Israel, let us examine the probable state of its "home-land," some of its physical features, its government and economy. It seems safe to assume that, to avoid the constant incursions of the warriors of the house of Laman, the Nephites had more than once forsaken their homes and retired farther northward into the wilderness. We judge this from the fact that in the days of Amaleki the land of Nephi appears to have been in or near the region we call Ecuador, a country far distant from the place where Lehi's colony first landed; and it is scarcely consistent with the narrative of the Book of Mormon to believe that Nephi and his little band, when they first separated from their brethren, made a journey of so many hundreds of miles before they established their homes. Then the very fact that the Lamanites almost immediately began to harass them in the new land which they occupied is strong evidence that their first removal was not so distant but that these enemies could, without great difficulty, reach them, a thing that would have been almost impossible if they had gone directly to the far distant region of Ecuador.

SCOmni 1 12Omni 1 13We will briefly summarize what we know of the history of the Nephites during the first three or four hundred years of their national existence.

SCOmni 1 12Omni 1 13They were governed by kings who were the direct descendants of Nephi. These kings were, as a rule, righteous men and wise rulers. The law of Moses was strictly observed and other good and just laws were enacted to regulate those matters the Mosaic law did not touch.

SCOmni 1 12Omni 1 13The Nephites multiplied greatly and also grew exceedingly rich in the wealth of this world; while their artisans and mechanics were very expert in the arts and manufactures. They also spread abroad on the face of the land of Nephi and were scattered.

SCOmni 1 12Omni 1 13The Lamanites followed them from the land of their first possession and were constantly harassing them by incursions and invasions which led to numberous and bloody wars. These were sometimes very disastrous to the Nephites.

SCOmni 1 12Omni 1 13Spiritually, the Nephites had many seasons of faithfulness to God when they listened to and obeyed the words of his prophets and unfortunately, they had also many seasons of apostasy, at which times the judgments of God fell upon them; the Lamanites being often used by him as a sharp instrument to bring them to repentance and reformation.

SCOmni 1 12Omni 1 13At such a time as this, when moral and spiritual decay had undermined the righteous behavior of many of the Nephites, the Lord warned Mosiah to flee from the land of Nephi and take with him all who were willing to go. Mosiah obeyed and soon he and his followers "departed out of the land into the wilderness ... and they were led by many preachings and prophesyings. And they were admonished continually by the word of God; and they were led by the power of his arm, through the wilderness, until they came down into the land which is called the land of Zarahemla."

SCOmni 1 12Omni 1 13Several facts are to be noted here. Zarahemla was separated from the land of Nephi by a wilderness. It occupied a lower altitude, for the travelers had to go "down" to get there. There must have been a considerable distance between the two countries, for the company was led by "many preachings and prophesyings" and it must have been a perilous journey, for they were also led by "the power of the arm of the Lord," and were admonished continually.

SCOmni 1 14Omni 1 15Omni 1 16Omni 1 17Omni 1 18Omni 1 19VERSES 14-19

SCOmni 1 14Omni 1 15Omni 1 16Omni 1 17Omni 1 18Omni 1 19All this indicates clearly a long and exacting effort, but the pilgrims were well paid for their enterprise, for finally, they discovered a new country, inhabited by a colony from Palestine. The country was called Zarahemla after its ruler by that same name.

SCOmni 1 14Omni 1 15Omni 1 16Omni 1 17Omni 1 18Omni 1 19The people there were called "the people of Zarahemla" and are now known as the Mulekites. The arrival of Mosiah was a joyful event, for he had, among other things, the Brass Plates from Jerusalem.

SCOmni 1 14Omni 1 15Omni 1 16Omni 1 17Omni 1 18Omni 1 19At the time of the arrival of Mosiah, the Mulekites had become exceedingly numerous, notwithstanding "wars and serious contentions." [^1] Their language had been corrupted and their religion forgotten. After a while, however, the people of Mosiah and those of Zarahemla began to understand each other and united and elected Mosiah king and ruler. I think we may safely assume that both Nephites and Lamanites, during three or four centuries, had spread over an immense area, from their first two centers of population. There was no abiding place for Mosiah and his followers in the immediate vicinity of their home-land. Consequently, the Lord led them out in the wilderness.

SCOmni 1 14Omni 1 15Omni 1 16Omni 1 17Omni 1 18Omni 1 19Two geographical facts are here noted: (1) Zarahemla was separated from the Land of Nephi by a wilderness; (2) it had a lower altitude, for Mosiah "came down into the land." (v. 13) And those who would return "went up into the wilderness." (v. 27)

SCOmni 1 20Omni 1 21Omni 1 22VERSES 20-22

SCOmni 1 20Omni 1 21Omni 1 22In the Land of Zarahemla, Mosiah came into possession of a large stone, upon which was engraved some unknown characters. He interpreted them by the gift of God and found thereon an account of one Corinantumr and the slain of his people "whose bones were scattered in the land northward." Coriantumr had lived with the people of Zarahemla for "nine moons" and according to the engravings on said stone, the ancestors of the race of which he was the sole survivor, came from the region of the Tower of Babel. These people are known as the Jaredites. Here is another geographic fact. The land where the bones of the slain Jaredites lay scattered was north of Zarahemla.

SCOmni 1 23Omni 1 24VERSES 23-24

SCOmni 1 23Omni 1 24The historian, Amaleki, says that he (Amaleki) was born in the days of Mosiah and that he survived him. He lived through a great war between Nephites and Lamanites during the beginning of the reign of King Benjamin. [^2] The Nephites drove the Lamanites out of Zarahemla.

SCOmni 1 25Omni 1 26VERSES 25-26

SCOmni 1 25Omni 1 26Knowing the plates whereon he wrote were small and that they were almost filled, nevertheless, Amaleki used a goodly portion of what was left to exhort those who should come after him to lives of goodness and purity. The personal testimony which he records is an appeal to all to come and partake of the gifts of God and through Christ, who is the Holy One of Israel, obtain salvation. The testimony of Amaleki is a sure bit of evidence pertaining to the authenticity of the Book of Mormon. For, he exhorts us only to righteousness and goodness and he says, "There is nothing which is good save it comes from the Lord."

SCOmni 1 27Omni 1 28Omni 1 29Omni 1 30VERSES 27-30

SCOmni 1 27Omni 1 28Omni 1 29Omni 1 30Before Amaleki ended his account he records that many Nephites in Zarahemla desired to return to the land of Nephi, whence their forefathers came, to take possession of their inheritance, which, according to Mosaic law, always remained theirs. Accordingly, a large company was formed. The leader was a strong and a mighty man but unfit for leadership. Owing to his stubbornness, contention arose and all but a few—fifty—of their numbers perished in the wilderness. The survivors returned to Zarahemla.

SCOmni 1 27Omni 1 28Omni 1 29Omni 1 30Another expedition was formed. Amaleki had a brother in this company but he never heard of their experiences after their departure. (See the Record of Zeniff, Mosiah 9 et seq., where the narrative shifts from the Nephites in Zarahemla to those in the original land of Nephi.)

SCOmni 1 27Omni 1 28Omni 1 29Omni 1 30Amaleki completed the smaller plates until there was no more room for engravings. Being without descendants, he turned them over to King Benjamin.

SCOmni 1 27Omni 1 28Omni 1 29Omni 1 30King Benjamin put them with the other plates that had been kept and handed down by the kings from generation to generation. The Prophet Mormon found them centuries later and finally deposited them in the Hill Cumorah. (Words of Mormon 10-11 and Mormon 6:6)

GENERAL NOTES

Where italics are used in writing a name it indicates that a biographical sketch of that person is herewith included.

OMNI

A Nephite prophet, son of Jarom and a descendant of Jacob the younger brother of Nephi. He lived in the land of Nephi and was the custodian of the plates of Nephi from the 239th to the 283rd year of the Nephite annals. He characterizes himself as a wicked man who had not kept the commandments and statutes of the Lord as he ought to have done but had been principally engaged in defending his people from constantly recurring onslaughts of the Lamanites. The history of his times he sums up in one short sentence: "And it came to pass that 276 years had passed away from the time Lehi left Jerusalem and we had many seasons of peace and we had many seasons of serious war and bloodshed." Having kept the plates according to the commandments of his fathers he conferred them upon his son Amaron. (B.C. 318)

AMARON

A Nephite prophet, son of Omni and a descendant of Jacob, the younger brother of Nephi. He resided in the land of Nephi in the third and fourth centuries before Christ. Amaron received the plates of Nephi from his father and held them from the two hundred and eighty-third to the three hundred and twenty-first year of the Nephite annals when he transferred them to his brother Chemish. Owing to the increasing wickedness of the Nephite people, the Lord, during Amaron's days, visited them in great judgment so that the more wicked part were destroyed but he spared the righteous and delivered them out of the hands of their enemies. Of Amaron's private character the sacred record is silent.

CHEMISH

The son of Omni, a descendant of Jacob, the son of Lehi. He received the sacred records from his brother Amaron in the year 280 B.C. His entire writings consist of only sixty-nine words and from them we can gather nothing regarding his private life, the history of his times, nor for how long a period he retained the plates. We must, however, suppose that his brother Amaron considered him the most suitable person on whom to impose this sacred trust and consequently believe him to have been a good man. He is ranked among the prophets by Mormon. He conferred the custody of the plates upon his son Abinadom.

ABINADOM

A Nephite prophet and historian who lived in the third century before Christ He received the plates of Nephi from his father, Chemish, who was a descendant of Jacob, the brother of Nephi, and at his death, which occurred in the days of the first Mosiah, his son Amaleki took charge of them. Either he or his son conveyed the sacred records from the land of Nephi to Zarahemla in the great migration of the Nephites under Mosiah but the record does not show whether he died in the land of Nephi before this movement took place or after. His record is a very short one. From it we learn that he was a warrior and had seen many wars between the Nephites and Lamanites and that in those wars he, with his own sword, had taken the lives of many of the enemy in the defense of his brethren. These disastrous wars were undoubtedly one of the causes that led to the removal of the righteous portion of the Nephites from Nephi to Zarahemla. Abinadom concludes his brief record with the following statement, "And I know of no revelation, save that which has been written, neither prophecy; wherefore, that which is sufficient is written. And I make an end."

AMALEKI

The son of Abinadom and a descendant of Jacob, the son of Lehi. He was one of the custodians of the sacred records of the Nephites and was born in the days of the first Mosiah but whether in the land of Nephi or of Zarahemla does not appear. If in Nephi then he transported the plates from that land to Zarahemla in the great migration of the Nephites under Mosiah and it is quite likely that he did so, for it is he that gives the account of this vast movement. Having no children at his death he transferred the holy things of which he had charge to King Benjamin. He lived about B.C. 200.

MOSIAH I

Mosiah resided in the land of Nephi and lived there during the latter half of the third century before Christ. Whether he was originally a prophet, priest or king the historian (Amaleki) does not inform us. Most certainly he was a righteous man for the Lord made choice of him to guide the obedient Nephites from their choice country to a land that he would show them.

The causes that led the Lord to make this call upon the Nephites are not stated but some of them can be easily surmised. Among such we suggest that:

The aggressive Lamanites were constantly crowding upon them, ravaging their more remote districts, entrapping and enslaving the inhabitants of the outlying settlements, driving off their flocks and herds and keeping them in a constant state of anxiety and dread which hindered their progress and stayed the growth of the work of God. The Lord therefore led them to a land of peace.

Again, this course of events continued for so long a period, had caused much hard-heartedness and stiff-neckedness in the midst of the Nephites. Some of the people had remained righteous, some had grown very wicked. To separate these classes the Lord called the faithful and obedient to follow Mosiah to another land.

For a third reason there was a portion of the house of Israel a few hundred miles to the north entirely unknown to their Nephite brethren. These people had sunk very low in true civilization, they were so degraded that they denied the being of their Creator, they had had many wars and contentions among themselves, they had corrupted their language, had no records nor scriptures and were altogether in a deplorable condition. To save and regenerate this branch of God's covenant people Mosiah and the Nephites were led to the place where they dwelt.

The statement made by Amaleki regarding this great migration under Mosiah is brief. We are altogether left to our imagination to picture the scenes that occurred at this division of a nation. Nor can we tell how many, preferring home, kindred and friends and the endearments and associations of their native land, faltered and tarried behind, while the faithful started on their journey northward into the untrodden wilderness. Nor are we informed what afterwards became of those who allowed the allurements of the world to prevail. It is most probable that they united with the Lamanites, were absorbed into that race and like them became darkened, bloodthirsty and savage.

The Nephite evacuation of the cities built in the land of Nephi no doubt had a beneficial effect on those portions of the Lamanite race that took possession of them. They thereby became acquainted with some of the comforts and excellencies of civilization and though very slow to learn, their experience at this time laid the foundation for a slight advance of the arts of peace in their midst.

Mosiah gathered up the willing and obedient and as directed by the Lord, started on the journey. Whither they were going they understood not, only they knew that the Lord was leading them. With preachings and prophesyings they crossed the wilderness and passed down into the land of Zarahemla.

On the west bank of the River Sidon, the people of Mosiah found a populous city, of whose existence they had never before heard. Its people were a semi-civilized and irreligious race, speaking a strange language and with many habits and customs different from those of the new comers.

The meeting must have been a perplexing one to both peoples, brought face to face but unable to understand each other by reason of their different modes of speech. We often read in history of the irruption of an inferior or more barbarous race into the domains of a more highly civilized one but it is seldom, as in this case, that the superior race moves in a body, occupies the country and unites with the less enlightened people. It is probable that the first feelings of the old settlers were akin to dismay as they learned of the hosts of the invaders that were marching upon them but these feelings were soon soothed and an understanding arrived at by which the two people became one nation. We are forced to the conclusion that this arrangement could not have been effected without the direct interposition of heaven by and through which both peoples were brought to a united purpose and common understanding.

When the Nephites began to comprehend the language of their new fellow citizens they found that they were the descendants of a colony which had been led from Jerusalem by the hand of the Lord in the year that that city was destroyed by the king of Babylon (say B.C. 589. See Mulek). At this time their king or ruler was named Zarahemla (about B.C. 200). The reason assigned for their departure from the worship of the true God, their degradation and the corruption of their language was that their forefathers brought with them from their ancient home in Palestine no records or copies of the holy scriptures to guide and preserve them from error in their isolated land of adoption.

When the two races joined it was decided that Mosiah should be the king of the united people though the Nephites were then the less numerous. This arrangement probably grew out of the fact that though fewer in numbers they were the more civilized and also being worshipers of the God of Israel they would not willingly submit to be ruled by those who had no knowledge of his laws.

The education of the people of Zarahemla to the standard of the Nephites and the work of harmonizing the two races were not the task of an hour. It required much wisdom, patience and perseverance. Mosiah gave stability to the new kingdom by his own virtues and wise example, by the just laws he established and by placing the service of the Lord before all earthly consideration. It is evident that he built a temple in the new land as its existence is particularly mentioned in the days of his son, King Benjamin and as the people observed the law of Moses in the matter of sacrifices and offerings a temple would be one of their very first necessities. But to the forms, types and ceremonies of the Mosaic law were added gospel principles with a clear and definite understanding of the coming and divine work of the Messiah. Mosiah was not only a divinely inspired leader and king but he was also a seer. While reigning in Zarahemla a large engraved stone was brought to him and by the gift and power of God he translated the engravings thereon. They gave an account of the rise, fall and destruction of the great Jaredite nation from the days of its founders to the time of their last king Coriantumr, who himself was discovered by the people of Zarahemla and lived with them nine moons. When Mosiah died he was succeeded by his son Benjamin.

ZEDEKIAH

The last king of Judea. In the first year of his reign Lehi and his family left Jerusalem. Zedekiah's name occurs eight times in the Book of Mormon, five of which are connected with Lehi's departure, the other three relate to the monarch's posterity. The killing of the sons of Zedekiah by the king of Babylon is spoken of in Helaman 8:21.

LAND OF LEHI-NEPHI

A small division of the land of Nephi originally settled by the Nephites but after their departure it was taken possession of by the Lamanites and by them made the chief center of their government. It appears to have been simply the valley in which the City of Lehi-Nephi stood but because it at one time comprised all the territory occupied by the Nephites, whence they spread out and colonized, it is more often called the land of Nephi than the land of Lehi-Nephi; but it must not be confounded with the larger land of Nephi which grew out of it. This smaller land of Nephi is supposed to have been situated in the country now called Ecuador.

MULEK

The infant son of Zedekiah, king of Judea, who was preserved when the rest of his brothers were slain (II Kings 25:7) by the king of Babylon. Eleven years after Lehi left Jerusalem the Lord led another colony from that city to America, among whom was Mulek, who, at that time must have been very young as his father was only 21 years old when he commenced to reign and he reigned but eleven years in Jerusalem (II Chronicles 36:11; Jeremiah 25:1). It is altogether probable that when Mulek attained a proper age he, on account of his lineage, was recognized as king or leader of the colony.

Regarding the journey of this company, all we are told in the Book of Mormon is that they came out of Jerusalem at the time that Zedekiah, king of Judea, was carried away captive into Babylon and that they journeyed in the wilderness and were brought by the hand of the Lord across the great waters. Again we are informed that they landed on the northern continent, in the land afterwards known to the Nephites as the land Desolation and for this reason the Nephites called North America the land of Mulek. This must not be confounded with the country immediately surrounding the city of Mulek in South America. In after years this colony migrated southward and settled on the River Sidon where their descendants were afterwards found by the Nephites.

ZARAHEMLA

When Mosiah I led the more righteous portion of the Nephites northward from the land of Lehi-Nephi (about B.C. 200) he found on the west bank of the River Sidon a city inhabited by a partly civilized and irreligious people whose language he could not understand. They were ruled by a chief or king named Zarahemla. When the two races began to understand each other it was found that the people of Zarahemla were the descendants of a colony which was led by the Lord out of Jerusalem in the year when that city was destroyed by the king of Babylon (B.C. 589). After wandering in the wilderness they were brought across the great water and landed in the southern portion of the North American continent. In after years they migrated southward to the place where they were found by Mosiah. Among the members of the original colony was Mulek, the youngest son of King Zedekiah and it is presumable that most of them were of the house of Judah.

Of the history of the colony for nearly four hundred years we know next to nothing. It is summed up in the few following words, "And at the time that Mosiah discovered them, they had become exceedingly numerous. Nevertheless, they had had many wars and serious contentions, and had fallen by the sword from time to time; and their language had become corrupted; and they had brought no records with them; and they denied the being of their Creator; and Mosiah, nor the people of Mosiah, could understand them." (Omni 1:17)

CORIANTUMR

Coriantumr was the last of the Jaredites. We are first introduced to him as king of all the lands of the Jaredites. In his day the Prophet Ether raised his warning voice but all his words of exhortation and reproof were rejected by that rapidly decaying race.

Coriantumr, himself, was a mighty prince, well versed in the art of war, cunning, diplomatic and learned, but exceedingly corrupt. Like his people, he gave no heed to the prophecies of Ether. Troublous and terrible times followed, for the war that commenced in the first year of Ether's warnings, lasted until the nation was destroyed. This war became one of the most bloodthirsty, cruel and vindictive that ever cursed our fair planet. It was not the work of a day, it was the outgrowth of centuries of dishonor, crime and iniquity. Men's most savage passions were worked up to such an extent that every better feeling of humanity was crushed out. The women and children armed themselves for the fray with the same fiendish activity and fought with the same intense hate as the men. It was not a conflict of armies alone; it was the crushing together of a divided house that had long tottered because of internal weakness but now fell in upon itself.

Coriantumr was wounded in the last great battle of this war and when he regained consciousness, wandered forth aimlessly and alone, the last of his race. How long he thus wandered to and fro, wretched, comfortless and forlorn we know not but at last he reached the southern portion of the northern continent, thousands of miles from Ramah and there, to the great astonishment of both, he found the people of Mulek, who had been led by the hand of the Lord from Jerusalem. With them he spent his few remaining days and when nine moons had grown and waned he passed away to join the hosts of his people in the unknown world of spirits.

A CLOSING WORD

When the neighbors of Noah and those who foretold the weather, gathered about him to ridicule his efforts to save himself and his family from a flood which was to come, they joined a great throng of those who are always ready to reject the counsel of God.

"This man builds a ship where there is no water," they said.

"Noah is getting old and perhaps a little mad."

"A rainstorm to flood the earth!"

"Impossible!"

When the brothers of Joseph sold him to some Ishmaelitish merchants going down into Africa, they did not dream that one day he would become second only to the ruler in Egypt. But when he interpreted the dreams of troubled Pharaoh, which the magicians of Pharaoh's court could not do, Joseph stored up great quantities of grain against a famine which he predicted would last for seven years.

Again the scoffers came as they had come to Noah.

"A famine in Egypt!"

"Is not the valley of the Nile the great granary of the whole earth?"

"Have our crops ever failed?"

"A famine in Egypt?"

"Impossible!"

Joshua led the armies of Israel. In modern warfare he would not rank as a strategist. He brought his armies to battle against the city of Jericho. One day he marched them around its walls. The second and the third day and for seven days he did the same. This must have amused the embattled people of Jericho who had heard of the strength and fierceness of Israel's hosts. To them it was strange tactics. They thought it childish strategy. Ensconced behind the bulwarks and the battlements of their great city they felt safe. I can conceive of their ignorance and infatuation as they stood upon its walls and shouted,

"Joshua take Jericho?"

"Impossible!"

To the skeptic who loves to carp and cavil, all things are impossible. In part let us agree. The impossible cannot happen. But, did not the flood come? Does not history record the famine in Egypt? Did not Joshua take Jericho? These things all happened, yet they were said to be impossible.

Had Noah refused to build the Ark, his family would have drowned with the wicked. Had Joseph neglected to store up grain, his parents and his brothers, who afterwards became the heads of the tribes of Israel, would have starved as would also the Egyptians. Had Joshua said, "O, what's the use?" when on the morning of the seventh day he marched his armies around the city, the Israelites and not the people of Jericho would have been destroyed.

There is a lesson, all may learn here.

These are a few instances where men chose to believe the word of God. They were benefited and blessed. History declares in the experience of six thousand years that those who refuse are destroyed.

These incidents were not accidents. They are recorded in the Hebrew Scriptures.

Are there other scriptures?

Every people have had their sacred writings. Their wise men, their poets, and their prophets have recorded their wisdom, their poetry, their prophecies. These have been preserved by their posterity. These are their scriptures. The Parsees have the Zend Avesta; the Hindu, the Veda; the Mohammedans, the Koran; the Jews, the Old Testament.

Will someone tell me, "Did the Redman of America have his?" Or will someone explain to me, "How it is that so many of the beliefs and practices of ancient Israel are to be found in the myths and saga of the American Indian? Did God speak to their wise men as he did to the great Hebrew prophets? Or, did God leave his millions of children who dwelt on the Western Hemisphere to perish in ignorance of the plan of life and salvation?"

Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints do not believe it. They believe in God the Father, Almighty, and they believe it is his "work and his glory" to bring to pass the "salvation and exaltation" of all his children, everywhere.

They believe he has spoken many times to many different peoples.

Did he speak to the ancient inhabitants of America?

The Book of Mormon testifies, "He did!"

The Book of Mormon is an inspired and revealed history of the millions of God's children who dwelt on these American continents hundreds of years ago.

It is their Scripture.

It is a "New Witness for God."

Its cry is Baptist-like, "Prepare ye the way of the Lord."

To those who today cry "Impossible," let it be said: "Be not like the neighbors of Noah who were lost in the flood; be not like those who thought the corn of Egypt would never fail; be not like the Canaanites of Jericho who put their trust in their city's walls and saw them crumble to ruin."

Let us remember, always, "Nothing is impossible with the Lord."

Thanks be to God, the Book of Mormon is written. "It was not left to treacherous memory. It was not left to the diluting influence of oral transmission. It was not bequeathed to hearts, diseased and depraved, who might corrupt it." But it is written, and written at the very command of him who said:

"Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold; them also must I bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd." (John 10:16)

—P.C.R.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] In view of the fact, that, in the traditions of nearly all Indians, wherever their ancestors first settled, they were the followers of others or earlier occupants, the question may be asked whether "wars" in the text indicates that the Mulekites had suffered from hostile aborigines as well as from contentions among themselves.
[^2] This war was fought in Zarahemla. Lamanites were those who sought to destroy the Nephites. Nephites were friends and adherents of that great prophet. (Jacob 1:14)
