Various authors, Testimonies of Book of Mormon Witnesses

Stephen S. Harding's Account of Martin Harris' Early Life and Testimony

Source: Stephen S. Harding to Thomas Gregg, Feb 1882, cit. Thomas Gregg, The Prophet of Palmyra (New York: John B. Alden, 1890).

[The following historical sketch is a quotation from a letter to Thomas Gregg from Stephen S. Harding, former governor of Utah territory, written February 1882.]

. . . The fact that such a man as Martin Harris should mortgage his farm for a large sum, to secure the publisher for printing the book, should abandon the cultivation of one of the best farms in the neighborhood, and change all his habits of life from industry to indolence and general shiftlessness, was truly phenomenal. He, at the same time was the only man among the primitive Mormons who was responsible in a pecuniary sense for a single dollar. Nevertheless, he had become absolutely infatuated, and believed that an immense fortune could be made out of the enterprise. The misfortune that attended Harris from that day did not consist in the loss of money merely, and the general breaking up of his business as a farmer; but the blight and ruin fell upon all his domestic relations—causing his separation from his wife and family forever.

In early life he had been brought up a Quaker, then took to Methodism as more congenial to his nature. He was noted as one who could quote more scripture than any man in the neighborhood; and as a general thing could give the chapter and verse where some important passages could be found. If one passage more than another seemed to be in his mind, it was this: `God has chosen the weak things of the world to confound the wise.' His eccentricities and idiosyncrasies had been charitably passed over by all who knew him, until his separation from his wife and family, when he was looked upon as utterly infatuated and crazy. I had been acquainted with this man when a little boy, until my father emigrated from that neighborhood in 1820. He was intimately acquainted with my father's family, and on several occasions had visited our house, in company with Mrs. Harris. None in all that neighborhood were more promising in their future prospects than they.

Upon my return to Palmyra, and learning that Martin Harris was the only man of any account, as we say in the West, among all his near associates, it was but natural that I should seek an early interview with him. I found him at the printing office of the Wayne Sentinel in Palmyra, where the Book of Mormon was being printed. He had heard several days before of my arrival in the neighborhood, and expressed great pleasure at seeing me. [The interview consisted of a discussion of the lost 116 pages.]
