Hugh Nibley, Nibley on the Timely and the Timeless ( 1978)

1

To Open the Last Dispensation: Moses Chapter

After all these years it comes as a surprise for me to learn that the Book of Moses appeared in the same year as the publication of the Book of Mormon, the first chapter being delivered in the very month of its publication. And it is a totally different kind of book, in another style, from another world. It puts to rest the silly arguments about who really wrote the Book of Mormon, for whoever produced the Book of Moses would have been even a greater genius. That first chapter is a composition of unsurpassed magnificence. And we have all overlooked it completely.

The Joseph Smith controversy is silly for the same reason the Shakespeare controversy is silly. Granted that a simple countryman could not have written the plays that go under the name of Will Shakespeare, who could? If that man is hard to imagine as their author, is it any easier to imagine a courtier, or a London wit, or a doctor of the schools or, just for laughs, a committee of any of the above as the source of that miraculous outpouring? Joseph Smith's achievement is of a different sort, but even more staggering: he challenged the whole world to fault him in his massive sacred history and an unprecedented corpus of apocalyptic books. He took all the initiative and did all the work, withholding nothing and claiming no immunity on religious or any other grounds; he spreads a thousand pages before us and asks us to find something wrong. And after a century and a half with all that material to work on, the learned world comes up with nothing better than the old discredited Solomon Spaulding story it began with. What an astounding tribute to the achievement of the Prophet; that after all this time and with all that evidence his enemies can do no better than that! Even more impressive is the positive evidence that is accumulating behind the Book of Moses — which includes fragments from books of Adam, Noah and Enoch; for in our day ancient books that bear those names are being seriously studied for the first time in modern history, and comparison with the Joseph Smith versions is impressing leading scholars in the field. But even without external witnesses, what a masterpiece we have in that first chapter of the Book of Moses! Consider the below.

Was the great last dispensation to be brought on with old shopworn forms and ceremonies? A dispensation is a period of the world's history during which the church of God with its covenants and ordinances is upon the earth; in the apocalyptic scheme of things it is a comparatively brief period of light following a long period of darkness. What would be an appropriate ensign to announce and inaugurate such a happy time? The single civilization that embraces the world today, whichever way it turns, sees only itself, a great all-confining cliche in which one can think only of what is being thought and do only what is being done. It cannot even imagine a new dispensation, let alone supply one. Like a heavy galleon it labors on into everdeepening gloom, prodded on its way from time to time by promising puffs of a New Order, New Method, New Education, New Deal, New Life, New Cure, New Light, New Way, etc., but ever and again losing momentum as the fleeting winds quickly blow themselves out, leaving the old scow to wallow on as best it may towards the dawn of nothing. To want something totally new and different is one thing; to supply it is another. Dr. Johnson, Boswell reports, "projected ... a work to shew how small a quantity of real fiction there is in the world; and that the same images, with very little variation, have served all the authors who have ever lived." Who, then, is going to come up with anything really new? It would help also, since we are asking for the impossible, for this new thing to be vast in scope and glorious in conception and compounded of truth rather than fiction. From what source can we look for comfort? From none on this distracted globe.

It came from the outside, the Mormons said: The long, long silence was broken by an angel from on high. At once the whole world exploded in one long hoot of derision—adequate witness to the total novelty of the thing; here was something utterly alien and retrograde to everything the world taught and believed. It wasn't only that the boy Joseph Smith had an idea about an angel—it was the clear, detailed, factual, clinical account of the visits that left his fellowmen incoherent with rage. Even more outrageous was his vision of the Father and Son: the mere idea of it was astoundingly original, but again, the simple, straightforward, noble manner in which he reported it left no room for contention; it was "yea, yea, and nay, nay," for as the only witness to the most astonishing of his experiences, Joseph could not be confounded by any contrary evidence; and by the same token neither could anyone be asked to take him seriously were it not that he came before an unbelieving world with boundless riches in his hands.

For one thing, he brought out three formidable volumes of scripture. One need look no farther than the opening chapter of each of these to realize that a new dispensation is indeed upon us, with all the visions and blessings of old. The first section of the Doctrine and Covenants, or Book of Commandments, takes up all the main themes of the gospel that had been the burden of every former dispensation, and had been lost in all the dark intervals between them, and weaves them together into one strong texture in which warning and deliverance are equally balanced. The emergence in our day of the old apocalyptic literature, heretofore unrecognized for what it was, though it has suddenly become clear that the Bible teems with it, now supports Doctrine and Covenants, section 1, as new-found text after text echoes its message in identical terms.

At the same time, the opening chapter of the Book of Mormon emerges as the perfect model and type of those more specialized apocalypses or testaments attributed to individuals that are now taking up their position in the growing procession of early Jewish and Christian Apocrypha. The standard scenario which they follow is the story of the righteous man, distressed by the evils of his time and deeply concerned for the future of his people, for whom he weeps and prays until one day he is carried away in a vision in which he makes a celestial journey culminating with the view of God upon his throne; on his journey he learns the plan of salvation as well as the secrets of the universe, and receives a call to teach and admonish God's children on earth. Returning to earth, he first bears witness of divine providence to his immediate family, and bestows patriarchal blessings and prophetic warnings on his sons (hence the designation of his story as a "testament"), and then goes forth among the people to preach repentance and warn of judgments to come (that makes the account an "apocalypse"). Usually his message is rejected and he with a faithful band retires from the scene as destruction descends upon the wicked. Today we have testaments and apocalypses bearing the name of almost every patriarch, prophet, and apostle from Adam on down, some of them very old, and all of them connected in with each other and with the Bible at crucial points. Hence, we can say without hesitation that the first chapter of the Book of Mormon, the testament of Lehi, has the authenticity of a truly ancient pseudepigraphic writing stamped all over it. It is a well-nigh perfect example of the genre.

But it is the first chapter of the Book of Moses that commands the most boundless wonder and esteem. It was brought forth in the very month that the Book of Mormon came from the press and no one less inspired than the man who produced the one could have produced the other. Find the author of the Book of Moses and you have found the author of the Book of Mormon. All other candidates may withdraw. And yet, what a difference! The one is a collection of the writings of pious sectaries in the wilderness—the Rekhabite motif resounds on almost every page: chronicles and annals, letters and sermons, commentaries, hymns and meditations; the other, the voice of Moses booming down the corridors of time as he transmits to us the words that come down to him from the beginning—he sings Enoch's song, and Noah's and Adam's, to which Abraham's is added in another book. But it is that opening chapter to which we turn with awe. What other prelude could there be to the history of the race, what other prologue could ever give it such depth of meaning and such gratifying consistency? First, we find Moses in the presence of God and the bosom of eternity, being apprised of a special calling to which he has been appointed as co-worker with the Savior. (Moses 1:3-9.) A preliminary test is indicated—suddenly the lights go out and Moses is found lying unconscious and helpless upon the earth; as he slowly comes to himself, he recognizes the misery and the glory of fallen man: "Now ... I know that man is nothing, which thing I never had supposed." And then, in the same breath: "But now mine own eyes have beheld God ... his glory was upon me ... I was transfigured before him." (Moses 1:10-11.) Weakness is his present condition, glory his everlasting birthright. It is in this moment of man's greatest helplessness and vulnerability that Satan chooses to strike, attempting first by persuasion and then by intimidation to get Moses to worship him as the god of this world. But Moses has not wholly forgotten who he is, "a son of God, in the similitude of his Only Begotten," and denounces Satan as a sham, while professing himself awaiting further light and knowledge: "I will not cease to call upon God, I have other things to inquire of him." (Moses 1:13, 18.) The humiliating exposure of Satan becomes unendurable when Moses announces that he actually is what his adversary falsely claims to be, "a son of God, in the similitude of his Only begotten; and where is thy glory that I should worship thee?" This is too much for Satan, who casts aside his celebrated but now useless subtlety and launches a frontal attack of satanic fury, a tremendous tantrum, as he "cried with a loud voice, and rent upon the earth, and commanded, saying: I am the Only Begotten, worship me." (Moses 1:19.) The whole scene is presented in dramatic form as a ritual combat, a stychomachia, and true to the ancient pattern, the hero is momentarily bested, overcome by the powers of darkness, as he "began to fear," and "saw the bitterness of hell." But with his last ounce of strength he calls upon God from the depths and is delivered: he has won the fight, he has prevailed against the power of him who "sought to destroy the world, for he knew not the mind of God."

And now the scene changes (verses 23 and 24 read like stage directions); the lights go up, the music soars and Moses, though remaining on earth, is again invested with glory and hears the voice of God proclaiming him victor, worthy and chosen to lead God's people "as if thou wert God" — the type and model of the ancient Year King proclaimed after his victory over death as God's ruler on earth. He is specifically told that he shall "be made stronger than many waters" — for he has just passed through the waters of death and rebirth, de profundis; and shown himself capable and worthy of the mission which is now entrusted to him. After this royal acclamation, reminiscent of combat and coronation episodes dramatized in the earliest year rites throughout the ancient world, after the coronation, the scene again changes, as Moses and the reader view the field of labor in which the prophet is to work; he receives a thorough briefing, an intimate knowledge of the earth in its cosmic setting, its physical makeup ("every particle" of it), and everything that lives upon it. Naturally, he wants to know what is behind the behind and beyond the beyond, but God assures him that such knowledge is not for now: "But only an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, give I unto you" (Moses 1:35), with which knowledge Moses is finally "content." Nevertheless, quite fundamental to a correct understanding of this world is its relationship to the wider structure of things, to heavens without end and worlds without number, constantly coming into existence and passing away in an endless processing;" ... and there is no end to my works, neither to my words." (Moses 1:38.) And this cosmic discourse is summed up and concluded in the most comforting proclamation of all: "For behold — this is my work and my glory — to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) All this becoming and passing away, the endless processing of the same elements, would offer only the overpowering and depressing prospect of science fiction, were it not for that ultimate assurance: man is going somewhere after all; in the course of nature he is doomed (2 Nephi 9:7) but the course of nature does not have the last word — God is on top of the problem and he is working for us.

The three concluding verses of the chapter place upon it an undeniable seal of authenticity. Of careful concern in each of the records handed down through the Prophet Joseph is the establishing of the exact manner in which the work has been preserved. This is another mark of the newly discovered pseudepigrapha: these verses of Moses might have been taken out of any number of Jewish or Christian Apocrypha; especially those writings from the "Fortyday Literature" in which the Coptic records are so rich: "And now Moses, my son ... thou shalt write the things which I shall speak. And in a day when the children of men shall esteem my words as naught and take many of them from the book which thou shalt write, behold, I will raise up another like unto thee; and they shall be had again among the children of men — among as many as shall believe." (Moses 1:40-41.) And so the present dispensation gets them: "And now they are spoken unto you. Show them not unto any except them that believe." (Moses 1:42.) Such is the standard formula for the preservation and transmission of apocalyptic writings.

As a literary tour de force, Moses chapter 1 is awe-inspiring. Equally impressive is the way it takes up a position alongside other ancient writings that tell the same story in much the same way. Of particular relevance are the apocalypses of Abraham and Adam, from both of which Joseph Smith has conveyed purported writings. Let us turn to them for some illuminating comparisons.

Those who wish to credit Joseph Smith with a comprehension of comparative literature and ritual far beyond his time and training are free to do so. They may even insist, as they have with the Book of Mormon, that this is the way any uneducated rustic would tell the story. Today, however, we have several very ancient and significant parallels to Moses 1, which lie far beyond the reach of coincidence or daydreaming. The number of details and the order in which they occur make it perfectly clear that we are dealing with specific works of great antiquity which come from a common source. To show what we mean, let us compare Moses', Abraham's, and Adam's confrontations with Satan; these stories themselves contain pointed references to Enoch, with whom each here is duly compared. Let it be remembered that these accounts are not scripture, but are simply ancient records that help us understand the Enoch story.

First the Apocalypse of Abraham, an Old Slavonic account discovered in 1895 and first published by Bonwetsch in 1897. [^1] K. Koch has recently ranked it as one of the six definitely authentic early Hebrew apocalypses. [^2] Let us place it in parallel columns against our book of Moses, chapter 1.

Moses Apocalypse of

Chapter 1 Abraham

Chapter 9 (Ch. 1 of the

Apocalypse proper)

The setting:

1:1. The words of God ... unto 9:8 [Abraham, in order to

Moses ... when Moses was receive the vision, must]

caught up into an exceedingly "Bring me the sacrifice...

high mountain. upon a high mountain."

God will show him everything:

workmanship of mine hands; forth to thee the ages of the

but not all, for my works are world,

without end, ...

and show thee that which is

behold my works ... and no great things, which thou hast

man can behold all my glory. never seen before,

[See Abr. 2:12: "Thy servant

has sought thee earnestly; now because thou delightest to seek

I have found thee."]. ... after me,

Moses, my son. ... friend.

beheld the world upon which the ages of the world fixed and

he was created ... and all the created by my word, and show

children of men which are, and thee what is going to happen to

which were created. ... the children of men as they

shall do good or evil.

The hero is helpless after the Ch. 10.

vision:

withdrew from Moses ... and here and there.

[he] was left unto himself. 2. It was not a human breath,

And ... he fell unto the earth. and so my spirit was afraid,

and my soul departed from

me. And I became as a stone,

and fell to the earth, for I had no more strength to stand;

of many hours before Moses the ground I heard the voice of

did again receive his natural the Holy One say,

strength. ... 4. Go, Jaoel, in the power of my

name, and raise that man up!

Let him recover from his

trembling.

Satan takes advantage of his (Chaps. 11 & 12 are a detailed

weakness: description of Abraham's

sacrifice, during which, Chap.

13):

according to the angel's

instructions ...

#12. Behold, Satan came 3. Then an unclean creature

tempting him, saying: Moses, with wings alighted upon the

son of man, worship me. sacrificial victims ...

(Italics added.) 4. The unclean bird said to me:

What are you doing, Abraham,

in this holy place ... where you

yourself may perish in the fire!

# #5. Leave the man [angel] standing beside you and flee!

Who art thou? ... is this, my Lord?"

and God. ... this is Azazel [Satan]!

deceive me not. ...

Satan put to shame by humiliating

contrast with the hero:

where is thy glory, that I Satan!

should worship thee? 9. For Abraham's part is in

heaven, and thine is upon this

earth.

this earth as the Adversary, to

lead dishonest spirits and

practice deception.

upon God, except ... I were put you to shame,

strengthened before him. But I

can look upon thee in the

natural man. Is it not so,

surely?

is darkness unto me? And I can

judge between thee and 13. Thou has not the power to

God. ... tempt all the righteous.

deceive me not; canst not lead him astray, for

he is thine enemy and enemy

to all those who follow thee

and love after thy desire.

for God said unto me: Thou art 15. For behold, the garment [of

after the similitude of mine glory] which once fitted you in

Only Begotten. heaven, is now laid up for him.

And the decay to which he was

fated now goes over to thee!

The hero is strengthened for the

contest:

commandments ... saying: power that I give thee over this

Call upon God in the name of one, who hateth truth ...

mine Only Begotten, and 4. ... who rebelled against the

worship me. Almighty ...

inquire of him: for his glory has Azazel ...

been upon me, wherefore I can 6. Thy lot is to rule over those

judge between him and thee. who are with thee ...

Depart hence, Satan. 7. Depart from me ...

instructed me.

The hero is overcome but calls out

and is saved:

loud voice, and rent upon the And I said: Here is thy servant.

earth, and commanded,

saying: I am the Only

Begotten, worship me.

fear exceedingly; and ... saw do not reply to him! For God

the bitterness of hell. has given him power over

Nevertheless, calling upon those who answer him ...

God, he received strength, and 11. ... no matter how much he

he commanded, saying: speaks to thee, answer him

Depart from me, Satan. ... not, lest his will overpower

thine.

given him a powerful will.

Answer him not! (See

Testament of Abraham

[Falasha p. 100ff.] where he

says to Isaac approaching the

altar: "Come near, my son, so

that thou mayest perceive the

one ... who frightened me and

because of whom I was

afraid ..." referring to his own

jeopardy on the altar.)

tremble, and the earth shook; meeting with Satan in Giz.

and Moses received strength, 13:1-3. "And Enoch said to

and called upon God, saying: Azazel, Depart! Thou shalt

In the name of the Only have no peace, a great sentence

Begotten, departhence, Satan. has gone forth against thee to

bind thee. 2. And there will be

no further discussion or

questioning with thee, because

of thy dishonest and deceitful

works among men.")

loud voice, with weeping, and and spoke to all of them [his

wailing, and gnashing of teeth; followers] and they all feared,

and he departed hence, even and trembling and terror

from the presence of Moses, seized them.

that he beheld him not.

The hero is borne aloft:

departed ... Moses lifted up sacrifice ... took

his eyes unto heaven, being 3. me by the right hand, and set

filled with the Holy Ghost. ... me on the right wing of the

dove while he sat on the left

side.

he beheld his glory again. ... the flaming fire

if on many winds, which was

fixed above the firmament.

(See 2 Ne. 4:25 — "Upon the Bait ha-Midrash. 5:170. R.

wings of his Spirit hath my Ishmael [double for Enoch]:

body been carried away upon When I went up to the

exceeding high mountains. mountain top ... arriving at

And mine eyes have beheld the seventh temple. I stood to

great things, yea, even too pray before God: and I lifted up

great for man.") my eyes and said ... deliver

me from Satan. And the

Metatron [also Enoch!] came

who [served?] the angel, even

departed from the presence of spread his wings and came to

Moses ... Moses lifted up his meet me with great joy ... and

eyes unto heaven, being filled he took me with his hand and

with the Holy Ghost. ... raised me up.] 25. ... And he heard a voice, 17:1. And while he was

saying: Blessed art thou, speaking, fire surrounded us

Moses, for I, the Almighty, and a voice ... like the voice of

have chosen thee, and thou many waters like the raging of

shalt be made stronger than the sea in the surf.

many waters; for they shall

obey thy command as if thou

wert God. (Here Moses is

hailed as the victorious sacral

king.)

and beheld the earth. ... light ... and in the light a

inhabitants thereof, and there host, even a great host of

was not a soul which he beheld mighty beings [forms] not ... and their numbers were constantly changing shape and

great, even numberless. appearance, moving,

changing, praying, and

uttering words I could not

understand.

He is shown the field of his

mission:

In the "testamentary"

literature, each patriarch takes

a journey to heaven and is

given a view of the entire earth,

an account of which then

becomes an integral part of his

missionary message upon his

return. (Compare 1 Ne. 1:4-15,

Abr. 3:15, Moses 1:40.)

speaking, Moses cast his eyes beneath thy feet upon the

and beheld the earth, yea, even Firmament. Recognize at that

all of it; and there was not a level the creation there

particle of it which he did not presented, the creatures that

behold.... are in it, and the world that has

been prepared for them.

inhabitants thereof, and there behold ... the earth and her

was not a soul which he beheld fruits, and all that moves upon

not ... and their numbers were her ... and the power of the

great, even numberless as the people ...

sand upon the sea shore. 3. the lower regions ... the pit

and its torments ...

and each land was called earth, islands, the beasts, its fishes,

and there were inhabitants on leviathan and his sphere ...

the face thereof. 5. the streams of water, their

sources and their courses ...

men, women, and children

half of them on the right side of

the picture and half on the left.

Confrontation with God:

Lord was upon Moses, so that see nothing, I have become

Moses stood in the presence of weak, my spirit leaves me!

God, and talked with him face 2. He said to me: Stay with me;

to face. be not afraid. He whom thou

now beholdest coming

towards us ... is the Eternal

One, who loves thee.

see ...

with you to strengthen you.

Moses called upon God. ... 6. He said: Speak without

ceasing!

7ff. (Abraham calls upon God

naming his attributes.)

El! El! El! Jaoel!

number have I created; and I into the unorganized universe,

also created them for mine own even the chaos which in the

purpose. ... perishable world goes forth

from good and evil.

away ... even so shall another of the righteous.

come; and there is no end to 14. O light, that shone upon my works, neither to my thy creatures before the

words. morning light ...

The Epic Question and Answer:

God, saying: Tell me, I pray 17. Look with favor upon me:

thee, why these things are so, Show me, teach me. Give thy

and by what thou madest servant all that which thou hast

them? (Italics added. Cf. Abr. promised him.

1:2. "I sought for the blessings 26.1. Eternal, Mighty, Only

of the fathers, ... desiring One! Why hast thou so

also ... to possess a greater arranged things, that it should

knowledge.") be so?

unto Moses: For mine own [Terah's] will is in him, and as

purpose have I made these thine own will is in thee, so the

things. Here is wisdom and it resolves of mine own will are

remaineth in me. set for all the future, before you

knew there even was such a

thing ...

number have I created; and I beneath the firmament, upon

also created them for mine own which thou standest [Cf. this

purpose. ... formula in Abr. 3:3, 4, 5, 7 etc.!]

Behold there is not a single

earth, and the inhabitants what is occupied by Him

thereof, give I unto you. For whom thou seekest.

behold, there are many 4. And as he spoke the place

worlds ... that now stand, ... opened up and beneath me

but all things are numbered there was heaven.

unto me, but they are mine and 5. And upon the seventh

I know them. Firmament on which I

stood ... I saw the splendor of

invisible glory investing living

beings.

Left alone a second time:

withdrew from Moses, that his speaking I found myself upon

glory was not upon Moses; and the earth.

Moses was left unto himself. 2. I spoke: Eternal, Mighty,

And as he was left unto Only one!

himself, he fell unto the earth. 3. Behold I am no longer in the

glory in which I was above!

(Abraham 2:12: "Now, after And what my heart sought to

the Lord had withdrawn from know I did not understand.

speaking to me, and

withdrawn his face from me, I 4. And he said to me: What in

said in my heart: Thy servant thy heart thou didst so desire,

has sought thee earnestly; now that I will tell thee, because

I have found thee.") thou hast sought diligently to

behold, etc.

These parallel accounts, separated by centuries, cannot be coincidence. Nor can all the others. The first man to have such a confrontation with Satan was Adam. A wealth of stories about it closely matches the accounts of Abraham, Moses, Enoch, and other heroes. Perhaps the oldest Adam traditions are those collected from all over the ancient East at a very early time, which have reached us in later Ethiopian and Arabic manuscripts under the title of "The Combat of Adam and Eve against Satan. [^3] It contains at least thirteen different showdowns between Adam and the adversary, of which we present a few of the most striking. Since the motif was characteristically repeated with variations (the monkish mind could not resist the temptation to work a good thing to death) it will be necessary to repeat some passages from the book of Moses.

Moses Combat of Adam (direct

Chapter 1 quotations from the document

are indicated with quotation

marks)

withdrew from Moses, that his glorious garden, they (Adam

glory was not upon Moses; and and Eve) were seized with fear

Moses was left unto and "they fell down upon the

himself. ... he fell unto the earth and remained as if

earth. dead."

was for the space of many that condition, Eve, stretching

hours before Moses did again high her hands, prayed: "O

receive his natural strength like Lord ... thy servant has fallen

unto man; and he said unto from the Garden" and is

himself: Now, for this cause I banished to a desert place.

know that man is nothing, (Gen. 3:18f.)

which thing I never had

supposed.

have beheld God; but not my having become terrestrial can

natural, but my spiritual eyes, no longer behold the things

for my natural eyes could not they once did."

have beheld: for I should have

withered and died in his

presence; but his glory was

upon me: and I beheld his face,

for I was transfigured before

him.

when Moses had said these prayer, appears to them in a

words, behold, Satan came great light and sets up his

tempting him, saying: Moses, throne on the site, thus

son of man, worship me. claiming the earth as his

kingdom while his followers

sing hymns in his praise.

Moses looked upon Satan and light, asking: Can this be

said: Who art thou? For another God here hailed by his

behold, I am a son of God, in angels? An angel of the Lord

the similitude of his Only arrives and says: "Fear not,

Begotten; and where is thy Adam, what you see is Satan

glory, that I should worship and his companions who wish

thee? to seduce you again. First he

appeared to you as a serpent

and now he wants you to

worship him so he can draw

you after him away from

God."

15-18. ... Where is thy glory, Then the angel exposed and

for it is darkness unto me? ... humiliated Satan in Adam's

Get thee hence, Satan; deceive presence and cast him out

me not. ... I can judge saying to Adam:

between [God] and thee.

Depart hence, Satan.

God, except ... I were

strengthened before him. (See

20: "Calling upon God, he

received strength.")

307-8. The next morning as

Adam prayed with upraised

hands, Satan appeared to him,

saying, "Adam, I am an angel

of the great God. The Lord has

sent me to you." It was his plan

to kill Adam and thus "remain

sole master and possessor of

the earth." But God sent three

heavenly messengers to Adam

bringing him the signs of the

priesthood and kingship.

they reminded him of his

departed glory, but God said

they were signs of the

atonement to come,

whereupon Adam rejoiced.

323-24. After a forty-day fast

Adam and Eve were very

weak, stretched out upon the

floor of the cave as if dead, but

saying: Moses, son of man, clothed in light, speaking

worship me. sweet words to deceive them

worship me. of God ... now God has

commanded me to lead you to

my habitation ... to be

restored to your former glory."

planned to lead them to

far-away places and destroy

and said: Who art thou? this glorious old man who

came to us? Answer: He is

Satan in human form come to

deceive you by giving you

signs to prove his bonafides

but I have cast him out.

from fasting and still praying,

are again confronted by Satan

who, being rebuffed, "is sore

tremble. ... wailing says, " 'God has

Satan cried with a loud voice, rendered worthless the plan

with weeping, and wailing, which I contrived against his

and gnashing of teeth; and he servants.' And he retired in

departed hence. ... confusion."

inquire of [God]: for his glory you the weakness of Satan and

has been upon me, wherefore I his evil intentions for since the

can judge between him and day you left the Garden he has

thee. Depart hence, Satan. not let a day pass without

trying to harm you, but I have

not let him have the victory

over you." (Adam thus learned

to distinguish between good

and evil.)

5:6. And after many days an 329. Again Adam and Eve were

angel of the Lord appeared sacrificing with upraised arms

unto Adam, saying: Why dost in prayer, asking God to accept

thou offer sacrifices unto the their sacrifice and forgive their

Lord? And Adam said unto sins. "And the Lord said to

him: I know not, save the Lord Adam and Eve: As you have

commanded me. made this sacrifice to me, so I

saying: This thing is a flesh when I come to earth, and

similitude of the sacrifice of the so save you. ... And God

Only begotten of the Father, ordered an angel to take tongs

which is full of grace and truth. and receive the sacrifice of

mayest be redeemed, and all

mankind, even as many as

will.

saying: ... In this life I shall God said: When the terms of

have joy, and again in the flesh my covenant are fulfilled, I will

I shall see God. again receive you into my Garden and my Grace. So

Adam continued to make this

sacrifice for the rest of his days.

And God caused his word to be

preached to Adam.

1:20. ... Moses began to fear 330. On the fiftieth day, Adam

exceedingly; and as he began offering sacrifice as was his

to fear, he saw the bitterness of custom, Satan appeared in the

hell. Nevertheless, calling form of a man and smote him

upon God, he received in the side with a sharp stone

strength. (See Book of even as Adam raised his arms

Abraham, Facsimile No. 1!) in prayer. Eve tried to help him

5:7. This thing is a similitude of as blood and water flowed on

the sacrifice of the Only the altar. "God ... sent his

Begotten of the Father, which word and revived Adam

is full of grace and truth. saying: 'Finish thy sacrifice,

which is most pleasing to me.

For even so will I be wounded

and blood and water will come

from my side; that will be the

true Sacrifice, placed on the

altar as a perfect offering.' ...

And so God healed Adam."

Plainly, others knew the story long ago, but who could have taught it to Joseph?

NOTES

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] M. Grabmann, Die Geschichte der Scholastischen Methode (Graz: Akad. Verlag, 1957), I, 1-37; O. Chadwick, From Bousset to Newman (Cambridge University Press: 1959), chapters i-iii.
[^2] For a recent treatment of this much-treated theme, see Ol Eissfeldt, Einleitung in das Alte Testament (TÃ¼ngen: J. C. B. Mohr, 1964), pp. 2-9.
[^3] J. Danielou, The Dead Sea Scrolls and Primitive Christianity (N. Y.: Mentor Omega, 1957), p. 81.
