Hugh Nibley, Nibley on the Timely and the Timeless ( 1978)

2

The Expanding Gospel

Moses takes us back to the beginning — but which beginning? Nothing in the restored gospel is more stimulating to the inquiring mind than the infinitely expanded panorama of time and space it spreads before us. Our existence is viewed not as a one-act play, beginning with instantaneous creation of everything out of nothing and ending with its dissolution into the immaterial nothing from which it came (as St. Jerome puts it), but as a series of episodes of which for the present we are allowed to view only a few. The play has always been going on and always will be: The Man Adam played other roles and was known by different names before he came here, and after his departure from mortal life assumes other offices and titles. Even in this life everyone changes from one form to another, gets new names and callings and new identities as he plays his proverbial seven parts — but always preserving his identity as the same conscious living being. The common religion of the human race centers around that theme: the individual and the society pass from one stage of life to another not by a gradual and imperceptible evolution but by a series of abrupt transformations, dramatized the world over in Rites of Passage, of which birth and death are the prime examples coming not unannounced but suddenly and irresistibly when their time is ripe; other passages, as into puberty and marriage, follow the same pattern.

In such a perspective of eternity the stock questions of controversy between science and religion become meaningless. When did it all begin - can you set a date? Were there ever human-like creatures who did not belong to the human race? (There still are!) How old is the earth? the universe? How long are they going to last? What will we do in heaven forever? etc. Nothing is settled yet, not only because the last precincts are never heard from in science-and their report always comes as a shocker-but because we are far from getting the last word in religion either; for us the story remains open-ended - at both ends - in a progression of beginnings and endings without beginning or end, each episode proceeding from what goes before and leading to the next. The Absolutes of the University of Alexandria to which the Doctors of the Christians and the Jews were completely in the thrall from the fourth century on, simply do not exist for Latter-day Saints. Instead of that, they have a much bigger book to study; it is time they were getting with it

The expression "expanding gospel" is not a contradiction of terms. Even the Roman Catholic authorities concluded after much thought that the proper business of theology and philosophy is to expand men's knowledge of the gospel while leaving the scriptures, the sacred deposit and source of that knowledge, untouched by the addition or subtraction of so much as a syllable. [^1] Thus men, by the exercise of their intellects, may add to the gospel, but God may not. But this puts the thunder before the lightning: where has God imposed any limits on his own prerogative of imparting his word to man? The scriptural warnings against adding or subtracting, aside from being limited to specific individual books, are addressed specifically to men—no man may add to the scriptures. That imposes no restriction on God. But it is men who have expanded and contracted the scope of the holy writ to conform to their broad or narrow views of the gospel; it is men who have selected the books that make up the word of God, and these men have not been in agreement. The debate has raged for centuries about certain well-known writings, and still remains undecided. [^2]

Now we are faced by a new and important development. A sizable number of writings have recently been discovered claiming apostolic or otherwise inspired authorship and enjoying unprecedented antiquity. What is to be done with them? Of the author of some of the prophecies in the Dead Sea Scrolls Father Danielou writes:

A revelation was made known to him ... that the Messiah was near. ... Now what is amazing is that this prophecy was verified exactly. Thus between the great prophets of the Old Testament and John the Baptist he emerges as a new link in the preparation for the Advent of Christ: he is, as Michaud writes, one of the great figures of Israel's prophetic tradition. It is amazing that he remained so unknown for so long. Now that he is known the question arises as to what we are going to do about this knowledge. ... Why does not this message, then, form part of inspired Scripture? [^3]

This question, says Danielou, now confronts equally the Jewish and the Christian world. How can they expand their gospel to include the words of a newly found prophet? If the new discoveries only contained exactly what was already known and accepted, there would be no objection to admitting them to the cannon; but neither would they have any message for us, save to confirm what is already known. But what makes the documents so exciting is that they follow along familiar grooves to the end and then continue onward into new territory, expanding the confines of the gospel. Are we to assume that their writers, so strict and upright in their ways and so conscientious in their teachings, are saints as far as we can follow them only to become deluded purveyors of fraud and falsehood the moment they step beyond territory familiar to us?

Before reaching a decision on this important head, our first obligation is to inform ourselves as to what it is that these writings teach over and above conventional Jewish and Christian doctrine. What they teach, that is, seriously and as a whole. Speculative flights and picturesque oddities can be ruled out as serious doctrine. But in working through the newly found documents one soon becomes aware of certain themes that receive overwhelming emphasis and appear not in a few texts but in many or most of them. Such deserve our serious attention. Among the most conspicuous of these is the matter of a certain council held in heaven "at the foundation of the world" where the divine plan of salvation was presented and received with acclamations of joy; joined to this we are presented almost in variably with some account of the opposition to that plan and the results of that opposition. Around these two themes of the plan and the opposition a great deal of the old apocryphal writing revolves. But it is in the very oldest records of the race that we find some of the clearest statements of the doctrine, which in the oldest fragment of all, actually goes under a recognized label as "the Memphite theology."

The antiquity of the material contained in the so-called Shabako stone of the British Museum has been fully demonstrated and is today not seriously questioned. [^4] The only puzzle to scholars has been how anything so completely thought-out and sophisticated could turn up in what may well be the oldest known text in existence. There is nothing "primitive" in this dramatic presentation which was to mark the founding of the First Dynasty of Egypt. It is divided into two parts, a historical and a theological, the former explaining how the kingdom came to be established and organized after its peculiar fashion, and the latter how and why the world itself was created. The beholder of the drama, which was enacted by priests with the king taking the leading role, is never allowed to forget that what is ritually done on earth is but the faithful reflection of what was once done in heaven. [^5] Since a number of scholars today see an unbroken line of succession between the "Memphite theology" and the Logos-theology of John, the Shabako stone may not be out of place as the starting point in a study of the expanding gospel. [^6] But quite aside from that, it deserves mention as the earliest and one of the best descriptions of the council in heaven.

In the beginning, we are told, "... all the gods assembled in the presence" of Ptah, who "made a division between Horus and Seth, and forbade them to quarrel," giving each his assigned portion. [^7] Then for some reason he decided that his first-born, Horus, should be his unique heir, and solemnly announced to the assembled gods, pointing to Horus, "I have chosen thee to be the first, thee alone; my inheritance shall be to this my heir, the son of my son ... the first-born, opener of the ways, a son born on the birthday of Wep-wawet," that is, on the New Year, the Day of Creation. [^8] Thus, instead of being two portions, they were both united under Horus, while the controversy with Seth was patched up for the duration of the festival. [^9] The entire middle portion of the Shabako Text is obliterated, but from countless other Egyptian sources, we know that the conflict between Horus and Seth never ceased on this earth, the combat and victory of Horus being ritually repeated at every coronation. [^10] After rites dealing with a baptism, resurrection and the building of the temple at Memphis, the texts break off completely to resume with a catalogue of Ptah's titles as "he who sitteth upon the great throne, heavenly father who begot Atum, heavenly mother who bore Atum, the great one, the mind and mouth [heart and tongue] of the council of the gods [the ennead]." [^11] "In the heart [of Ptah] was conceived the image [form, likeness] of Atum, on the tongue [by the word] was the image of Atum. Great and mighty is Ptah through whose mind and word all the spirits were brought forth. [^12] And through the mind and word [of God] all physical members were invested with power, according to the doctrine that he [God] is as that which is in every body [i.e., the heart] and in every mouth [i.e., the tongue] of every god, of every human, of every animal, of every creeping thing, of whatsoever possessed life; for whatever is thought and whatever is uttered is according to his will. The council of the gods brought forth the seeing of the eyes, the hearing of the ears, the breathing of the nose, that these might convey information to the heart, which in turn became aware of things, to which awareness the tongue gives expression, giving utterance to the mind. In such a way were all the gods brought forth—Atum and the council of the Nine. But the word of God was first that which was conceived in his mind and then what was commanded by his tongue. In such a way were the spirits brought forth and the hmswt-spirits elected, for the provision of all nourishment and food, according to the mind and word of God." [^13] The best interpretation of hmswt-spirits, following Sethe's long discussion of the word, would seem to be spirits chosen for specially high callings, in particular to have progeny. [^14] The spirits having been thus created and a physical basis for life supplied, a law was laid down, "that he who does what is good [lovable, desirable] shall be given life to be in a state of peace [or salvation], while he who does evil [that which is hatefull] shall be given death to be in a state of punishment [or condemnation]. All the works [of men], all the arts and crafts, the labors of the arms and the goings of the legs, the motion of all the members are subject to this law, conceived in the mind and declared by the tongue [of God], which law shall be the measure [yimakh] of all things." [^15] All this was done and nourishment and food and all other good things provided by God alone and he saw that his work was good. [^16] "And thus it was that all the gods and all the spirits assembled" before the throne of God, the source of all life and joy. [^17] The king, representing Osiris, who is the dead king, his own predecessor, "goes through the secret gates in the splendor of the lord of Eternity, in the footsteps of Re of the great throne, to enter the courts on high and become united with the gods and with Ptah, the ancient of days [lord of years]." In the concluding scene the earthly king publicly embraces his son and heir, declaring his calling and succession, even as the god did in the beginning. [^18]

That the picture actually goes back to Menes, the founder of the First Dynasty, is confirmed right at the beginning of the Pyramid Texts in a writing for Teti, the second king of the dynasty and immediate successor of Menes: "Spoken by the great heavens in the midst of the lower hall of Geb [i.e., the temple of Memphis as the earthly counterpart of the heavenly court]. This is Teti, my beloved son, who sits upon the throne of Geb [the principle of patriarchal succession], who is well pleased with him; he hath declared him to be his heir in the presence of the great assembly of all the gods; every god hath acclaimed him joyfully with upraised hands, saying, Worthy is Teti with whom his father Geb is well pleased!" [^19] In the Coffin Texts the theme is carried on as Ptah summons the Great Assembly," "they who share the secret," gives them formal greeting, and introduces his son and heir to them, who acclaim him as Prince of Peace and Righteousness, shouting for joy. [^20] The earthly rites reflect the heavenly, and the king (or noble) announces in his Coffin Text, "I am in the human assembly what he is in heaven. I am ... the seed of Atum, the issue of him who gave the names in the day when Atum discussed it with the gods." [^21]

The great Babylonian creation text, the Enuma Elish, begins and ends with the great assembly in heaven. "As once above," it starts out, "when the heavens had not yet received their name and the earth below was not known, ... the Creator, he of vast intelligence, omniscient, omnipotent," presided over "a great assembly among his brethren the gods." [^22] Since the purpose of this version of the hymn is to exalt Marduk of Babylon, he takes over the principal functions of creating man and settling the score with the adversary. The most concise statement is on Tablet VI: "Then Marduk resolved upon a wondrous work. He opened his mouth and addressed Ea [his father], and told him of what he had conceived in his heart: 'I wish to bring blood and bone together and to organize them into a human being, whose name shall be man; let it be his duty to serve the gods and satisfy them.' "To provide satisfaction, however, was beyond the power of man, and "Marduk, in order that there be satisfaction, proposed a plan to the gods: 'Let one of their race be put to death that humanity might be. Let one of the assembled gods be delivered up as a guilty one, that they might subsist.' " [^23] But Kingu opposed the plan; it was he who made Tiamat rebel and caused the war. But he was defeated and cast down by Marduk, and the great assembly gave all the power of heaven and earth to Anu and through him to Marduk for carrying out the execution of the plan. [^24] Throughout, the earthly rites are a ritual repetition of what was done (in the opening words and title of the hymn) "once above" (enuma elish); and the affair ends with the admonition that the rites be repeated at the same place from year to year forever: "Let them rehearse throughout the ages to come at this spot what God has done, that they may never forget it. ... For this is the earthly image of that which is done in the heavens. ... Great planner, full of loving-kindness, may he forgive their sins and deliver them by his grace. ... Let us praise his name. They who have taken their places in the assembly to declare his names, in the holy place let them all together proclaim his name." [^25] Though the texts are full of repetitions, contamination, overlapping of different versions coming from different times and places, the main themes of the council and the plan recur consistently. [^26]

We know today that the religion of Israel cannot be studied in isolation from that of its neighbors, and for many years the experts have recognized affinities between the documents just cited and certain biblical texts. We have referred to them here, however, primarily to forestall the claim commonly made that the doctrines we are considering are of late, even Gnostic origin. The newly discovered Jewish and Christian Apocrypha have so much to say about the council in heaven and the plan laid down at the foundation of the world that every student should be aware of the very great antiquity and wide ramifications of the idea. According to Ben Sirach, the great assemblies of Israel were the ritual repetition not merely of the gathering at the foot of Sinai but specifically of the great assembly at the creation of the world, when "God set before them [the human race-to-be] a covenant, the Law of Life ... and showed them his judgments. Their eyes beheld His glorious majesty and their ears heard his voice." [^27] According to II Baruch the whole plan of the history of the world was set forth in detail" when the Mighty One took counsel to create the world." [^28] According to the Book of Enoch, in the beginning" the Head of Days, his head like white wool, sat with the Son of Man beside him upon the throne of his glory, and the books of the living were opened before him," the books of the living being the register of names of those who were to live upon the earth. [^29] Then the calling or mission of the Son and the plan, both of which had been kept secret until then, were "revealed to the Elect." [^30] It is not too much to say that the dominant theme of the Thanksgiving Hymns of the Dead Sea Scrolls is an ecstatic contemplation of the wonder of man's participation in heavenly affairs going back to the beginning. Consider a few lines from Hymn VI (or F):

Thou hast caused me to mount up to an eternal height and to walk in an inconceivable exaltation. And I know that there is a hope for everyone whom thou didst form of dust in the presence of the eternal assembly; and that the sinful spirit whom thou hast purified of great sin may be counted with the host of the saints and enter the society of the congregation of the Sons of Heaven. Thou didst appoint unto man an eternal share with the Spirits that Know, to praise thy name in joyful unison with them and to recount thy wondrous works in the presence thereof. [^31]

The whole point of this is that man actually belongs by prior appointment to that community of the Elect who share in the knowledge of the plan and who shouted for joy at the foundation of the world. In the preceding hymn, God is hailed as "prince of the gods and King of the Venerable Ones" and we must remind ourselves that this is neither a Gnostic nor a pagan production. [^32] The baffling tenth and eleventh pages of the Manual of Discipline come to life in the light of this imagery. To refer their message to prayers at various times of day makes good sense, since, as we have noted, earthly rites are but the reflection of heavenly events; but if we leave it there much is left unexplained. "He has placed them as an eternal treasure, and established for them a share with the saints, and has joined their society to the family of the Sons of Heaven, the council of the Church and the assembly of the Temple, an establishment [lit. "planting"] which reaches forever into the future and the past." [^33] The word which we have translated as "share" above is usually rendered as "lot" (it occurs seventy-six times in the Old Testament), but it is not the gift of chance, but is rather one's "lot" in the sense of having been appointed by God ahead of time. If we turn back to the opening lines of the preceding section of the hymn (p. x), we may see in prayers at dawn a conscious counterpart of the celestial drama: we are told of God's blessing "at the times which he fixed at the beginning of the rule of light, along with his cycles, and in the assembly at the place appointed by him, when the Watchers of Darkness also began." The Watchers, as is well known, were fallen angels, here the equivalent of those who first opposed the Rule of Light. At that time, the text continues, God "opens his treasury and shows his plan." The treasury is referred to many times in the apocrypha, especially in the Hodiyot Scroll, as that knowledge which was with God in the beginning, and which he imparted to his Elect. [^34] The last word of the phrase is in code—a plain indication that the text does indeed have a double meaning, as it goes on to tell us in terms of lamps in a shrine, of the shining ones being received in the mansion of glory. We are even told that the great light of the Holy of Holies here actually signifies something else. [^35]

This interpretation is borne out at the beginning of the Clementine Recognitions, a work having the closest affinities to the Dead Sea Scrolls, in which Peter tells of "the plan (definitio) of God which he announced (promisit) as his own will and desire in the presence of the First Angels, and which he established as an eternal law for all." [^36] This is from a very early and strongly anti-Gnostic work, but the Gnostics have preserved the teaching and given it a characteristic Gnostic twist: "My Father, the joyful glorious light," says the Psalm of Thomas, "summoned all the Aeons of Peace [the First Angels have here become mere abstractions], all his sons and all the angels, and established them that they might rejoice in his greatness [i.e., share it] [^37]. ... All bowed the knee before him and sang his praises together, hailing him as the Illuminator of the Worlds." [^38] The newly discovered Creation Apocryphon, another "Gnostic" interpretation, tells us that this earth is the result of a discussion in heaven: "On that day began the discussion in which gods, angels, and men participated. And the decisions of the discussion were then carried out by gods, angels, and men. But the Prince Jaltabaoth did not understand the power of faith," and so was denied "the authority over matter" which the others shared. [^39] The power of faith, it will be recalled, was the power "by which the worlds were created."

The unimpeachable orthodox Pastor of Hermas is quite as specific: "Behold God, constructing the world in accordance with the great council [in some Mss. "the most honored council"] ... creating the beautiful world and turning it over to his chosen ones, that He might carry out his promise to them, which he gave in the midst of great glory and rejoicing, that is, if they keep his laws (legitima) which they accepted in great faith." [^40] The Mandaean version is interesting because it calls the Creator Ptah-il, combining the archaic Egyptian and Semitic names, [^41] and while giving the familiar account of the great council, adds the important detail that three messengers were sent down to supervise the work and to instruct Adam, these three being glorious angels who were later to live upon the earth as ordinary mortals and prophets. [^42]

So far we have only mentioned the bare fact of an assembly in the presence of God at the foundation of the world, but even so it has not been possible to do so without giving some indication of what the business of the meeting was, namely, the agreement upon the great plan which is to be "the measure of all things" for those who live upon the earth. Recently J. Fichtner has pointed out that the preoccupation with "Yahweh's plan" is the very core and center of Isaiah's thinking, and scholars are now noting that the presence of a heavenly council from the beginning has been part and parcel of Jewish thought from the earliest times. [^43] In fact, it was concentration on God's preexistent plan, Seligmann avers, which freed the Jews from the danger of falling into the "naturalistic fatalism" that engulfed the religions of their neighbors. [^44] Before the Creation, according to IV Ezra, "even then I God had these things in mind, even to the end thereof"; [^45] and at the Creation itself "when the Most High made the world and Adam ... he first of all prepared the judgment and the things which pertain to the judgment." [^46] Where there is a purpose there is a plan; where there is neither there is only chaos and chance, leading to the "naturalistic fatalism" of the pagans and the philosophers. God knew, Enoch tells us, "before the world was created what is forever and what will be from generation to generation." [^47] Or, in the words of Ben Sirach, "When God created his works in the beginning, after making them he assigned them their portions. He set in order his works for all time, and their authority unto their generations; and after this God filled the earth with good things, and then finally created man, and gave him a fixed number of days, and gave him authority over all the earth." [^48]

When the plan is discussed, we usually hear of a definite time schedule as part of it, with set ages, dispensations, and ends carefully worked out and determined ahead of time, along with a definite and fixed number of spirits appointed to go to the earth in each of those dispensations. The so-called Manual of Discipline has a positive obsession with times and periods as part of God's plan: "From God is the knowledge of all that is and all that will be; and before they existed he established their whole plan (makhshevtam), and when they exist [upon the earth] he prescribes the conditions of their existence according to his glorious plan." [^49] Since God created man "according to his own plan [or purpose]," says a Thanksgiving Hymn," ... before thou didst create them, thou didst know all their doings from eternity to eternity." [^50] This writer often reminds us that man was allowed to share in the plan: "In the wisdom of Thy knowledge thou didst establish their knowledge before they existed ... and without thy knowing nothing was done." [^51] The Battle Scroll reminds us that both blessing and cursing are but the faithful working out of God's plan, that a definite day" has been appointed for the overthrow and humbling of the rule of Wickedness," and that the saints should never despair in their time of probation "until God gives the sign that he has completed his test." [^52] The Zadokite documents teach that the wicked on this earth were those who were not chosen and called up in the preexistence; thus Rabin translates a key passage on the subject:

For God has not chosen them 'from of old, (from the days of) eternity,' and before they were established He knew their works and abhorred the generations (when they arose), and He hid His face from the land from their arising (or: and from Israel) until their being consumed. And He knows (or: knew) the years of their existence and the number (or: set times) and exact epochs of all them that come into being in eternity (or: in the worlds) and past events, even unto that which will befall in the epochs of all the years of eternity (or: the world). And in all of them He raised for Himself 'men called by name,' in order 'to leave a remnant' for the land and to fill the face of the universe of their seed, and to make (or: and he made) known to them by the hand of His anointed ones His holy spirit and shew them (or: demonstration of) truth. And with exactitude He set out their names; but those whom He hated He caused to stray. [^53]

Rabin has taken liberties with the next-to -last sentence which, as many have pointed out, states as clearly as possible that God has made known the truth to chosen spirits, called up in the preexistence, through the Holy Ghost, bestowed "by the hand of His Messiah." [^54]

Almost always when the plan is mentioned something is said about its glad reception, "when the Morning Stars sang together and all the Sons of God shouted for joy." The great year-rites, common to all ancient societies, are a rehearsal of the Creation, usually presented in dramatic form; invariably the rites end with a great and joyful acclamation. [^55] Thus the concluding lines of the Shabako stone, with which we began our story: "So all the gods and all the spirits came together to hail God upon his throne ... and they rejoiced before him in his temple, the source of all good things." [^56] And the Mesopotamian Enuma Elish ends with an exhortation to all men to "come to this place and rejoice and celebrate the festival," hailing God for his wonderful deeds and his loving kindness, even as was done "once above." [^57] In the Asmavedha, the oldest recorded rites of India, the king is joyfully hailed at the Creation as "the Morning Star," a title that often occurs in this connection. [^58] This is a reminder that the question put to Job, "Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth, when the morning stars sang together and all the sons of God shouted for joy?" was not a rhetorical question at all, for Job is expected to give the right answer —"answer, for thou knowest!" This is confirmed in the testament of Job, where that prophet says, "The Lord spake with me in power, and showed me the past and future." [^59] The same writing recommends study of the hymns of Job's daughter, designating them as inspired poems. The word poema, meaning literally creation, owes its prominence, as Walter Otto has shown, to the circumstance that the first poets were all inspired people who sang one and the same song, namely the Song of the Creation: that was the standard ritual hymn at all the ancient cult centers where the Muses were housed and the royal year-rites rehearsed and performed. [^60]

The whole purpose of the Book of Jubilees is to show that the great rites of Israel, centering about the temple and the throne, actually originated with the "the celebration in heaven on the Day of Creation." [^61] All who were present on that occasion, according to I Enoch, took an oath to abide by the proposed order and then burst forth into a mighty spontaneous shout of joy. [^62] Like Job, the psalmist of the Thanksgiving Hymns is frightfully downcast until he is reminded that "the humble bless Thee, while the Sons of Heaven jubilate in eternal glory. ..." [^63] "Thou hast placed the lot of man eternally with the eternal spirits to shout for joy and to tell thy wonders. ..." [^64] The thing to notice here is that man shares fully in these heavenly jubilations; the poet is simple intoxicated with the assurance that man, a mere speck of "wet dust" is allowed not only to know about the secret councils of the beginning, but actually to share in them, not only as a participant but as one of the directors! The words marvellous, knowledge, treasures, secrets, counsel, intelligence, understanding, etc., occur in constant and varied association in the scrolls. "Mere man is to be raised up to join the heavenly hosts... and be among Those Who Know in the great choir of jubilation." [^65] "Who is man that God gives him intelligence to share in such marvels and lets him know his true secrets?" [^66] "Thou hast given to thy children a rich portion of the knowledge of thy Truth, and to the degree of a man's knowledge will he be glorified." [^67]

This equating of knowledge with glory may lie at the root of the unique Jewish reverence for things of the mind: "Endowed with intelligence, O Lord, I have known thee. ... I have learned sure and certain things regarding thy marvellous secrets, thanks to Thy Holy Spirit. ... [^68] And in the wisdom of thy knowledge didst thou establish their knowledge before they existed." [^69] The same thoughts preoccupy the author of the Manual of Discipline, who also asks, "Who is man... that he should take his place before thy face. ... How can the clay and the potter sit together; or who understands thy wonderful plan of God?" [^70] And he supplies the answer: "For eternal glory he has chosen me, and for that he teaches me. ..." [^71] the Way of Light itself is "the spirit of the understanding of all the Plan. ... Without thee nothing came into existence — and he instructed me in all knowledge." Even the Battle Scroll recurs to the theme: "Thou hast engraven them," speaking of the elect of Israel, "on the Tablets of Life for Kingship... in all the promised ages of the eternities." [^72] Hence if it should happen that the hosts of Israel are defeated in battle, one seeks the explanation where Job found it, in the economy of heaven; the ultimate victory of the earthly hosts is assured by their close cooperation with the heavenly hosts, of which they are but a local extension: "... the rule of Michael will be exalted among the angels, and the dominion of Israel among all flesh. Righteousness shall flourish in heaven while all those who embrace God's truth (on earth), shall have joy in the knowledge of eternal things. So, Sons of the Covenant of God, be of good courage in the trial which God visits upon you. ..." [^73] This was the answer that Job received.

The oft-recurring statement that nothing exists whatever except in the will and plan of God, has led scholars to see a connection not only of the Dead Sea Scrolls but of the Shabako stone itself with the Gospel of John. [^74] The suggestion of Richard L. Anderson, that the logos in John may sometimes be translated "council" deserves closer consideration: "In the beginning was the logos (council, discussion) and the logos was in the presence of God, and God was the logos. This was in the beginning in his presence. Everything was done (determined) by it, and without it not a single thing was created. ..." Recently C.N.Dahl has shown that the early Christian conceived of salvation "as a counterpart to the beginnings of the world. ... As a divine act of creation, conforming to the creation of the world, eschatology and creation can be linked up with one another even in this way." [^75] Eschatology, that is, cannot be understood without protology (Dahl uses the word), or an understanding of what took place in the beginning before the foundation of the world. The words of the early Christian Barnabas might have been taken right out of the Dead Sea Scrolls: "Praise the Lord who put wisdom and intelligence (nous) in us for the understanding of his secrets. Who understands the Plan (parabolen: project) of the Lord save the wise one who knows and loves his Lord?" [^76] We have seen in the Pastor of Hermas that God's plan was "promised in the midst of great glory and rejoicing." [^77] The theme is as conspicuous in the earliest Christian writings as in the Jewish, but after the fourth century the doctors of both religions rejected it completely. [^78]

The early Christian Apocrypha are especially concerned with the opposition to the plan, which was also initiated at the foundation of the world. The combat between the powers of light and darkness enjoys a very conspicuous place in ritual, being one of the essential episodes of the worldwide creation drama of ancient times. [^79] In the scroll entitled "The War between the Sons of Light and the Sons of Darkness" we have ample illustration of the ritual and doctrinal concern of the Jews for this motif, and the quotations just cited from that work show that the embattled hosts on earth were but a local version of the war in heaven. [^80] Satan, who opposed the plan, led a rebellion and was cast out of heaven with his followers, to become an unwilling agent in the carrying out of the plan upon the earth. The name Mephistopheles"... der stets das Bose will, und stets das Gute schafft," denotes the ultimate frustration of the Evil One, who with the worst intent in the world, can only contribute to the exaltation of man by providing the opposition necessary for testing him in the time of probation upon the earth. [^81] In the early Christian Apocrypha Satan's rebellion in heaven begins not with a refusal to worship God, but with his refusal to bow down to Adam. "I have no need to worship Adam, "he says in one early writing,"... I will not worship an inferior and younger being. I am his senior in the Creation; before he was made I was already made. It is rather his duty to worship me! When the angels who were under me heard this, they refused to worship him also...", and so the revolt was on. [^82] "Now the Prince," says the recently discovered Bodmer Papyrus X, "not being righteous wanted to be God," he had his own counterplan to propose, and the apostates of the Church "actually accept the plan of the serpent whenever they reject God's plan." [^83] The two plans represent the two ways that confront us in life, the devil himself having a definite mission on earth. "If I am a fisherman of men," says the Lord in the Gospel of the XII Apostles (a writing which Origen says is older than the Gospel of Luke), [^84] "the Devil is also a fisherman, who catches many in his nets. ... If I have come to take for my kingdom those who are mine, why should not he do the same?" [^85] "O Adam," cries the Evil One upon meeting him out in the dreary world after the fall, "I was cast forth from my glory because of thee, and behold I have caused thee to be expelled from paradise... because thou didst cause me to become a stranger to my home in heaven. Know thou that I shall never cease to contend against thee and all those who shall come after thee ... until I have taken them all down into Amend with me!" [^86]

The contrast and choice between the Way of Light and the Way of Darkness is made possible by Satan's presence upon the earth. "Horus has two heads," says the famous seventeenth chapter of the Book of the Dead, "the one is truth, the other is sin; he gives truth to whoever brings truth to him, and sin he gives to whoever sins." [^87] The concept of this world as a double sphere of light and darkness, good and evil, war and peace, meets us in the earliest meaningful human documents, the prehistoric palette, seals, "standards," reliefs on temples, and designs on clay vessels. On these we find in dramatic opposition to the happy and orderly banquet scenes, rural charm and religious processions opposing scenes of conflict, rapine, and military aggression. [^88] The contrast is shown on the shield of Achilles in the eighteenth book of the Iliad, [^89] and Hesiod in the eighth century B.C. reminds his wayward brother that two ways are always open to man: "O Perses, the better road of the two is that of Righteousness," the hard and narrow one. [^90] Evil upon the earth is not a dreadful mistake, as St. Augustine thought, [^91] for, as the Zohar says, "if God had not given men a double inclination to both good and bad, he would have been incapable either of virtue or of vice; but as it is he is endowed with a capacity for both." [^92] "All things have their opposites," says the old and mysterious Sefer Yeshira, "good and bad. It is the Good which is the foil and proof of the Bad, and vice versa." [^93] Hence in this world "we may live either by the Law of the Lord or the Law of Belial," according to the Testament of Naphthali [^94] and though the Testament of Abraham announces the alarming news that "for seven thousand who walk the road of perdition, there is hardly one soul that takes the path of righteousness ... to find salvation!" [^95] the presence of the two ways is a blessing, giving man a freedom of choice and opportunity for exaltation that makes him "envied of the angels." "Happy is the man," says Ben Sirach, "who could have fallen away and did not fall away; who could have inflicted injury but did not do so. ... Poured out before thee are fire and water, stretch forth thy hand and take thy choice. ... Life and death are before man, and that which he desireth shall be given him." [^96] This state of things, according to Fourth Ezra, was established "when the Most High made the world and Adam, "and is" the condition of the contest which every man who is born upon the earth must wage." [^97] The Manual of Discipline takes up the theme with zeal: "To these two ways all the children of men are born, and to these two divisions they are heirs; every one of them each in his generation, and in his time every man shares more or less in both of them." [^98] The whole human race, "all kinds of their spirits and their natures" are put to the same test, each in his own dispensation, "until the final appointed end-time." The real issue is never lost from sight, for Satan himself remains actively engaged: "All man's afflictions and tribulations are in the dominion of Mastema [the devil as a deceiver of men], and everything that makes the Children of Light to stumble is due to the operations of the angels of the Devil," while on the other hand "the God of Israel and his true angels will help every Son of Light, for He created both the spirits of the Light and of Darkness, and according to them he will determine all the deeds of their life ... for a judgment that will last for all the eternities." [^99] The main idea of "the plan which God laid down ... in the presence of the First Angels for an eternal universal law," according to the Clementine Recognitions, is that "there shall be two kingdoms placed upon the earth to stay there until judgment day ... and when the world was prepared for man it was prepared for man it was so deceived that ... he would be free to exercise his own will, to turn to good things if he wanted them, or if not to turn to bad things." [^100] In the Dead Sea Scrolls and the earliest Christian writings this is expressly designated as "the ancient Law of Liberty." [^101]

The Didache, one of the oldest (discovered in 1873) Christian writings known, begins with the words, "There are two roads, one of life and the other of death, and there is a great difference between the two," which difference it then proceeds to describe. [^102] All the other apostolic fathers so-called are concerned with this doctrine, but one of the most striking expositions is in the newly found Gospel of Philip, a strongly anti-Gnostic work: "Light and Darkness, life and death, right and left, are brothers to one another. It is not possible to separate them from one another," in this world, that is, though in the next world where only the good is eternal this will not be so. [^103] This is the doctrine of "the Wintertime of the Just," i.e., that while we are in this world men cannot really distinguish the righteous from the unrighteous, since in the wintertime all trees are bare and look equally dead, "but when the summertime of the Just shall come, then the righteous shall bear their leaves and fruit while the dead limbs of evil trees shall be cast into the fire." [^104] It is another aspect of the plan. "We believe that God organized all things in the beginning out of unformed matter," says Justin Martyr to the Jew Trypho," ... for the sake of the human race, that they, if they prove themselves by their works to be worthy of His plan, having been judged worthy to return to his presence (so we believe), shall reign with him, having been made immortal and incorruptible. At the creation they themselves made the choice ... and so were deemed worthy to live with him in immortality." [^105]

There are many other areas of doctrine and important rites and ordinances set forth in the newly found writings and in the longer known texts which must now be reread and reconsidered in the light of recent discoveries. In time these are bound to exert some pressure to push out the walls of conventional Christian doctrine. But before the student gets involved in them it would be well to consider one issue which forces itself on the attention of every serious student of early Christianity and Judaism. We mean the problem of literalism. Just how literal are all these things supposed to be? What we have been talking about implies a different view of reality from that of conventional Christianity; it introduces as it were a third dimension into the purely two-dimensional pictures given us by scholastic philosophy and naturalism. The great difference between the Primitive Church and conventional Christianity is that the two take different things literally. [^106] The history of Christian dogma has been one long process of accomodation and deeschatologizing by which one body of belief has been completely displaced by another, eschatological reality being supplanted by sacramental piety. The teachings with which we have been dealing in this paper definitely infer a level of reality above that of the allegory and symbolism of the schools of rhetoric which became the official teachers of Christianity. The early Christian literalism was an horrendum to the schoolmen, but the more we learn about the early Church the clearer it becomes that very literalism is the distinctive stamp not only of the Christian religion but of the Jewish as well. [^107] Today scholars are being forced into a compromise. A recent study of Christ's forty-day ministry concludes: "What happened after our Lord's resurrection was that He moved constantly back and forth between these two 'spaces' or worlds — the seen and the unseen. There is another world than this. It is not at some remote point in outer space. It exists side by side with this; ... it is the world of the spirit, and this is the world of matter." [^108] Here a rather surprising concession to literalism is made only to be promptly withdrawn as the "other world" turns out to be only the immaterial "spirit" world after all, in spite of all the pains to which the Lord went as he "moved continually back and forth" between the two worlds to make perfectly clear that he was not a spirit.

The earliest Christian apologist, Aristides, rejects spiritual or allegorical interpretations outright when his colleagues at Athens want to introduce them into their religious discussions. If religious stories are "mythical," he insists, "they are nothing but just so many words ... but if they are allegorical they are simply myths and nothing else." [^109] Early Christians were not interested in myths or allegories. The youthful Clement leaves the schools of the philosophers in distress because they cannot answer what he considers the important questions of life: When was the world created? What was before that? Will a man really continue to live after death? [^110] Only Peter could answer such questions, and Peter opens his discourse by saying, "To begin with, we say unequivocally that there is nothing bad about material substance." [^111] This was the absolute antithesis of the teachings of the schools; it was the Gnostic intellectuals who first insisted on dematerializing Christian doctrine, followed by the Neoplatonists. Between those two the attitude of Christian theology to literalism was given its fixed and permanent form. The Bodmer Papyrus X shows how early they attacked with their basic weapons:" ... they deny the resurrection, they are ashamed of the physical birth and death of the Lord." [^112] The charge is repeated by all the apostolic fathers and in all the oldest Christian Apocrypha. "Christianity," wrote Schopenhauer, "has this peculiar disadvantage, that, unlike other religions, it is not a pure system of doctrine: its chief and essential feature is that it is a history, a series of events, a collection of facts." [^113]

If the eschatological drama deals with real rather than allegorical events, part of those real events took place long ago and far away, but part of them are actually being acted out here upon the earth. If the saints were taught to think of themselves as outcasts in a hostile world, it just so happened that they were outcasts in a hostile world; one had only to look around to see that the pitfalls and dangers were real and physical as well as "spiritual." The faithful actually have found themselves more often than not holing up in the desert places of the world — E. Kaesemann's "Wandernde Gottesvolk," and when they talked of being gathered out of the world and taking leave of it, they were thinking in the most factual and spatial terms. Even those learned doctors of the Church who utterly deplored the old-fashioned literalistic ways of thinking constantly slip back to those ways themselves, especially in times of crisis; and the spiritual miracles, spiritual parousia, spiritual pilgrimage, spiritual temple, and spiritual Jerusalem, etc., of the schoolmen never proved very satisfying to the Christian mind which displays a constant tendency to revert to the tangible article whenever possible — even the great doctors prefer the dinner to the menu, when they can get it!" [^114] Today a return to literalism is part of the expanding gospel.

But there is ambiguity here. Take for example the business of light and darkness. In the thousands of passages contrasting the two they are most of the time quite plainly figurative. Yet the shining garments of heavenly beings, as of Jesus at the Transfiguration, are real; and so is the darkness: "As every man's nature in this life is dark," says Enoch, "so are also his conception, birth, and departure from life." [^115] When in the Pastor of Hermas the Church is described as a tower built above the water, we are told that the tower is a symbol, but that the water is very real: no one can enter the typological tower without passing through real water. [^116] From this we see that rites and ordinances present an ambiguous situation, with some things to be taken literally and done literally and others figuratively. But in our ancient texts the reader is rarely left in doubt as to which is which; it is only the doctors of the Church, all men of the schools, who insist on minimizing the literal at the expense of the allegorical. Once one comes to understand, Origen assures us, that the historical parts of the Bible are to be understood symbolically, the historical interpretation of the whole becomes not only expendable but actually misleading, and should be abandoned altogether! [^117]

The mixing of types and images with reality is of the very essence of our life upon the earth, where we see through a glass but darkly. In the scriptures and the Apocrypha we are told of things that are real and yet too wonderful for us even to imagine here, let alone describe; we simply can't conceive them: "Eye hath not seen nor ear heard, neither hath entered into the heart of man the things which God hath prepared. ..." (1 Corinthians 2:9.) Consequently, if these things are to be mentioned at all, it must be in terms of types and images which are not real. Yet the types and images are not for that reason to be despised. A valuable commentary on this theme is supplied in the newly discovered Gospel of Philip: "Truth did not come into the world naked, but she came clothed in types and images. One cannot receive the truth in any other way." (115:10-12.) The solid reality behind the images can only be known by apocatastasis, or restoration to a former state. (115:15-18.) If people do not receive the ordinances here, we are told, they will not enjoy the real thing hereafter. (121:1-8.) Marriage, for example, has a different form in the next world to what it has here (124:6-9); but only by entering it here will one be allowed to enter it there: "If anyone does not receive it while he is in this world, he will not receive it in the other place" (134:6-7). So it is with all the ordinances: he who has not mastered "the places" here "will not be able to be master of that place. ..." (124:33-36.) "The mysteries of the truth are revealed as types and images" here, while "the veil conceals how God really governs the physical creation." (132:20-25.) The rending of the veil is not the abolition but the revelation of what is behind it, "in order that we might enter into the truth of it. ... We enter in our weakness through despised symbols" (133:1-15), [^118] but enter we must, for who does not "receive the light" through these ordinances "will not receive it in the other place," while he who does receive it "cannot be held back, and will be beyond the reach of all his enemies even in this world. And when the time comes for him to go out of this world he has already received the truth in the images." (134:6-13.)

If one makes a sketch of a mountain, what is it? A few lines on a piece of paper. But there is a solid reality behind this poor composition; even if the tattered scrap is picked up later in a street in Tokyo or a gutter in Madrid, it still attests to the artist's experience of the mountain as a reality. If the sketch should be copied by others who have never seen the original mountain, it still bears witness to its reality. So it is with the apocryphal writings: most of them are pretty poor stuff and all of them are copies of copies. But when we compare them we cannot escape the impression that they have a real model behind them, more faithfully represented in some than in other. All we ever get on this earth, Paul reminds us, is a distorted reflection, but it is a reflection of things that really are. Since we are dealing with derivative evidence only, we are not only justified but required to listen to all the witnesses, no matter how shoddy some of them may be. For years the evidence of the Egyptians, Greeks, Babylonians, etc., has been brought into court as powerful refutation of the Bible's claims to originality and inspiration. Their voices do indeed refute the claims of conventional Christianity to the absolute originality and exclusive inspiration of the Bible, but the Bible itself never made such claims. [^119] What the outside texts prove is the antiquity and universality of the gospel and its central position in the whole history of civilization. It is not a local or tribal tradition on the one hand, nor is it the spontaneous expression of evolving human intelligence on the other, but is the common heritage of all ancient civilizations, battered, corrupted, and distorted in most cases, to be sure, but always recognizable in its main features and much too ingenious and elaborate to be the product of independent discovery. [^120]

But what are we to make of pagans possessing the gospel, and that from the most ancient times? We did not say they had it, but only that their records testify to it. If we examine those records, we soon discover that all their authors possess are mere fragments which they do not pretend to understand. For them all those elements of the gospel which fit so perfectly into the account of things given in the story of the redemption are but distant traditions, shattered remnants of a forgotten structure, completely mystifying odds and ends that once meant something but whose meaning can now only be guessed at. This attitude to the heritage of the past may fairly be called the basic mood of Egyptian religion. In the seventeenth chapter of the Book of the Dead, to which we have already referred, the question is regularly asked, "What does this mean?" and fourteen times when an answer is supplied, it is with the reservation that "others say" it means something else. From the earliest times "the impression made on the modern mind" by the Egyptians, according to I.E.S. Edwards, "is that of a people searching in the dark for a key to truth ... retaining all lest perchance the appropriate one should be lost." [^121] They know there is a key, that is, but they also know they do not have it. It would be easy to show that the keynote of the literature and religion of all ancient people who have left us their records, with the exception of Israel, is one of pessimism and despair. We would only have to quote the authors of the standard literary histories of the various nations to make that clear. [^122] Israel escaped both that pessimism and fatalism by being constantly reminded by the prophets of the great preexistent plan that lies behind everything that happens. This we believe to be the most significant element in the expanding gospel.

NOTES

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] We have treated this theme in "Sparsiones," Classical Journal, 40 (1945), 515-43.
[^2] Secrets of Enoch, v:1, cf. vi:1;Jerem. li:16;Ps. cxxxv:7;Job xxxviii:22; I Enoch, xviii:1; Slavonic Enoch (in J. A. T. Robinson, Apocrypha Anecdota (Cambridge:1897), II, Iviii); Pseudo-Philo, xxxii:7 (in M. R. James, Antiquities of Philo [SPCK, 1917], 176). "Clouds of radiance drip moisture and life," Psalms of Thomas, i:11 (A. Adam, in ZNTW, Beih. No.24,[1959], 2); text in A Manichaean Psalm-book (Stuttgart: 1938), 203-228. On the heavens as a general storehouse and treasure-house, K. Ahrens, in ZMDG, 84 (1930), 163, discussing Koran, xv:21; cf. Ben Sirach, xliii:14ff. In the Enuma Elish, Tab. vii:8, God's "treasure is the abundance which is poured out over all." On the relevance of this source, see W. Bousset, Hauptprobleme der Gnosis (GÃ¶ingen: 1907), 246.
[^3] They are "for a blessing or a curse as the Lord of Spirits willeth," I Enoch, lix:lff.; lx:22. They must undergo a transformation to be useful to man: Deut. xxviii:12; l Enoch, xviii:2; and lx:15, 21-22; lll Baruch, x:9-10. They may serve "against the day of battle and war," Job xxxviii:22, for unless benignly restrained they are dark and destructive, J. A. T. Robinson, Apocrypha Anecdota, lviii, citing Testament of Levi, iii:2; cf.Od. Sal., xvi:16; Pseudo-Philo, xv:5.
[^4] "I am the Treasure of Life who descended upon the King of Glory, so that he was radiant in his understanding," M. Lidzbarski, Das Johannes-buch der Mandaer (Giessen:1905), 203, No. 57. God holds the keys to control and administer the treasure, K. Ahrens, in ZMDG, 84, (1930), 163; he restrains the elements as by a dam, l Enoch, lx:lff., keeping them "sealed up," Pseudo-Philo, viii:6-10, in places of peace and order, l Baruch, iii:15. His treasury is a shrine of wisdom, Jerem. li:16-17; cf. Pindar, Olymp. vi:64ff., 109. For the Mandaeans treasure means "capability, ability, worthiness," E. S. Drower, The Thousand and Twelve Questions (Berlin: Akad.-Verlag, 1960, 117, n. 8. An impressive treatment of the theme is in the Thanksgiving Hymns (IQH), especially 1 (Plate 35), 3 (Pl. 37), 10f. (Pl. 44f.), 13 (Pl.47).
[^5] Quotation is from E. S. Drower, A Pair of Nasoraean Commentaries (Leiden:Brill, 1963), 69, n.1., Cf. ll Baruch, liv:13; Od. Sal., iv:8. The treasure is a fountain, Proverbs viii:24. "He has multitude of waters in the heavens...," Jerem. li:16. The source of all earthly treasure is a pool in heaven, lll Baruch, x:1-10. The "treasures of glory" are the clouds and earthly fountains, says the Battle Scroll (IQM), x:12, the latter being fed by the former, Pseudo-Philo, xix:10, cf.N. Sed, "Une Cosmologie juive du haut moyen-age," in Revue des Etudes Juives, 124 (1965), 64-5. In the treasuries of the heavens are "the living waters," l Enoch, xviii:2; blessings pour from "the holy dwelling and the eternal fountain that never deceives," IQSb, i:3 (this is also temple imagery, l Enoch, xxxix:5). God's creative intelligence is "a strong fountain," IQH, xii:11. Pindar, Olymp. i:lff.; iii:65ff.; ix:19, and Aeschylus, Persians, 234, 1022, equate the life-giving gold and silver of the divine treasure-house of oracular wisdom with golden grain and silver fountains. The light of the treasure is also a stream, Pistis Sophia, 65 (132f.). The creative process is an ever-flowing Jordan of Light, Ginza, 67 (M. Lidzbarski, Ginza [GÃ¶ingen: 1925], 61f.).
[^6] II Baruch, liv:13.
[^7] K. Koch, "Wort and Einheit des SchÃ¶ergottes im Memphis and Jerusalem," in Zeitschr. f. Theol. u. Kirche, 62(1965), 276. This is one of many recent studies pointing out the relevance and importance of early Egyptian texts for the study of Jewish and Christian concepts. So L. V. Khybar, in JNES, 13(1954), 87; R. Anthes, in JNES, 18(1959), 169-212; L. Speleers, Les Textes des Cercueils (Brussels: 1946), xxviii. The five stoicheia "gush forth" from the five treasure-houses, ManichÃ¤ische Handschriften der Staatl. Museen Berlin (Stuttgart: 1940), I, 30.
[^8] Such a scene is depicted in the archaic text of the so-called Shabako stone, K. Sethe, Das 'Denkmal Memphitischer TheologiÃ©, der Schabakostein des Br. Museums (Leipzig: 1928), 23-32, 60-70, in the Pyramid Texts, e.g., #468 (895); and Coffin Texts, e.g., #39 (166-67); in Enuma Elish, Tab. iii: 132-38; iv; vi. On the general Near Eastern background of the Council in Heaven, see F. M. Cross, in JNES, 12(1959), 274-77; H. W. Robinson, in Jnl. Theol. Stud. 45(1944), 151-57. On the presentation of the plan, see J. Fichtner, in ZATW, 63 (1951), 16-33. The scene is presented in the Serekh Scroll (IQS), x:1ff.; Ben Sirach, xvii:11f.; Pastor Hermae, Vis. i:3; The 1012 Questions (Drower), 112.
[^9] Thus in the Shabako stone (see note 8) as rendered by J. Breasted, The Development of Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt (London: 1912), 46; "Then he assembled all the gods and their kas (saying to them): 'Come ye and take possession of the "Meb-towe," the divine store-house...whence is furnished the "Life of the Two Lands."' "Cf. Pindar, Pyth., xi:5: "Come to the hidden Melian treasury of the golden tripods...the storehouse of true counsels, where the host of heroes assembles." Cf. Jerem. x:12; 4 Ezra viii:20; Ben Sirach, xxxix:12-17; IQH, i:10, xiii:1, IQS, x:1-2; Od. Sal. xv and xvi; xix:1ff.; Acts of Thomas, c.136 (A. F. J. Klijn, The Acts of Thomas [Leiden: Brill, 1962], 137); Psalms of Thomas, i:7-14; cciii:11ff.; the Second Gnostic Work, 39a (C. Schmidt, in Texte u. Untersuchungen, 8[1892], 254, 301). At the great council in heaven the Son said to the Father: "If it please Thee...speak, open Thy treasury, and take therefrom a boon," the boon being the plan of salvation, Prayerbook of the Mandaeans, No. 250, in E. S. Drower, The Canonical Prayerbook of the Mandaeans (Leiden: Brill, 1959), 207; the scene is also described, ibid., 225 (No. 318), 227 (No. 321), 228 (No. 323), 252 (No. 358, cf. 365-68), 269(No. 375) 271ff. (No. 376). There is a dramatic description of the opening of the chest in the Alma Rishaia Zuta, iii:199ff. (in Drower, Nasoraean Commentaries, 69). So Ginza (Lidzbarski), 493. There are five treasuries of the senses; when the mind (enthymsis) wants to create, it opens the appropriate treasure-chest to get the things it needs, Manichaische Handschriften der staatl. Museen Berlin (Stuttgart: 1940), I, 138-40, the things being the elements in an unformed state, ib. 54. Though they were later corrupted by mixture with a lower state of matter or ground-substance, the physical elements are in the themselves pure and holy, ib., 239; in their corrupt earthly form they are gold, silver, copper, lead, and tin, ib., 33. God also opens a treasure-chest to bring forth healing elements for man, Manichaean Psalm-book, II, 46.
[^10] Gospel of Truth (M. Malinine, et. al., Evangelium Veritatis [Zurich: 1956], fol. XIVV, 5-7. Smoke, fire, wind, and water were the chaotic contents of the divine store-house, Manichaean Psalm-book, II, 9. In the Ginza, 259, there is a leavening substance, a "Sauerteig der Welt," kept in the divine treasure-house, and from this the world and the planets are created, as higher worlds are created of a like substance, 261. God furnishes "the whole creation" from "the treasuries of all the winds," I Enoch xviii:1, which are in the midst of "secret things" amidst mountains of precious stones and minerals, ib. lii:5. On wind as the "Urstoff," Coffin Texts, Spell 162 (A. de Buck, ed., Univ. of Chicago: 1938, II, 401). On water, W. Lambert, in Jnl. Theol. Stud., 16 (1965), 293.
[^11] For a through treatment, H. F. Weiss, Untersuchungen zur Kosmologie des hellenistischen und Palastinischen Judentums (Berlin: Akademic-Verlag, 1966), 59-74, and notes 81 to 84, below; also W. Richter, "Urgeschichte and Hoftheologie," Bibilsche Zeitschr., NF 10 (1966) 97; H. A. Brongers, De Scheppingstradities bij de Profeten (Amsterdam: 1945), 3-18.
[^12] The idea is carried over into the widespread ritual dramatizations of the Creation, the essence of which is the strict regulation of persons, times, and places, S. Mowinckel, Religion und Kultus (Gottingen: 1953), 53-9. See esp. Pistis Sophia 128-135.
[^13] This is an unfailing part of the picture: the Hallelujah chorus with its refrain of "Forever and ever!" is the closing section of almost any ritual text. See W. F. Otto, Die Musen und der gottlichen Ursprung des Singens und Sagens (Dusseldorf-Koln: E. Diederich, 1956); H. Nibley, "The Expanding Gospel," B.Y.U. Studies, 7 (1965), 5-27.
[^14] K. Koch, in Zeitschr. f. Theol, u. Kirche, 62 (1965), 271, 281-82, shows that the "creative word of God" originally refers to a conversation, a discussion with others. The Egyptian concept is discussed by H. Junker, Die Gotterlehre von Memphis (Berlin: Akad. d. Wiss., 1940), 36f., 42, 55; the holy ones are "as it were extensions of the Great God," H. Grapow, Das 17. Kapitel des aeg. Totenbuches (Berlin: 1912), 40. See above, notes 8 and 9. May not the Logos of John I also be a "council" discussion"?
[^15] Quotation from D. Winston, in History of Religions, 5 (1966), 212, citing Jewish and Persian sources. It was a real discussion, in which many divergent views were expressed, as described in Timothy Abp. of Alexandria, Discourse on Abbaton, fol. 10a-12a (E. A. W. Budge, Coptic Martyrdoms [Br. Mus: 1914], 232-34); Ginza (Lidzbarski), 331-33; Mandaean Prayerbook, No. 361 (Drower, 255); Alma Rishaia Zuta, iii, 215ff (67,70); Alma Rishaia Rba, iv, 150ff. (7); Pistis Sophia, 33ff.
[^16] IQM, xii:2-3; IQSa, i:1ff. The world was created on their behalf, Ascension of Moses, i:12; 4 Ezra ix:13. All the elect were known and the kingdom with "the riches of his glory" (i.e. the treasure) appointed to them "from the foundation of the world," Matt. xxv:34,41; Rom. ix:23; Od. Sal., xxiii:1-3; Psalms of Solomon, xviii:30; Didache, x:3; Test. Dom. nostri J. Christi, xxiv (J. E. Rahmani, ed.; Mainz: 1899). They are the pearls in the treasure house of Life, Ginza, 590f. They alone share the secrets of the treasure, ibid., 296, cf. IQH, xvii:9.
[^17] IQM, xiii:2; vii:6; xv:13; IQSa, ii:8f, 14f, 20:IQH, iii:20f. Every major event in the N.T. is marked by the presence on the scene of heavenly beings participating with the saints in the activities.
[^18] IQM, x:10; Clementine Recognitions, iii:53f, 58; v:5-7; Oxyrhynchus Frg., No. 654:5ff; Gospel of Thomas, 80:14-18; 94:14ff, 19; 1ff; Gospel of Truth, fol. IXr,2-4; Lactantius, Div. Inst., IV:ii. "The Chosen people alone understand what the others have rejected," K. Koch, Zeitschr. f. Theol. u. Kirche, 62 (1965), 292.
[^19] IQH, i:21; II:7, 13, 17, iii:19ff; iv:27; v:25; vi:10-11; vii:26-30; x:4, 14ff, 22ff, 29; xi:4-8, 10, 27f; xii:11f, xiii:18f; xv:21f. Cf. IQS, xi:6f; ix:16-18; Isaiah xlv:3; Matt. xi:25ff; Rom. xi:33, 12; Eph., iii:8f; Col. ii:2f, 26f; Phil. iv:19; I Enoch, lxiii: 3; Ep. Barnab., vi; Od. Sal., vi:4-5; xxx:1; Gospel of Truth, fol. XVIr, 17; Test Dom. nostri J. Christi, xliii (Rahmanie, 103); Ben Sirach, xvii:11-13, Manichaean Psalm-book, II, 120, 126. "In a certain way, election is pre-existence," writes J. Zandee, in Numen, 11 (1964), 46, citing Logion No. 49 of the Gospel of Thomas. Not only the Son of Man but Isaac, Jacob, Jeremiah, the Twelve Apostles, Peter, etc., are specifically said to have been chosen and set apart in the preexistence.
[^20] Clement of Alex., Paedagog., I, vii (in Migne, P.G., vii:321), citing Jeremiah i:7, 5; cf. Ephes. i:4; I Pet. i:20. The awards and assignments handed out at the Creation must have been earned in a preexistent life, Origen, De princip., I, viii, 4;II, ix, 6-8; cf. Zaddokite Document, ii:7; IQS, iv:22; iii:15; IQS, 1:7.
[^21] The expression occurs in Gospel of Thomas, 84:17; Gospel of Philip, 112:10; cf. Secrets of Enoch, xxiii:4-6; IQH, i:19, xiii:8; Od. Sal., vii:10.
[^22] II Baruch, xxi:16. Cf. Gospel of Philip, 112:10: "For he who is both was and shall be." "By not yet existing, I do not mean that they do not exist at all..." Gospel of Truth, fol. XIVr: 35-36. The formula "out of the eternities and into the eternities" is found in IQS, ii: line 1, and Ep. Barnab., xviii, and indicates an endless past as well as an endless future for man, "...for Thoudidst establish them before eternity," IQH, xiii:8. "When he prepared the heavens I was there. Then I was by him, as one brought up with him; and I was his daily delight," Proverbs xiii:21ff; see H. Donner, in Aegypt. Zeitschr., 81 (1956), 8-18, for Egyptian parallels.
[^23] With a new creation things become visible on new level, Secrets of Enoch, xxiv:5-xxv:1; xxiv:2; xxx:10-11; lxv; II Baruch, li:8. This is consistent with the doctrine that one sees or comprehends only what one is like, see below, note 103. In the Genesis creation hymn, "everything is as it were created twice, in two different ways," J. B. Bauer,in Theol. Zeitschr., 20 (1964), 7; Albright has shown that "in the beginning" does not refer to an absolute beginning but to the start of a new phase in a going concern, ib., 1. Ex ouk onton refers to such a phase rather than to creation ex nihilo, W. Richter, in Biblische Zeitschr., NF 10 (1966), 97, citing 2 Macc. vii:28, and Homil. Clem., xix:4, 9, 16, 18.
[^24] The concept of Gen. i and Psalms xciv and civ is the same as the old Egyptian idea that the Creation was the beginning of a new cycle of time following a different kind of age, K. Koch, Zeitschr. f. Theol. u. Kirche, 62 (1965), 257. At the Creation God Showed his children "what they did not know before, creating new things and abolishing old agreements, to establish that which should be eternally," IQH, xiii:10-12; Ben Sirach, xxxvi:6-8. Passing from one life to another is a renewal, IQH, xi:12ff; one's existence does not begin with the womb, though a new life begins there, IQH, xv:12-15; Apocalypse of Adam, 78:1. When the "treasury of the heavenly King is opened" the saints become heirs to a new kingdom by a renewal of the mind, Acts of Thomas, Ch. 136. To become a Christian is to accept a new creation, Epist. to Diognetus, xi.
[^25] Below, note 79. The Egyptians taught that a creation was the reuniting of existing things in new forms, R. Anthes, in Aegypt. Zeitschr., 82 (1957), 3. Untamed chaotic matter is represented as a raging beast, e.g., Pistis Sophia, 54 (104); 55 (105); when the beast is subdued an orderly world is composed of its substance, ib., 70 (154). Can this be the origin of the common tradition of creation from the body of some slain monster?
[^26] Clementine Recognitions, i:24. So Ginza, 506, 508-10, 438. The spirits are equal in age, but not in power and glory, in which they compare as fathers to sons, without any rivalry or jealousy, Sophia Christi (ed. W. Till), 97:2ff.
[^27] Every man has a dmuta—"likeness, counterpart, image," which is the "spiritual or ideal counterpart or double...," E. S. Drower, 1012 Questions, 11; it is "the pre-existent pneumatic part of man," ib., 122, n. 5, 161, 173, n. 3. Thus Paul (in the Apocalypsis Pauli, xviii:22ff) and Tobit (in an Aramaic text of Tobit from Qumran) both see their spiritual doubles. In the remarkable Vision of Kenaz in the Pseudo-Philo, xxviii:8, that early prophet sees the spirits of men walking about in another spirit-world while waiting for this world be created. This is the Mandaean Ether-Earth, E. Drower, Prayerbook of the Mandaeans, 290, n. 4. Before the creation of the world "the soul still sat in the Kanna, without pain and without defect...," Lidzbarski, Johannesbuch der Mandaer, 55 (No. 13). All creature are double, Paster Hermae, II (Mand., viii), 1, and all souls existed before the formation of the world, Secrets of Enoch, xxiii:4. The related Platonic doctrine "became a prevailing dogma in later Judaism," according to R. H. Charles, Apocrypha & Pseudepiographa of the Old Testament (Oxford: 1913), II, 444.
[^28] "God has shed upon man the splendor of his glory at the creation of all things," IQH, xvi:9; vii:24ff; Secrets of Enoch, xxiv:1, 5; xii:8b; Od. Sal., xxviii:14-15; xli; xxiv:5; xxxvi:3-5; Gospel of Thomas, 90:2; Gospel of Philip, 112:12, 14f. The Nature of the Archons, 144:20 (in Thoel. Literaturzeitung, 83 [1958], p. 668); Pastor Hermae, Simil. I:i; Mandaean texts cited by R. Bultmann, "Die neuerschlossenen mandaischen u. manichaischen Quellen...," ZNTW, 24 (1925), 108f. One is overawed by the thought that this thing of wet dust once "praised among the praising ones... was great among the mighty ones...," IQS, xi:20-22; IQSb, iii, 28. To know one's true identity is the great treasure, Gospel of Thomas, 80:26; 81:3f; 87:1f. "I am a Son and come out of the Father... descended from the pre-existing Father," etc., Apocryphon of James (ed. W. Till), i:333, 15f.
[^29] Thus a fragment from Turfan, cited by Bultmann, 126: "I come from the light as one of the gods, and here I have become a stranger." With characteristic vanity the Gnostics reserved such glory for themselves alone, Irenaeus, adv. Haeres., I, vi. cf. Od. Sal. 41:8, The Pearl, 11, 31-44, 56.
[^30] Job xxxviii:3-7, 21, this last is not stated as a question in the MT, but a flat declaration; IQM, xvii:20-27; "...peace was prepared for you before ever your war was," and God will not take back the promises made at the Creation, Od. Sal., iv:12-14.
[^31] Gospel of Thomas, Log. 84. When Adam complained of his hard lot on earth, a heavenly messenger shamed him by reminding him of the throne awaiting him in heaven, Lidzbarski, Mand. Johannesbuch, 57 (No. 13). "Endure much; then you will soon see your treasure!" Ginza, 493; cf. The Apocryphon of John, 20:19-22; 17.
[^32] E.g., IQH, iii:22; vii:32; x:1ff, and above, note 19. Cf. Acts i:23, 26.
[^33] Those who will go to heaven are they who came from there in the first place, John iii:13. They recognize the Lord on earth even as they once acclaimed him above, John xvii:8; xvii:10-12.
[^34] Justin Martyr, Apol., i:10, 59; ii:4-5, 7. So Zadokite Frg., ii:3-6. "When you lay your hand on the treasure the soul enters the scales that will test her," Alma Rishaia Rba (Drower), 44-46. Only when you have overcome here "is your name called out from the Book of Those Who Were Valiant, and you become the heir to our Kingdom..." The Pearl, lines 46-48. For the reward aspect, Origen, De princ., I, viii, 4; II, ix, 6-8. Cf. Manichaean Psalmbook, II, 4, 58, on this "world of testing...."
[^35] clementine Recognitions, i:24.
[^36] K. Sethe, Dramatische Texte (Leipzig: 1928), I, 64-65.
[^37] A specific counterplan is mentioned in Clementine Recognitions, iii:61; cf. IQM, xiii:4; IQS, ii:4ff.; 4Qflor., i:8; Gospel of Philip 123:2ff.; 103:14ff.; Apocryphon of John, 74:1ff,; 36:16ff.; 72:10ff; Sophia Christi, 122:1ff. There are those in the Church who preach the doctrine of the Serpent, according to the Pseudo-Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians in Bodmer Papyrus, X:54:15, describing his ambitious opposition to God's plan in the beginning, ib., X:53:11-15.
[^38] "Now the Prince, not being righteous and wanting to be God...enchains all the flesh of men...," Bodmer Papyrus, X:53. So Irenaeus, adv. Haer., V, xxv; Creation Apocryphon (Ursprung der Welt), 151:11ff. (A. Bohilg u. P. Labib, Die Koptisch-Gnostische Schrift ohen Titel aus Cod. II von Nag Hammadi [Berlin:Akad. Verlag, 1962], 48f.), 155:25ff.; 150:27, 35; 151:3, 7, 15, 18, 24; 154:19ff., 14f.; 156:1; Psalms of Thomas, ii:1-2; 1:30-37, 22-25, 43-47; vii:1-3; Test. Dom. nostri J. Christi, xxiii:43; Acts of Thomas (A. J. Klijn), 204:22-25; Book of John the Evangelist (ed. M. R. James), 187-89; Vita Adae et Evae, xv:3; xvi:1, 4 (in R. H. Charles, Apocrypha & Pseudepiographa of the Old Testment 137) Hypostasis of the Archons 134:9 (after Isaiah xlvi:9); 140:26; 141:1 Abp. Timothy Ep. on Abbaton, fol. XIIIa; Pseudo-Phil, xxx:5; xxxiv:2f; Sibylline Oracles, iii:105ff. (in Charles, 381); Ascension of Isaiah, ii:9; vii:3-5, 9f., 15; Secrets of Enoch, x:18; xxxa:3f.; M. Lidzbarski, Mand. Johannesbuch, No. 2, 3(14f., 17ff.); Alma Rishaia Zuta, iii:215ff. (70); Ginza, 18, 263.
[^39] When God sent forth a ship of light "laden with the riches of the Living," Satan and his pirate crew coming "I know not from where" seized "the treasure of the Mighty One" and "distributed it among their worlds" until they were forced to give it up, Psalms of Thomas, iii:1-15, 29-32, 35; Manichaean Psalm-book, II, 53, 163, 178; cf. the image of the three ships, ib., 168, 171, 174; Berlin Manich, Hs., I, 50; Psalms of Thomas xii:1-xiii. The Second Coptic Work, 14a (ed. C. Schmidt, in Texte u. Unters., VIII:236, 286) has Christ coming out of the monas of Setheus "like a ship laden with all manner of precious things," so also the Manichaean Psalm-book, II, 151f; in the Mand. Johannesbuch, No. 58 (206), a ship moves between the worlds bearing the glory of the Treasure of Life from one to the other. In the Egyptian Victory over Seth, i:19-22, the god passes through dangerous straits in his ship while Seth and his robber band try to waylay him. (In the Book of Dead the battle of the gods takes place on board a ship, H. Grapow, Das 17. Kapitel des Totenbuches, 37). When Adam returns to "the Treasure of Life" he is asked by the guardians "what wares he is bringing in his ship," J. Leipoldt, Religionsgeschichte des Orients (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1961), 86. In numerous Acts of Thomas the Captain of the ship or the rich merchant is Christ in disguise, e.g., A. Klijn, Acts of Thomas, ii-iii. The same commercial imagery of the ship in the Mand. Johannesbuch, No. 18, 84-86; cf. Ginza, 324. The seven planets are described as floating ships, Mandaean Prayerbook, No. 286, 288; these seven try to rob man of his treasure, Psalm of Thomas, v:4 (in ZNTW, Beih. 24, [1925], 123); The 1012 Questions, 251, 258. The Ark itself was not a ship but a luminous cloud in space, according to the Apocryphon of John 73:5f.
[^40] Mark v:5ff; Luke iv:34f. The recognition is mutual, Luke iv:41; viii:27f; x:17. The contest is continued in the desert, Matt. iv:1, with Satan still claiming the rule and challenging the Lord's title, Matt. iv:10, 3. The war we wage here (Eph. vi:12) is a continuation of the conflict in the beginning, Hypostasis of the Archons, 134:20. Those who follow wither leader here, followed the same there, John viii:44, 7; Od. Sal., xxiv:5, 7.
[^41] Apocryphon of James, liii:12ff (the gifts); Apocryphon of Adam, 85:1f (ordinances); The 1012 Questions, II, iiib, 86 (Drower, 226-27) (signs); 2 Thess. ii:9 (wonders); Bodmer Papyrus, X:54 (doctrine); Apocalypse of Elias, i:8ff (glory); they are even rival fishermen, Logion, No. 174, in M. Osin et Palacias, "Logia et agrapha D. Jesu," Patro. Or., XIX, 574.
[^42] Matt. vi:19-21; xiii:10ff; xix:21, 29; Mark x:21; xii:41ff; Luke xviii:21f; xii:21, 32; Rom. ii:5, I Tim. vi:17-19; Jerem. xlviii:7; Ben Sirach, v:2. Many Logia deal with the theme, M. A. Palacios. Logia et agrapha, Nos. 34, 42, 44, 50, 53-55, 77 (in Migne, P.O., XIII, 357ff.). So the Gospel of Thomas, 37, 137, 147; Apocalypse of Elias, viii:12f.; Psalms of Thomas, i:17-19; Apocryphon of James, ii:53; Acts of Thomas, 37, 137, 147; Gospel of Thomas, 85:6ff.; 86:27; 92; 94; 14; 95; 15; 98; 31; 99; 4; Slavic Adam and Eve, xxxiii:1. It is important not to confuse the treasures or to falsify, Ginza, 19, 40, 123f, 334, 392, 433; cf. Pistis Sophia, 100(249-51). Berlin Manich. Hs. I, 223, 228f.; Manichaean Psalm-book, II, 75, 79, 82.
[^43] Hence the paradox that the "Poor" are the rich, Epist. to Diognetus, v; Manichaean Psalm-book, II, 157. See below, note 45.
[^44] Treasures now "prepared" and awaiting the righteous on the other side, Mark x:40; Gospel of Truth, fol. XXIv, 11-17, can only be claimed by meeting certain stipulations, Gospel of Philip, 108:1ff. All treasures are held in trust, "dedicated," 1 Chron. xxvi:20; Pseudo-Philo, xxxix:3, and will be handed over when the time comes, I Enoch, li:1. The righteous "without fear leave this world, " because they have with God "a store of works preserved in treasuries," II Baruch, xiv:12; xxiv:1. Whatever part of the Treasure we enjoy on earth is not ours but has only been entrusted to our keeping, The 1012 Questions, I, i; 111f.; 122f. On the "treasury of good works" as "an old Oriental doctrine," K. Ahrens, in ZMDG, 84 (1930), 163. "One's good works are his deposits," says Ignatius, Epist. ad Polycarp., vi. The Christian (Manichaean) and Chinese versions are compared by A. Adam, in J. Leipoldt, Religionsgeschichte des Orients, 109; for the Iranian version, D. Winston, in History of Religions, 5 (1966), 194f., who also mentions concealing the treasure under God's throne, 212, to ;which parallels are supplied by II Baruch, liv:13, Ginza, 281; the Shabako Stone, line 61, and the Ark of the Covenant "under the feet of the statue of god," W. H. Irwin, in Revue Biblique, 72 (1965), 164. This is the theme of The Pearl.
[^45] Matt. xxv:14-29. Dives is welcome to his treasures on earth, but cannot claim treasures in heaven, Luke xvi:20-5, Matt. xix:21, 24; vi:19f; Mark x:25; Luke xviii:25; xii:33f. II Baruch, xliv:13-15; Secrets of Enoch, i:5; Gospel of Thomas, 88:34f.; 89:1ff.; Acts of Thomas 146; The 1012 Questions, II, iv, 159 (245). It is a Jewish, Christian, and Mandaean tradition that earthly prayers are laid up in God's treasure-house, Lidzbarski, Mand. Johannesbuch, 10, n.2; Mand. Prayerbook, No. 379 (293). If a righteous one strays "his treasure will be taken from him." Alma Rishaia Zuta, i, in E. Drower, Nasoraean Commentaries, 55; Berlin Manch. Hs., I, 73.
[^46] Apocalypsis Pauli, 19 (text in Orientalia, ii [1933], 22). Cf. II Baruch, lii:7; The 1012 Questions, vib, 379 (Drower, 279).
[^47] IQS, iv:16-18. This is an "Abbild" of the cosmic struggle, J. Schreiner, in Biblische Zeitschr., NF 9 (1965), 180; J. M. Allegro, in Jnl. of Semit. Stud., 9 (1964), 291-94.
[^48] For the erasing of the memory, see below, note 60. The "Law of Liberty" (Khq kherut) of IQS, x:6, 11, is "the Ancient Law of Liberty" of Clementine Recognitions, ii:23-25; iii:26, 59; iv:24, 34; x:2; cf. Minucius Felix, Octav., xxvii; Cyril of Jerusalem, Catehesis iv:19f, (in Migne, P.G., xxiii:481). Having such freedom, the wicked have deliberately rejected God's plan, IQS, iv:25-26. Though the evil spirits are fiercely opposed to this liberty (Clementine Recognitions, i:42) the "testing of election for every single individual" goes on without coercion in "truth, righteousness, humility, judgement," etc., while the self-willed are free "to go the way of their own heart...according to the plan of his own devising..." IQS, v:3-5, the spirit being "immortal, rational and independent," Const. Apostol., vi:11; Tatian, Adv. Graecos, vii. The Present test was appointed from the beginning, IQM, xiii:14ff. "This is the condition of the contest which every man who is born on the earth must wage; if he be overcome, he shall suffer...if he be victorious, he shall receive what I said..." 4 Ezra, vii:127, cf. IQH, xiv:23. It is "a testing-time in the common light," Sibylline Oracles, frg. 1:5, 18, 25-17. See further J. B. Bauer, in Theolog. Zeitschr., 20 (1964), 2-3.
[^49] A. Adam, "Die Psalmen des Thomas u. das Perlenleid," Beiheft 24 of ZNTW, 1959, 49-54. The Syria text is given by G. Hoffman, in ZNTW, 4 (1903), bearing the title, "Song of Judas Thomas the Apostle in the Land of India." Thomas's situation in India resembles that of the hero in the Land of Egypt. The pearl itself comes from the other world and is that part of the heavenly knowledge which is to be found here, Mand. Prayerbook, No. 252, 208f.; when it is taken away the world collapses, Ginza, 517; it is "the pure pearl which was transported from the treasuries of Life, Mand. Prayerbook No. 69. The robe of glory, left behind with the treasure, is to be regained with it, Bartholomew, "Book of the Resurrection of Christ," Fol. 18b (in E. A. W. Budge, Coptic Apocrypha, 208); Pistis Sophia, 6 (9f.).
[^50] J. Leipoldt, Religionsgeschichte des Orients, 86; Abp. Timothy on Abbaton, Fol. 20b. The joyful homecoming is a conspicuous Egyptian theme from the beginning: There is rejoicing among the Great Ones for one of their own has returned, Pyramid Texts, No. 606 (1696); 217 (160); 222 (201); 212, 213, etc. Coffin Texts (de Buck), II, Spells 31, 132. The theme is discussed by H. Brunner, in Aegypt. Zeitschr., 80 (1955), 6; cf. Pindar, Olymp., viii:13. The righteous are homesick, I Enoch, xiv:4; xlii:1ff.; Manichaean Psalm-book, II, 197-200, 87. Going to heaven is a return, 4 Ezra, vii:78, John xvii:5f.; iii:7-13; Rev. v:12. The saints desire "to be received back again" into "the first Chruch (that)...existed from the beginning," before the Creation, II Clem. Epist., xiv: Clementine Recognitions, iii:26; Test. Dom. nostri J. Christi, xxviii (61); Timothy on Abbaton; Fol. 20b; 12a; Gospel of Philip, 115:18. The saints find the Kingdom because they came from there, Gospel of Thomas, 89:27; Pastor Hermae, III (simil. i, the Pearl motif); Apocalypsis Pauli, xxiii:9; xxiv:6ff.; Apocryphon of James, i:27:5ff., 12; xxxi:13-25; ii:58:2ff. "The Living Ones will return again to the Treasure which is theirs," Psalms of Thomas, i:49; cf. xviii:1ff.; xvii:20ff. In the end everything returns to its "root," Creation Apocryphon, 175:4; cf. J. Zandee, in Numen, 11 (1964), 66. Those above are equally impatient for the reuniting, Pistis Sophia, 10/16-19); Manichaean Psalm-book, II, 201, 72, 136.
[^51] In reclaiming its treasure the spirit "becomes what is was before removing its garment," Apocryphon of James, ii:56:11ff.; cf. Gospel of Philip, 105:19; Gospel of Truth, fol. XXIv, 24; Psalms of Thomas, ii:70-72, 74, 77; Acts of Thomas, vi-vii (lines 35-55 of The Pearl); Second Gnostic Work, i-a; Ginza, 487, 26f; Od. Sal., xi:10; Pastor Hermae, III, Simil. viii, 2. The garment is the treasure for both men and angels, Ginza, 13; the garment of Adam and Eve "was like the Treasure of Life," ib., 243; it is a protection for the righteous which the evil ones try to seize and possess, ib., 247, 259, 132.
[^52] The Garment represents ritual in general, C. Schmidt, in Texte u. Unters., 8 (1892), 347.
[^53] E. Drower, The 1012 Questions, 212, 241; the ordinances are "the treasures that transcend the world," ib., 245. "Ginza" means "a treasure, mystery, sacrament ... what is hidden and precious ...," ib. 12. As guardian of these secrets and mysteries the Eldest Son is called "the Treasurer," Ginza, 150. The eldest are they who observe the ordinances secretly in this world, ib. 153-54, and their highest duty is to transmit and explain these rites to their children, Mand. Prayerbook, No. 373, 266. See S. A. Pallis, Mandaean Studies, 192.
[^54] Discussed by B. Gartner, The Temple and Community in Qumran and the New Testament (Cambridge Univ.: 1965), 16ff. The temple with its rites is the earthly counterpart of the heavenly treasury, I Baruch, iv:3-5. Since the Creation the ordinances have been essential to God's plan, Jubilees, vi:18; Pseudo-Philo, xxi:2. It is in the cultus that the cosmic plan is unfolded, N. A. Dahl, in W. D. Davies and D. Daube, Background of the New Testament, 430f., and the return of the temple is the return of the heavenly order, 4 QFlor., i; vi.
[^55] I.e., I and II Jeu and the 2nd Coptic Gnostic Work. Without the "mysteries" one has no power and no light, Pistis Sophia, 55 (107); this is a Hauptthema of the Gospel of Philip, 124. The old temple rite of the shewbread is an initiation to the Treasury of Light, Pistis Sophia, iv: 370. One's station (taxis) hereafter depends entirely on the mysteries one has "received" on earth, ib., 90(202); 86(195); 32(52); Gospel of Philip, 125(317); 129(329). Without the performance of certain ordinances, no one, no matter how righteous, can enter into the Light, Pistis Sophia, 103(263). Hence the rites are all-important, ib., 107, 11(279), 100(249f). One becomes "an heir of the Treasure of Light by becoming perfect in all the mysteries ..." II Jeu, 1xxvi; I Jeu, v; Apocryphon of John, 1iii:11ff.
[^56] K. Ahrens, in ZDMG, 84 (1930), 163; quotation is from D. Winston, History of Religions 5 (1966), 195, giving Jewish and Avestan sources; cf. IQS, x:4; ii:3, Secrets of Enoch, xl:9f. At the fall of the temple "the heavens shut up the treasure of the rain" and the priests "took the Keys of the Sanctuary and cast them into the height of heaven," II Baruch, x:18. The key to the Mandaean kushta (initiation rites) is held by the Master of the Treasurehouse, Ginza, 429f. So also in the Pistis Sophia, iv (336), the ordinances are "the keys to the Kingdom of Heaven." The keys which Christ gave to Peter were those to "the Heavenly Treasure," EpistolaXII Apostolorum, Frg. 2, in Migne, P.O., II:147.
[^57] II Jeu, lxxiii (in T.U., VIII:211f); the same image in Pistis Sophia, 14 (23). Cf. IQH, xvii:21: "God has chosen his elect ... instructed him in the understanding of his mysteries so that he could not go astray ... fortified by his secrets." Through definite ordinances one progressess in the community and helps others to progress, IQH,, xiv:17-18, teaching of "the Creation and of the Treasures of Glory," IQM, x:12f, and testing the knowledge of the members, IQM, xvii:8; IQSb,, iii:22-26. In the Coptic works all the rites "serve a single oekonomia, i.e., the gathering in of the spirits who have received the mysteries, so that they can be sealed ... and proceed to the kleronomta (heritage) of Light ... called in the literal sense of the word the Treasure of Simil. iii:5, the saints are raised up by degrees, being tested at each step, to the precious tower.
[^58] E. Drower, The 1012 Questions, 212, 241. See Morton Smith, The Secret Gospel (N.Y.: Harpers, 1972), 96, 115, 83.
[^59] J. Zandee, in Numen, 11 (1964), 45. Adam is the type of the initiate, Ep. Barnap., vi:11-16, from whom the mysteries have been handed down, Apocryphon of Adam, lxxxv:19ff. He was privy to the whole plan of creation, II Baruch, iv:2; Secrets of Enoch, xxx:13ff, being in the "Creation Hymn" (Gen. i:26ff) "God's counterpart as a speaking, active, personal being." J. B. Bauer, in Theol. Zeitschr., 20:8, a historical, not a mythological, character, ib., 7. He "came forth out of the light of the invisible place ..." Pseudo-Philo, xxviii:9, and received the first anointing, Creation Apocryphon, 159:5; Clementine Recognitions i:47. It is "the light of Adam" that leads men back to the Light, Psalms of Thomas, iv:9; and the faithful are promised "all the glory of Adam," IQS, iv: line 23; Zadokite Doc., iii:20. He is called "the son of the Treasuries of Radiance" in the Mandaean Prayerbook, No. 379, 290.
[^60] On the sleep of forgetting, The Pearl, line 34; Psalms of Thomas, xv:5; Apocryphon of John, 58:15ff; Apocryphon of Adam, 65:14-21; Abp. Timothy on Abbaton, fol. 15b; Sophia Chr., 106:1-10; Creation Apocryphon, 158:25; Apocryphon of James, Ixxviii, 14, 22f; Hypostasis of the Archons, 137:1-5. It is the Sem-sleep" of the Egyptian initiation rites. It is also expressed in terms suggesting Plato's Cup of Lethe, Manichaean Psalm-book, II, 7, 57, 117, and as the dropping of a veil, Sophia Chr., 120 (in Texte u. Unters., 60:280); Pistis Sophia, 131(336-38); Ginza, 34; the Cup-of-Lethe plays an important role in the Greek mysteries, to a lesser extent the Cup of Memory is discussed by C. Schmidt, in Texte u. Unters., 8 (1892), 405f.
[^61] Called "Three Great Men" in Apocryphon of Adam, 66:12ff., they are three arch-angels, Creation Apocryphon, 152:23; Sophia Christi 96:3ff.; 2nd Gnostic Work, 19a. They are sent down to instruct and accompany Adam, Ginza, 15, 33-35; they are the Three Uthras, "sent into the world to fetch the blect ... back to the House of Light," R. Bultmann, in ZNTW, 24(1925), 132. Thus Enoch is fetched by three men in white, I Enoch, xc:31; who also visit Abraham, Genesis Apocryphon, ii:24, xix:23ff.; xx:1-8; xxi:21f.; xxii:22f. For the Jewish version of the Three Men in White, R. Goodenough, Jewish Symbols in the Greco-Roman Period (N.Y.: Panteon 1958), IX, 102-4, 84-89; X, 91-96. Cf. J. Barbel, "Zur Engel-trinitatslehre im Urchristentum," in Theological Review, 54(1954), 48-58, 103-112; K. Rudolph, Die Mandaer, I, 162 noting that these three were the arch-types of the Sent Ones in general.
[^62] Od. Sal., xxix:1ff; xxii:1; Psalms of Thomas, v:28; Gospel of Truth, fol. Xl.v, 22; I Jeu, 3; Epistle of the Apostles, xii(23); Berlin Manich. Hs., I, 56; not only Adam but every patriarch after him is instructed by a Sent One, Mand. , Nos. 13, 14(57ff) 60, n.6. Indeed the Sent Ones are to help every mortal back "to the place from which he came," Ginza, 244; cf. IQS, xi:1; Luke i:78-79 (John the Baptist as a Sent One). The adversary also has his sent ones, Pistis Sophia, 66(136).
[^63] Being rejected like the poor, the Sent Ones may be identified with them, R. Bultmann, in ZNTW, 24(1925), 124. The evil spirits accuse the Sent Ones of being aliens and meddlers in the earth, Ginza, 263f., and accuse Adam and his descendants of the same thing. The poor are the true heirs 4QpPs 37:iii:10; Od. Sal., viii:6-13; see K. Romaniuk, in Aegyptus, 44 (1964), 85, 88, citing Old Testament and New Testament parallels to Egyptian teachings. Their "angels" have unbroken contact with the Father, Matt. xviii:10.
[^64] The Sent One is the Treasure, C. Schmidt, in Texte u. Unters., 8 (1892), 349. The saints receive the law "by angels" (lit. "sent ones"), Acts vii:52, each dispensation having its special angel, Pastor Hermae, I, iii, 4. "There has come from the plains of heaven a blessed man ... and he has restored to all the good wealth (treasure) which the former men took away," namely, the ordinances of the temple, Sibylline Oracles, v:414-33. "Thou didst appoint from the beginning a Prince of Light to assist us," IQM, xiii:10. Enos, Enoch, Moses, and Joshua were such Sent Ones, Const. Apostol., vii:38, as was John the Baptist, restoring lost ordinances and preparing the people for things to come, John 1:6;Luke i:16f; Heb. i:14; cf. IQS, ix:11. Those who accept the plan had a pure begetting through the First Sent One, Sophia Chr., 82:12. Like Adam, everyone is awakened from the sleep of forgetfulness by a Sent One, ib., 94:5ff. Angels and prophets are sent to bring men "what is theirs," Gospel of Thomas, 96:7, instructing them in the mysteries, Mysteries of Heaven and Earth,iv, 1, in Migne, P.O., VI, 428; Bodmer Papyrus X:53. Adam himself became a Sent One to help his children, Psalms of Thomas, v:26-8; iv:1-10, 12-17. The instructions to the Sent One and his two counsellors were to teach Adam and his posterity what they must know and do to return to the Light, Ginza, 16,17, 18, 41, 57ff., 113 (on the teaching of ordinances), 119; for the Sent One is in special charge of the Treasure of Life in this world and the other, ib, 96.
[^65] It was by "a letter of command from the Father" that "the Son of Truth inherited and took possession of everything," Od. Sal., xxiii:15-17; The Pearl, lines 35-39, 63f., 50. The "King's Letter" is one's passport to heaven, The 1012 Questions, 198. As a knowledge of the ordinances, the Treasure is an actual scroll, written by the hand of the Lord of Greatness, Alma Rishaia Zuta, 72. Writing is one of the Ten Treasures of the Creation. Pesachim, Fol. 54a. The heavenly books are "Beweisdokumente," L. Koep, Das himmlische Buch ... (Bonn: Hanstein, 1952), 54-61; e.g., The Book of Deeds is a written contract between Christ and Adam, ib., 64. "Thou hast engraved them on the Tables of Life for kingship ...," IQM, xii:3, discussed by F. Notscher, in Revue de Qumran, 3 (1959), 405-12. For the Mandaeans the holy books are heavenly treasures, E. Drower, The 1012 Questions, 158f, 170, 252. The holy books were often literally treasures, being inscribed on precious metals and buried in the earth like other treasures. H. Nibley, "Qumran and the Companions of the Cave," Revue de Qumran, 5 (1965), 191f. The idea of books as treasures is a natural one. "The treasures of the wise men of old are the books they have left us," Xenophon, Memorab I, vi, 14.
[^66] We have given some examples in "Christian Envy of the Temple," Jewish Quarterly Review, 50(1959), 97ff.; reprinted in When the Lights Went Out (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), 54ff.
[^67] J. B. Frey, in Biblica, 13 (1932), 164.
[^68] For the first formula, M. R. James, Biblical Antiquities of Philo, 56, 44. Luther called for second "locus vexatissimus" and indeed it "makes impossible a spiritual interpretation" of the kerygma, M.H. Scharlemann, in Concordia Theological Monthly, 27 (1956), 86, 89.
[^69] Quotation from J. Frankowski, in Verbum Domini, 43 (1965), 149. See also below, notes 91, 96, 97.
[^70] Pistis Sophia, 185, 186, 189; on the basic materials, id.247-48.
[^71] In the Genesis Apocryphon, ii:4, Abraham and Sarah swear by the King of all the Worlds," (cf. the common Moslem expressions); God made the "words," Od. Sal., 10; xvi:16; xii;4, 8; all the worlds worship the Sent One as "Illuminator of their worlds," ib., xii:12; so Psalms of Thomas, viii:13, 6ff; The 1012 Questions, 112; "other worlds" have been going on forever, Gospel of Philip, 106:18f. God "arranged all the kosmois in his glory," Apocryphon of John, xxi-xxii; the worlds assemble before him, Psalms of Thomas, viii:13. The angel who came to Isaiah was "of another firmament and another world," Ascension of Isaiah, vi:13. The adversary opposed the plan of God "to create another world" and put Adam in charge, Secrets of Enoch, xxi:3. A logion depicts the saints hereafter moving freely through space among the spheres, Logia et agrapha, No. 127, in Migne, P.O., XIX: 547; cf. II Baruch, xlviii:9. The Father is in the worlds (kosmois) and the Son is first and highest among those worlds (en toisde tois kosmois) according to an early Liturgy, in Migne, P.O., XVIII:445f., 448. Each heaven is completely equipped with thrones, dwellings, temples, etc., and there are many such heavens, Creation Apocryphon, 150:18ff., 23-25. The Archon Jaldaboth created beautiful heavens for his sons, ib., 150:9f.; Hypostasis of the Archons, 144:5-10, furnished with stolen materials, above, note 39.
[^72] Ascension of Isaiah, x:12; Creation Apocryphon, 148:29f; Ginza, 80, they say, "There is only one world — ours!"
[^73] Od. Sal., xii:3, 10; xvi:14-16; Gospel of Truth, fol. XIVr, 11-16; Apocryphon of John, xxvi:2f.; xxi:1ff.; I Enoch, ii:1, 4; xliii:1; II Baruch, xlviii:9; Epist. I Clement., xx. When God created this world, all the other worlds rejoiced together, 2nd Gnostic Work, 47a. The worlds borrow light from each other and exchange all they know, Ginza, 10-11; they form a single lively community, Mand. Prayerbook, No. 379, 303, 298-99, all the mysteries being shared out amongst the worlds of light," The 1012 Questions, 112, 164. In a pinch the "Treasures" help each other out, Psalms of Thomas, xii:25.
[^74] Quotation is from the Mand. Johannesbuch, No. 59, 207. So also Od. Sal., xii:4-9; The 1012 Questions, 213; Mand. Prayerbook, No. 379, 296. This seems to be an Eastern tradition, the others being more concerned with emissaries and messengers; see the following notes.
[^75] 2nd Gnostic Work, 45a. Cf. Manichaean Psalm-book, II, 23, 66. On his visits each world implores him to stay, "and be our King and bring peace to our city!" (l.c., Ginza, 258) — i.e. it is a true Parousia, Psalms of Thomas, viii:1-13f,; cf. John x:16.
[^76] Two hundred angels act as interplanetary messengers, Secrets of Enoch, iv:1. The business of the angels is to coordinate the working of the central plan among the worlds, F. Dieterici, Thier und Mensch vor dem KÃ¶g der Genien (Leipzig: 1881), 78f. The heavenly bodies receive commands from a single center, M. R. James, Biblical Antiquities of philo, 43, the highest heaven being the "indispensable exchange-center between the spheres," K. Koch, in Zeitschr. f. Theol. u. Kirche, 62 (1965), 275; the affairs of "the incomprehensible expanse of the structure of heaven," are directed from a command-post in the center, Creation Apocryphon, 146:15-20. The rulers dispatch "letters from world to world and reveal the truth to each other, and there are some souls that travel like an arrow and cleave through all the worlds," The 1012 Questions, 192, cf. 164. Adakas "is a 'go-between' between the worlds," E. S. Drower, Mand, Prayerbook, 293, and Manda d-Haiai, called "the Capable" by his brother 'uthras, is called "to regulate and to station the 'uthras in their places" among the worlds, ib., 294. In the beginning of the Apocalypse of Paul, i:1f., Paul is ordered "to go down and speak to the planet earth," (le'alma de arga). Visitors to celestial regions in the various Testaments (Abraham, Isaac, Isaiah, the XII Patriarchs, Adam, etc.) report a traffic of chariots in the spaces, e.g., I Enoch, lxxv:8. By whatever means, they circulate ceaselessly among the worlds with marvellous ease, Ginza, 13, 42. The Mandaean faithful are urged to "be informed about all worlds" as far as possible, The 1012 Questions, 289. The worlds of darkness also communicate, but on another level, Berlin Manich. Hs. I, 32.
[^77] Ben Sirach, xlii:23-5; Od. Sal., xii:9;" ...each is more wonderful than the other!" Ginza, 11-13; so also Mand. Johannesbuch, No. 59, 207, explaining that it is "the power of the Treasure" that makes such rich variety possible. Among ten thousand times ten thousand worlds "every world is different from the others," Ginza, 152. Even the worlds of darkness are all different, Berlin Manich. Hs., I, 68. One cannot describe how another world differs entirely from every other, Pistis Sophia, Ch. 88 (199); no other world can be described in terms of this one, so different are they all (84, 133).
[^78] Wisdom of Solomon, xix:18. On the letters of the alphabet as elements of creation, see Sefer Yeshira, texts by P. Mordell, in JQR, N.S. III (1913), 536-44.
[^79] The Creation is compared to the smashing of inferior vessels to use their substance for better ones, Gospel of Truth, fol. XIIIf., 25ff.; or the melting down of scrap-metal for reuse, Manichaean Psalm-book, II, 11; or with the breaking of an egg that a more perfect form might emerge, Clementine Recognitions, iii, 27-29; cf. The 1012 Questions, 183; the Ginza, 83f. God spares some worlds from dismantling until they have fulfilled their purpose, Psalms of Thomas, ii:30-31. While treasure-ships carry matter through space (above, note 38), the Seven Planets "intercept all the goods bestowed by the constellations and divert them to the use of the demons" in furbishing out their worlds, D. Winston, History of Religions, 5 (1966), 2ff,; the fullest treatment in Berlin Manich. Hs., I, 109, 111-14, 177; where it is even necessary to decontaminate older materials before reusing! ib., 113-14, 130. Pistis Sophia.
[^80] E. A. E. Reymond, The Mystical Origin of the Egyptian Temple (Manchester Univ. Press: 1969), 187.
[^81] H. F. Weiss, Hellenist. Judentum, 92-99.
[^82] Ib., 22ff.
[^83] Ib., 146.
[^84] Ib., 29-36, citing many sources. It is the business of the Demiurge to organize rather than to produce out of nothing, ib., 44ff.
[^85] The 1012 Questions, 164. "There is abundant room in thy Paradise, and nothing is useless therein ..." Od. Sal., xi:20. There is a remarkable picture of the struggle for survival, however, when life began in the waters:" ...they attacked one another and slew one another, saying to one another: 'Move off out of my way ...Move on that I may come!' "The 1012 Questions, 184.
[^86] The 1012 Questions, 111; Gospel of Philip, 104:18f.; the physis itself is "imperishable, complete, and boundless," Creation Apocryphon, 146:11.
[^87] It represents "die Begrenzund und Begrenztheit der Welt," E. Horning in Aegypt. Zeitschr., 97 (1971), 78.
[^88] Pistis Sophia, 323-4; L. Kakosy, in Aeg. Zeitschr., 97 (1971), 104-5.
[^89] Worlds come and go, only progeny (sonship) is eternal, Gospel of Philip, 123:6-10; "The man of heaven, many are his Sons, more than the man of earth. If the Sons of Adam are many but still die, how much more the sons of the perfect man, they who do not die but are begotten at all times," ib., 106:17. "Mounting up from world to world" is from The 1012 Questions, 192, and "towards His perfection" from the Gospel of Truth, fol. XXv, 4-14. The ultimate objective is to receive the same glory which the Son received from the Father in the beginning, John xvii:22; the Epistle to Diognetus, x, tells us not to marvel at this — man must become the heir of divinity in the fullest sense, C. Schmidt, in Texte u. Unters., 8 (1892), 319f.; Gospel of Philip, 100:1ff, 11; 101:1ff; Psalms of Solomon, i:3-4. It is important not to get stuck "in the middle" and so delay progress, Schmidt., op. cit., 335, this world being merely a bridge, according to the famous logion (Migne, P.O., XIII, No. 75). The fundamental nature of Godhood is to beget and create, Sophia Christi., 87:1-88:1.
[^90] G. Thausing, in Mitt. dt. Inst. Kairo, VIII (1939), 63-64.
[^91] This is the ametretos bathos in which a sector is staked out for a new creation, 2nd Gnostic Work, 9a. Ptahil-Uthra is ordered: "Go down to a place where there are no Shkinas (dwellings) and no other worlds, and make thee a world as the Sons of Salvation do ..." Ginza, 98. God plans for the occupancy of all the "spaces" ahead of time, Gospel of Truth, fol. XIVr, 11-16. One seeks release by moving "from the more confined to the more spacious places," Pistis Sophia, 47 (83). The role of space in creations is vividly depicted in Egyptian temple-founding rites, in which the King, representing God creating the world, takes sightings on the stars in a pure and empty place, A. Moret, Du caractere religieux de la royaute pharaonique (Paris: 1902), 130-42; R. T. R. Clark, Myth and Symbol in Ancient Egypt (London: Thames, 1959), 80. Preparing for the creation of the world, "Marduk went into the heavens, inspecting the places, and there he established a new one, an exact replica ...of the dwelling of Ea," Enuma Elish, iv:142. "Space and time are the plan of the world-system ...," G. S. Fullerton, in Philosophical Review, 10 (1910), 595.
[^92] The work begins with hyle, C. Schmidt, Texte u. Unters., 8 (1892), 365, 372, although "We do not know whether Hyle was already present in the Treasury of Light or not," there was a "kerasmos in which Light and Matter are mixed in various proportions," ib., 383. "Kenaz" in the Visio Kenaz (M. R. James, Apocr. Anecdota, II, No. 3 [Cambridge: 1893], 178-79) sees "flames that do not consume and fountains stirring into life," amid a vague substance taking form at the Creation. Those who were with God "before his works of old" are later "to inherit substance, and fill their treasures," Proverbs viii:19-22, referring perhaps to a new, material phase of creation — see above, notes 80-84.
[^93] It is well for men not to contemplate the bathos too intently, Gospel of Truth, fol. XIXr, 8f.; I Enoch, frgs. in R. H. Charles, The Book of Enoch (Oxford: 1912), 297; Evang. Barthol., Frg.iii, in Revue Biblique, 10 (1913), 326. "Matter having no fixity or stability," is repellent, Gospel of Truth, fol. XIIIv, 15ff; Pistis Sophia, 39 (63). Apocal. of Abraham, 16-17. Sophia's first advice to her son was, "Get a foothold, O youth, in these places!" Creation Apocryphon, 148:12; 149:6. The foothold idea may have inspired the ubiquitous image of the "Rock," e.g., IQS, xi:5; R. Eisler, Iesous Basileus ... (Heidelberg: 1930), II, 286f. Preparing for the Creation, Marduk, having found his space, established the stations (fixed points of reference) besides the star Nibiru, firmly bolted on the left and on the right, Enuma Elish, v:8-10.
[^94] 2nd Gnostic Work, 2a-3s; 18a. The fundamentum of a world begins to take form when touched by a scintilla, but "the spark ceases and the fountain is stopped" when the inhabitants transgress, Visio Kenaz, l.c. Matter without Light in inert and helpless, Pistis Sophia, 55 (107); Berlin Manich. Hs., I, 130; it is the "first light" which reproduces "the pattern of the heavenly model" wherever it touches, Creation Apocryphon, 146:20. For "rays from the worlds of light stream down to the early world" for the awakening of mortals, The 1012 Questions, 199f.; sometimes a column of light joins earth to heaven, Synax. Arab., in Migne, P.O., XI:754, even as the divine plan is communicated to distant worlds by a spark, 2nd Gnostic Work, 29a-30a; it is the "dynamis of Light" that animates one world from another, C. Schmidt., Texte u. Unters., 8 (1892), 331. God's assistants, "the faithful servants of Melchizedek," rescue and preserve the light particles lest any be lost in space, Schmidt, Texte u. Unters., 8 (1892), 404, cf. 2nd Gnostic Work. The spark is also called a "drop," Sophia Christi, 104:7ff.; it is "the divine drop of light that he (man) brought with him from above," ib., 119:1ff. The Spark can reactivate bodies that have become inert by the loss of former light, Pistis Sophia, 65 (134). It is like a tiny bit of God himself, "die kleine Idee" Schmidt, Texte u. Unters., 8 (1892), 396; I Jeu, 7;H. Zandee, in Numen, 11 (1964), 67. Thus Christ calls upon the Father, addressing him as "Spinther," to send light to the Apostles, Pistis Sophia, 130 (35). This light comes from the Treasury, Berlin Manich. Hs., I, 44.
[^95] C. Schmidt, op. cit., 333. Knowledge of the divine plan is communicated to the worlds by a spark, 2nd Gnostic Work, 29a-30a; the Father "let an idea come out of His Treasury ..." I Jeu, 7, even as "the Son of Radiance"is sent forth to enlighten the worlds, Psalms of Thomas, viii:12; such an ambassador is himself a "treasure-chamber of Life ..." ib., iii:18. All the mysteries are "shared out" among 380 Worlds of Light "as they emanate from that Supreme Celestial world," The 1012 Questions, 112. God is "pure radiance, a precious Treasure of Light, the Intelligence which correcteth the hearts of all our kings!" ib. 123. The "Emanation" (probole) is a sharing of treasures, so that "das Lichtschatz ist also der Gipfelpunkt des Universums," C. Schmidt, Texte u. Unters., 8 (1892), 325, 266. "The sparks from the Crown scatter to every Place," Ginza, 7; the Power of the Light, radiating into surrounding Chaos, produces a higher type of topos wherever it goes, Pistis Sophia, 58 (112), the creation process being the adding of Light and its power to dark chaotic matter, ib., 50 (94), 48 (85f.), 50 (90). Every phoster goes back to the same Root, Manichaean Psalm-book, II, 26, 138.
[^96] An important part of God's plan is the providing of a proper topos for the saints, Pastor Hermae, III, Simil. v:6. Each topos awaiting occupants is the result of the diffusion of the Treasure, I Jeu, 11. For "there has previously been prepared a topos for every soul of man," Secrets of Enoch, xlix:2; lviii:4ff., "mansions without number," lx:2. The work of Jesus was to collect the treasures of the Father into one blessed topos of meeting, Acts of Thomas, xlviii. While the elect have their mansions, I Enoch, xli:1-9, there are special places set apart for spirits in transition, ib., xxii:3, 9. For each specific group yet to be born a place has been prepared, II Baruch, xxiii:4. The earthly and heavenly hosts alike have their assigned places, IQM, xii: 1-2. There is an assigned place of glory for each hereafter, Epist. I Clem, v, vi; Polycrap, Epist. and Phil., ix; Apocryphon of Adam, 69:19ff.; everyone should know to what topos he has been called and live accordingly, Epist. II Clem, i; v; Ignatius, ad Magnes., v; Polycarp, op. cit., xi; Oxyrhinchus Frg., No. 654:22. No one gets a topos without earning it, Ignatius, ad Smyrn., vi; Pastor Hermae, III, Simil. viii, 3, 5, 8; Apocalypse of Elias, vi:6ff. The topothesias of the angels greatly interested the early saints, Ignatius, ad Trall., v.
[^97] The central topos is the Treasury of the true God, C. Schmidt, Texte u. Unters., 8 (1892), 367; it is "the topos from which all aeons and all cosmoses take their pattern and their origin.." Sophia Christi, 116 (in Texte u. Unters. 60:266ff.). It is "the self-produced and self-begotten topos" from which all others are derived, 2nd Gnostic Work, 1a; it is called "the God-bearing" topos, or "land of the begetting of gods," ib., 21a. The Egyptians regarded the "werden der Welt als ein Kolonisati onsvorgang ..." W. Richter, in Biblische Zeitschr., NS, 10 (1966), 101f. The colonization is always a family affair: God wants 'all of those he raised up for Himself" to "fill the face of the universe with their seed ..." Zadokite Doc., ii:10. The inhabitants are the progeny or seed of those who sent them, I Enoch, xxxix:1; The 1012 Questions, 118, 170f.; Sophia Christi, 88:7ff.; 98:1-99:5ff.; Apocryphon of James, 1:43:5ff; called "chosen seed, or seed of promise ...," J. Zandee, in Numen, 11 (1964), 45f., 72f. When "the elect ... descend from heaven ...their seed will become one with the children of man," I Enoch, xxxix:1. Simat-Hiia, the primordial Eve is "mother of all kings, from whom all worlds proceeded," Alma Rishaia Rba, vi:388ff. (29). A colonizing activity is described in Pistis Sophia, 26f. (36f.), 24 (34f.). Lactantius presents the idea of real seeds floating around in space, Div. Inst., III, xvii.
[^98] "Planting" can here mean create, beget, establish or assist, i.e., it is the proper work of the "Sent One," according to M. Lidzbarski, Mand. Johannesbuch, 60, n.6, and Berlin Manich. Hs. I, 53f. Eden was God's planting on earth, W. Richter, Biblische Zeitschr., NF, 10 (1966), 101f. "I said that the world should be ... (saying) I will plant a great vineyard, and out of it I will choose a plant," i.e. the Chosen People, Pseudo-Philo, xxviii:4; the Qumran community calls itself a planting, IQS, viii:5, 20-2; ix:15, as does the early Church, Irenaeus, adv. haeres., V, xxxvi, 1. God's "planting in the world of men" includes providing necessary physical substances, Psalms of Thomas, iii:29-35, and the "planting" of light in a place of darkness, ib., vii:17. God before the world existed planted the earth and then planted the Garden in it, 4 Esdras 3:4, 6; He is the "Greatest of Gardeners," "the Planter" par excellence, H. F. Weiss, Hell. Judent., 50. Those who share in God's plan are his "plants," The 1012 Questions, 127, 140, 150, who in turn have their disciples or plants, ib., 130, 216f. The human race is Adam's "planting," Mand. Prayerbook, No. 378, 283, 286; No. 386, 290. The Elect are "the plants that God has planted," and must plant their own plants through marriage, Ginza, 61f. The "planting" of the earth is described as a colonizing enterprise in Ginza, 335,337; they move from place to place in winged wagons, looking for places to settle, ib., 337-40; the Planter is expected to provide the necessary helpers for new settlers, ib., 404. Ritually, the planting is a sparsio, a sowing or begetting of the race, H. Nibley, "Sparsiones," Classical Journal, 40 (1945), 515ff.
[^99] On the "Treasure-house of Souls," see R. H. Charles, note on 4 Ezra. iv:35 (Apocrypha & Pseudepiographa of the Old Testament, II, 567); II Baruch, xxx:2;Pseudo-Philo, xxxii:13; C. Schmidt, in Texte u. Unters., VIII: 368. The souls of the righteous like the Treasure itself are beneath the throne of God, Bab. Sabbath, fol. 152b; cf. Rev. vii:9. The "planting" of a world is always from the "House of Light, the shining Home," i.e., the Treasure-house, Mand. Johannesbuch, No. 63, 218. It is "through the power of the Treasure" that "earths of radiance" are created, "thrones of glory are established and Chiefs of worlds appointed," ib., No. 59, 207; the Treasure being the source of everything within as well as between the worlds, ib., No. 57, 203-5. Every world comes into existence by a sort of fission from the Treasure of the Secret Mysteries, Oxford Mand. Scroll, 55f. What Adam plants then grows and so increases his Treasure, Mand. Prayerbook, 285. The bestowing of the "Treasure of the Mighty One" on men to test them is called a "planting of plants," in Psalms of Thomas, xiii:5-14; iii:24-7; Acts of Thomas, Ch. 10.
[^100] On the hierarchy of emanations, Schmidt, Texte u. Unters., 8 (1892), 367. In the system of I Jeu, 5-7, one put in charge of a new topos as "Chief" is a Jeu, who then becomes the Father of "other emanations to fill other toposes," each of which in turn becomes a "Father of Treasures"; in the end "myriads of myriads will go forth from them," ib., 6. Every Son begets sons, and these in turn consult in the making of "other worlds," Ginza, 240; just so "a Jordan produces Jordans without number and without end — living waters," ib., 65-67. Through the power of the Treasure earths are created, places made inhabitable, "chiefs of worlds are appointed," so that the Treasures may be handed down from the older worlds to newer ones, Mand. Johannesbuch, No. 59, 207. It is perhaps from his Manichaean experience that St. Augustine derives the image of sparks springing from a central fire, each becoming a focal center for more sparks, an idea conveyed in the Berlin Manich. Hs., I, 35f.
[^101] Quotation from the 2nd Gnostic Work, 49a. He who is begotten is expected to beget, Gen. 1:29; ix:1. In the Egyptian rites the First-born is commanded "to create men, to give birth to the gods, to create all that should exist," R. Reymond, in Chroniques d'Egype, 40 (1965), 61; the work of the Creation is repeated indefinitely and daily in ritual, H. Kees, in Aegypt. Zeitschr., 78 (1942), 48. One becomes a Son in order to become a Father; one receives in order to give, Gospel of Philip, 123:10-14. The Son is commanded, "Go, confirm kings, create new Jordans, and help Chosen Ones (to) arise with thee to the Father," The 1012 Questions, 123. The Sent Ones say to the Father, "O our Lord, Lord of all worlds, Thou didst command that we should create worlds and propagate species!" and God informs them that is the secret treasure, bestowed only on "one who is our son (plant)," ib., 137. All who behold the creative process have a normal desire to become creators themselves, Ginza, 67f., creation being the essence of godhood, see above, notes 8, 9, 14.
[^102] The patriarchal line is never broken: "Let us, Father, create other worlds in order to raise to Thee a planting ...," Ginza, 241. One does not create without the express permission of the "Creator of the Treasures," ib., 67f. He who is "planted from above" does his own "pure planting" under the auspices of his Planter, Mand. Johannesbuch, No. 59, 207. Hence "all gloried in the knowledge that their Father had transplanted them from the House of life," Alma Rishaia Rba, 1; in the end, all come "into existence for his sake," Mand. Johannesbuch, iv, 30-35, 70. Even to the greatest Sent Ones he is the "lofty King by Whom our Treasure ascends!" Alma Rishaia Zuta, 64f. At the Council in Heaven the Son was hailed as "the Father of those who believe," 2nd Gnostic Work, 29a-30a; this identity of Father and Son to and with believers is a basic teaching of the Fourth Gospel, R. Bultmann, in ZNTW, 24 (1925), 122.
[^103] "The dwellers upon the earth can understand only what is upon the earth ..." and the same applies to other worlds, 4 Ezra, iv:21. Beings comprehend only what they are like, so that the Lord must take the form of those to whom he appears, C. Schmidt, Kopt.-Gnost. Schrift, I, 342; Gospel of Philip, 101:27-36; 105:29-106:10; Ascension of Isaiah, vii:25; Pistis Sophia, 7 (12); cf. U. Bianchi, in Numen, 12 (1965), 165; Manichaean Psalmbook, II, 42.
[^104] Gospel of Thomas, 95:20-23; II Jeu, 54; cf. Gospel of Truth, fol. xv, 20-23: Exod. iii:6; Matt. xvii:5-6; Mark ix:5-6; E. L. Cherbonnier, in Harvard Theological Review, 55 (1962), 195-199. So also the Son, Gospel of Thomas, 87:27, whose "true name man is not able to hear at this time," Psalms of Thomas, xiii:14, xiv. "He ... is within the Veil, within his own shkinta" (dwelling tabernacle), Mand. Prayerbook, No. 374, 267; His topos is completely out of our cosmos, being the ultimate Treasure, "the Treasure of the Outer Ones," I Jeu, 47; 59; 2nd Gnostic Work, 2a, surrounded by veils and guarded gates, C. Schmidt, Texte u. Unters., 8 (1892), 402; hence it is "beyond the veil, a place of shadowless light," ib., 366; Sophia Christi, ix:116, "the great secret Dwelling of Light," The 1012 Questions, 163. By night all the outer worlds strain to see the Father...because of the invisibility that surrounds him," 2nd Gnostic Work, 5a, even as the angels yearn to see the ultimate place of the saints, L. Guerrier, in Patrol.Or., IX,153.I Peter i:12.
[^105] Sophia Christi, ix:118; 2nd Gnostic Work, 47a; Berlin Manich, Hs., I,118; "the veil at first concealed how God controlled the creation," Gospel of Philip, 132:23; there is a veil between us and the heavens, N.Sed, in Revue des Etudes Juives, 124 (1965), 39. All treasures are hidden treasures until God reveals them, Zadokite Doc., v:1; II Baruch, li:7-8; Evang. Barthol., iii:2-7; Gospel of Thomas, 86:4f., 24. "If you want to go to the Father you must pass through the veil," I Jeu, 42. God isolates hostile worlds from each other lest they unite against him, Ginza, 177. "As the doctrine of the body is hidden in its treasure-house, so God the Father is hidden in his kingdom, invisible to the wastelands without," Berlin Manich. Hs., I, 151.
[^106] A. Pelletier, in Syria, 35 (1958), 225f.
[^107] M. J. bin Gorion, Sagen der Juden (1913), I, 59.
[^108] N. Sed, in Revue des Etudes Juives, 124(1965), 39.
[^109] 2nd Gnostic Work, 47a; Pistis Sophia, 317; in Texte u. Unters., 60:118.
[^110] C. Schmidt, in Texte u. Unters., 8 (1892), 368.
[^111] Hypostasis of the Archons, 143:20.
[^112] Pistis Sophia, 366.
[^113] Ib., 42-44
[^114] Ib., 23.
[^115] I Jeu, 39; Pistis Sophia, 317-18.
[^116] Pistis Sophia, 184.
[^117] Apocalypse of Baruch (3rd bar.), VI, 3-6.
[^118] The progress of the soul in the afterworld, with three main degrees of glory is found in Egyptian funerary literature, e.g., Book of Breathings, lines 2-3, in Biblioth. Egyptol. 17:113. So Pindar, Olymp., ii:75. For Jewish and Christian concepts, H. P. Owen, in New Testament Studies, 3 (1956), 243f., 247-49; K. Prumm, in Biblica, 10 (1929), 74; K. Kohler, in Jewish Quarterly Review, 7 (1894/5), 595-602; C. Schmidt, in Texte u. Unters., 8 (1892). 478, n. 1, 489-91,496f.,519-21,524f. Eternal progression is indicated in IQH, vii:15, and in the formula, "out of the eternities and into the eternities," IQS, ii:1; Epist. Barnab., xviii;"...press on from glory to glory," says a Hymn of Serverus, in Migne,P.O.,v:683;I Jeu,54f.,58f.;2nd Gnostic work, 5a; Gospel of Thomas, 90:4ff. ("...a forward motion, and then a resting-time..."). You master the places in this world so that you can master them in the next, Gospel of Philip, 124:33f.; Gospel of Truth, fol. XIIr, 11-14, the ultimate object being to "share in the treasury of light as immortal gods," II Jeu, 58. He who receives all the ordinances "cannot be held back in the way," Ginza, 19.
[^119] 119. E.L.Cherbonnier, in Harvard Theological Review, 60 (1962), 206.
[^120] 120. This idea is forcibly expressed in the Pistis sophia, 88f. (199), 84 (183); Ginza, 14, 493-94.
[^121] 121. J. Soggin; in Theologische Literaturzeitung, 89 (1966), 729. Those who receive the mysteries of the gospel will also come to know the mysteries of the physical Cosmos, Pistis Sophia, 232.
[^122] 122. A. Piankoff, in Inst. Francais Archeol. Orient., Bibl. Et., 19, 1.
