Hugh Nibley, Nibley on the Timely and the Timeless ( 1978)

8

Churches in the Wilderness

Long before the Dead Sea Scrolls were found, Robert Eisler called attention to the existence of societies of ancient sectaries, including the early Christians, who fled to the desert and formed pious communities there, after the manner of the order of Rekhabites (Jeremiah 35.) More recently, E. Kaesemann and U. W. Mauser have taken up the theme and now the Pope himself refers to his followers as "the Wayfaring Church," of all things. No aspect of the gospel is more fundamental than that which calls the Saints out of the world; it has recently been recognized as fundamental to the universal apocalyptic pattern, and is now recognized as a basic teaching of the prophets of Israel, including the Lord himself. It is the central theme of the Book of Mormon, and Lehi's people faithfully follow the correct routine of flights to the desert as their stories now merge with new manuscript finds from the Dead Sea and elsewhere. And while many Christian communities have consciously sought to imitate the dramatic flight into the Wilderness, from monastic orders to Pilgrim Fathers, only the followers of Joseph Smith can claim the distinction of a wholesale, involuntary and total expulsion into a most authentic wilderness.

Now, the Book of Mormon is not only a typical product of a religious people driven to the wilds — surprisingly we have learned since 1950 that such people had a veritable passion for writing books and keeping records —

but it actually contains passages that match some of the Dead Sea Scrolls almost word for word. Isn't that going a bit too far? How, one may ask, would Alma be able to quote from a book written on the other side of the would among people with whom his own had lost all contact for five hundred years? Joseph Smith must have possessed supernatural cunning to have foreseen such an impasse, yet his Book of Mormon explains it easily: Alma informs us that the passages in question are not his, but he is quoting them directly from an ancient source, the work of an early prophet of Israel named Zenos. Alma and the author of the Thanksgiving Scroll are drawing from the same ancient source. No wonder they sound alike.

If all the Dead Sea Scrolls which are now known to scholars but have not yet been published were to go through the press at the same rate that the others have, we might well be talking about new Dead Sea Scrolls for at least two centuries to come. This is about some scrolls and some readings hitherto quite unknown to the public.

The first is the Enoch Scroll, which became accessible not long ago. I want to call attention to just one item which caught my attention. In the Joseph Smith book of Enoch is an episode that stands out conspicuously for the strangely intimate twist it gives to the story. That is when out of the blue comes "a man ... whose name was Mahijah," who asks Enoch point-blank, "Tell us plainly who thou art, and from whence thou comest?" (Moses 6:40.) This triggers Enoch's great sermon in response, in which he reads to the people from the book of Adam and puts them to shame for their sins. As far as I know, the episode is not found in the Ethiopian, Old Slavonic, Hebrew, Aramaic or Greek Enoch text, so I was brought up with a start when, upon reaching the final fragments of the newly published Aramaic Enoch from the Dead Sea Scrolls, the name MHWY started popping up repeatedly. Before telling the story of MHWY from Qumran, a word about the name is in order.

It is of course the MHWY-EL of Genesis 4:18, where the other Enoch's grandfather is given the name, appearing in our King James Bible as Mehujael. This is not our hero, whose name lacks the -el ending; on the contrary, he belongs to the Cainite branch of the family, which would make the Sethite missionary Enoch an alien to his people. In the Joseph Smith Enoch both forms of the name appear, Mahijah and Mahujah, which should not be surprising, for in Semitic languages the consonants abide, as everyone knows, while the vowels undergo all manner of vicissitudes; and of all the vowels the w and the y are the most active. (One need mention only such obvious examples as the Hebrew yeled and Arabic walad, "boy," or the way the w and y constantly supplant each other in Egyptian participles, depending on time and place of writing.) The name MHWY is written exactly the same in the Qumran texts as in the Hebrew Bible. In the Greek Septuagint it is Mai-el (the Greeks, having letters for neither h nor w could end up with Ma[hu]y[ah] as Mai); the trace of the waf is preserved in the Latin Vulgate: Mavia-el; but in both cases the semi-vowel waf is weakened and the y sound dominates. Mahujah and Mahijah obviously have the same root. The Ma- prefix may denote the place of an action or in derived forms of the verb the person acting, reminding us that it was "upon the place Mahujah" that Enoch inquired of the Lord and received his missionary assignment in a glorious theophany (Moses 7:2), while the man who boldly put the questions to Enoch himself was Mahijah, the asker. And, since we are playing games, what the Mamost strongly suggests is certainly the all-but-universal ancient interrogative, Ma, who? or what? so that the names Mahujah and Mahijah both sound to the student of Semitics like questions. In the newly discovered texts from Ebla (Tel-Mardikh) the same names are written with Ma- (Amorite) and Mi (Phoenician-Hebrew.)

But the important thing about MHWY in the Aramaic Enoch — by far the oldest Enoch texts so far known — is what the man does. Let me read you some parallel passages, following the translation of Professors Milik and Black so that you won't think I have been loading the dice to come out this way.

The presence of Enoch was a disturbing one, "a strange thing in the land," in the Joseph Smith version, "a wild man hath come among us." And so this is what we get (italics added):

Moses 6:39 ... when they 4QEnGiants b 1.20 [Thereupon]

heard him ... fear came on all all the giants [and the

them that heard him nephilim] took fright

6:40. And there came a man and they summoned MHWY

unto him, whose name was [Mahujah] and he came to

Mahijah, and said unto him: them. And the giants asked

Tell us plainly who thou art, and him and sent him to Enoch ...

from whence thou comest? saying to him: "Go then ...

and under pain of death you

must ... and listen to his voice;

and tell him that he is to explain

to you and to interpret the

dreams....

So here comes Mahujah-Mahijah to Enoch, representing a disturbed constituency, to ask the holy man just what the situation is. That MHWY was sent "under pain of death" shows that not only the dreams but the presence of Enoch was a cause of dread. In reply the messenger learns that Enoch comes from a special and holy place:

6:41. And he said unto them: I 4QEnGiants [Ohyah,

came out from ... the land of following MHWY's report]: ...

my fathers, a land of my accusers ... they dwell in

righteousness unto this day [heaven]s, for they live in holy

abodes ... they are more

powerful than I ...

Enoch tells the man about a revelation and call he received as he traveled in the mountains on a missionary journey. The journey here seems to be transferred to MHWY himself, who crosses the deserts on high to behold Enoch and receive an oracle from him, while in the Joseph Smith version Enoch himself makes such a journey to receive instructions from God:

6.42. And ... as I journeyed ... 4QEnGiants b [MHWY ... rose

by the sea east, I beheld a up into the air] like the

vision: and lo, the heavens I whirlwind, and he flew ... and

saw.... crossed Solitude, the great

7:2-3. ...As I was desert ... And he caught sight

journeying ... I went up on the of Enoch, and he called to him

mount ... I beheld the heavens and said to him: 'An oracle....'

open....

It is in reply to Mahijah-MHWY that Enoch refers the people to an ancient book which he bears with him, having according to some sources (Jubilees, XII Patriarchs) copied it with his own hand from heavenly tablets.

6:45. Enoch: We ... cannot 4QEnGiants a 7 ... to you, MH

deny ... for a book of [wy ...] the two tablets ... and

remembrance we have written the second has not been read

among us, up till now. 8. the boo [k of ...

According to the pattern given The copy of the second tablet of

by the finger of God ... in our the Epistle ... written] by

own language. Enoch, the distinguished

scribe's own hand ... and the

Holy One, to Shemihazah and

all [his] Com[panions].

The teachings of the book (from Adam's time in the Joseph Smith version) strike home, and the hearers are overcome:

6:47. And as Enoch spake forth 6Q8 a ... Ohya and he said to

the words of God, the people MHWY: "... and [I?] do not

trembled, and could not standtremble. Who showed you all

in his presence. [that] tell [us?]...." And

MHWY said: "... Baraq'el, my

father, was with me."

4[En Giants a Frg.4 ...Ohyah

said to Ha]hyah, his

brother.... they prostrated

themselves and began to weep

before [Enoch (?) ...].

The name Baraq'el is interesting in this context, since Joseph Smith is designated in the Doctrine and Covenants both as Enoch and as Baurakale (D&C 78:9; 102:21f, etc.) Next comes a resounding declaration of general depravity, which in two verses of the Joseph Smith text powerfully sums up the same message in the longest of the Aramaic Enoch fragments:

6:48. And he said unto 4EnGiants a Frg.8. The longest

them ... We are made fragment: The depravity and

partakers of misery and misery of the people described.

woe ... Their petition is rejected: God

6:49. ...carnal, sensual, and has cast them out. All is "for the

devilish, and are shut out from worst",

the presence of God.

But then interestingly enough, both the Qumran and the Joseph Smith sermons end on a note of hope — which is not found in the other versions of the Book of Enoch:

6:52. If thou wilt turn unto [Closing line] And yet, loosen

me; ... and repent ... asking all your bonds [of sin?] which tie things in his name ... it shall [you] up ... and begin to pray.

be given you.

Now comes what I consider an important theological note. Enoch tells how the Lord told Adam of the natural inclination to sin that came with the Fall. This is converted in the Aramaic version to a denunciation of the wicked people of Enoch's day, who did indeed conceive their children in sin, since they were illegitimate offspring of a totally amoral society:

6:55. Inasmuch as thy children 4QEnGaints 8. Let it be known

are conceived in sin. even so... to you that ... and your works

sin conceiveth in their and those of your wives...

hearts ... themselves [and their] children

6:57. Wherefore teach it unto and the wives of [their

your children, that all men, children ...] by your prostitution

everywhere, must repent. on earth. And it befell you. ...

Next the wicked move against Enoch and his people in force, but are themselves forced to acknowledge the superior power supporting the patriarch:

7:13. And ... he [Enoch] led 4QEnGiant c [Ohyah the

the people of God, and their enemy of Enoch]: "... by the

enemies came to battle against strength of my power, [I had

them; and he spake the word of attacked] all flesh and I have

the Lord, and the earth made war with them ... they live

trembled.... in holy abodes, and ... they

are more powerful than I."

And then that striking passage, so surprisingly vindicated in other Enoch texts, of the roaring lions amidst scenes of general terror:

and the roar of the lions was [Thereupon ...] the roaring of

heard out of the wilderness; the wild beasts came and the

multitude of wild animals

and all nations feared began to cry out

greatly.... And Ohyah spoke ... "My

dream has overwhelmed me

[... and the s]leep of my eyes

[has fled]...

Finally the prediction of utter destruction and the confining in prison that is to follow:

7:37 ...these shall suffer. 38. 4QEnGiants a Frg. 7. Then

...these ... shall perish in the Ohyah [said] to Hahyah, his

floods; and behold, I will shut brother.... Then he [sc.

them up; a prison have I God] punished ... the [sons]

prepared for them. of the Watchers, the giants,

and all [their] beloved ones will

not be spared ... he has

imprisoned us and you he has

subdued [lit. tqaf: seized,

confined].

Among new Dead Sea Scrolls we may number those found in 1966 not at Qumran but in the all but inaccessible caves that lines the precipitous walls of the Nahal Khever or, as we would say, "Heber Valley." Instead of a valley it is a deep gorge, like Rock Canyon; it is the next canyon just south of En Gedi where the people bathe in the Dead Sea today. In those caves Jews fleeing from the Romans in the time of Bar Kokhba holed up with their families and their most precious portable possessions. A cave in the side of a cliff that can only be approached by one man at a time is easy to defend, and the Romans did not bother to attack them there, but simply set up camps on the flat mesas on either side of the canyon, from which they could look right down into the caves and make sure that no one escaped. Thus trapped, the poor Jews perished miserably in their hideouts, refusing to surrender, and left behind not only all manner of artifacts, kitchen-ware, clothing, baskets in excellent condition, shoes, etc., but a priceless harvest of their personal papers and books. These throw a great deal of light on practices described in the Book of Mormon.

For what these people were doing in fleeing from the farms and cities of Judea, as digging in these very caves has shown, was exactly what had been done at other times when the land was overrun by foreign armies. The evidence goes clear back to mysterious bronze vessels hidden there about 3000 B.C., supposedly by people fleeing from the armies of the first king of Egypt! I will be quoting from the review of Professor Yigael Yadin's book Bar-Kokhba (New York: Random House, 1971) on the subject.

First of all, there is something almost alarmingly literal about these "voices from the dust." For these documents were deliberately buried in the deep dust of the cave floors and came forth in choking clouds of dust — the finders had to wear masks: "For those who shall be destroyed shall speak unto them out of the ground, and their speech shall be low out of the dust, and their voice shall be as one that hath a familiar spirit; for the Lord God will give unto him power, that he may whisper concerning them, even as it were out of the ground; and their speech shall whisper out of the dust." (2 Nephi 26:16.) They have not survived accidentally, as most other ancient writings have, but were hidden away on purpose; nor were they simply left behind or misplaced or forgotten by people who moved on and lived out their lives elsewhere — the people who left these records died soon after they buried them and died on the spot, the victims of a savage religious war. "For those who shall be destroyed shall speak unto them out of the ground...." (2 Nephi 26:16.) What do these records contain? Accounts of contemporary affairs in private letters, legal documents, military and civil correspondence, or, in the words of the Book of Mormon, "For thus saith the Lord God: They shall write the things which shall be done among them.... Wherefore, as those who have been destroyed have been destroyed speedily ..." (2 Nephi 26:17-18.) Not only all their letters and legal papers, but their household effects and their bones were left behind in the caves, for the simple reason that they did not have time to escape. As to their destroyers, "Nothing remains here today of the Romans save a heap of stones on the face of the desert," writes Yadin, "but here the descendants of the besieged were returning to salvage their ancestors' precious belongings." (P. 235.) Again the Book of Mormon: " ... and the multitude of their terrible ones shall be as chaff that passeth away...." (2 Nephi 26:18.)

With the Dead Sea Scrolls we have something new under the sun; even if they simply repeated what we already know, their principal contribution would be the same — a new dimension of reality to our religion. It has been a long time since scholars asked, "Are there really such things as this? Did this really happen?" They have learned to be content with the easy assumption that it really makes no difference in dealing with spiritual, allegorical, moral emblems whether or not there is a physical reality to our stories. The most shocking thing that Joseph Smith brought before the world was the announcement that things men had been talking about for centuries were literally true, and would have to be viewed as such. The restoration of the gospel brought a new reality, but found few believers — it was more comfortable the old way, when you could take things just as you wanted them.

But with the scrolls from the caves, the reality of things hits us in the face with a shock. How often does it happen that documents thousands of years old have been dug up by the very descendants of the people who wrote those documents, who could actually read them on the spot, not referring them to pedantic decipherment in distant studies and laboratories, but reading them right off as messages from their own grandparents? "We found that our emotions were a mixture of tension and awe," writes Professor Yadin, "yet astonishment and pride at being part of the reborn State of Israel after a Diaspora of 1,800 years." (p. 253.) Compare this with Nephi's moving lines: "And it shall be as if the fruit of thy loins had cried unto them from the dust.... even after many generations have gone by them...." (2 Nephi 3:19-20.)

Nothing illustrates this better than Ezekiel's dry bones. The question in Ezekiel 37:3 is, "Can these bones live?" and the answer is, Yes, when "the stick of Ephraim, for Joseph, and for all the house of Israel" is joined "with the stick of Judah" "one to another into one stick; and they shall be one in thine hand." (See Ezekiel 37:16-19.) I once wrote a series of articles on the ancient tally-sticks. The true tally-stick was a staff (originally an arrow-shaft) on which the contract and names of the contracting parties were written; the staff was then split down the middle and one half, called "the stock" was kept by one of the parties, while the other "the bill" was held by the other. When the time came to settle the contract, the two parties would present their halves of the stick to the king. If they matched perfectly it was plain that neither party had attempted to tinker with the document, and all conditions having been met, the two halves, joined together again to make one, would be bound with string in the king's hand and laid away in the archives. The oldest known tallies are written in Latin and, surprisingly, in Hebrew. Are such the "sticks" to which Ezekiel refers? They are. The Bar Kochba cave has now produced no less than twenty-three examples of this technique in those letters of "the type commonly known as 'double deeds' or 'tied deeds,' "the use of which" is a very old and known practice in the ancient world." The idea was to write the same contract twice, once very small, roll it into a tight cylinder, sew it closed, and sign it over with the participants' signatures, not to be opened until the final settlement — plainly the technique of the tally-stick.

So here the Dead Sea Scrolls confirm our own interpretation of what the sticks of Ephraim and Judah were: matching documents to be brought together and placed side by side to make one book at that particular moment when God would set his hand to resurrecting the dry bones of dead Israel. The word of the Lord assures us now that it is indeed "Moroni, whom I have sent unto you to reveal the Book of Mormon, containing the fulness of my everlasting gospel, to whom I have committed the keys of the records of the stick of Ephraim." (D&C 27:5.) It is specifically with the bringing forth of these documents that the work of the last days is to start moving. Moroni, who brought the book again, sealed it up anciently with the prophecy that when its word shall be "like as one crying from the dead, yea, even as one speaking out of the dust" (Moroni 10:27), then shall the invitation go forth to the Jews: "Awake, and arise from the dust, O Jerusalem ... enlarge thy borders forever, that thou mayest no more be confounded...." (10:31). Which is exactly what they are doing today: the only way they can keep from being "confounded" is to have defensible borders.

In 1948 the world turned a corner. Overnight modern Israel became a reality, and so did ancient Israel. The Battle Scroll appeared just at the moment that Israel was called to arms, and according to Yadin had not only a moral but even a practical value in that great crisis. Suddenly scriptures became "relevant." In the same year the oldest Jewish library and the oldest Christian library were discovered: both were threatened with destruction; both were challenged as hoaxes; both became the object of political and religious rivalries and deadlocks; both were viewed as the work of irresponsible and fanatic sectaries. Yet through the years there has been a growing respect for both the Nag Hammadi and the Qumran writings, both because of their impressive spiritual content and the number of other pseudepigrapha that are being discovered or rediscovered to confirm their proximity to the authentic Judaism and Christianity that flourished in the days before the Jewish and Christian doctors of Alexandria changed everything.

To me this seems to be an obvious sequel to what happened in 1830, when another book appeared from the dust, and another Israel was established. There are three main parts to the Restoration, as was made clear in a revelation given a year later: "But before the great day of the Lord shall come, Jacob shall flourish in the wilderness, and the Lamanites shall blossom as the rose. Zion shall flourish upon the hills and rejoice upon the mountains, and shall be assembled together unto the place which I have appointed." (D&C 49:24-25.) And the three shall combine their records, for "it shall come to pass that the Jews shall have the words of the Nephites, and the Nephites shall have the words of the Jews; and the Nephites and the Jews shall have the words of the lost tribes of Israel; and the lost tribes of Israel shall have the words of the Nephites and the Jews. And it shall come to pass that my people, which are of the house of Israel, shall be gathered home unto the lands of their possessions; and my word also shall be gathered in one. And I will show unto them that fight against my word and against my people, who are of the house of Israel, that I am God, and that I covenanted with Abraham that I would remember his seed forever." (2 Nephi 29:13-14.) The Dead Sea Scrolls bind the Old Testament and the New Testament together as nothing else, and almost all the Scrolls so far published show remarkable affinity to the Book of Mormon, as well as the restored Church. Why should this be? Or am I just imagining things? The proper cure for "parallelomania" is not to avoid parallels but to explain them: every parallel has a proper explanation, even if it is only mere coincidence or illusion. There are marks on rocks that sometimes look like writing or like fossilized plants; these are not to be ignored even though they often turn out to be misleading, because once in a while they really are true writing and true fossils. Resemblances between the Bible and the Book of Mormon are not hard to explain; far from being evidence of fraud, they are rather confirmation of authenticity. If the Book of Mormon is what it pretends to be, we should expect to find a strong biblical influence in it. Its prophets sound like those of the Old Testament because they studied and consciously quoted the words of those prophets, and all prophets moreover are programmed to sound alike, being called for the same purpose under much the same conditions.

But the Book of Mormon goes far beyond such generalities when it takes us into worlds hitherto undreamed of, namely those societies of desert sectaries, Jewish and Christian, which since the discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls and Nag Hammadi documents have come to life in our histories and commentaries. The Book of Mormon deals with both types of religious community for 3 Nephi gives us the Christian version, as other books do the Jewish. The presence of Jewish colonies that look strangely Christian and early Christian colonies that look strangely Jewish has been disturbing to both conventional "normative" Judaism and conventional Christianity, and has already called for drastic revisions of doctrine and liturgy.

In the Dead Sea Scrolls we learn of the peculiar way of life of the sectaries of the desert, whose Rekhabite tradition goes back to Lehi's day and long before, and survives long after, as is very apparent from the 2nd Sura of the Koran. The people of Lehi were rooted in this tradition. When John Welch was studying at Duke a few years ago, he was struck by the close resemblance between the story of Lehi and the writing of Zosimus, a Greek of the third century A.D. What would a Greek know about Lehi almost a thousand years after? Zosimus was looking for the model society of the saints, and affected to find it in the desert among the Rekhabites — that is the common tradition; I pointed out long ago that Lehi was in the proper sense a Rekhabite and certainly acquainted with the pious sectaries of Jeremiah 30. The writing of Zosimus shows that we are dealing with a pervasive and persistent pattern. Since the rise of "patternism" in the 1930s scholars have come to recognize all manner of common religious forms and stereotypes throughout the world. But it is important to remember that Joseph Smith in his day was running in an open field, a boundless plain where there was nothing to check or restrain him. Mrs. Brodie saw in the Book of Mormon only the product of a completely untrained, unbridled, undisciplined imagination that ran over like a spring freshet, as she put it. A hundred and forty years ago he might have gotten away with it, but now surely comes the day of reckoning! And it is not he but his critics who are confounded.

The Book of Mormon is, as it often reminds us, a selective history. It deals with small groups of pious believers, intensely conservative by nature and tradition; consciously identifying themselves with their ancestors, Israel in the wilderness of long ago. (See 1 Nephi 19:23.) It was this characteristic tendency of the sectaries to identify themselves with earlier trails and tribulations of Israel that at first made the Dead Sea Scrolls so hard to date: the same situations seem to obtain again and again through history, so that the Kittim of the Scrolls might be the Egyptians, Assyrians, Babylonians, Greeks, or Romans. Though carrying on in the New World, the Book of Mormon people preserve their ancient culture for centuries: which should not surprise us — do not the present inhabitants of America speak the English, Spanish and Portuguese and preserve the customs of the Old World after four hundred years? With this strong cultural carry-over, the Nephites are aware of being special and apart — as the sectaries always are—" a lonesome and a solemn people," is the moving expression of Nephi's brother. And strangely enough, they are peculiarly bound to the written word, as are the people of Qumran. One of the most important discoveries of the Book of Mormon was the process and techniques of recording, transmitting, concealing, editing, translating, and duplicating ancient writings. Here is something the world refused to see in the Bible, the most sealed of books, but it has been thoroughly vindicated in the Dead Sea Scrolls.

Of many striking parallels, I would like to speak of one here that goes to the root of things. It is an episode that opens in the Book of Mormon in the middle of the second century B.C. with "a man whose name was Abinadi," in deep trouble with the establishment: In the Old World we find about the same time a certain "Teacher of Righteousness" in much the same fix: his story is told in the Manual of Discipline, the Damascus or Zadokite Fragment, the commentary on Habaku and the Thanksgiving Hymns from Qumran. He is being given a bad time by certain corrupt priests who are in the saddle. In the Book of Mormon we find them cross-examining the righteous man as they sit at a special tribunal with comfortable seats,

The common formula is "lying

speakers and vain seers"

(mlitse kazav w-khoze rmiyah,

4:10)

Mosiah 11:11. ...that they IQH 4:6 ...But they lead thy

might rest their bodies ... people astray by speaking

while they should speak lying smooth things to them,

and vain words to his people. practitioners of vain

rhetoric... (melitse remiuah,

preachers of deceit.)

IQH 4:20. they are men of

deceit [mirmah] and seers who

lead astray [khozeh ta'ut].

IQH 4:16. in their insolence

they would sit in judgement on

thee [investigate, persecute:

yidreshu-ka] from the mouths of

lying prophets led astray by

error.

11:19. they did delight in... CD 1:20. and they took the

shedding ... the blood of their offensive [ya'udu] against the

brethren, and this because of life of the Righteous one and all

the wickedness of their king who walked uprightly

and priests. [perfectly] they hated in their

hearts, and pursued them with

the sword and rejoiced in

controversy.

CD 19:15. The princes of Judah

have transgressed in a bond of

conspiracy [tshuvah]... 18. in

vengeance and wrath, every

man against his brother, and

everyone hating his neighbor,

greedy for gain

11:26. ...they were wroth with IQH 2:21. The ruthless ones

him, and sought to take away sought my life ... a gang of

his life; but the Lord delivered no-goods [sodh shaweh], a

him out of their hands. conspiracy of Belial. But they

knew not that my security [ma

amadhi] rested on Thee, 23. and

that through thy mercy is my

soul delivered ... 32: They

sought to take away my life

and shed my blood, but Thou

God hast helped the weak and

suffering out of the hand of the

one who was stronger that he.

11:28. Abinadi ... has said IQH 2:14. I became a man of

these things that he might stir controversy [ish riv, a

up my people to anger one troublemaker] to the preachers

with another, and to raise of error ...

contentions among my people;

therefore I will slay him. (Cf. Joseph Smith 2:20. I was

destined to prove a disturber

and annoyer of his [Satan's]

kingdom ...)

12.1 ...after the space of two IQH 4:8. For they drove me out

years ... Abinadi came among of my land, 9. like a bird from

them in disguise, that they its nest, and all my friends and

knew him not, and began to relatives they turned against

prophesy. me.

(Cf. Od. Sal. 42)

Next Abinadi uses an interesting figure, combining two elements of fire and weaving, as the Damascus text also does, but in a quite different combination:

12.3. the life of king Noah shall CD 2:5. for those who

be valued even as a garment in stubbornly oppose [God] there

a hot furnace. shall be violence and

overpowering of great terror

by the flame of fire.

CD 5:13. they are playing with

fire and throwing sparks

around [or setting fires].

thing, the weaving of spiders.

Here both prophets are borrowing from Isaiah 50:9, 11: "... who is he that shall condemn me? lo, they all shall wax old as a garment; the moth shall eat them up. Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass yourselves about with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled...." The idea is that those who have foolishly started such fires will themselves perish by them. In the Zadokite Fragment the precarious position of the persecutors is compared with the playing with fire and a flimsy weaving of spiders. Abinadi combines the images with characteristic wit: Noah himself is the flimsy garment in the hot fire, to suffer the very death he is inflicting on Abinadi. In the next verse he employs a figure from the Scrolls:

12:10. he [Abinadi] saith that

thy life shall be as a garment in

a furnace of fire.

12:12. And again, he saith thou IQH 7:2 ...Thou ... scatterest

shalt be as the blossoms of a the remnant of the men who

thistle, which ... the wind fight against me like chaff

bloweth.... before the wind [naturally

suggesting Psalm 1].

12:19. [The priests] began to IQH 2:29. They spread a net to

question him, that they might catch me, but it caught their

cross him, ... to accuse him; own foot ... 3. Thou deliverest

but ... to their me from the spite of the

astonishment ... he did manipulators [rhetoricians] of

withstand them in all their lies, 32. from the council of

questions, and did confound those who seek smooth things;

them in all their words. thou has rescued the soul of

the Poor one whom they

desired to destroy because of

his service to thee.

IQH 14:14. I was zealous

against the deceitful men. For

all who are near to Thee resist

not thy mouth nor change thy

words.

12:25. [You] pretend to teach IQH 2:15. I became an accusing

this people, 12:26. If ye spirit [of qinah] against all who

understand these things ye taught smooth things; and all

have not taught them; the men of false teaching

therefore, ye have perverted [remiyah, deception, illusion]

the ways of the Lord stormed against me.

12:27. Ye have not applied your 16. They professed to be in the

hearts to understanding covenant of repentance.

12:28. And they said: We teach CD 19:17. ...but they have not

the law of Moses. departed from the way of the

12:29. If ye teach the law of apostates, but have wallowed

Moses why do ye not keep it? in the ways of whoredoms,

Why do ye set your hearts and godlessness ... Everyone

upon riches? Why do ye has deserted his family for

commit whoredoms and spend immoral practices, zealous in

your strength with harlots? the acquisition of wealth and

property, every man doing

what is right in his own eyes,

confirming the people in their

sins

(Cf. Alma 30:17.)

12:33. I know if ye keep the IQH 4:10. The preachers of lies

commandments of God ye and seers of illusions contrive

shall be saved; yea, if ye keep devil's tricks against me to

the commandments which the make me exchange the Law

Lord delivered unto Moses in which thou has engraved in

the mount of Sinai ... my heart for the smooth things

12:37. Have ye done all they teach to the people.

this? ... And have ye taught 11. They who shut up the drink

this people that they should do of knowledge from the

all these things? I say unto you, thirsting ones to give them

Nay, ye have not. vinegar, to turn them to false

teachings that they fall into

your nets!

Then comes a long sermon to the wicked priests in which he chides them with their indifference to the scriptures and lays it on with a caustic tongue, showing himself well versed in the ancient writings: "And now I read unto you the remainder of the commandments of God, for I perceive that they are not written in your hearts; I perceive that ye have studied and taught iniquity the most part of your lives." (Mosiah 13:11.) Like the Teacher of Righteousness, Abinadi sees in the law a preparation for the Messiah to come. Professor Frank Cross called the Qumran community "the church of anticipation."

13:27. I say unto you that it is IQS 9:9. And from no precept

expedient that ye should keep of the Law [Torah] shall they

the law of Moses as yet; but I depart...

say unto you, that the time 11. UNTIL there shall come the

shall come when it shall no Prophet and the Messiah of

more be expedient to keep the Aaron and Israel.

law of Moses. (Italics added.)

13:30. Therefore there was a CD 12:21. And according to

law given ... a law of this rule shall they walk even

performances and of the seed of Israel ... and this is

ordinances ... which they the way [serekh] of living for the

were to observe strictly from camp, by which they walk in

day to day.... the time of the wicked, UNTIL

things were types of things to Aaron arises.

come.

all understand the law; and

this because of the hardness of

their hearts.

13:33. Did not Moses IQS 1:2. ...as was

prophesy ... concerning the commanded by the hand of

coming of the Messiah, and Moses and by the hand of his

that God should redeem his servants the prophets.

people? Yea, and even all the

prophets who have IQS 9:4. to atone for the sins ...

prophesied ever since the to please God in the land

world began — have they not MORE than the flesh of burnt

spoken more or less offerings and the fat of

concerning these things? sacrifices: the heave-offering of

the lips for a mishpat, like the

sacrificial odor [k-nikhoakh] the offering acceptable to him.

Being perfect in the way means keeping the covenants one has made: the expression is found at thand ening of the Book of Luke, where we find the parents of John the Baptist following precepts like these.

Mosiah 15:10. And who shall IQS 3:2-3. ...may he lift up his

be his seed? face upon all thy assembly and

the words of the prophets ... crown.

and believed that the Lord 4. in eternal glory and sanctify

would redeem his people, and thy seed with eternal glory ...

have looked forward to that and give thee peace and the

day ... these are his seed, or kingdom [malkuth,

they are the heirs of the kingship] ...

kindgom of God. 5:21. A covenant of the Church

to establish forever the

kingship of his people.

15:26. Behold, and fear, and IQS 2:26-3:1. For his soul has

tremble ... ye ... that hav turned away and departed

known the commandments of from the knowledge [counsel]

God, and would not keep them of the ordinances [mishpate] of

truth; he did not remain firm in

his dedication [changing of his

life].

16:1. ...when all shall see the CD 20:26. When the glory of

salvation of the Lord. 16:2. God is openly revealed to

And then shall the wicked be Israel, then shall all the

cast out.... 3. ...and the devil evil-doers of Judah be cast out

has power over them.... from the midst of the camp and

the people.

During the trial of Abinadi, Alma, one of the priests of Noah who had been converted by the teaching of the holy man, pleaded on his behalf, and being in danger of his own life (Mosiah 17:3), withdrew from circulation while he could put everything down in writing. The name of Alma, incidentally, has turned up in one of the newly discovered scrolls. In 1966, Professor Yadin found deeply buried in the floor of the Cave of Manuscripts the deed to a farm. Today the visitor entering the Shrine of the Book in Jerusalem will find the very first display on his left hand to be this deed, a strip of papyrus mounted on glass with a light shining through; and there written in a neat and legible hand is the name "Alma, son of Judah" —one of the owners of the farm. This deserves mention because the critics have always made great fun of the name of Alma (both Latin and feminine), comically out of place among the ancient Jews.

17:3. ...the king ... caused IQH 5:5. I praise THEE Lord for that Alma should be cast thou didst not desert me when

out ... and sent his servants I was among the people ... and

after him that they might slay didst not leave me in my secret

him. 4. But he fled from before affairs, but saved my life out of

them and hid himself that they the pit and gave ... in the

found him not. And he being midst of lions ... 8. Thou didst

concealed for many days did take me to a place removed

write all the words which among the fisherfolk and

Abinadi had spoken. hunters.

God, from the children of men,

and hid thy law in me, until the

time,

revealed to me.

of the Poor One in the place of

lions.

This is something of a standard situation — preparation for a holy mission by a retreat into the wilderness: we see the same thing in the cases of Ether, Moroni, Lehi and his sons, of Moses, John the Baptist and the Lord himself. The wilderness motif (Cf. Mauser's book, Christ in the wilderness) is preparation for the more ambitious Rekhabite motif, about which Robert Eisler wrote so learnedly many years ago. Alma came out of hiding to do his work among the people; and in the Hodiyot we see the leader building up just such a following in the towns:

18:1 ...Alma ... went about IQH 4:23. Thou hast not kept

privately among the people ... hiding for shame

to teach the words of Abinadi 24. all of those who permitted

— 3. And he taught them me to visit [or instruct] them,

privately.... who came together in a church

[yahad] of thy covenant to listen

to me, and to follow the ways

of thy heart. They rallied to my defense as a group of Sains.

And now come the New World Qumran:

18:4. And ... as many as did CD 6:4. The volunteers from

believe him did go forth to a the people are those who bear

place which was called the staff [cf. of wandering Mormon ... being in the Moses] and the Fountain [of

borders of the land ... spring] is the Law ... and they

infested, by times or at are the inhabitants of Israel

seasons, by wild beasts. who depart from the land of

Judah and dwell in the land of

(N.b. This is not the howling Damascus as strangers. 7. The

wilderness, but the midhbar, staff is the one who teaches

the places where desert and them the Law, as Isaiah says.

cultivation or grazing

infringe upon each other; (1 Nephi 19:23. I [Nephi in

the next verse shows that it the desert] did read unto

was a desert terrain.) them that which was

written by the prophet

Isaiah; for I did liken all

scriptures unto us, that it

might be for our profit and

learning.)

18:5. Now, there was in IQS 8:13. At the fulfillment of

Mormon a fountain of pure these signs they shall separate

water ... there being near the themselves from dwelling in

water a thicket of small trees the midst of a perverse people,

[like Ain Feshka?], where he and go forth into the desert to

did hide himself in the daytime prepare a way for Him ... 15.

from the searches of the king. ...even by the study of the

Law as it was given to Moses

according to what has been

revealed from time to time as it

was shown to the prophet

through the Holy Ghost.

18:6. ...as many as believed IQS 9:18. To lead and instruct

him went thither to hear his (lehinkhotam) in knowledge

words. and so give them

there were a goodly number wonders and truth [s] in the

gathered together at the place midst of

of Mormon, to hear the words 19. the men of the Church; to

of Alma.... And he did teach walk each one blamelessly

them, and did preach unto [perfect] with his neighbor in

them.... all that has been revealed to

them: ...as ye are ... willing the way in the wilderness, and

to bear one another's to instruct them in all that must

burdens.... be done at this time.

Such communities were not without precedent in Israel. There were fraudulent prophets and quacks who time and again led such groups into the wilderness (see Eisler's work). The Dead Sea Scrolls have a good deal to say about such ambitious would-be Moseses. There is one instance in the early Christian literature which is interesting because it tells of one impostor who led his people to a place of filthy water — reminding us of Ignatius's charge that the apostate leaders of his day are giving the thirsting people poison to drink. What makes this case arresting is that the false prophet's name was Mormon. (Text in J. P. Migne, Dict. des Apocryphes I.) So too we read in CD 1:14. "The man of deception [latson — the phony] arose who preached lying waters to Israel and led them astray in the pathless desert, away from the paths of righteousness." In IQH 2:16 the righteous teacher tells how "all the men of falsehood [remiyah] stormed against me like a mass of mighty waters," 2:12. "The assembly of the wicked rushed upon me like a stormy sea, whose waves cast up all manner of mud," and 13. "fifth." This is the "filthy water" of Nephi's vision, an image found also in the desert Arab poets. What could be worse to one dying of thirst in the desert than to be led to waters that could not be drunk!

18:8. [Alma says] Here are the IQS 3:8. [In baptism] he

waters of Mormon.... submits his soul in all humility

being baptized in the name of God,

the Lord, as a witness ... that 3:9f. after which he applies

ye have entered into a himself to walking carefully

covenant that ye will serve him [perfectly] in all the ways of

and keep his God as he commanded for the

commandments.... specified time and conditions

in turning aside to the right or

to the left....

have entered into a covenant to covenant member of God's

serve him.... eternal church.

18:8. ...willing to bear one IQS 2:2-4. For all shall be

another's burdens, that they united in one true church

may be light, ... [oneness of truth], and in

with those that mourn; yea, mercy and fair dealing

and comfort those that stand in [dealings of righteousness]

need of comfort.... each man with his neighbor.

5:24. to be perfect each in

supporting his fellow in truth

and humility and love of mercy

towards all.

18:8. ...as ye are desirous to CD 4:2. The sons of Zadok are

come into the fold of God, and following the patterns: The

to be called his people.... priests are penitent Israel 3.

who have left the Land of

Judah [and they are the

LEVITES] ... they are the elect

of Israel who will be called up

by name in the Last Days.

18:9. ...and to stand as IQS 18:9. And not to turn away

witnesses of God at all times from him out of any fear or

and in all things and in all terror or any burning that may

places ... even until death, threaten in the government of

Belial.

18:9. that ye may be redeemed, IQH 6:7-8. I was comforted

and be numbered with those of amidst all the raging of the

the first resurrection — that ye people gathering together. For

may have eternal life. I know that 8. after a time thou

wilt raise up the Living One in

the midst of thy people, and

a remnant in thine inheritance,

and purify them with the

purification of forgiveness, for

all their deed. 9. They trust on

thee.

2 Nephi 9:41. ...the keeper of 13. And there is no go-between

the gate is the Holy One of (melits benayim — servant

Israel: and he employeth no representative) for thy

servant there; ... Saints.... 14. for they answer

him will he open.... 43. [to become thy princes in an

them] ... that happiness eternal inheritance.

which is prepared for the

saints.

The IQH 6:26 here uses the language of the Pastor of Hermas: "O God thou layest a foundation upon a Rock ... according to the true rule and plummet [made] of thy chosen stones ... and none stumbles who walketh hence. For no stranger will enter into its gates, protective gates ... whose strong bolts cannot be forced." These verses (cf. 2 Nephi 9:42-43) plainly refer to the mysteries of godliness both in the Book of Mormon and the Qumran texts. When I first visited Qumran, in 1966, (Dr. Joseph Saad, Vontella Kimball, Moses Kader and myself were the only persons on the site, for it was during a time of troubles) Christian and Jewish scholars vigorously denied that the tanks, basins and water-conduits connecting them had anything to do with baptism or ritual ablutions; but last year our group visiting the place noted with interest that the Israeli authorities had put up signs designating such places as meant for ritual ablutions. The baptism of Alma is the old Jewish baptism, strictly an ordinance of purification and initiation with no mention of death and resurrection.

Mosiah 18:10. ...baptized ... IQH 14:71. Thine abundant

as a witness ... that ye have goodness have I recognized by

entered into a covenant ... that an oath, not to sin against thee

ye will serve him and keep his or to do anything that is evil in

commandments, that he may thine eyes. And so I have

pour out his Spirit more joined in the fellowship of all

abundantly upon you. who share my faith [sodh]

18:11. [When Alma put the IQS 1:20. And all those

proposition before all the desiring to enter into the

people gathered]... when the covenant shall say after them

people heard these words, [the Levite who preaches

they clapped their hands for repentance and the Priest who

joy, and exclaimed: This is the proposes the new covenant]

desire of our hearts. Amen! Amen!

Reference to baptism has naturally caused a good deal of discussion among Christians and Jews alike. It is plain from the Scrolls that there was both an initiatory baptism and frequent ritual washings.

18:10. Being baptized ... that IQS 3:4. (Introductory

he may pour out his Spirit.... admonition) The backsliders

upon thy servant.... purified and cleansed by the

waters of niddah [removal of

Lord be poured out upon by the water of the running

you ... eternal life, through streams, nor [cleansed by the

the redemption of Christ,... waters of washing, bathing;

prepared from the foundation raphkatz]

of the world.

Now we come to the organization of Alma's church — Jewish in some respects, early Christian in others. The writers of the Scrolls call their organization a yahad, the word meaning simply "oneness." Some would translate it as "unity," others as "community," others as "oneness." George Molin, the eminent Roman Catholic student of the Scrolls, insists that the usage and context of the word requires it to be translated simply as "church," while the name the people gave to themselves, according to him, was "Latter-day Saints." The emphasis on oneness is a reminder that these churches in the wilderness thought of themselves as little scale models of Enoch, City of Zion, so-called "because they were of one heart and one mind." (Moses 7:18.)

18:21. He [Alma] IQS 5:25. No one shall speak to

commanded ... that there his brother in anger or

should be no contention one peevishness, or haughtily

with another, but that they [with stiff neck] or with any

should look forward with one unkind feeling [qinah] but

eye, having one faith and one everyone shall admonish his

baptism, having their hearts fellow in truth, humility and

knit together in unity and in loving-kindness.

love one towards another. 1:3 and to love all the

(Italics added.) Chosen ... 9. and to love all the Sons of Light in the quorum

[council, brotherhood] of God

['etsath].

As to organization,

18:17. And they were called the IQSa 2:11f. This is the

church of God, or the church of assembly of the men of the

Christ [Messiah].... And ... name, the meeting of the

whosoever was baptized by council of the church [yahad]

the power and authority of whenever God causes the

God was added to his church. Messiah [Anointed One,

Christ] to be born among them.

together for the table of the

church [yahad, unity] or to

drink the new wine, and the

table of the yahad is set, 18. and

the new wine is mixed for

drinking, no one shall put forth

his hand toward the bread and wine at first before the Priest,

for he must bless the first-fruits of the bread and wine; and he

takes the bread before them,

and after that the Messiah of

Israel puts forth his hand on

the bread, and after that all the

assembly of the church shall

bless [or be blessed, served],

each in the order of his office

[dignity],

do it on every formal

occasion, [ma'rakhah] when as

many as ten come together.

If this sounds disturbingly

Christian, it is no more so than

IQS 8:1 "In the council of the

church there shall be twelve

men, and three priests,

perfectly instructed in all that

has been revealed.

23:14. ...trust no one to be 2. in the entire Torah, to act in

your teacher nor your minister, truth and justice and judgment

except he be a man of God, and love of mercy, walking in

walking in his ways and humility with their brethren.

keeping his commandments.

23:16. Alma was their high

priest ... [and] founder of their

church.

23:17. ...none received IQS 6:3f. Ten men shall not

authority to preach or to teach meet without a priest to

except it were by him from preside.

God.... he consecrated all 6:7ff. There must never be a

their priests and all their priest failing to teach the word

teachers.... of God.

6:6 And there shall not be

missing in any place where

there are as many as 10 men a

doresh [reader, expounder in

the Torah, whether by day or

night].

IQS 2:20. The priests shall

enter or move on first of all, the

Levites come next, and all the

people in third place, for

thousands and hundreds and

fifties, and then tens, so that

every man may know his place

in the church of God for the

doctrine of the eternities

6:8 the priests sit in the first

place, the elders in the second

and then all the other people 9.

each according to his dignity.

And they shall be consulted

concerning the law and all

decisions whatsoever that

come before the congregation,

so that every member

the disposal of all

IQSa 1:24. all things are

directed by the Sons of Zadok

the priests.

CD 13:2. In a place of 10 people

there must a priest learned in

the Book of Hagi, and all must

follow his instructions. If he

does not know enough, a

Levite

18:19. [The priest] should teach IQS 9:7. Only the Sons of

nothing save it were ... [what Aaron shall decide matters of

Alma] had taught, and which law and property and

had been spoken by the mouth administer the affairs of the

of the holy prophets. society.

2:1. The priests shall bless all

the active members [men who

share the lot] who are in good

standing [lit. who are walking

perfectly].

18:23. ...they should observe CD 10:14-12:4. Anyone who

the sabbath day,... and also desecrates the Sabbath or the

every day they should give special day [mo'a doth] is put on

thanks.... (Italics added.) probation for 7 years, before 6.

he is permitted again to attend

all the meetings.

18:25. And there was one day

in every week that was set

apart that they should gather

themselves together to teach

the people, and to worship the

Lord their God, and also, as IQS 6:7. the entire

often as it was in their power, congregation shall watch

to assemble themselves together for a third of every

together. night, to read in the Book,

discuss the Law, 8. and sing

hymns together.

18:24. ...the priests ... should IQS 6:2. And the small shall

labor with their own hands for heed the superior regarding

their support. work and property [Mammon,

depend upon the people for together.

their support ... for their labor

they were to receive the grace CD 13:11. And everyone who

of God, that they might ... joins the community shall be

teach with power.... examined for his past

activities, his knowledge and

skills, his physical capacity, his

energy, and his possession.

(All contribute these.)

18:27. ...the people of the IQS 6:19. Anyone accepted

church should impart of their into the community shall turn

substance, every one over his property agreeable to

according to that which he the priests and the

had.... congregation, and receive a

their substance of their own charge.

free will ... to those priests 7:6-7. Anyone careless with the

that stood in need,... and to common property must

every needy, naked soul. replace it.

18:29. ...and they did walk CD 13:7. The overseer of the

uprightly before God, Camp shall direct the

imparting to one another both generality in the works of God,

temporally and spiritually and teach them about the according to their needs and wonderful things he has done,

their wants. and have compassion like a

father with his children, saving

them from their erring ways as

a Shepherd his sheep ... that

there be no oppressor or smiter

in his group [adatho]

14:12. The gain [shkar] from at

least 2 days a month shall be

placed in the hands of the

Overseer and the judges, for

the support of the widows, the

ailing and the poor and aged.

(In the Pastor of Hermas the

rule is one day's income a

month.)

As he sums up the achievements of this holy band, struggling to be real saints, and to a degree succeeding, the author of our account breaks out into an ecstatic little hymn of joy. The author of which account? Of both! The author of Mosiah 18:30 precedes the hymn with a satisfying summary to his story: "... and they did walk uprightly before God, imparting to one another both temporally and spiritually ..." The writer of the Thanksgiving Hymns prefaces this particular one with an account of the wicked world in which he lived, but then he sees the community in the desert as a light shining all the more brightly by contrast:

IQH 6:11. the people of thy

counsel in the midst of those of

the world [the bne adam],

telling for endless generations

thy marvellous things and

meditating upon thy greatness

without ceasing ... for thou

sendest thy glory to all the men

of thy counsel, sharing a

common lot with the angels of

thy presence."

IQH 6:5. from the world of

shaw [vanity] and khamas

[violence] ... 8. God will

establish a new life for his

people, the remnant who will

be his heirs.

counsel receiving a common

share with the angels of the

presence [the Zion of Enoch

motif].

There is no "go between"

between the Holy One and the

Saints (cf. 2 Nephi 9:41). 14.

they are like a congregation of

princes sharing in the eternal

glory of the presence....

forever, putting forth shoots to

bear foliage in endless planting

[renewal], to cast their shade

over all the earth....

the foundations of the earth

[tehom] they strike the cosmic

waters, and all the streams of

Eden water them ...

unfailing fountain that knows

no ceasing

to the wicked

After this brief happy vision of the community as a well-watered garden, an oasis in the desert, the poet plunges back into the dreary and wicked world. But the most remarkable parallel to Alma's hymn is No. VIII of the Thanksgiving Hymns from Qumran: The Book of Mormon hymn is divided into two stanzas, the first about the waters of Mormon, the second about the trees of Mormon. IQH VIII emphasizes the same dependence of the water and the trees on each other:

Mosiah 18:30. And ... all this IQH 8:4. I praise the Lord,

was done in Mormon, yea, by for Thou didst bring me to a

the waters of Mormon, in the place of water

forest that was near the waters in a dry land,

of Mormon; yea, the place of to a fountain of water

Mormon, the waters of Mormon, in a parched land,

the forest of Mormon, how and to a water of a garden ...

a growth [planting] of

beautiful are they to the eyes of junipers, poplars and cedars,

them who there came to the along with thy glory,

knowledge of their Redeemer; trees of life are hidden

Yea, and how blessed are they, amidst secret springs in the

midst of all the trees,

for they shall sing his praise by the water,

forever. (Italics added.) and they shall bring forth

shoots

for an eternal planting

to salvation.

Even without the last line and the formal word of conclusion — "forever" — it would be plain that the Book of Mormon verses are a hymn with a melody hovering about the word Mormon. In both songs the imagery is that of the wanderer in the desert saved by the water of life and the tree of life, saved from spiritual death to find redemption and salvation. As might be expected, the trees and the water give knowledge — life-giving knowledge as sustenance. So

1 Nephi 2:9. [Lehi's song, IQS 10:9. I will sing and

qasida, in the desert] O that play ... to

thou mightest be like unto this 10:12. ...the Most High, the

river, continually running into fountain of my good, the

the fountain of all source of my well-being, a

righteousness! (Cf. Ether 8:26.) fountain of knowledge, a

flowing spring of holiness ...I

will praise him at my going out

and coming in ...

Even the end of the colony is much the same in the two stories. Neither Qumran nor the waters of Mormon were unknown to the king's men (Noah's in one case, Herod's in the other); after all the places were not too far out in the wilderness, numbers of people streamed out to them, and only one spy could find out or suspect all that was necessary. What happened in the Book of Mormon suggests quite sensibly what could have happened at Qumran, with a jealous monarch keeping the place under surveillance until he decided it would have to go.

Mosiah 18:32. ...the king ...

sent his servants to watch

them.... 33. And ... said that

Alma was stirring up the

people to rebellion against

him; therefore he sent his army

to destroy them.

So they had to move on — but they were used to that, for that is the Rekhabite tradition: Israel is ever "das wandernde Gottesvolk" God's Wandering People — indeed the present Pope of Rome is partial to the title "Wayfaring Church" to describe his own flock.

Mosiah 18:34. And ... Alma CD 6:5. They went into the

and the people of the Lord ... desert [Nu. 21:8] to dig a well,

took their tents and their that is, to study the Law,

families and departed into the namely the noble ones with the

wilderness. staff, that of Israel who had

about four hundred and fifty shuv]; and they departed from

souls. the land of Judah and

sojourned in the Land of

Then they repeat Operation Damascus, a land that was

Flight into the Wilderness. strange. 6. God has called

them princes because they

23.1 Now Alma ... made it sought after him,

known to his people, therefore 7. and the Staff [their leader] is

they gathered together their he who studies the Law [as

flocks, and took of their grain, Isaiah 54:16 says], an

and departed into the implement in the hands of God

wilderness.... to bring about his purposes.

23:3. And they fled eight days'

journey into the wilderness.

beautiful and pleasant land, a

land of pure water.

and began to till the ground,

and began to build buildings;

yea, they were industrious,

and did labor exceedingly.

It would be easy to supply many times more such parallels between the Book of Mormon and the other ancient records. If the latter are authentic (and both the Qumran and the Enoch writings were once challenged as late forgeries), it is hard to see how we can brush aside the Joseph Smith productions as nonsense. Even if every parallel were the purest coincidence, we would still have to explain how the Prophet contrived to pack such a dense succession of happy accidents into the scriptures he gave us. Where the world has a perfect right to expect a great potpourri of the most outrageous nonsense, and in anticipation has indeed rushed to judgment with all manner of premature accusations, we discover whenever ancient texts turn up to offer the necessary checks and controls, that the man was astonishingly on target in his depiction of general situations, in the almost casual mention of peculiar oddities, in the strange proper names, and countless other unaccountable details. What have Joseph Smith's critics really known about the true nature of those ancient societies into which his apocalyptic writings propose to take us? As the evidence accumulates, it is not the Prophet but his critics who find themselves with a lot of explaining to do.
