Patriarchal blessings can be a catalyst for learning and a source of guidance and inspiration. President Russell M. Nelson, speaking to a group of college students, asked: “Do you see the importance of your patriarchal blessing? I hope each one of you has obtained one. It is precious. It is personal scripture to you. It declares your special lineage. It reminds you of your linkage with the past.”

Because most people who receive a patriarchal blessing are under the age of 25, some older members might be uncertain about whether they are too old to receive such a blessing. After all, aren’t patriarchal blessings mostly about future possibilities? After a certain age, haven’t members either missed or realized them already?

We found in one of our stakes that half of the members in the stake over the age of 50 did not have a patriarchal blessing. Perhaps they considered that their time had passed. Is it too late for them to receive one?

While serving as a member of the Seventy, Elder Kazuhiko Yamashita explained that we are never too old:

“Dear adult members, some of you have not yet received your patriarch blessings. Remember, there is no maximum age. …

“… Everyone’s spiritual timeline is different. If you are 35 or 85 and you have a desire, talk to your bishop about receiving your blessing.”

The two-fold purposes of a patriarchal blessing are (1) to declare the member’s lineage in the house of Israel and (2) to provide inspired counsel and guidance.

Some members may overlook the declaration of lineage in the house of Israel in their patriarchal blessing. But President Russell M. Nelson emphasized that this declaration of lineage—whether literal or through adoption—personalizes our connection to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. It teaches us that we are “children of the covenant” (3 Nephi 20:26).

One brother who received his patriarchal blessing in his 60s said: “I was surprised how important knowing my lineage was to me. It gave me a sense of belonging. While I have mostly been going through the motions of daily life lately—and trying to survive health and financial problems—now I feel like what I do matters and that I’m part of something much bigger than myself.”

While there may be no maximum age limit in receiving a patriarchal blessing, perhaps some older members may wonder about its benefits for them if they are already of an advanced age.

Not long after being called as a stake patriarch, one of us gave a 93-year-old sister her patriarchal blessing. The words pronounced in that blessing were a heaven-sent message of approval for a life well lived in valiant service to the Lord. More than reassurance, she was given additional counsel and direction for her life both here and hereafter. She was also told that the long-awaited reunion with her beloved eternal companion who had passed away years ago was not far off. Both she and the immediate family members present wept and embraced and celebrated her willingness to seek this revelation from the Lord.

Shortly thereafter, this stalwart sister passed through the veil.

I treasure the memory of that day when I began more fully to understand the power of a patriarchal blessing in whatever season of life it might be received.

No doubt each member—regardless of our age—will treasure the “personal scripture” that we receive in our own patriarchal blessings, for a patriarchal blessing not only gives promised blessings but also can be a catalyst for new insights and inspiration. Like any catalyst, it is more than the words on a page. It is a stepping stone to making our relationship with our Heavenly Father stronger and more personal. As a loving Father, He desires to bless us, love us, and help us be closer to Him.
