I can still see the home in my mind’s eye that cold, gray December day in Illinois, USA. Its roof was above the ground, but most of the house was below the ground. “Probably, no one lives there,” my companion and I concluded.

We knocked. After a few moments, a lady opened the door a crack. We told her we were missionaries from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and that we had an important message for her. She hesitated but let us in.

She motioned us to sit on two wobbly wooden chairs. The room was dimly lit. As my eyes adjusted to the light, I noticed that the home had a dirt floor. No pictures hung on the walls. Suddenly, four sad children dressed in colorless clothing appeared.

Christmas was two weeks away. Where was baby Jesus in a manger? Where were the colorful decorations and Christmas tree?

After we delivered our message about the Restoration, the mother invited us back to talk to her husband. Before we left, we asked about Christmas. She said times were tough and that they would not have anything for Christmas that year.

After we left, my companion and I appealed for help from local ward members. A great act of love followed. Members donated food, clothes, toys, and a Christmas tree with ornaments.

We returned to the home a few days later. We knocked, and again the door opened a crack. “Merry Christmas,” we said as we greeted the father, mother, and four wide-eyed children.

We carried the tree, the gifts, and the food into the home. The family looked stunned. We set up the tree, placed gifts under it, put food on the table, and enjoyed a short visit. As we prepared to leave, I looked at the children. They all had big smiles on their faces.

We continued to teach the family, and eventually they joined the Church. As the light of the gospel brightened their home, the father developed faith and received a new vision for his family. He found a better job. The family grew closer. Soon they moved into a new home.

More than 60 years later, I still thank the Lord for allowing us to bless six of His precious children, reminding me that “inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me” (Matthew 25:40).
