Jesus Christ is the spirit of Christmas, the light of Christmas, and the focus of Christmas. The Book of Mormon holds within in its pages the spirit, light, and focus of Christmas because it teaches about Jesus Christ and how to come unto Him. Here are just two ways the Book of Mormon teaches us to draw closer to Him.

The Book of Mormon gives us a deeper knowledge of what it means to have a covenant relationship with God (see, for example, 1 Nephi 15:18; Mosiah 5:5; 18:13; 3 Nephi 20:26). Its title page states that the Book of Mormon’s purpose, among others, is to help the remnant of the house of Israel “know the covenants of the Lord, that they are not cast off forever.” The Book of Mormon gives us the restored knowledge of the covenant relationship we can have with Heavenly Father through Jesus Christ and His Atonement.

As we make and keep sacred covenants through baptism and in the temple, we draw closer to Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ in a way that binds us to Them, in a way that can bring us back to Them.

Our study of the Book of Mormon helps us understand that Jesus Christ is the ultimate gift of love (see 1 Nephi 11:16–23) and that He loves us individually.

After His Resurrection, the Lord invited the Nephites to “arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world.

“… And this they did do, going forth one by one” (3 Nephi 11:14–15).

These verses show us that the Savior’s desire for all of us, everywhere and in every situation, is to come unto Him, learn of Him, and feel His love. Jesus, in His infinite love, willingly sacrificed Himself to pay the price for our sins, granting us the opportunity to be cleansed, be reconciled to God, and ultimately return to the presence of God (see Alma 34:13–17; Helaman 14:15–17; 3 Nephi 27:14–22).

We can show our gratitude for the gift of the Book of Mormon by reading it and following the Savior’s teachings. As we do so, we embrace the true spirit of Christmas, bringing light to our lives not just in December but throughout the year.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="163641783" id="aside1_p1">How has the Book of Mormon been a gift to you this year?</p> <p data-aid="163641790" id="aside1_p2">With whom could you share the Book of Mormon as a gift?</p> [/SIDEBAR]
