# The Lands of the Gospel of John

### The Lands of the Gospel of John
Various Authors , Testimony of John the Beloved (Salt Lake City 1998)
 
 

The Lands of the Gospel of John

Craig J. Ostler

The Gospel of John is unique among the four Gospels in the choice of events that were recorded. Indeed, Robert J. Matthews, former dean of Religious Education at Brigham Young University, determined that 92 percent of the Gospel of John is material not found in any of the other three Gospels.1 Part of this uniqueness is the often-overlooked contribution to our knowledge of the lands where the Savior’s ministry took place. John is the only writer who named such locations as Bethabara, Cana, Jacob’s well, the Pool of Bethesda, the garden in Gethsemane,2 and the garden tomb near the place of crucifixion. These particular sites hold a place in the hearts of Bible students because they are the lands where Jesus walked during his mortal ministry. In addition to these sites, several locations are mentioned by all four of the Gospel writers. Our knowledge of these important locations is enhanced by John’s unique narrative of the events that took place in such areas as Capernaum, Bethany, and Jerusalem.3

By no means are we as Latter-day Saints to venerate historic places. Such veneration was part of the Great Apostasy in the meridian-day Church of Jesus Christ. As President J. Reuben Clark Jr. explained: “Historical sites or places noted in our history are not to be worshipped or clothed with sanctity. It is interesting to visit them. On such occasions we may be moved emotionally or spiritually, but this comes, not from the place, but from our inner selves stirred thereto by the thoughts and spiritual reflections our visit has engendered.”4 With this spirit of reflection we will examine several places mentioned by John.

Bethabara beyond Jordan

John was a participating witness to the events recorded in his Gospel, beginning with the ministry of John the Baptist. John referred to the Baptist’s early ministry, indicating, “These things were done in Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing” (John 1:28). The other three synoptic Gospel writers are not as specific in their designation of the area where John taught and baptized. They simply indicate that John taught in the area of the Jordan River, convenient for the ordinance of baptism by immersion. The importance of Bethabara is rooted in the sacred events that took place there. It was there that John the Baptist bore witness to his listeners that he was preparing the way for the Messiah, who soon was to walk among them. “Looking upon Jesus as he walked” at Bethabara, John heard the Baptist testify, “Behold the Lamb of God!” (John 1:36). It was there that Jesus came to John and requested baptism at his hands that he might “fulfil all righteousness” (Matthew 3:15). It was there that the Holy Ghost descended as a dove upon the Savior, and John received the sign that had been given of the promised Messiah (see John 1:32–34). Luke clarified that “the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape” (Luke 3:22). The only other recorded vision of the Holy Ghost in bodily shape is Nephi’s interview with the Spirit of the Lord as he appeared to him “in the form of a man” (1 Nephi 11:11).5 Most important of all of the events that are recorded to have taken place at Bethabara is that following the baptism of the Savior: God the Father spoke from heaven testifying that Jesus of Nazareth is His Son, in whom he is well pleased. Bethabara is one of a privileged few locations known on earth where God the Father has spoken to mortals. Only on the Mount of Transfiguration, and later in the precincts of the temple during the Savior’s last week in mortality, is it recorded in the Bible that the voice of the Father spoke from the heavens.6 Further, it was at Bethabara that all three members of the Godhead were manifest: the Father speaking from heaven, the Son fulfilling all righteousness in being baptized, and the Holy Ghost descending upon the Savior in bodily form.

The actual location of the New Testament Bethabara has not been identified with certainty. In fact, many modern translations of the Bible take the view that the site of the Baptist’s ministry was in a location called Bethany.7 This Bethany, however, should not be confused with the Bethany of Judea, the home of Mary, Martha, and Lazarus. It would have been a Bethany near the Jordan River. The Book of Mormon employs the word Bethabara for the location where, according to Lehi’s prophecy, John the Baptist would preach and baptize (see 1 Nephi 10:9). This reference indicates that Lehi may have been familiar with the area known to him as Bethabara. It is possible that the designation of Bethabara also had some significance in Old Testament times.

The meaning of the word Bethabara is “ford, crossing” where a stream may be crossed.8 Berrett and Ogden suggest that Bethabara may be near a “natural fording place today called Allenby Bridge, or King Hussein Bridge.”9 For centuries Christian pilgrims have resorted to the Jordan River near the Hajlah ford for baptisms and bathing. Viewing the slow and quiet waters of the Jordan River at this location provides the visitor with a sense of peace through nature’s hallowed setting. The tremendous events recorded by John and the other Gospel writers to have taken place at Bethabara are couched in an understanding of the stillness of the wilderness.

Aenon Near to Salim

John received the witness borne by the Baptist that Jesus of Nazareth was the awaited Messiah of Israel. The need to prepare people to receive the Messiah through faith, repentance, and baptism by immersion continued. This work moved forward by the hands of the Master’s disciples, who taught and baptized throughout Judea. Indeed, Jesus and his disciples baptized more individuals than did John the Baptist (see John 3:22; 4:1–3). Joseph Smith clarified that Jesus himself did baptize but “not so many as his disciples; for he suffered them for an example, preferring one another” (JST John 4:3–4). This was a time of a growing discipleship that believed in and followed the Master. John the Baptist continued to bear his witness of Jesus Christ and to baptize those who came to him. Apparently, the Baptist thought it needful to move to a new location, possibly to escape the growing scrutiny of the Jewish leaders.10 The apostle John records that John the Baptist sought out another site that could meet the needs of the ordinance of baptism by immersion. The Baptist moved to “Aenon near to Salim, because there was much water there” (John 3:23). It was at Aenon that John the Baptist referred to himself as merely the friend of the Bridegroom, who, he testified, was Jesus of Nazareth.

The reference to Aenon as a place of much water seems to refer to an area near the Jordan River identified by the early Christian leader Eusebius as the Aenon of the New Testament. The word means “double springs,” and Tell Sheikh Selim has several springs that would fit John’s description;11 however, this site cannot be identified with certainty. If Aenon is located near the area identified by Eusebius, then it is possible to shed light on John’s description of the area as one where there was much water. This general area, near present-day Beth She’an, has several pools of water surrounded by luxuriant plant growth and is a popular recreation area. These conditions would indicate that John was no longer baptizing in the Jordan River but had resorted to pools of water in which his listeners were immersed for the ordinance of baptism.

Cana of Galilee

Cana is a small village in the area of Galilee. As with Bethabara and Aenon, John is the only Gospel writer to mention Cana. Two events of note are recorded by John to have taken place there. Both of these references are to miracles at the word of the Lord. The first of these two miracles is the changing of water into wine at a wedding feast. John refers to it as the “beginning of miracles [that] did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested forth his glory; and his disciples believed on him” (John 2:11). We do not know the relationship of the Savior to either the bridegroom or the bride, yet Jesus was called upon to rescue them from the embarrassment of running short of wine for those who attended the wedding celebration. Jesus instructed that the servants fill six stone pots with water, which miraculously poured out wine at the wedding. John, who likely was one of the Master’s disciples present at the wedding feast, testified to the Lord’s power over the elements. This event is unique in the miracles of Christ in that, unlike the later multiplying of loaves and fishes, this miracle involves a change in the nature of the substance. Further, Jesus illustrated, by changing the water to wine, that not only does he have power over elements such that water may become wine but also that his power transcends time—in the aging process of the wine.12

Later in the Savior’s ministry, while he was again passing through Cana, he was met by “a certain nobleman, whose son was sick at Capernaum” (John 4:46). The man pleaded with the Lord to accompany him to his home, where his son lay. Jesus chose to show forth his power once again. Without leaving Cana he told the nobleman to return home, and he would find his son made whole. When the nobleman returned to Capernaum, he met his servants, who confirmed that the son had recovered at the very hour Jesus had spoken the words, “Thy son liveth” (John 4:53).

The small village of Cana is known today because John recorded the events that took place there as part of his witness that Jesus of Nazareth is the Son of God. Yet, like the location of Bethabara and Aenon, the exact location of Cana is uncertain. A modern village claiming to be the Cana of Galilee referred to in John’s Gospel is Cana (Kafr Kanna), which lies four miles northeast of Nazareth. Three churches in this town claim ties to the events of the Cana of New Testament times. The visitor to modern Cana will see stone waterpots and stone basins connected with the “six waterpots of stone” (John 2:6) mentioned in John’s account. In addition, the Greek Orthodox church in modern Cana has a red dome, reminding the visitor of the red-colored wine that was a result of the Savior’s power at the wedding. It is more likely, however, that the site of the biblical Cana is some five miles north of modern Cana. This archaeological site that lies across the Beit Netofa Valley overlooking a marshy plain is more in line with the meaning of Cana as a “place of reeds,” for reeds are still plentiful in the area.13

Capernaum: “His Own City”

John recorded that after the Lord’s miracle of changing water to wine at Cana, “he went down to Capernaum, he, and his mother, and his brethren, and his disciples: and they continued there not many days” (John 2:12). Capernaum’s significance is attested to by Matthew, who stated that Jesus “dwelt in Capernaum” (Matthew 4:13) and referred to Capernaum as “his own city” (Matthew 9:1). John is notably silent compared to the other Gospel writers regarding the events that took place in Capernaum; however, the one discourse that he does record is of greatest importance: the Savior’s sermon given in the synagogue at Capernaum (see John 6:59) in which he declared “I am the bread of life” (John 6:35). Greater perspective is gained from this discourse and the place of Capernaum with a review of the events recorded by Matthew, Mark, and Luke. Before the Savior’s declaration that he was “the living bread which came down from heaven” (John 6:51), Jesus had been a familiar figure in Capernaum, for Peter and others of Jesus’ disciples lived there, and Jesus visited there often. President David O. McKay explained:

“Peter at this time was a married man, and was perhaps the father of a little boy. He had moved from his old home in Bethsaida, and lived with his wife’s mother, or she with him, in Capernaum. With him were also Andrew and their two faithful companions and friends, James and John, the sons of Zebedee.

“Peter’s home became the most distinguished home in all Capernaum, and later one of the most memorable spots in all the world. Here, undoubtedly, Jesus stayed whenever He was at Capernaum! Indeed after Jesus had been so ruthlessly rejected by His own townsmen in Nazareth, He made Capernaum His ‘own city’; and it is supposed that much of the time, the honor fell upon Peter to entertain in his home the Savior of the world.”14

While in Capernaum the Savior had become well-known through teaching astonishing doctrine in the synagogue on the Sabbath (see Luke 4:31–32). On one occasion he was confronted by a man with an unclean spirit who pleaded with the Savior to let him alone, as he knew He was “the Holy One of God” (Luke 4:34). Those present in the synagogue that day were amazed as the unclean spirit left the man at Jesus’ command.

From the biblical record available to us today, it appears that the city of Capernaum was the site of more healings by the mortal Messiah than any other city on the earth. A listing of the miracles of God among men is necessary to fix the place of Capernaum in the Savior’s ministry. It was in Capernaum that Peter’s mother-in-law was healed of a burning fever, a centurion’s servant was healed, a palsied man took up his bed and walked, and “all they that had any sick with divers diseases brought them unto him; and he laid his hands on every one of them, and healed them. And devils also came out of many” (Luke 4:40–41). On a return visit to Capernaum the Lord was thronged by multitudes of people, including a woman with an issue of blood who touched the hem of his garment and was healed (see Matthew 9:20–22; Luke 8:40, 43–48). The twelve-year-old daughter of Jairus, ruler of the synagogue in Capernaum, was raised from the dead as she lay on her bed in the home of her parents. When he departed the home of Jairus, two blind men followed him and were healed at the Master’s touch, as was a man who was dumb (see Matthew 9:27–33). Applying Edersheim’s words regarding one night of healing to all the manifestations of Christ’s power in Capernaum, “never, surely, was He more truly the Christ ... than when ... He went through that suffering throng, laying His hands in the blessing of healing on every one of them, and casting out many devils.”15

It was in the city of Capernaum, scene of so many of the Lord’s compassionate healings, that John recorded the Savior’s rejection by many of his disciples. Just previous to this rejection the Master had fed five thousand with “five barley loaves, and two small fishes” (John 6:9–13). Men who had witnessed the miracle proclaimed that Jesus was “of a truth that prophet that should come into the world” (John 6:14). He had escaped the intentions of the multitude to make him a king by departing in the darkness of night, walking upon the waters of the Sea of Galilee (see John 6:15–19). In the synagogue at Capernaum where he taught on the Sabbath among those with whom he was familiar, he openly declared that he was sent from heaven by the Father to do the Father’s will. He explained, “And this is the Father’s will which hath sent me, ... that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the last day” (John 6:39–40). And it was also in this synagogue built by the centurion whose servant Jesus had healed (see Luke 7:1–10), the same synagogue over which Jairus was the ruler, where, John recorded, Christ’s sermon was too demanding for his listener’s hearts to receive. Christ declared that he was living bread and would give his flesh “for the life of the world” (John 6:51). John explained, “Many therefore of his disciples, when they had heard this, said, This is an hard saying; who can hear it?” (John 6:60). Capernaum was the place that “from that time many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him” (John 6:66). In contrast, it was also at Capernaum that in response to Jesus’ asking the Twelve if they also would go away, Peter responded, “Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the words of eternal life. And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God” (John 6:68–69).

Unlike Bethabara, Aenon, and Cana, it is quite certain where the New Testament city of Capernaum was located. On the north shores of the Sea of Galilee lie the ruins of Tell Hum, identified as Capernaum.16 Among the ruins has been found one of the best- preserved synagogues in the Holy Land. This synagogue dates to the fourth to fifth century—much too late to be the synagogue in the Gospels—however, beneath this synagogue is the foundation of another, which dates to the time of the New Testament and may have been the synagogue built for the Jews by the Roman centurion. Also, the home of Peter has been identified by archaeologists, based on the assumption that early Christians accurately marked New Testament sites. This home was built earlier during the Hellenistic period and must have been occupied later by Peter and his family when they moved there. The foundation of this multiroomed dwelling is of stone—black basalt being common to the area. Archaeological finds indicate that during the second half of the fifth century, the home identified as Peter’s home was razed and an octagonal church was built over the site to mark the spot of the original home.17 It stands apart from the other excavated homes by the plaster that was applied to the walls of one of the rooms. It is likely this room received such special attention because it is where meetings of the young church of Christ were held.

Jacob’s Well in Samaria

John alone recorded the conversation that the Savior had with a woman of Samaria in which he spoke of the “living water” that he has to give. The conversation took place as Jesus sat on Jacob’s Well, possibly meaning on a rock or covering over the well opening. Christ and his disciples were traveling from Judea into Galilee. John describes their route as going through Samaria by a city called Sychar (see John 4:3–5). He further described the area as being “near to the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph” (John 3:5). The book of Genesis relates a purchase of a field that Jacob bought in Shechem, the area inhabited by the Samaritans in New Testament times (see Genesis 33:18–20). Only John’s account, however, mentions that Jacob had a well there. This well figures in the account because Jesus was wearied from his journey and remained at the well to rest while his disciples went into the city to buy food. While he was resting a Samaritan woman came to Jacob’s Well to draw water and the Savior asked her to give him water to drink. Apparently, to draw water, each individual needed a jar and a rope to drop the jar into the well and to draw the jar up again. When the Savior offered the woman “living water” that he could give to her, she replied, “Sir, thou has nothing to draw with, and the well is deep” (John 4:11). Following the demonstration of the Savior’s spiritual insight into the woman’s past (having had five husbands and living at the time with a man who was not her husband), the woman recognized Jesus as a prophet.

Jacob’s Well was near Mount Gerizim. The woman declared, “Our fathers worshipped in this mountain” (John 4:20), but the Jews say men ought to worship in Jerusalem. She may have spoken in the hope that this prophet sitting on the well before her could clear up the question of who was correct. She was disappointed with his answer that salvation was of the Jews and that the Samaritans did not even know what they worshipped. She retorted that when the “Messiah cometh, ... he will tell us all things” (John 4:25). John recorded that while resting at Jacob’s Well in Samaria, Jesus identified himself as the Messiah to this Samaritan woman in the simple words, “I that speak unto thee am he” (John 4:26). Her heart was penetrated with the truth of his testimony, and she testified to others in the nearby city of Sychar that she had found the Christ.

The site that has been identified as Jacob’s Well is near Shechem, or Nablus. Some archaeologists have declared that this site is “the most authentic of all the Holy Places in Palestine.”18 This assertion stems not only from the fact that the well is more than one hundred feet deep, as reflected in the Samaritan woman’s words, but also that “all traditions—Jewish, Samaritan, Christian, and Muslim—support it.”19 The well that is recognized as that in John’s New Testament account is housed in a Greek Orthodox church that has remained unfinished for nearly a century. In the partially finished church or chapel the caretaker still offers visitors to the site a drink of water from the well, a reminder of the “living water” Jesus offered the Samaritan woman nearly two millennia ago.

The city of Sychar has not been as positively identified. Two nearby locations have adherents that declare that their site is the original referred to in John’s writings. They both lie near Mount Gerizim which, along with its companion, Mount Ebal, figured in the reading of the law to the children of Israel anciently, as recorded in Joshua 8:32–35. There is still a community of several hundred Samaritans living in nearby Shechem, or Nablus. They have remained a separate people from the Christian and Moslem Arabs who dominate this area of Palestine. They marry within their own group and celebrate the Passover upon Mount Gerizim each year.

Bethany

Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: “Lazarus lived in the town of Bethany some two miles east of Jerusalem, but hidden from the Holy City by a spur of the mount of Olives. There also dwelt in this Judean village of blessed memory the beloved sisters Mary and Martha, in whose family circle the Lord Jesus so often found surcease from toil and rest from his labors. They and their brother Lazarus were three of the most intimate friends Jesus had on earth.”20

We do not know from today’s record the particular circumstances of the relationship of the Lord and this family. We are told by John that when Lazarus took ill, his sisters sent to Jesus, “saying, Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest is sick” (John 11:3). The town of Bethany is a symbol of the Savior’s power over death. As is well known to readers of the Bible, by the time the Son of God arrived in Bethany, Lazarus had died and his body had lain in the tomb for four days (see John 11:17). John recorded that when Jesus was taken by Mary and Martha to the tomb, “Jesus wept” (John 11:35). The tomb “was a cave, and a stone lay upon it” (John 11:38). Jesus commanded them to take the stone away, and at the mouth of the tomb-cave the Savior “cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth” (John 11:43). Elder McConkie shared his feelings about this event: “Though Jesus spoke often of his own resurrection and the resurrection of all men, in my judgment the most persuasive and convincing witness, both of his divine Sonship and of the reality of the resurrection, that ever came from mortal lips, his or any others, were the words he spoke at the tomb of Lazarus.”21

Thus, John alone recorded the event, and Bethany was the site of the Lord’s singular utterance. Moreover, it was in Bethany that “he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with graveclothes: and his face was bound about with a napkin” (John 11:44). There is a site dating to a.d. 333 that is reputed to be the very tomb from which Lazarus was called forth.22 It is in the town of Bethany, approximately two miles east of Jerusalem. The visitor enters the room housing the underground chamber directly from the street by descending a steep, narrow staircase into a room identified as the “tomb of Lazarus.” This designation of locale is consistent with Brown’s observation that “vertical shaft tombs were more common for private burial than horizontal cave tombs.”23

John also exclusively recorded in his Gospel testimony that the home of Mary and Martha in Bethany was the location of a supper during the last week of the Savior’s life in which Mary “anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair” (John 12:3). The occasion of the supper found Lazarus sitting at the table and testifying by his very presence of the power of the Master to raise the dead from the tomb. Bethany was, while Lazarus continued to reside there, a place of living witness to the Lord’s power over death. John wrote that “the chief priests consulted that they might put Lazarus also to death; because that by reason of him many of the Jews went away, and believed on Jesus” (John 12:10–11). Thus, upon the roads of Bethany and within the home of Mary and Martha, many had their hearts awakened to the reality that Jesus is the Christ as they saw, listened to and perhaps spoke to Lazarus, his sisters, and the townspeople. It was also from Bethany, the city of the irrefutable living witness, that Jesus entered the city of Jerusalem in triumph, riding upon a colt of an ass, and met by those people who had “heard that he had done this miracle” (John 12:18).

Jerusalem

Most of John’s writings have the city of Jerusalem as their setting, in stark contrast to the other Gospel authors, who are virtually silent concerning the Savior’s ministry in Jerusalem before the week of the atoning sacrifice.24 Over half of John’s testimony concerning the Savior’s ministry before his last week in mortality took place in Jerusalem. Indeed, immediately following the changing of water to wine at Cana, John alone recorded the visit of the Savior to Jerusalem for the Passover feast. The other references to the Savior’s ministry in Jerusalem that are related by John have Jewish feasts as their focus. There are several locations in Jerusalem to which John referred.

The Pools of Bethesda and Siloam

John’s writings indicate that two pools in Jerusalem were sites of the healing power of Jesus Christ. Each healing took place while Jesus attended a Jewish feast; however, John does not specifically name the feast to which the Lord “went up to Jerusalem” (John 5:1) and passed by the Pool of Bethesda. John identified that “there is at Jerusalem by the sheep market a pool, which is called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda, having five porches” (John 5:2). John described the scene at the pool of Bethesda as one in which “a great multitude of impotent folk, of blind, halt, [and] withered” lay waiting for the moving of the water (John 5:3). There was a superstitious belief that an angel would touch the water and the first individual into the pool following the “troubling of the water ... was made whole of whatsoever disease he had” (John 5:4). While walking on the porches that surrounded the pool, Jesus came upon a man who had been infirm for thirty-eight years. He had compassion on the man and commanded him to take up his bed and walk. Immediately rising to his feet, the man was healed of his malady.

The Pool of Bethesda has been identified today by archaeologists as very likely being near the present-day Crusader Church of St. Anne north of the temple area. Excavations revealed a pool with five porticoes over which several successive structures had been built throughout the centuries that have passed since the time Jesus healed the infirm man. These excavations show that the pool was actually twin pools, 165 to 220 feet wide by 315 feet long, with four colonnaded sides divided by a central fifth portico. Stairways in the corners descend into the pools.25 It is rather difficult for the modern visitor to envision the setting of this healing as the pool area has only been partially excavated and is now located about sixty feet beneath the present ground level. The structure above the water in the pool is what remains of a Crusader chapel built over the ruins of a Byzantine church.26 The successive scenes of destruction of Jerusalem over the centuries left the city in heaps of rubble. The city has been rebuilt a number of times upon the ruins of previous societies that inhabited Jerusalem.

The second pool mentioned in John’s writings is the Pool of Siloam. There is no indication that the Savior himself ever went to this location. He did, however, send a blind man to wash in the pool. After the Savior taught at the Feast of Tabernacles (see John 7–8), he came upon “a man which was blind from his birth” (John 9:1).27 The blind man was sent to the pool after Jesus “spat on the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay” (John 9:6). The Savior gave him the simple instructions to wash in the Pool of Siloam. In what we could call “blind obedience,” the man felt his way to the pool “and washed, and came seeing” (John 9:7).

The Pool of Siloam is identified with a tunnel built in King Hezekiah’s reign. This tunnel, southeast of the walled portion of present-day Jerusalem, runs between the Kidron and the Tyropoen Valleys. Water from the Spring of Gihon is conducted by means of the tunnel-canal to the Pool of Siloam. As the visitor leaves Hezekiah’s Tunnel in the Tyropoen Valley, he or she passes by a small pool of water enclosed by stone walls and ascends a more modern staircase to ground level. It is believed that this is a remnant of the Pool of Siloam to which the blind man was sent by the Savior to wash.

The Temple

On several occasions John mentioned the temple built by Herod as the site of Jesus Christ’s ministry. The Savior did not enter the actual building enclosing the Holy Place, which housed the sacred furniture of the temple, nor did he enter into the Holy of Holies. According to Mosaic law, only Levitical priests entered the Holy Place, and even the high priest entered the Holy of Holies on but one day each year, the Day of Atonement.28 Jesus’ ministry primarily took place in the outer precincts or courtyard of the temple. Surrounding the outer courtyard was a portico. The Jewish historian Josephus recorded that the colonnades of the portico “were all double, the supporting pillars were 37H feet high, cut from single blocks of the whitest marble, and the ceiling was panelled with cedar. The natural magnificence of it all, the perfect polish, the accurate joining, afforded a remarkable spectacle, without any superficial ornament either painted or carved.”29

It is possible that from one or more of the colonnaded sides of the courtyard Jesus drove out those “that sold oxen and sheep and doves, and the changers of money” (John 2:14). It would have been in a similar area of the portico where earlier, as a twelve-year-old boy, he was “sitting in the midst of the doctors, and they were hearing him, and asking him questions” (JST Luke 2:46). After the healing of the man at the pool of Bethesda, Jesus spoke to him again while he walked in the temple precincts. During each visit to Jerusalem of which we have record, the Savior sought to go to the mount upon which the temple and its attendant portico and courtyard were located. During the last week of his mortal life, the Savior again cast the moneychangers from the temple and was repeatedly challenged by the chief priests as he taught the people in the temple precincts.

John alone recorded the Savior’s earlier visits to Jerusalem for the Feast of Tabernacles and the Feast of Dedication. During the Feast of Tabernacles “Jesus went up into the temple, and taught” (John 7:14). Alarmed that “many of the people believed on him, ... the Pharisees and the chief priests sent officers to take him” (John 7:31–32). Such a desperate attempt only led to the officers of the temple returning to bear testimony of Jesus’ teachings and a refusal to arrest him. John recorded that the next day “early in the morning he came again into the temple, and all the people came unto him; and he sat down, and taught them” (John 8:2). The Temple Mount was the place to which the woman taken in adultery was brought to the Master as he taught. It was there that he challenged the scribes and Pharisees to cast the first stone if they were without sin. Referring to the incident with the adulterous woman and the Savior’s teachings that morning concerning his Messiahship as the light of the world, John wrote, “These words spake Jesus in the treasury, as he taught in the temple” (John 8:20).

The temple building itself was separated from the outer courtyard by an inner wall, which surrounded and enclosed the temple proper from activities of the courtyard, which even the Gentiles were permitted to observe. The gate leading to the inner temple courtyard opened to an area nearly two hundred feet square, called the Court of the Women. Entry into this court was restricted to Israelites. In each of the four corners of the court was a chamber with the entire court surrounded by porticoes. The treasury was located in the center of the north portico. Elder James E. Talmage explained that “within that space were thirteen chests, each provided with a trumpet-shaped receptacle; and into these the people dropped their contributions for the several purposes indicated by inscriptions on the boxes.”30 It was from this temple treasury that the chief priests took the money they paid to Judas for his betrayal of the Savior. In addition, “in this court stood giant lampstands (menorot), seventy-five feet in height, giving light to the Temple Mount and to much of the City.”31 Thus, John identified the Savior’s choice of a perfect setting, the treasury of the temple beneath the giant menorah, where he declared “I am the light of the world” (John 8:12).

John indicated that during the Feast of Dedication Jesus walked in the colonnaded area on the east side of the courtyard known as Solomon’s Porch “in recognition of a tradition that the porch covered and included a portion of the original wall belonging to the Temple of Solomon.”32 While there the Jews gathered “round about him, and said unto him, How long dost thou make us to doubt? If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly” (John 10:24). At Solomon’s Porch, near his father’s house, Jesus answered the Jews, indicating that he worked in his father’s name and that he and his father are one. He declared openly to the Jews that he is God and the Son of God. For that plain testimony, in the area of Solomon’s Porch, the Jews took up stones to put him to death for blasphemy.

It is quite certain where the temple precincts of the New Testament were located. In the eastern area of the city of Old Jerusalem is the Holy Mount, called by the Moslems, who own and administer that area, Haram esh-Sharif, “the Noble Sanctuary.” The Holy Mount is one of the most prominent features of the city of Old Jerusalem. The Roman armies destroyed the temple in a.d. 70 as the Savior foretold his disciples. All that remains today of King Herod’s temple is the Western Wall below the Holy Mount. In honor of the sacred events and the holy houses of God that stood on the mount, the Moslems built two important structures: El Aqsa Mosque and the Dome of the Rock. The magnificent Dome of the Rock was completed in a.d. 691 soon after the city of Jerusalem came under Moslem control.33

The Brook Cedron and Garden in Gethsemane

John is notably silent concerning the Savior’s ministry on the temple grounds during his last week in mortality. The other Gospel writers give attention in their records to the Savior’s teaching on the Temple Mount and identify locations around Jerusalem at which the Savior taught and ate the Passover meal, but John records little identifying information for his reader. It is very likely that the Savior’s instructions recorded by John to love one another as he had loved them, his promise of the Comforter, and the great intercessory prayer were given while in the “upper room” (Luke 22:12) where the Savior and his disciples ate the Passover meal.34 John is also silent concerning the atoning events of which he was an eyewitness at Gethsemane. He did record that the disciples went “over the brook Cedron, where was a garden” (John 18:1). Further, John indicated that “Jesus ofttimes resorted thither with his disciples” (John 18:2). The brook Cedron is actually a brook of the Kidron Valley that separates the city of Jerusalem and the Mount of Olives.35 The Savior chose a garden on the slopes of this mount for the site of the atoning sacrifice for which he was foreordained to come into the world. As Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: “In reality the pain and suffering, the triumph and grandeur, of the atonement took place primarily in Gethsemane. It was there Jesus took upon himself the sins of the world on conditions of repentance. It was there he suffered beyond human power to endure. It was there he sweat great drops of blood from every pore. It was there his anguish was so great he fain would have let the bitter cup pass. It was there he made the final choice to follow the will of the Father. It was there that an angel from heaven came to strengthen him in his greatest trial ... in which he descended below all things as he prepared himself to rise above them all.”36

It was also to Gethsemane that Judas came by night with “a band of men and officers from the chief priests and Pharisees, ... with lanterns and torches and weapons” that they might arrest the Savior (John 18:3).

Today it is simple to visually identify the Mount of Olives. The visitor looking east of the Old City of Jerusalem sees the mount running the length of the view. But the location of the garden referred to by John is not quite as easy to ascertain. “The name Gethsemane derives from Hebrew and Aramaic words for ‘oil press.’”37 As a result, it is supposed that the garden included an orchard of olive trees and a press to obtain oil from the olive fruit. Today each of four sites has advocates claiming it to be the location of the original Gethsemane of the Gospels. Olive trees, some of great age, cover the hillside, but none of the trees in the olive orchards were there during the events recorded in the Bible, for the Roman army under Titus cut down the trees on the Mount of Olives in the siege of Jerusalem in a.d. 70.38 Still, somewhere on the Mount of Olives, took place the most important event in all history—the atoning sacrifice of the Son of God, the Savior of the world.

Trials before Annas, Caiaphas, and Pilate

John, along with the other three Gospel writers, recorded that from Gethsemane Jesus was taken to “the palace of the high priest” (John 18:15). Caiaphas was the high priest at the time of the Savior’s illegal trial before the Jewish Sanhedrin. Jesus was first taken within the palace to Caiaphas’ father-in-law and the earlier high priest, Annas. He was questioned concerning his doctrine, struck on the face, and sent bound to Caiaphas. The courtyard of this palace was also the site of Peter’s denials, in which he refused to acknowledge his relationship with the Lord.

It is not certain where the palace was located. Two sites southwest of the Old City of Jerusalem, outside the wall, claim to be the biblical location. One is located on the summit of today’s Mount Zion within the area owned by the Armenian Church; the other is “down the slope a hundred yards on what are now the grounds of St. Peter in Gallicantu.”39

John recorded that from the interrogation at the palace of the high priest, “then led they Jesus from Caiaphas unto the hall of judgment” (John 18:28). This hall was the site of Jesus’ trial before Pilate. John referred to this hall as “the Pavement, but in the Hebrew, Gabbatha” (John 19:13). Mark called this same hall the Praetorium (see Mark 15:16), “a Latin term for the palace with its hearing room to which the Roman governor came to transact public business.”40 John wrote of a raised seat upon which Pilate sat as the judgment seat (see John 19:13). Here the Son of God stood before an earthly governor for judgment! Elder James E. Talmage described the scene that was enacted in the hall of judgment: “Pilate was surprised at the submissive yet majestic demeanor of Jesus; there was certainly much that was kingly about the Man; never before had such a One stood before him. ... That some of the disciples, and among them almost certainly John, also went in, is apparent from the detailed accounts of the proceedings preserved in the fourth Gospel. Anyone was at liberty to enter, for publicity was an actual and a widely proclaimed feature of Roman trials.”41

In this hall of judgment Jesus was sentenced to die by crucifixion. The echoes of the persuading voices of the chief priests may still be heard as “they cried out, saying, Crucify him, crucify him” (John 19:6).

Two locations are possibilities as the site of the hall of judgment. Pilate may have been at either King Herod’s palace or at the Antonia Fortress during the Passover celebration. Excavations at both sites have yielded stone pavements like those of which John wrote in his description. The more popular of the two to visit is the ancient site of the Antonia Fortress, north of the Temple Mount beneath the modern Sisters of Zion Convent. Indications are, however, that the more likely site was that of King Herod’s Palace in the western part of the upper city in the Armenian quarter.42 “Without additional evidence, it is impossible to conclusively determine which of the two sites might be the location of Jesus’ presentation before Pilate.”43

Golgotha

John, along with Matthew and Mark, identified the place of the Savior’s crucifixion as Golgotha. John wrote, “And he bearing his cross went forth into a place called the place of a skull, which is called in the Hebrew Golgotha: where they crucified him, and two other with him, on either side one, and Jesus in the midst” (John 19:17–18). The Joseph Smith Translation of this same passage indicates that it was a place of burial. Golgotha is the one place in all of creation that the Son of God was nailed to a cross. The horror of crucifixion and the pains of suffering for sin combined together on this site of godly sacrifice. No pen can write the feelings that are associated with Golgotha. It is the focus of Christian reflection, for on Golgotha Jesus Christ suffered the pains of sin and death for all humankind. Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained regarding the Savior’s cry from the cross, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” (Matthew 27:46): “It seems, that in addition to the fearful suffering incident to crucifixion, the agony of Gethsemane had recurred, intensified beyond human power to endure.”44 The last words uttered in mortality from the lips of the Messiah were at Golgotha. He said, “Father, it is finished, thy will is done” (JST Matthew 27:54). Or, in the words of Luke, “Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit” (Luke 23:46). Following which, John recorded, “he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost” (John 19:30).

John wrote that after the Savior gave up his life on the cross at Golgotha, the soldiers came to break the legs of the three men that had been crucified that day. “But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they brake not his legs: but one of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith came there out blood and water” (John 19:33–34). Later, Joseph of Arimathaea and Nicodemus came to Golgotha and took the body of Jesus from the cross to prepare it for burial and to lay it in a tomb.

Where was Golgotha? John wrote “the place where Jesus was crucified was nigh to the city” (John 19:20). Therefore, it is assumed with considerable confidence that Golgotha was located outside of the city wall. Christian tradition dating to more than three hundred years after the event places Golgotha at the site of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, which is located within the present walls of Jerusalem. That does not prevent this site from being authentic, however, for this location may have been outside the city wall in the Savior’s time.45 Another possible site is that of Gordon’s Calvary, north of Damascus Gate. This site has become the destination of many Christian pilgrims within the last century. The artistic focus of Gordon’s Calvary is the face of a hill pockmarked by little caves that give the viewer the impression of a skull. Whether the Golgotha of the crucifixion was at either of these two locations is not certain.

A Garden and a New Sepulchre

After the removal of the Savior’s body from the cross, Joseph of Arimathaea and Nicodemus hurriedly prepared it for burial. John indicated that “then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen clothes with the spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury” (John 19:40). John further described the burial site: “Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden; and in the garden a new sepulchre, wherein was never man yet laid. There laid they Jesus” (John 19:41–42). This sepulchre, in and of itself, would be associated with sacred reverence because it is where the Son of God was entombed. Yet the true significance of the sepulchre is due to its association with the fact that the Savior’s body did not remain there for more than three days and three nights. It was at the mouth of this sepulchre that the stone was taken away, “and two angels sitting thereon” (JST John 20:1) were seen by Mary Magdalene in the early morning hours of the greatest day to dawn in the history of the earth. It was from this sepulchre that the resurrected Lord broke the bands of death. John himself was one of the first witnesses to see the empty tomb. He and Peter went running to the tomb at the bidding of Mary Magdalene. John arriving first at the sepulchre, “stooping down, and looking in, saw the linen clothes lying; yet went he not in” (John 20:5). After Peter arrived and entered the sepulchre, he observed the linen grave clothes and “the napkin, that was about his head, not lying with the linen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by itself” (John 20:7).

The garden in which the sepulchre was located is also a focal point of the gospel of Jesus Christ. It was in this garden that the resurrected Lord first appeared to Mary Magdalene. What setting could be more beautiful than a garden with a sepulchre whose stone has been rolled away for the first appearance of the resurrected Son of God? Even today, the Christian heart breaks forth in song as the scene at the garden tomb is contemplated.

All that is true of the location of Golgotha is true of the sepulchre and the garden. When we can be certain of the location of one, we will be nearer to knowing the location of the others. Of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre and Gordon’s Calvary, the latter has a modern setting near a sepulchre within a garden. It is, however, the newer garden tomb that has stirred the hearts of latter-day prophets. In 1988, Elder Howard W. Hunter said, “I’ve stood in front of the garden tomb and imagined that glorious day of resurrection when the Savior emerged from the tomb alive, resurrected, immortal. In that contemplation my heart has swelled with joy.”46

Previously, Presidents Harold B. Lee and Spencer W. Kimball had expressed their feelings regarding visits to the garden tomb. President Lee stated, “Something seemed to impress us as we stood there that this was the holiest place of all, and we fancied we could have witnessed the dramatic scene that took place there.”47 President Kimball added, “I feel quite sure that this is the spot where His body was laid. It gives me such a sacred feeling just to be here.”48

Sea of Tiberias

The shores of the Sea of Tiberias, also called Galilee, are the place last-named in the Gospel of John. It was there that the resurrected Savior appeared to seven of his disciples. In mortality Jesus had calmed a storm—the winds and the waves obeyed his command—while in a boat upon the Sea of Galilee. On another occasion the Lord had walked upon the water of the Sea of Galilee to reach the boat in which his disciples were traveling. After the resurrection, in the morning hours following a night of fishing in which the seven disciples had caught nothing, “Jesus stood on the shore” (John 21:4). When Peter recognized the Master, he jumped into the lake and swam to meet Jesus on shore. There, on the shores of the Sea of Galilee, the seven disciples feasted upon fish with the risen Lord. After the dinner, Peter was questioned by the Master concerning his love for his Lord and was charged to feed the Savior’s sheep.

The shores of the Sea of Galilee were of particular importance to John. It was there that he asked the Lord to have power to tarry until Jesus returned in glory. His request was granted, and John was given power over death that he might bring souls unto Christ.49 John gave no identifying information about where on the shores of the Sea of Galilee this commission was given; however, it was from the shores of this lake that “went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die” (John 21:23).

Conclusion

The Gospel of John is invaluable in its identification of the lands where Jesus walked during mortality. Additionally, John’s unique contributions regarding the Savior’s ministry not only enhance our understanding of those events that bear witness that Jesus Christ is the Son of God but also stir our hearts to new heights of appreciation for his life among men. The singular contributions John made to our knowledge of the Jerusalem of Christ’s day have given Christians vivid pictures regarding the garden settings of Gethsemane and the sepulchre from which he rose triumphantly. As one reads the Bible or is privileged to walk the lands of Palestine, John’s Gospel writings add color and shape to the backdrops of the Savior’s teachings, miracles, atoning sacrifice, and resurrection.

Notes

1. Robert J. Matthews, Behold the Messiah (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1994), 27.

2. The garden location for the tomb is also mentioned in JST Mark 14:36.

3. It is possibly important to note that John, at one time, was believed to have used symbolic names that did not exist as real locations; however, as Raymond Brown stated, “Scholars have become more cautious now that some Johannine place names, once accounted to be purely symbolic, have been shown to be factual.” The Gospel According to John (I-XII), vol. 29 of The Anchor Bible, 38 vols. (New York: Doubleday, 1966), 45.

4. J. Reuben Clark Jr., On the Way to Immortality and Eternal Life, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1949), 292.

5. James E. Talmage, Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1968), 159–60.

6. Matthew 17:1–5; Mark 9:2–7; Luke 9:28–35; John 12:27–29.

7. See John 1:28 in the Living Bible, Today’s English Version, New International Version, Phillips Modern English, Revised Standard Version, Jerusalem Bible, and New English Bible. Eight Translation New Testament (Wheaton, Ill.: Tyndale House Publishers, 1974), 642–43.

8. The Interpreter’s Dictionary of the Bible, ed. George A. Buttrick, 4 vols. (New York: Abingdon Press, 1962), 1:387.

9. LaMar C. Berrett and D. Kelly Ogden, Discovering the World of the Bible (Provo: Grandin Book Co., 1996), 83. Tradition holds that near this, the Hajlah ford, Joshua crossed the Jordan River in leading the children of Israel into the promised land. If such is the case, it may be that Bethabara is a name used by John to tie events of the Old and New Testaments together as he also does in the opening phrase of his Gospel—“in the beginning,” referring to the first words of Genesis.

10. John 1:19–28.

11. Interpreter’s Dictionary of the Bible, 1:52; Anchor Bible Dictionary, ed. David Noel Freedman, 6 vols. (New York: Doubleday, 1992), 1:87.

12. Matthews, Behold the Messiah, 130–31.

13. Berrett and Ogden, Discovering the World of the Bible, 112; Interpreter’s Dictionary of the Bible, 1:493.

14. David O. McKay, Ancient Apostles (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1952), 7.

15. Alfred Edersheim, The Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah, Part One, (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1981), 487.

16. Interpreter’s Dictionary of the Bible, 1:533.

17. Anchor Bible Dictionary, 1:866–68. For a further discussion of the home identified as Peter’s in Capernaum, see James F. Strange and Hershel Shanks, “Has the House Where Jesus Stayed in Capernaum Been Found?” Biblical Archaeology Review 8 (November/December 1982): 26–35.

18. Anchor Bible Dictionary, 3:608.

19. Anchor Bible Dictionary, 3:608.

20. Bruce R. McConkie, The Mortal Messiah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1980), 3:270.

21. Bruce R. McConkie, The Promised Messiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1978), 275–76.

22. Anchor Bible Dictionary, 1:703.

23. Brown, Gospel According to John, 426.

24. A comparison by verse count of the Gospels reveals that Matthew makes no mention of the Savior in Jerusalem before the week of the atoning sacrifice. His lone reference to Jerusalem is the Nativity account, which mentions King Herod the Great being approached by the magi. Mark makes no mention of Jesus in Jerusalem during that same time period. Luke records the presentation of the Messiah as a baby in the temple at Jerusalem and the Savior’s experience in the temple as a twelve-year-old boy but mentions nothing of the Savior’s ministry in Jerusalem after those events. The one exception in Luke may be the giving of the parable of the Good Samaritan and a visit to Bethany at the home of Mary and Martha, if we consider Bethany as part of the environs of Jerusalem.

25. Brown, Gospel According to John, 207.

26. Berrett and Ogden, Discovering the World of the Bible, 29–30.

27. The pool of Siloam had been the site of ritual drawing of water during the eight days of the feast.

28. Exodus 29:29–30; 30:10; Numbers 18:7; Hebrews 9:1–7.

29. Flavius Josephus, The Jewish War, trans. G. A. Williamson (New York: Penguin Books, 1959), 291.

30. James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ, 3d ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), 561.

31. David Galbraith, D. Kelly Ogden, and Andrew Skinner, Jerusalem, the Eternal City (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1996), 190.

32. Talmage, Jesus the Christ, 500.

33. Galbraith et al., Jerusalem, 281.

34. John 13–17.

35. Buttrick, 3:10–11.

36. Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965–73) 1:774–75.

37. Anchor Bible Dictionary, 2:997.

38. Flavius Josephus, Complete Works, trans. William Whiston (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Kregel Publications, 1981), 571.

39. Galbraith, et al., Jerusalem, 174.

40. Galbraith, et al., Jerusalem, 176.

41. Talmage, Jesus the Christ, 633–34.

42. Anchor Bible Dictionary, 2:862.

43. Galbraith, et al., Jerusalem, 176. Also see Brown, Gospel According to John, 845.

44. McConkie, Mortal Messiah, 4:226.

45. Anchor Bible Dictionary, 2:1071–73.

46. Howard W. Hunter, Teachings of Howard W. Hunter, ed. Clyde J. Williams (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1997), 9.

47. Harold B. Lee, “I Walked Today Where Jesus Walked,” Ensign, April, 1972, 6.

48. Spencer W. Kimball, Deseret News, 3 November 1979, Church Section, 5, as cited in Galbraith, et al., 507.

49. See John 21:20–25; D&C 7.

Craig J. Ostler is an assistant professor of Church history and doctrine at Brigham Young University.
 

Chapter Sixteen

 
 
© 1998 Deseret Book Company 

Printed from Gospelink.com
