# Jewish Holy Days and the Testimony of Christ

### Jewish Holy Days and the Testimony of Christ
Various Authors , Testimony of John the Beloved (Salt Lake City 1998)
 
 

Jewish Holy Days and the Testimony of Christ

David M. Whitchurch

The Gospel of St. John has been called by some “the greatest book in the world.”1 Even though for Latter-day Saints such a statement mostly typifies the Book of Mormon, the value and importance of The Testimony of St. John (as it is titled in the Joseph Smith Translation) should not be underestimated.2 The fourth Gospel manifests its worth through a wealth of knowledge and insight into the Savior and his divine calling. John clearly states that the purpose for writing his Gospel is that his readers “might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing [they] might have life through his name” (John 20:31). It is evident that John furnishes frequent and compelling testimony that Jesus is the “Anointed One” sent by the Father to redeem humankind from their fallen state.

The Book of Mormon contributes valuable insight into understanding the writings of ancient prophets. Nephi taught that the words of Isaiah were “hard for many of [his] people to understand; for they know not concerning the manner of prophesying among the Jews. ... And there is none other people that understand the things which were spoken unto the Jews like unto them, save it be that they are taught after the manner of the things of the Jews” (2 Nephi 25:1, 5; emphasis added). Extending Nephi’s admonition regarding Isaiah’s writings to those of other ancient prophets, including John, provides a sound foundation upon which to work. The historical background of St. John, chapters 5 through 10, in light of Jewish custom, culture, and tradition as it existed during the time of Jesus, including weekly synagogue scripture readings, known as Jewish lectionary, and the applicable Jewish feasts and holy days are important building blocks in that foundation.

Historical Significance of St. John

Upon careful examination of the fourth Gospel, it becomes evident that John is well grounded in the writings of the Old Testament. John combines scriptures from Exodus, Deuteronomy, Judges, Isaiah, Zechariah, Ezekiel, and Psalms with his own writings to bear a solemn witness of Jesus’ divinity.3 Evidence argues favorably that John referred to various versions of the Old Testament, including the Septuagint (the Greek version of the Old Testament), the Masoretic Text (the traditional text from which the King James Version was translated), and the Palestinian Targum (local Aramaic translations).4

John’s writings also reveal a strong cultural, historical, and geographical attachment to the Holy Land. The disciple “whom Jesus loved” (see John 13:23; 20:2; 21:7, 20) demonstrates an intimate knowledge of Jewish holy days, including the Sabbath,5 Passover,6 the Feast of Tabernacles,7 and the Feast of Dedication.8 He regularly refers to such Jewish rituals as purification (see John 3:25; 11:55), marriage customs (see John 2:1–10); and burial (see John 11:38, 44; 19:31, 40). John displays a vivid knowledge of topography as he talks about going down from Cana to Capernaum and about Jacob’s well being deep (see John 4:11). Lastly, he identifies such places as Ephraim (see John 11:54), Aenon (see John 3:23), Mount Gerizim (see John 4:20), Jerusalem (see John 5:1), Cedron (see John 18:1), Bethesda (see John 5:2), Siloam (see John 9:7), and Golgotha (see John 19:17) in a manner consistent with one who has firsthand knowledge of the region. It becomes evident that the more we increase our knowledge of the meridian-day culture, customs, and traditions of the Holy Land, the more likely it becomes that the scriptures will unveil to us their oft-veiled testimony that “Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing [we] might have life through his name” (John 20:31).

The Jewish Lectionary

Public reading of the scriptures dates at least as far back as the time of Moses. Every seven years during the Feast of Tabernacles Moses commanded Israelite men, women, and children, and people not of Israel who lived among God’s covenant people to appear before the Lord and “read [the law of God] before all Israel in their hearing” (Deuteronomy 31:11). Near the end of Old Testament times, the people were also reminded of the importance of public scripture reading by Ezra.9

Although it cannot be determined for certain when weekly readings of the scriptures began, evidence suggests that the Septuagint was compiled, in part, for the purpose of regular public readings (called lections) in the Jewish synagogues.10 If that is true, then it would appear that at least by the first half of the third century before Christ, weekly lections were in use.

During the tannaitic period,11 which includes the time of Christ, the Law had been divided into sections for systematic public readings. This weekly reading, frequently referred to as the Jewish lectionary, meant that on any given Sabbath, a specific scriptural text would be read during synagogue service.12 The scriptural passages used for these readings in the synagogue came from the Pentateuch, or five books of Moses (Torah), with additional readings taken from the writings of the prophets (Nevi’im)13 or the book of Psalms (Tehillim). Many have suggested that the reading of Isaiah 61:1–2 by Jesus in the synagogue at Nazareth is evidence of such a practice (see Luke 4:16–21).14

Aileen Guilding, in her study, The Fourth Gospel and Jewish Worship, maintains that during the time of Jesus textual passages were set up and rotated on a three-year, or triennial, cycle.15 She contends that many of Jesus’ major discourses followed on the heels of an Old Testament Sabbath lection.16 A prime example of Dr. Guilding’s thesis can be seen by examining Jesus’ discourse on the bread of life (see John 6). John specifically states that it took place near the time of Passover (see John 6:4). According to Guilding, the three-year synagogical lections near Passover were as follows:

Year 1. Genesis 1–8, with Genesis 2–3 being read on the Sabbaths closest to the feast.

Year 2. Exodus 11–16, with Exodus 16 being read about four weeks after the feast.

Year 3. Numbers 6–14, with Numbers 11 being read on the second Sabbath after the feast.17

Knowing that the Savior’s audience in John 6 had likely heard at least one of these lections gives us tremendous insight into this message of the Master Teacher. For example, John 6 reflects a theme centered on Exodus 16, the lection of Year 2; yet, it also echoes the lections of the other two years. Some parallels emerge between John 6, Numbers 11, and Genesis 3—the latter centering on the tree of knowledge of good and evil in the Garden of Eden.18

When Genesis 3 is compared with Numbers 11 an interesting theme emerges. For example, in the book of Numbers, Moses tells of Israel’s contempt for manna. The people openly complain for want of “flesh” to eat. The message and potential application is sobering: those who reject blessings sent from God will be “driven” out of his presence or destroyed if they do not repent. History provides multiple examples of this truth, including Adam and Eve’s removal from the Garden of Eden, ancient Israel who provoked God while in the wilderness, as well as many of the Jews to whom Jesus delivered his discourse on the bread of life19 (see John 6:66).

From such comparisons it seems possible that studying the Jewish lectionary can powerfully augment our understanding of the Savior’s teachings. Certainly, a strong case has been made for the bread of life discourse in John 6. As good as it appears at the outset, however, Guilding’s supposition has been subjected to sharp criticism.20 Most scholars agree that weekly Sabbath readings from the Old Testament were in place at the time of Jesus but, to date, no universal reading schedule has been determined.21 Estimates for completing a reading cycle of the scriptures range from yearly (thought to be used in the region of ancient Babylon) to upward of three and a half years (thought to be used in ancient Palestine). There is also disagreement as to the time of year the reading cycle began. Without this information it becomes difficult to make definitive statements regarding which Old Testament readings may have coincided with Jesus’ discourses.

Even though at present it cannot be determined which scriptural texts coincide with a given Sabbath, two conclusions may be drawn from studying the Jewish lectionary. First, assuming that the general populace participated in Sabbath synagogue services at the time of Jesus, most of Jesus’ audiences would be well versed in Old Testament scriptures.22 This meant that as Jesus spoke he could readily make allusions to Old Testament passages in ways that did not demand explanation. Therefore, as we study the teachings and discourses of the Savior, we should familiarize ourselves with the Old Testament and look for the connections and associations they have with the Gospels. Jesus himself bore solemn witness regarding the importance of the Old Testament when he said, “They are they which testify of me.”23 Second, even though scriptural passages from the Sabbath day lections cannot be identified, there is widespread agreement that specific readings are associated with the Jewish feasts and festivals.24 That allows students the opportunity to pursue careful scripture analysis between Jesus’ discourses delivered during feast days and their affiliated Old Testament scriptures.

Jewish Sabbaths, Feasts, and Holy Days

John 5 through 10 includes accounts of the Sabbath, the Passover (with its associated Feast of Unleavened Bread), the Feast of Tabernacles, and the Feast of Dedication.

Chapter 5: The Sabbath. Jesus declares that there can be no Sabbath rest for him because, as the Son of God, he must continue to exercise the powers of life and judgment entrusted to him by the Father.

Chapter 6: The Passover and the Feast of Unleavened Bread. Jesus uses the multiplying of bread as a means to teach that he is the true bread of life who has come down from heaven. His flesh and blood will replace the manna of the Passover of the Exodus.

Chapters 7 through 9: The Feast of Tabernacles. The ceremonies of water and light associated with this feast symbolically represent Jesus, who is the true source of living water and light.

Chapter 10: The Feast of Dedication (also known as the Feast of Lights, or Hanukkah). The Feast of Dedication recalls the Maccabean dedication of the temple and its altar. Jesus, through his discourse of the Good Shepherd, proclaims that he is the one who has truly been consecrated by God.

The extensive amount of information related to these festivals cannot all be discussed here. Instead, the primary focus will be with the rituals and practices as they relate to the discourses of the Master Teacher.

John 5: The Sabbath

John 5 begins by stating that Jesus went to Jerusalem during a feast. Many have speculated about what feast he was attending; however, John never provides the information necessary to make a positive determination.25 John may have purposely left out this information because it was not pertinent to his message. Instead, by simply mentioning Jesus was attending a feast, he lets his audience know why the Savior left Galilee, and, more importantly, lets them know that a feast in Jerusalem meant the city and temple would be filled to capacity with people from throughout the region.

The cardinal message and conflict in John 5 revolve around keeping the Sabbath day holy. To fully appreciate this chapter, it is necessary to understand the Jewish Sabbath. The institution of the Sabbath dates from the beginning of the earth’s creation. Following the Creation account, the scriptures remain silent regarding the Sabbath until the Israelite exodus.26 Thereafter, the importance of the Sabbath manifests itself throughout holy writ. Many of the Old Testament prophets, such as Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Nehemiah, teach and, at times, condemn God’s people for desecrating this holy day.27 Of all the special days identified in the scriptures, the Sabbath is the only one embraced within the Decalogue (see Exodus 20:8–11).

The Jewish commitment and determination to keep the Sabbath day holy can be readily seen throughout rabbinic literature.28 The keeping of the Sabbath was of such import that a person who publicly desecrated this most holy day was treated as an idolater.29 Israel was commanded to kill those who failed to comply with God’s law. The precedent for such an act came from Jehovah himself, who commanded that the man who gathered sticks on the Sabbath must “be surely put to death” by stoning at the hands of all Israel (see Numbers 15:35).

Upon the death of Malachi and other Old Testament prophets, the interpretation of scripture was taken up by individuals of religious and social influence who lacked the prophetic mantle. Scribes, Pharisees, Sadducees, and the like began to expound on Jewish law. Over time, the Jewish leadership “elaborated from the command of Moses, a vast array of prohibitions and injunctions, covering the whole of social, individual, and public life, and carried it to the extreme of ridiculous caricature.”30 The Mishnah itself states that “the laws of forbidden work on the Sabbath are as mountains hanging by a hair.”31 In other words, actual Sabbath laws as revealed in scripture are minuscule compared to the interpretations of those laws.

Thus, it is not surprising that the Savior confronts the Jewish leadership on several occasions regarding Sabbath prohibitions.32 A prime example is found in the story of the man healed at the Pool of Bethesda (see John 5). After healing the man of a thirty-eight-year infirmity, Jesus commanded him to “rise, take up thy bed, and walk” (John 5:8). The rabbinical interpretation of this act identifies two ways in which the Savior was guilty of Sabbath-breaking. First, Jewish law prohibits the carrying of items from one domain to another on the Sabbath; and second, it specifically forbids the carrying of an empty bed.33 This supposed abuse of the Sabbath led to a confrontation within the temple, just a stone’s throw from the Pool of Bethesda (see John 5:10–15).

The pivotal point in the story comes when Jesus, the Lord of the Sabbath (the one who commanded Moses to put to death the man for gathering sticks), reminded his antagonists that not all work ends on the Sabbath. Jesus boldly reminded them that God is required to work on this most holy day, and that he, being God’s Son, is only doing the work of his Father (see John 5:17). If the Jewish leaders were angry at Jesus for what they thought were Sabbath violations, this open declaration ignited profuse indignation. Not only had Jesus broken the Sabbath but, in their view, he had now made “himself equal with God” (John 5:18).

In light of the law of Moses, their anger and desire to kill Jesus seems understandable (see John 5:16); however, the Jewish leaders were so steeped in their own tradition that they failed to recognize the individual who had divine prerogative to countermand the excessive interpretations of that law. Ingeniously, Jesus reasoned from their own tradition to support his position. Jewish theologians recognized that God could not suspend all his work on the Sabbath, for if he did, “all nature and life would cease to exist.”34 Rabbi Johanan in the Babylonian Talmud states, “God has kept in His hand three keys that He entrusts to no agent: the key of the rain, the key of birth, and the key of the resurrection of the dead. And it was obvious to the rabbis that God used these keys even on the Sabbath.”35

Beginning with John 5:19–22, Jesus explained that the work he did—granting life and judging those who have died—was done in imitation of his Father. Jesus’ capacity to imitate the Father came because the Father empowered him, through the Atonement, to grant life to those who were in the realm of spiritual death, on account of sin. He demonstrated this life-giving power by finding the man in the temple and telling him, “Behold, thou art made whole [physically and spiritually]: sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee” (John 5:14). Thus, the only threat to real life was further sin. Similarly, Jesus became Judge because the Father had “committed all judgment unto the Son” (John 5:22). This judgment is to be taken in the Old Testament sense of vindicating the good (see Deuteronomy 32:36) and delivering him “from the deceitful and unjust man” (Psalm 43:1).36

For the remainder of the chapter, Jesus uses the law of witnesses given by Moses (see Deuteronomy 17:6; 19:15; Numbers 35:30) as a means to attest to his unbelieving audience that he is the Messiah (see John 5:32–39). Rather than the required two or three witnesses, Jesus provided a total of four: John the Baptist (see John 5:32–33), his own works and miracles (v. 36), the voice of the Father himself (v. 37),37 and the holy scriptures (v. 39).38 By so doing, Jesus powerfully and unmistakably offered to the Jewish leaders immutable evidence that he was the Son of God. Most important, he did it using the very law they claimed brought them salvation. Jesus concluded this confrontation by reminding the Jewish leaders: “For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me: for he wrote of me. But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words?” (John 5:46–47).

John 6: The Passover and the Feast of Unleavened Bread

John stated that the setting for the bread of life discourse took place near the time of Passover (see John 6:4). This feast (lasting one day) and its closely affiliated counterpart, the Feast of Unleavened Bread (lasting seven days), are integral to the discourse (see Leviticus 23:4–6).39 Celebration of Passover commemorates the Israelite escape from Egyptian bondage. This spring festival begins the fourteenth day of the Jewish month Nisan (also called Abib). Its name comes from the passage in Exodus in which Moses informs the children of Israel, “For the Lord will pass through to smite the Egyptians; and when he seeth the blood upon the lintel, and on the two side posts, the Lord will pass over the door, and will not suffer the destroyer to come in unto your houses to smite you” (Exodus 12:23). The sacrificial lamb and shedding of blood saves Israel.

Prior to the destruction of the temple in a.d. 70, the Jews gathered in family groups to keep the Feast of Passover. Part of the feast included slaying a lamb, roasting it whole, eating it with unleavened bread, and drinking wine (see Exodus 12; Deuteronomy 16:1–8).40 Josephus states that during the temple’s destruction, nearly 1.2 million Jews were either killed or taken captive in Jerusalem. Furthermore, most of the people were not from the Holy City but had come for the Feast of Unleavened Bread.41 Such large numbers traveling to Jerusalem suggests that people throughout the area thought about and prepared for weeks prior to the Passover and Unleavened Bread celebration.

John introduced Jesus’ bread of life discourse by reminding his readers that Passover was “nigh” and then telling them about the miracle of feeding the five thousand near the shores of Galilee (see John 6:4–12). It is clear from the exchange of words between Jesus and his followers that more was going on than simply a free meal. This was evidenced in the people’s attempt to take him by force to make him a king and to coerce Jesus to prove to them who he was by producing manna (see John 6:15, 25–31). Such actions result from an expectation that the Messiah would appear sometime during Passover and, once again, provide manna for his people.

According to rabbinic and aprocryphal sources, the association between Passover and manna developed during the Israelite conquest of Canaan.42 The day prior to Israel’s crossing of the Jordan was the fourteenth of Nisan. The following morning, after keeping the Feast of Passover, “the manna ceased” (Joshua 5:12). From this, “the expectation grew that the Messiah would come on Passover, and that the manna would begin to fall again on Passover.”43 The Old Testament lections read during Passover reminded Israel of the manna/Messiah relationship, along with other themes found throughout John 6, including the atoning blood of the lamb; escape from bondage; passage through the Red Sea; King David’s deliverance from his enemies; God’s miraculous rescue of Jerusalem from the Assyrians; and prophecies about “the stem of Jesse” (that is, the Christ) and how, in righteousness, he would usher in the millennial reign.44

After the feeding of the five thousand, certain participants concluded, “This is of a truth that prophet that should come into the world” (John 6:14). The key to understanding the Savior’s message is to identify who “that prophet” is. The Old Testament, New Testament, Book of Mormon, and Pearl of Great Price combine to reveal the identity of “that prophet.”45 Moses clearly indicated that at some future date a prophet would arise, similar to himself, who would speak the word of God. Furthermore, when this prophet appeared, the people would lack the faith, as Israel did in Moses’ day, to enter into Jehovah’s presence (see Deuteronomy 18:15–16; Exodus 19:10–21).46 This may explain why those who sought Jesus after his return to Capernaum were so defensive and demanded a sign when told that to be able to “work the works of God” they must “believe on him whom [God] hath sent” (John 6:28–29). Thus, Jesus unabashedly reminded them that they were the ones whom Moses said would have the same lack of faith as their forefathers who cowered at the thought of seeing Jehovah at Mount Horeb (Sinai).

Moses also foretold the consequences for those who refused to hear the words of “that prophet”: “I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him” (Deuteronomy 18:18–19).

The importance of this Mosaic prophecy is evident throughout the scriptures. Peter, after healing the lame man at the temple gate, declared to an astonished audience that Jesus had come in fulfillment of Moses’ prophecy (see Acts 3:19–26). Other references regarding “that prophet” were made by Stephen before his martyrdom (see Acts 7:37–38) and by the angel Moroni, who quoted to the Prophet Joseph Smith Acts 3:22–23 and said, “That prophet was Christ” (Joseph Smith–History 1:40). Nephi declared that “this prophet of whom Moses spake was the Holy One of Israel” (1 Nephi 22:21). Then, as if to add a final witness, the Savior himself said, “Behold, I am he of whom Moses spake, saying: A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me” (3 Nephi 20:23).

With such powerful declarations regarding “that prophet,” certainly, the people’s would-be attempt to make Jesus king, demonstrated at least a limited understanding of Moses’ prophecy. After he successfully eluded the people for the night, Jesus went to the synagogue at Capernaum (see John 6:15, 22–26, 59). From the ensuing discussion, it becomes apparent that many of the Jews, like their forefathers (see Deuteronomy 18:15–16), were unwilling to comply with the requirements mandated by “that prophet.” Indeed, those at the synagogue in Capernaum were more interested in signs and food than in partaking of the nourishment that only the incarnate Redeemer of Israel could provide (see John 6:27–31).

Furthermore, as Jesus declared he was the “living” Passover bread sent from heaven (John 6:51), he bluntly gave notice that if they failed to partake of his flesh and blood, they had no life in them (see John 6:53). Elder James E. Talmage taught that the Jews clearly understood the Savior’s intended message: “The utterances to which they objected were far more readily understood by them than they are by us on first reading; for the representation of the law and of truth in general as bread, and the acceptance thereof as a process of eating and drinking, were figures in every-day use by the rabbis of that time. Their failure to comprehend the symbolism of Christ’s doctrine was an act of will, not the natural consequence of innocent ignorance.”47

The Passover meal, with its attendant symbols, became the perfect opportunity for the Master Teacher to testify that “that prophet” of whom Moses prophesied had indeed come to deliver Israel from bondage. When Jesus stated, “Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day” (John 6:53–54), he was clearly giving the people an opportunity to choose. As families anticipated and prepared for Passover, the connection between the soon-to-be celebration with its slaying and roasting of the sacrificial lamb, drinking of wine, and eating of unleavened bread with “that prophet,” must have been difficult to miss. Yet, because many could not “believe on him whom [God had] sent” (John 6:29), John told us, “From that time many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him” (John 6:66).

John 7–9: The Feast of Tabernacles

Following the bread of life discourse, Jesus could no longer freely travel throughout the Holy Land. Even those in distant Jerusalem, the very heart of Judaism, “sought to kill him” (John 7:1). Yet, Jesus, knowing the risks, would use the upcoming Feast of Tabernacles to once again bear powerful witness of his divine mission. With familial pressure to leave for the feast, the Savior waited, choosing to arrive at mid-festival (see John 7:3–9). His reputation preceded him, for those at the feast already were debating just who this Jesus really was (see vv. 10–13). The Redeemer of mankind would soon give them the opportunity to learn for themselves.

The Feast of Tabernacles is the last of three designated feasts that all males were required to attend (see Deuteronomy 16:16). It began on the fifteenthth day of the seventh month, called Tishri (September or October). The book of Leviticus speaks of a seven-day celebration, with an additional eighth day set aside as a solemn assembly (see Leviticus 23:34–36). This autumnal feast received the name Tabernacles, the English rendering of Sukkot (“booths”), because people celebrated it out-of-doors in booths made of tree branches. The dwelling in booths was to remind Israel of the care and protection God provided while they journeyed to the promised land (see Deuteronomy 8:7–18).

According to the Encyclopedia Judaica, “Tabernacles was from ancient times one of the most important feasts of the Israelites and is therefore called ‘the feast of the Lord.’”48 Elder Bruce R. McConkie says of this feast, “In the full sense, it is the Feast of Jehovah, the one Mosaic celebration which, as part of the restitution of all things, shall be restored when Jehovah comes to reign personally upon the earth for a thousand years.”49

The Feast of Tabernacles is celebrated at a unique juncture of harvesting in the Holy Land. Farmers have finished the “in-gathering” of grapes, figs, pomegranates, and dates, but they still look forward to the picking and processing of olives. It is a time of tremendous rejoicing as an agrarian society offers thanks for what they have received and, at the same time, looks forward with anticipation and prayer for the much-needed cycle of rain (symbolizing living water) to once again bring the earth back to life.50 It is interesting to contemplate the significance of the Feast of Tabernacles in relation to the day of Pentecost (Acts 2:1–13). Even though Pentecost was months away, Jesus’ coming to the temple was an important part of the gathering before he concluded his mortal ministry. The soon-to-be olive harvest is a reminder to us all that the gathering of olives (a symbol for the people of Israel; see Jacob 5), and the processing of olive oil (oil being a symbol of the Holy Spirit; see D&C 45:56–57) is an important part of the gospel. During the coming year, the Savior would culminate his mortal ministry by harvesting the righteous in preparation for their receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost. The allegory of the olive tree (see Jacob 5) makes it clear that the gathering of God’s covenant people will continue until our Savior once again returns to his temple at the conclusion of the harvest.

Two aspects of the Feast of Tabernacles are critical to the Savior’s proclaimed testimony.51 The first deals with a daily water libation ceremony, which takes place throughout the feast. The Mishnah states that a priest carrying a golden pitcher capable of holding three “logs” (one and one-half pints) takes water from the Pool of Siloam (a Hebrew word meaning “sent”), approximately a half-mile distant, and carries it to the sacred altar of sacrifice at the temple. It is timed so that upon its arrival, a trumpet sounds announcing the priest, who then enters the Water Gate, giving him direct access to the Court of the Priests and the sacred altar. Once there, he is greeted by another priest, who holds in his hands a container of wine. Together, they ascend the ramp to the altar and pour the water and wine libations into designated funnels, which empty onto the sacrificial altar.52 The Mishnah asserts that each day, upon conclusion of the liquid libations, the priests “went in procession a single time around the Altar, saying, Save now, we beseech thee, O Lord! We beseech thee, O Lord, send now prosperity. [Psalm 118:25.] ... But on that day [the seventh day of the feast] they went in procession seven times around the Altar” (Sukkah 4.5).53 This seventh day, known as Hoshana Rabba or “the Great hoshana,” exemplifies Israel’s need and reliance upon Jehovah. The word hoshana means “Save, I pray!” or “Save, now!” Each day during the feast, the Hallel (see Psalms 113 to 118) is chanted by the priests while the people who gather at the temple carry in their hands palm branches and a lemon-like fruit, called a citron, to remind them of their wanderings in the wilderness and the bountiful harvest they received when they were brought to the promised land.

The second aspect of the feast related to the Savior’s testimony followed the ceremony of the pouring of the water. At the close of the first festival-day,54 the priests descended fifteen stairs from their court to the Court of the Women. Located in this court were “golden candlesticks ... with four golden bowls on the top of them,” which, according to the Talmud, rose fifty cubits in height (nearly seventy-three feet). There were “four ladders to each candlestick,” which four priestly youths climbed to pour a total of 120 “logs” of oil into the bowls (approximately ten gallons) (Sukkah 5.2).55

Upon the lighting of the candlesticks, the Mishnah states, “there was not a courtyard in Jerusalem that did not reflect the light” (Sukkah 5.3). Righteous men then danced before the candlesticks with torches in hand, singing songs of praise. While, at the same time, Levites stood on the fifteen steps playing “harps, lyres, cymbals and trumpets and instruments of music” (Sukkah 5.4). Two priests began at the top of the stairs with trumpets in hand. At predetermined places they sounded the trumpet, making three blasts at each stop, until they reached the eastern gate of the Court of the Women, called Beautiful (see Acts 3:2). Once there, they turned about and faced the temple and said, “Our fathers when they were in this place turned with their backs toward the Temple of the Lord and their faces toward the east, and they worshipped the sun toward the east; but as for us, our eyes are turned toward the Lord” (Sukkah 5.4; emphasis added). All energy was focused on the people’s need for and reliance upon Jehovah. The dancing, rejoicing, and spiritual jubilation lasted through the night.56

The eighth day of the Feast of Tabernacles was a solemn assembly, and the people were again commanded to “do no servile work therein” (Numbers 29:35). This holy day was considered by the rabbis as a separate festival. It was a memorial dedicated to scripture study and special prayer for rain57 (see Zechariah 10:1).

It should be noted that the Feast of Tabernacles came just five days after the Day of Atonement (Yom Kippur). On this day of reconciliation, the high priest alone was required to “make an atonement” for the holy sanctuary, tabernacle, altar, priests, and people (see Leviticus 16:33). The purpose of this atonement was to prepare a congregation for the upcoming feast, wherein “a people at peace with God might rejoice before Him in the blessing with which He had crowned the year.”58

To fully appreciate the testimony of Jesus, one must combine the rituals surrounding the feast with the Jewish lections read during the feast. Besides reciting the Mosaic instructions regarding the Feast of Tabernacles (Numbers 7:1–8:4), two additional scriptural events were recounted, one past and one future. The recitation of the past remembered the dedication of Solomon’s Temple, which took place during the Feast of Tabernacles. Upon placement of the ark of the covenant in the Holy of Holies, a thick cloud of “glory ... filled the house of the Lord [Jehovah]. Then spake Solomon, ... I have surely built thee an house to dwell in, a settled place for thee to abide in for ever” (1 Kings 8:11–13; emphasis added). The ensuing dedication linked the arrival of Jehovah at the Feast of Tabernacles.

The other important event associated with and read during the feast anticipated Jehovah’s return and “in-gathering” of his people. Zechariah prophesied of Jehovah’s triumphant return and reign as king over all the earth (see Zechariah 14:1–9). Even though only Zechariah 14 is read as a feast lection, prophecies such as the “King” coming to Jerusalem, “lowly, and riding upon an ass” (Zechariah 9:9) and “they shall look upon me whom they have pierced” (Zechariah 12:10) must surely be recognized as Messianic. A statement associated with Abba bar Kahana, a fourth century rabbi, says that the Feast of Tabernacles “holds within itself the promise of the Messiah.”59

With this background in place, the teachings of Jesus become clearer. The Savior began his message at the Feast of Tabernacles by identifying himself as the one sent from God (see John 7:18). He told his audience that if they truly want to know the truth of his doctrine, they must “do his will” (John 7:17) and keep the law of Moses (see John 7:19).60 Jesus iterates numerous times that he is sent from his Father.61 The Greek word for most occurrences of “sent” in John’s writings is pempo. It differs from the word “sent” (apostello) found in John 7:29. In this passage, Jesus uses the same term that is used to identify the Pool of Siloam (see John 9:7). Both words, pempo and apostello, mean “sent” but a distinction is typically made of the latter when it is God who does the commissioning and/or sending.62 Just as the “living water” retrieved from the Pool of Siloam was “sent” (apostello; see John 9:7) from God, Jesus, too, was “sent” (apostello) by the Father to bring life to those who abide in the true law of Moses. It should be noted that “living water” by definition is water that is sent directly from God (such as rain water sent from heaven or spring water flowing from the earth). The significance of the different meanings to the word sent is evident in the response made by the Jewish leadership. Upon making the bold pronouncement, “I am from him, and he hath sent [apostello] me” (see John 7:29; emphasis added), the Jewish leadership were so infuriated that, “they sought to take him,” (John 7:30) presumably to put him to death, but were unable to do so because his “hour was not yet come” (7:30).

The confusion and blindness of the people (see John 7:40–52) provide an ongoing theme throughout the following chapters. On the last day of the feast, Jesus used the background of the water-libation ceremony to proclaim that he was the source of water sent from God and that “if any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink” (John 7:37). This declaration echoed the prophetic voice of Zechariah, which was read during the feast to remind the people that when Jehovah returns “living waters shall go out from Jerusalem. ... And the Lord shall be king over all the earth” (Zechariah 14:8–9).

The day after Jesus’ declaration, he arrived at the temple early in the morning (see John 8:2). It is difficult to determine with certainty, but it is conceivable that the celebration from the lighting of the candelabra was either continuing or just concluding. Speaking in the treasury (see John 8:20) located in the Court of the Women, Jesus once again took the opportunity to teach and testify to the people of his divine role. He publicly proclaimed, “I am the light of the world [and] he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life” (John 8:12).

The Pharisees immediately challenged his testimony, claiming that if his testimony were true he would not bear record of himself (see John 8:13). The resulting confrontation furnished Jesus an opportunity to use the imagery that he is “living water” sent from God. He said, “If God were your Father, ye would love me: for I proceeded forth and came from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent [apostello] me” (John 8:42). The disputation concluded with Jesus publicly and unmistakably announcing, “Before Abraham was, I AM” (John 8:58). A clear statement that he was Jehovah sent from God to the children of Israel. The “I AM” expression replicates the Septuagint, or Greek, version of the Old Testament, in which Jehovah directs Moses to tell the children of Israel, “I AM hath sent me unto you” (Exodus 3:14; emphasis added). The response from the Jewish leaders led to yet another attempt to take Jesus’ life (see John 8:59).

Jesus now confirmed his identify by doing (see John 7:17) that which only one sent from God could do—he opened the eyes of a man blind from birth. He did this by sending the man to “the pool of Siloam, (which is by interpretation, Sent.)” (John 9:7). The symbolism speaks for itself. Jesus is the source of living water sent from God to open the eyes of the blind through sacrifice on the sacred altar of fire.

Significantly, the healing of the blind man once again occurs on a Sabbath day (see John 5; 9:14). The Mishnah identifies kneading as one of thirty-nine types of work forbidden on this day (Mishnah Sabbath 7.2). Because Jesus “kneaded” the soil to make clay with which to anoint the eyes of the blind man, he was, according to rabbinical interpretation, in violation of the Sabbath (see John 9:11–16). The Master Teacher used this opportune time to demonstrate the “in-gathering” process that heals those who are blind but believe (see John 9:35–38) but not those who say they see but in truth are blind (see vv. 40–41).

John 10: The Feast of Dedication

A subtle but important transition occurs between the Feast of Tabernacles (see John 7–9) and the Feast of Dedication (see John 10). The casual reader might assume that Jesus began his discourse of the Good Shepherd (see John 10:1) immediately after his indictment of the Pharisees at the conclusion of the Feast of Tabernacles (see John 9:40–41), but a careful reading clearly shows nearly three months had passed, fall had given way to winter, and the Feast of Dedication was underway (see John 10:22).63

The Feast of Dedication celebrated an event that had its beginnings in 175 b.c. The Greco-Syrian king, Antiochus IV (Epiphanes), in an attempt to subjugate the Jews, pillaged the land of Judah and desecrated the holy temple by setting up an idol to Zeus and sacrificing swine upon the altar of God (see 1 Maccabees 1:21–63). Antiochus followed his destruction with a campaign to eradicate Judaism. Soldiers were sent throughout the land to force the Jews to submit to paganism. A pious priest named Mattathias and his sons stood firm and defied Syria. After Mattathias’s death, his sons, with Judas Maccabeus at the lead, continued to wage a grass-roots rebellion that not only defeated Antiochus but eventually gained independence for the Jewish nation.

With the capture of Jerusalem, priests entered the temple, cleansed it, and replaced the desecrated altar with a new altar. On the 25th day, during the winter month of Kislev, in the year 164 b.c., the altar was dedicated (see 1 Maccabees 4:36–58). “Judas, and his brethren, and all the church of Israel decreed, that the day of the dedication of the altar should be kept in its season from year to year for eight days ... with joy and gladness” (1 Maccabees 4:59). The name of this feast comes from the Hebrew word Hanukkah, which means “dedication” or “consecration.”64 Celebrations of Hanukkah prior to the destruction of the temple in a.d. 70 focused on the dedication of the altar of sacrifice and the cleansing of the temple.65

Flavius Josephus described the Feast of Dedication in his day (a.d. 37–100) as follows: “Now Judas [Maccabaeus] celebrated the festival of the restoration of the sacrifices of the temple for eight days; and omitted no sort of pleasures thereon: but he feasted them upon very rich and splendid sacrifices; and he honoured God, and delighted them, by hymns and psalms. ... And from that time to this we celebrate this festival, and call it Lights.”66

The celebration of Hanukkah has close ties to the Feast of Tabernacles. It likely began as a celebration commemorating the dedication of the altar, because the Feast of Tabernacles had been missed on account of the war. Thus, many parallels exist between the two feasts, including the eight-day celebration, the illumination of lights, the carrying of palm branches, the recitation of Hallel (Psalms 113 to 118), and a celebration of the renewal of daily sacrifices.67 Both feasts are clearly modeled after the dedication of Solomon’s Temple. The Old Testament passages associated with and read during Hanukkah describe dedicating the house of God with sacrifice, feasting, thanksgiving, music, and singing.68

Of all the feasts identified by John, the Feast of Dedication has the least direct association with the Savior’s message. Yet, the background of the feast gives some helpful clues. Throughout the book of John, the Savior used images and events as an aid to help teach and testify of his divine Sonship. For example, at the well in Samaria Jesus identified himself as living water (see John 4:14); after multiplying the loaves and fishes, he proclaimed that he was “living bread” (John 6:51); during the Feast of Tabernacles he testified that he was “the light of the world” (John 8:12); and while healing the man born blind, he again proclaimed that he was “the light of the world” (John 9:5). This pattern suggests that while Jesus “walked in the temple in Solomon’s porch” (John 10:23) during the Feast of Dedication, he availed himself of another opportunity to testify of his divinity.

Solomon’s Porch, located at the east end of the Temple Mount, sat directly in front of the temple. Its location provided ample opportunity to witness sheep being “shepherded” toward the temple proper and its sacred altar. As mentioned, the Feast of Dedication was a time of tremendous celebration and sacrifice. It seems reasonable to surmise that the bringing of sheep for temple sacrifice helped trigger Jesus’ Good Shepherd discourse. If even a fraction of the number of sheep was used during the Feast of Dedication that was used during Solomon’s dedication (120,000; see 1 Kings 8:63; 2 Chronicles 7:5), the scenario would provide an ideal teaching opportunity for the Savior.

The Old Testament frequently alludes to God as a shepherd.69 Thus, Israel saw themselves as God’s flock who were under his divine care and protection.70 Although speculative, Aileen Guilding states that the Sabbath lections surrounding the Feast of Dedication “contain the theme of sheep and shepherds and of God the Shepherd of Israel.”71 Ezekiel 34 furnishes an excellent example of one of these lections. In it, Jehovah denounces the shepherds of Israel who have failed the flock. These shepherds are condemned for their cruelty, mismanagement, and scattering of his sheep (see Ezekiel 34:2–6). As the chapter progresses, Ezekiel describes how in time Jehovah will turn against these shepherds and seek out his sheep that have been scattered, and “will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David; he shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherd. And I the Lord will be their God, and my servant David a prince among them” (Ezekiel 34:23–24).

The association between Ezekiel 34 and John 10 adds weight and meaning to the Savior’s statement, “Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold” (John 10:16). True to Ezekiel’s prophecy, the Jewish leadership had indeed brought about a spiritual scattering. This, of course, included those descended from Lehi, as well as other lost tribes and branches of Israel (see 3 Nephi 15:11–24). Jesus’ testimony at the Feast of Dedication was that he was the “porter,” or gatekeeper (John 10:3), “the door of the sheep” (v. 7), and “the good shepherd” (v. 14). Jesus, standing at the temple during a feast that commemorated the dedication of the altar of God, provided the ideal opportunity to remind his people that the altar of the temple stood as a symbol of atonement and that only he could ultimately bring “peace between Israel and their Father in Heaven.”72 Rather than accept his invitation to “hear [his] voice” and “follow [him],” however, the Jews (likely meaning the Jewish leaders) “took up stones again to stone him” (John 10:27, 31).

Conclusion

Nephi wrote that he labored diligently “to persuade [his] children, and also [his] brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God” (2 Nephi 25:23). He stated, “We talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ, we prophesy of Christ, and we write according to our prophecies, that our children may know to what source they may look for a remission of their sins” (2 Nephi 25:26). Prophets throughout the ages have desired no more, and no less, than to bear this same witness. John’s advantage in bearing this testimony came from his personal relationship with Christ and his eyewitness account of the Savior’s own ingenious and self-proclaimed testimony that he was and is the “Anointed One” sent by the Father to redeem humankind.

Through careful examination of the Jewish rituals, customs, and traditions associated with the Sabbath and the Feasts of Passover, Tabernacles, and Dedication, John bore a fervent and powerful testimony that “Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God,” in hopes that all who read and hear his message might believe and “have life through his name” (John 20:31). True life, then, comes only to those who know these truths. Our testimony of Jesus Christ is central to who and what we are as Latter-day Saints. As we increase our understanding and testimony of the Savior through scripture study, prayer, and hearing the word of God from our modern apostles and prophets, we can then use these truths to bless the lives of those around us.

Notes

1. Merrill F. Unger, The New Unger’s Bible Dictionary, ed. R. K. Harrison (Chicago: Moody Press, 1988), 700.

2. Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965–73), 1:65.

3. For example, John frequently refers to such Old Testament stories and prophets as the Creation (John 1:1–14), manna (6:31), water from the rock (7:38), the brass serpent (3:14), the tabernacle (references to “dwelt” and to pitching a tent imply the tabernacle, according to Anchor Bible, 38 vols. [New York: Doubleday, 1964–], 1:13–14), the law of Moses (1:17, 7:19, 22–23; 8:5, 9:28–29), the prophets (five from Isaiah, two from Zechariah; one from Ezekiel; the last part of Zechariah seems to lie behind John’s reflections on the Feast of Tabernacles and on the stream of living water), and Psalms (John 2:17; 4:14; 10:34–35; 19:24, 29).

4. Raymond E. Brown, The Gospel According to John I–XII, 2 vols. (New York: Doubleday, 1966), 1:lxi.

5. See John 5:9–18; 7:22–23; 9:14–16; 19:31.

6. See John 6:4; 13:1; 18:28.

7. See John 7:2.

8. See John 10:22.

9. See Nehemiah 8:1–8.

10. Encyclopedia Judaica, 16 vols. (Jerusalem: Keter, 1974), 15:1246.

11. Tannaim is from the Aramaic tanna, which means “to repeat” or “learn.” The time period ranges from circa 20 b.c. to the early part of the third century a.d. During this time the unwritten authoritative traditions were transmitted via oral repetition. See H. L. Strack and G. Stemberger, Introduction to the Talmud and Midrash, trans. Markus Bockmuehl (Edinburgh: T&T Clark,1991), 7.

12. Encyclopedia Judaica, 15:1247.

13. Unger, Bible Dictionary, 1297. The readings taken from the writings of the prophets were called Haftarah.

14. Brown, Gospel According to John, 2:277–78; Aileen Guilding, The Fourth Gospel and Jewish Worship: A Study of the Relation of St. John’s Gospel to the Ancient Jewish Lectionary System (London: Oxford University Press, 1960) 6–7; John L. Fowles, “The Jewish Lectionary and Book of Mormon Prophecy,” Journal of Mormon Studies, ed. Stephen D. Ricks (Provo: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, vol. 3, no. 2 (Fall 1994), 118–22; Unger, Bible Dictionary, 1297.

15. Guilding, Fourth Gospel and Jewish Worship, 8–20.

16. Brown, Gospel According to John I–XII, 1:278–80.

17. Guilding, Fourth Gospel and Jewish Worship, 60–61; quoted in Brown, Gospel According to John I–XII, 1:279.

18. Some of the comparisons Guilding makes between Genesis and John 6 are as follows: “Gen. 3:3 repeats God’s warning from Gen. 2:17: ‘You shall not eat of the fruit of this tree ... lest you die.’ This may be contrasted with John 6:50: ‘This is the bread that comes down from heaven that a man may eat it and never die.’ Gen. 3:22 has God’s decision to drive man out of the garden ‘... lest he put forth his hand and take also of the tree of life and eat and live forever.’ This may be contrasted with the invitation to eat the bread of life of which John 6:51 says, ‘If anyone eats this bread, he will live forever.’ Gen. 3:24 ‘So he drove man out.’ In John 6:37: ‘Anyone who comes to me I will never drive out.” Quoted in Brown, Gospel According to John I–XII, 1:279.

19. See Genesis 3:23–24; Exodus 19:17–24.

20. Strack and Stemberger, Introduction to the Talmud and Midrash, 263–64; Raymond E. Brown, “Book Review of Aileen Guilding, The Fourth Gospel and Jewish Worship,” in Catholic Biblical Quarterly, 22 (1960): 460–61; J. Heinemann, “The Triennial Lectionary Cycle,” Journal of Jewish Studies, 19 (1969): 41–48; Michael L. Klein, “Four Notes on the Triennial Cycle,” The Journal of Jewish Studies, 32 (1981): 65–73.

21. Marc Bregman, “The Triennial Haftarot and the Perorations of the Midrashic Homilies,” in Journal of Jewish Studies, 32 (1981): 74–84; Klein, “Four Notes on the Triennial Lectionary Cycle,” 65–73; Heinemann, “Triennial Lectionary Cycle,” 41–48; Encyclopedia Judaica, 15:1246, 1386.

22. This assumption seems quite likely. For example, Alfred Edersheim in his book The Temple: Its Ministry and Services As They Were At the Time of Christ, indicates that it was not necessary at the Feast of Tabernacles to read the entire law of Moses as commanded in Deuteronomy 31:10–13 because the “law as a whole [was] sufficiently known from the weekly prelections in the synagogues.” (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1978) 286.

23. John 5:39; emphasis added.

24. Strack and Stemberger, Introduction to the Talmud and Midrash, 262–64.

25. J. Reuben Clark Jr. states that this is a Passover feast. Our Lord of the Gospels (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1954) 221. Footnote 1a to John 5:1 in the LDS edition of the King James Version of the Bible reads, “The Koine Greek manuscripts of the Gospels (Byzantine) read ‘the feast,’ implicitly the Passover. ... Some earlier manuscripts do not make this identification.” Others such as Brown view this feast as possibly Pentecost or Passover (Gospel According to John I–XII, 1:206). Others, such as Guilding, identify it as either Pentecost or the Feast of the New Year, also called Rosh Hashanah (Fourth Gospel and Jewish Worship, 47).

26. God took six days to create the heavens and the earth, and on the seventh he ceased from his labors, looked upon what he had done, declared it good, and “rested” (Genesis 1:1–2:2). The word rest is used to translate the Hebrew verb shavat, meaning “to stop, cease, or desist.” Thus, the name Sabbath (a noun) continually reminds the faithful that on this day they must “cease” from their weekly labors and worship the Lord. In commemoration of the Creation, God reminded his people at Mount Sinai that he had “blessed and sanctified” the seventh day, making it a day wherein “thou shalt not do any work” (Exodus 20:8–11). Furthermore, upon Israel’s receiving manna, God commanded on the sixth day that his covenant people were to gather “twice as much bread” because the next day was the “holy sabbath unto the Lord” (Exodus 16:22–23). Today, Jews continue to honor the double gathering of manna, along with the prohibition against work, by placing two loaves of bread on the table for their Sabbath evening meal. See Encyclopedia Judaica, 14:566.

27. See Isaiah 58:13–14; Jeremiah 17:19–27; Ezekiel 20:20–24; 22:8; 44:24; Nehemiah 10:31; 13:15–22. Such admonitions continue through our modern prophets. For example, President Gordon B. Hinckley recently reemphasized the importance of keeping this most sacred day holy (Ensign, November 1997, 69).

28. For example, “If Israel keeps one Sabbath as it should be kept, the Messiah will come. The Sabbath is equal to all the other precepts of the Torah.” During Jesus’ day, Sabbath relevance can be viewed through the writings of Philo, a Jewish philosopher and scholar of Alexandria (20 b.c.–a.d. 50), who saw the Sabbath “as an opportunity for man to imitate his Creator who rested on the seventh day.” Quoted in Encyclopedia Judaica, 14:562, 565.

29. Encyclopedia Judaica, 14:564.

30. Cunningham Geikie, Life and Words of Christ, ch. 38 (New York: Columbia, 1891), quoted in James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1915), 215.

31. Quoted in Encyclopedia Judaica, 14:564. The word Mishnah is from the Hebrew and means “instruction.” It is believed that the Mishnah are the oral laws given by God to Moses at Sinai. These collected traditions were collected and compiled circa a.d. 200. Today, they make up a considerable portion of the Talmud.

32. See Matthew 12:1–13; Mark 2:23–28; Luke 6:1–11; 13:10–17; 14:1–6; John 5:9–18; 7:22–24; 9:14–16.

33. Mishnaic tractate Sabbath 7:2 states that “carrying things from one domain to another is the last of 39 works forbidden” on the Sabbath, while “carrying empty beds is implicitly forbidden” in Sabbath 10:5. Quoted in Brown, Gospel According to John I–XII, 1:208.

34. Brown, Gospel According to John I–XII, 1:217.

35. I. Epstein, The Babylonian Talmud, English ed. (London: Soncino, 1961), Taanith 2a; quoted in Brown, Gospel According to John I–XII, 1:217.

36. Brown, Gospel According to John I–XII, 1:218–19.

37. This testimony of the Father possibly refers to Jesus’ baptism when “there came a voice from heaven, saying, Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased” (Mark 1:11).

38. The Savior may have used four witnesses to underscore to the Jews that his testimony goes beyond the Mosaic requirement of three. The book of Amos uses a Hebrew idiom, “for three transgressions ... yea, for four” as a way to produce a cumulative effect emphasizing the strength of his own testimony (Amos 1:3, 6, 9, 11; see also Proverbs 30:15, 18, 21, 29). Soncino Books of the Bible: The Twelve Prophets, 14 vols. (London: Soncino, 1966), 14:84. In both Amos and Proverbs the fourth transgression is followed by a prophecy of great destruction. This may be a means whereby the Savior cautions his unbelieving audience regarding the consequence to those who reject his message.

39. During the Feast of Unleavened Bread, all leaven was removed from their homes and from their diet (see Exodus 12:15). The unleavened bread was a reminder to Israel of their swift flight from Egypt (see Exodus 12:39). The Savior also used leaven as a symbol of hypocrisy and wickedness (see Luke 12:1). This usage implies that Israel, Jehovah’s covenant people, must remove all wickedness from amongst them and flee spiritual bondage.

40. Encyclopedia Judaica, 13:164–68.

41. Flavius Josephus, Wars of the Jews, 6.9.3, in Josephus: Complete Works, trans. William Whiston (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Kregel, 1978), 587. Such large numbers have also been supported in the Talmud. See Encyclopedia Judaica, 13:164.

42. Brown, Gospel According to John I–XII, 1:265.

43. Quoted in Brown, Gospel According to John I–XII, 1:265. A source from the second century after Christ, Apocryphon II Baruch 29:8, states: “The treasury of manna shall again descend from on high, and they will eat of it in those years.” Several Midrashic sources also refer to a second redeemer who will cause bread to rain from heaven.

44. Passover lections include Exodus 12:21–51; 13:1–16; 22:24–23:19; 33:12–34:26; 13:17–15:26; Numbers 9:1–14; 28:19–25; Leviticus 22:26–23:44; Deuteronomy 15:19–16:17; Joshua 5:2–6:1; 2 Kings 23:1–9; 21–25; Ezekiel 36:37–37:14; 2 Samuel 22:1–51; Isaiah 10:32–12:6. See Encyclopedia Judaica, 15:1251–52. For more information on Jesus as the “stem of Jesse,” see Isaiah 11:1; D&C 113; Bruce R. McConkie, The Promised Messiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1981), 192–95.

45. See McConkie, Promised Messiah, 443–44.

46. According to E. P. Sanders, “The acceptance of the covenant removes the consequences of the sin of Adam and restores Israel to the Herrlichkeit [Glory] lost through Adam’s fall. The restoration, however, is brief. Because of the incident of the golden calf, Israel loses its restored status: as Adam’s fall resulted in the separation of mankind from God, the worship of the golden calf results in Israel’s separation from God. Thereafter it becomes the goal of the individual Israelite to regain what had been lost through the fall of Israel.” See E. P. Sanders, Paul and Palestinian Judaism: A Comparison of Patterns of Religion (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1987), 37.

47. Talmage, Jesus the Christ, 342.

48. Encyclopedia Judaica, 15:496. See also Leviticus 23:39; Judges 21:19.

49. McConkie, Promised Messiah, 432–33; see also Zechariah 14:16.

50. “The Feast of Tabernacles and the Holy Spirit,” Neot Kedumim Newsletter, October 1997, 4.

51. For a more complete discussion of the many nuances associated with Christ’s divinity, see Albert Edersheim, Temple, 269–87; McConkie, Promised Messiah, 432–35; Encyclopedia Judaica, 15:495–502; Mishnah, trans. Herbert Danby (London: Oxford, 1933), 172–81.

52. Mishnah, trans. Danby, 179. See also Unger, Bible Dictionary, 419. Upon completion of the water pouring, the people demand that the priest raise his hands to ensure that the water has been properly emptied onto the altar. The reason for this seems to relate to a time in the life of Alexander Jannaeus, the Maccabean king-priest (c. 95 b.c.). On one occasion when he was performing this ceremony he emptied the water on the ground instead of the altar in response to the distrust and hatred the people had for him. The people were so angered by his actions that they threw at him their lemonlike citrons they were carrying as part of the celebration. During the ensuing uproar his armed soldiers killed six thousand people. Flavius Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews, 13.13.5

53. Mishnah, trans. Danby, 178.

54. This would be the second day of the feast, because the first day was set aside as a holy day or Sabbath wherein no work was allowed, including the lighting of fire. See Leviticus 23:34–35.

55. Mishnah, trans. Danby, 179, and n. 16. A cubit is about seventeen and one-half inches.

56. Mishnah, trans. Danby, 179–80.

57. Encyclopedia Judaica, 15:501.

58. Edersheim, Temple, 304.

59. Brown, Gospel According to John I–XII, 1:326; emphasis added.

60. Jeremiah, trans. H. Freedman, in Soncino Books of the Bible, 14 vols. (London: Soncino, 1970), 11:10. See also Jeremiah 2:13; 17:13; John 4:10; 7:38; Zechariah 14:8.

61. See John 7:16, 18, 28–29, 33; 8:16, 18, 26, 29; 9:4.

62. Geoffrey W. Bromiley, Theological Dictionary of the New Testament, ed. Gerhard Kittel and Gerhard Friedrich (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing, 1977) 68.

63. The evidence for this is found in the cohesion of the Good Shepherd discourse before John’s introduction of the Feast of Dedication (10:22) and the continued theme discussed afterward. Compare John 10:1–18 with John 10:26–27, keeping in mind verse 22 in which John introduces the Feast of Dedication. For a more comprehensive discussion see Brown, Gospel According to John I–XII, 1:388–89.

64. Anchor Bible Dictionary, ed. David Noel Freedman, 6 vols. (New York: Doubleday, 1992), 2:123.

65. See 1 Maccabees 4:36–61; 2 Maccabees 1:18; 2:16, 19; 10:3, 5, 7.

66. Josephus, Antiquities, 12.7.7.

67. 2 Maccabees never calls Hanukkah a festival of tabernacles, but it clearly relates the two occasions. See the following for further support: Anchor Bible Dictionary, 2:124; Encyclopedia Judaica, 7:1283; Unger, Bible Dictionary, 422.

68. See Numbers 7; Deuteronomy 20:5; 2 Chronicles 7:5–11; 1 Kings 8:63–66; Nehemiah 12:27; Psalm 30:1; Anchor Bible Dictionary, 2:123–24.

69. See Genesis 49:24; Psalms 23; 78:52–55, 70–72; Isaiah 40:11; 49:9–12; Jeremiah 13:17; 23:1–8; Ezekiel 34; Micah 7:14.

70. Anchor Bible Dictionary, 5:1189.

71. Guilding, Fourth Gospel and Jewish Worship, 129–30.

72. Rabbinic sources plainly taught that the sacred altar of the temple stood as a symbol of atonement, for it brought “peace between Israel and their Father in Heaven.” See Encyclopedia Judaica, 2:770.

David M. Whitchurch is an associate professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.
 

Chapter Twenty-One

 
 
© 1998 Deseret Book Company 

Printed from Gospelink.com
