Various General Authorities, Heroes of the Restoration ( 1997)

13

Samuel Harrison Smith He Was There

Elder Joe J. Christensen

Samuel Harrison Smith, the next younger brother of the Prophet Joseph, is truly one of my heroes of the Restoration.

I first remember being impressed in learning about Samuel Smith when we were studying Church history in seminary-actually, more than fifty years ago. Although we didn't spend a lot of time discussing him, I was impressed, and Samuel's example has made a positive impact on me since then in a variety of ways-especially while serving in the mission field in Mexico and Central America.

As a young nineteen-year-old elder, fresh into the mission, I discovered that door-to-door contacting-or tracting, as we used to call it-was not my favorite activity. By nature I was somewhat shy. I had to push myself to get out and knock on those doors.

I suppose it was difficult for a variety of reasons. I was not particularly enthusiastic about intruding into the lives of complete strangers. Also, when someone would come to the door it was not easy for me to stand there feeling somewhat embarrassed and as I attempted to share the message in a language I was just beginning to learn. The anxiety of being rejected-and sometimes hostilely-was not appealing to me. Nevertheless I persisted, and in this I owe much to the example of Samuel H. Smith. He too had left his comfort zone and as a missionary had confronted much greater odds than I was ever called to face. And in addition, on that first mission he didn't even have the benefit of a companion at his side.

With that kind of exemplary incentive, then, I would push myself to make the effort. In time the task became easier; and in fact, before long, contacting those strangers even came to be an enjoyable stimulus and challenge.

Now, years later, I am continually thankful for having had the privilege of facing those missionary difficulties and receiving the opportunity to play even a small part in the lives of several who were converted and came to be faithful members-and some of them even leaders-in the Church in Mexico. I owe an immense debt of gratitude to such as Samuel H. Smith.

Samuel had many other remarkable qualities worthy of our emulation. They began to be evident early in his life's experiences. He was born March 13, 1808. That means that in 1820, when his next older brother, Joseph, told the family of some of his remarkable spiritual experiences in connection with the First Vision, Samuel had just turned twelve years of age.

Soon after Joseph had the remarkable and life-changing experiences in the Sacred Grove, he apparently confided to his family, to ministers, and perhaps to others outside the family some of what he had experienced (see JS-H 1:21). Family discussions took on a new excitement. His mother, Lucy, recounted the family's delighted response to the heaven-sent knowledge shared by their eighteen-year-old son and brother:

From this time forth, Joseph continued to receive instructions from the Lord, and we continued to get the children together every evening for the purpose of listening while he gave us a relation of the sameÂ� .

During our evening conversations, Joseph would occasionally give us some of the most amusing recitals that could be imagined. He would describe the ancient inhabitants of this continent, their dress, mode of traveling, and the animals upon which they rode; their cities, their buildings, with every particular; their mode of warfare; and also their religious worship. This he would do with as much ease, seemingly, as if he had spent his whole life among them. [^1]

I can picture in my imagination, during such occasions of sharing, a younger brother Samuel-wide-eyed, mentally and spiritually tuned in-as he listened to his next older brother. Samuel's entire life following that time proved that he was not merely a passive listener, not just a believer only-he was a doer of the first order. For Samuel, those early years of the Restoration must have been a time of immense spiritual growth and commitment.

Like so many scriptural and historical figures, Samuel Harrison Smith has taught me a great deal. I see in him a rare blend of commitment and constancy. Someone said that just showing up-being where we ought to be-has to be one of the most important characteristics of a good Church member. Samuel was one who "showed up." He was there. In fact, his name is associated with many of the important "firsts" in the history of the Restoration.

Some time in May 1829, Samuel went to Harmony, Pennsylvania, to see his brother Joseph and Oliver Cowdery, who at that time were in the process of translating and transcribing the Book of Mormon. While there, he learned of that monumental visit of the resurrected John the Baptist to Joseph and Oliver on the banks of the Susquehanna River. Samuel was made aware that his brother Joseph and his scribe Oliver had received the Aaronic Priesthood and had been baptized.

Earlier, in the religious excitement that existed in the area of up-state New York, Samuel and others in the family had formally joined one of the Protestant churches. Subsequently, as Samuel learned more about what his brother Joseph was learning and doing, he had the challenge of considering giving up his newfound church and identifying with this new movement. Like many converts today, considering leaving one's faith was trying for him.

[Joseph and Oliver] informed him what the Lord was about to do for the children of men, and began to reason with him out of the Bible. We also showed him that part of the work which had been translated, and labored to persuade him concerning the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which was now about to be revealed in its fulness. He was not, however, very easily persuaded of these things, but after much inquiry and explanation he retired to the woods, in order that by secret and fervent prayer he might obtain of a merciful God, wisdom to enable him to judge for himself. The result was that he obtained revelation for himself. [^2]

After Joseph and Oliver had led the way, on May 25, 1829, Samuel was the first person to be baptized for the remission of his sins in this dispensation. Following the baptism "Samuel was filled with the spirit of prophecy and praise. He uttered many sublime truths of which his mind up to that moment had never conceived." [^3]

Samuel was not gullible. He did not rush into his conversion. He wanted to make sure that he knew enough about the restored gospel before he would agree to be baptized; but once he did, there was no retention problem with Samuel-there was no looking back.

A short time later, Samuel's name appeared as one of the Eight Witnesses of the Book of Mormon. He saw the plates. He touched them. He noted the careful workmanship on them. He knew and testified to his dying day that the plates were real-just as his brother Joseph had told him. He signed his name along with the seven others and testified to the world:

Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto whom this work shall come: That Joseph Smith, Jun., the translator of this work, has shown unto us the plates of which hath both been spoken, which have the appearance of gold; and as many of the leaves as the said Smith has translated we did handle with our hands; and we also saw the engravings thereon, all of which has the appearance of ancient work, and of curious workmanship. And this we bear record with words of soberness that the said Smith has shown unto us, for we have seen and hefted, and know of a surety that the said Smith has got the plates of which we have spoken. And we give our names unto the world, to witness unto the world that which we have seen. And we lie not, God bearing witness of it. (Book of Mormon, The Testimony of Eight Witnesses.)

On the historic date of April 6, 1830, about sixty people gathered at the Peter Whitmer home in Fayette, New York, to witness the formal organization of the Church of Jesus Christ in this dispensation. Samuel was again selected to be another "first" as he was designated one of the six charter members of the Church.

Presumably these six men signed a document required by state law. In Spanish, the word for signature is firma. I like that word even better in Spanish than its English equivalent because it comes from the Latin root firmus, which means "to strengthen, not yielding under pressure, solid, hard, not moved or shaken easily, fixed, stable, unchanging, resolute, constant, showing determination and steadfast in conviction." [^4]

All these definitions characterize Samuel well because when he participated and voted in that sacred inaugural meeting as one of the first members of this newly organized Church, he took it very seriously. His word was literally as good as his bond. Similarly, when he signed the document testifying to the world that he, along with those seven others, had actually seen the plates from which the Book of Mormon had been translated, he was honor-bound by that firma, or signature, and he did not waver. He never sought to hide behind the "small print" or seek legal escape from obligation. He was not one ever to go back on that signature, which manifested what he actually had seen and that which he had committed himself to support. His life became a living testament and should be a faith-producing example to all of us.

Samuel Smith set an example of a missionary spirit we could all well follow as committed Latter-day Saints. The Church of Jesus Christ in ancient times was a missionary church, so it follows that in the restoration of that church in our day it too was to be a missionary church. The final commandment the resurrected Savior gave to his disciples just before ascending to His Father in Heaven was related to this missionary responsibility: "And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned." (Mark 16:15-16.) That same basic charge has been given to the Church in this dispensation (see D&C 68:8).

Samuel knew that the message of the Restoration needed to be shared. I remember seeing years ago a painting by William H. Whitaker that made a significant impression on me. The painting pictured a solitary figure with a satchel in one hand and a book in the other trudging down what appears to be a muddy road. The painting represents Samuel, all alone, courageously leaving home, family, and loved ones to open this dispensation's missionary efforts.

It is significant that Samuel achieved another "first" in the history of the Church when he was called and set apart as a missionary. He began his mission in June of 1830.

There wasn't much of a temporal nature that Samuel took with him on this mission. He didn't have much money, if any, nor likely any more in his satchel than a few personal items, the rest of the space being occupied by as many copies of the newly published-and publicly boycotted-Book of Mormon as he could carry. As to spiritual things, Samuel carried with him all that was most necessary-a deep faith and an abiding testimony that Jesus was the Christ and that the Book of Mormon was literally another testament of this reality. In this lonely venture Samuel carved his place in history as he fulfilled his responsibility as the first formally called missionary in this dispensation of the fulness of times.

It was not merely a matter of stuffing a few copies of the Book of Mormon into a satchel and going out to share it with others who were anxious to accept it. Residents of the area around Palmyra-ministers of religion and a good share of the parishioners-had been encouraged, and many had agreed, to boycott the book in an effort to prevent it from selling. Thus it was not a benign atmosphere into which Samuel went. His brother Joseph had had his life threatened, and the entire Smith family had been vilified by the wagging tongues and scurrilous reports that spewed from the presses in the vicinity. Thus Samuel was entering a largely hostile world.

Nevertheless, he was willing to sacrifice his time and effort. He went, he began the appointed task of "opening his mouth" and proclaiming the good news that God really does live, and that the claims that Jesus is the resurrected Christ have been verified in modern times through actual revelation from God to a modern prophet.

Samuel's example can be a help to all of us in the area of overcoming "the fear of man" and in "opening our mouths" as we have been commanded. Note the following verses of scripture: "Open your mouths and they shall be filled, and you shall become even as Nephi of old, who journeyed from Jerusalem in the wilderness. Yea, open your mouths and spare not, and you shall be laden with sheaves upon your backs, for lo, I am with you. Yea, open your mouths and they shall be filled, saying: Repent, repent and prepare ye the way of the Lord." (D&C 33:8-10.)

For four years I had the privilege of serving as president of the Missionary Training Center in Provo, Utah. During that time I thought often of Samuel Harrison Smith as I saw the more than 58,000 missionaries who were beginning their preparation for their missions to carry the same message to the world. Now it is taught in more than thirty languages. They, the modern-day missionaries, like this younger brother of the Prophet Joseph, are willing to leave the comfort of their homes and families and go into what occasionally proves to be a somewhat inhospitable world. Like Samuel, they are willing to "open their mouths" and share the precious truths of the Book of Mormon and the restoration of the gospel.

In principle, the nature of a missionary call hasn't changed dramatically over all these years since Samuel's, other than the fact that there are now tens of thousands of companions sharing the same message. In Samuel's time he had to muster the courage and rise to the responsibility to start his mission alone, setting a precedent for all who would follow.

Samuel's valiant example helped me while I was serving as a missionary in Mexico and Central America during a time when the dominant church had great hold on the minds of people and many made us feel that we were not welcome among them. I remember the discouraging feeling of returning to our missionary apartment after a long day of rejections only to find a note attached to our door letting us know that we were not appreciated in the country and telling us that we should go home.

Samuel had experienced such feelings of discouragement long before any of us arrived in the mission field, and his experience, determination, and example were a great help to me. He may have felt disheartened because of the very few people who were willing to accept the book or his account of how it had been received and translated. However, most members of the Church have learned of the remarkable outcome of that first mission in terms of future leaders of the Church who were directly or indirectly influenced by its message-leaders such as President-to-be Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball.

The record indicates that Samuel left a copy of the Book of Mormon with the Reverend John P. Greene who, at first, was not personally interested. As an evidence of his persistence, Samuel didn't give up easily. He called back three times. At the insistence of his wife, Reverend Greene finally read the Book of Mormon. Later both he and his wife were baptized.

Meanwhile Mrs. Greene's brother, Phineas Young, had earlier obtained a copy of the Book of Mormon from Samuel. He gave it to his brother Brigham, who later passed it along to his sister, Mrs. Murray, the mother of the wife of Heber C. Kimball. Thus we see the serial impact of just one copy of the Book of Mormon in bringing into the Church some of its most influential early leaders.

Have you ever wondered how the history of the Church may have been significantly altered had Samuel not had the courage and fortitude to launch out on that first missionary effort?

Someone said that the Lord is not as much concerned with our ability as with our availability. Samuel Smith strikes me as one of those good, solid, committed, regular members of the Church. One of his daughters wrote of her father: "His sisters and his mother have always been loud in their praise of him, his honesty and his good qualities in general. While not as brilliant as some of the rest of his brothers he had a logical turn of mind and many excellent qualities that lay hidden under the stress of circumstances." [^5]He may not have had the talent or ability of his brothers Joseph or Hyrum, but he was there-he was available-and willing to serve when so many tasks of significance needed to be done.

I identify with such a man as Samuel Harrison Smith. He has been a great model to me personally. Because of such as he, it has been easier for me to "open my mouth" and come a little closer to being the kind of member missionary I know that I ought to be.

Samuel had other important personal traits and characteristics that I would like to emulate in my own life. Some of them have been described by his contemporaries. It would be marvelous if statements such as these could be made about each of us:

Â Orson Hyde, a missionary companion, described Samuel as "a man of good faith and extreme integrity." [^6]

Â Don Carlos, Samuel's brother, described him as "faithful as the sun." [^7]

Â Samuel's mother also recorded that "Samuel was never censured by revelation, to my knowledge, for he always performed his missions faithfully, and his work was well approved." [^8]

Â Samuel's spirituality is made evident by a statement made by his mother, Lucy Mack Smith, when she alleged that "none of her sons had a greater gift of healing than Samuel." [^9]

Â President George Q. Cannon described Samuel as "a man of integrity and singleness and fixity of purpose." [^10]

Â George A. Smith, a cousin of Samuel H. Smith, said, "He possessed great strength and wonderful powers of endurance, and was very exemplary in all his habits." [^11]

As another one of his "firsts," Samuel was a member of the initial high council called in 1834. Samuel's faithfulness and the integrity of his commitment are illustrated by the fact that during the time of apostasy in Kirtland, when some of the most prominent leaders were falling away, only three of that original high council remained faithful and were sustained. Samuel was one of them. Samuel later became its presiding officer.

Samuel's attributes of faithfulness, integrity, constancy, courage, and missionary zeal are all qualities we should strive to incorporate into our own lives.

We commemorate with love and admiration the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph and his faithful brother Hyrum on 27 June 1844. We also thrill at the dedication of Elders John Taylor and Willard Richards, who risked their lives to be with the brothers at Carthage. One fact we may tend to overlook is that Samuel was also one of the early martyrs of the Church.

When Samuel heard that his brothers were imprisoned in Carthage, he knew that they were in extreme danger. One of his daughters later recorded that Samuel took a young fourteen-year-old boy and set out in a wagon from Nauvoo to Carthage but was turned back by members of the mob, who anticipated that some help might be coming to Joseph and Hyrum from Nauvoo. Samuel was prevented from continuing. His daughter described subsequent events as follows:

He then returned home as quickly as possible, purchased a horse noted for its speed, and determined to reach his brothers in time to be of assistance to them, altho the hope seemed a forlorn one. He went unarmed, and as he again neared Carthage he met several people coming from there in great haste, among them a man and a woman in a buggy, of whom he asked what had happened, and received answer that the two Smiths had been killed by the mob. The terrible shock was too much for him, and for an instant he reeled in his saddle and they expected him to fall. Then as the necessity of immediate action flashed across his mind, he steadied himself, saying, "God help me! I must go to them," and he again pressed forward. The mob, expecting his return, and intent upon murder, were secreted in a thicket, and two men on horseback with rifles gave chase. As they emerged from the thicket, the man in the buggy gave a warning shout; my father, turning his head quickly, took in the situation at a glance, and put his horse to its utmost speed, still keeping his course straight toward Carthage. His splendid horsemanship kept him somewhat out of the range of the bullets sent after him, the one passed thru the top of his hat. The chase was a long and exciting one, but he finally out-distanced them and rode into Carthage. [^12]

Again, Samuel was there. Samuel's daughter mentions that her father was the first (another of those "firsts") to arrive at the jail following the Martyrdom. [^13]

Along with a Mr. Hamilton, Samuel performed the gruesome task of removing his brothers' bodies to the hotel. The next day was hot and humid. With green branches covering his two brothers' bodies to help protect them from the heat, the grief-stricken Samuel, accompanied by Willard Richards and Mr. Hamilton, escorted the sad caravan back to Nauvoo. Upon arrival, the responsibility fell to Samuel as the first family member to attempt to console the others.

His mother, Lucy, records that after she had retired to her room following viewing the bodies of her murdered sons, Samuel said, "Mother, I have had a dreadful distress in my side ever since I was chased by the mob, and I think I have received some injury which is going to make me sick." [^14]Greatly weakened due to fatigue, shock, and apparently some internal injuries he had suffered from the chase, he never recovered. Samuel Harrison Smith, at the young age of thirty-six, passed away on July 30, 1844, just over a month after the death of his brothers. Thus Samuel was a third victim of the Martyrdom. He was willing to sacrifice his all for his convictions.

In these tragic events, again Samuel was there at the very heart of the most important happenings of the time. Samuel's reliability, constancy, unwavering faith, commitment, and courage make him one of the truly outstanding heroes of the Restoration.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Eliza R. Snow Smith, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow (Salt Lake City: Deseret NewsCo., 1884), pp. 4-6.
[^2] Smith, p. 10.
[^3] Smith, p. 46.
[^4] Orson F. Whitney, "Lives of our Leaders-The Apostles: Lorenzo Snow," Juvenile Instructor, January 1, 1900, p. 4.
[^5] Thomas C. Romney, The Life of Lorenzo Snow (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1955), p. 47.
[^6] Lorenzo Snow to Brigham Young, November 1, 1850, as quoted in Smith, p. 129.
[^7] Lorenzo Snow to Brigham Young, November 1, 1850, as quoted in Smith, p. 133.
[^8] Lorenzo Snow to Brigham Young, November 1, 1850, as quoted in Smith, p. 233.
[^9] In Journal of Discourses 19:347.
[^10] Francis M. Gibbons, Lorenzo Snow: Spiritual Giant, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1982), pp. 168-69.
[^11] See LeRoi C. Snow, "Raised from the Dead," Improvement Era, September, 1929, pp. 881-86; October 1929, pp. 972-80.
[^12] Gibbons, pp. 204-9.
[^13] See Leonard J. Arrington, Great Basin Kingdom: An Economic History of the Latter-day Saints, 1830-1900. (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1958), pp. 245-51, 400-401.
[^14] LeRoi C. Snow, "An Experience of My Father's," Improvement Era, September 1933, p. 677.
