Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Preface

"One must have a sense of humor to be an optimist in times like these," Hugh B. Brown once said. "And you young women will need a sense of humor if you marry these young men and try to live with them. Golden Kimball once said in a conference, 'The Lord Himself must like a joke or he wouldn't have made some of you people.' But your good humor must be real, not simulated. Let your smiles come from the heart and they will become contagious. You may see men on the street any day whose laugh is only a frozen grin with nothing in it but teeth. Men without humor tend to forget their source, lose sight of their goal, and with no lubrication in their mental crankshafts, they must drop out of the race. Lincoln said, 'Good humor is the oxygen of the soul.' And someone paraphrased, 'The surly bird catches the germ'" (The Abundant Life [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965], 50).

Everybody loves a good joke. Whether we're giving a talk in sacrament meeting, teaching a Sunday School lesson, or presenting a family home evening message, we instinctively turn to humor to bridge the gap between speaker and listeners. Humor lets us see life's bright side, gives us new perspective, and allows us to laugh at our own foibles.

Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People is an extensive collection of oft-repeated jokes, true anecdotes, and quotations that have become or may become favorites among members of the Church. Because humor is so subjective, we have selected a broad variety of material—from mildly to wildly humorous, from one-liners to stories. Included are true incidents from Church history, gently humorous quotations from general conference addresses, and a broad variety of jokes.

Thomas Carlyle stated: "True humor springs not more from the head than from the heart. It is not contempt. Its essence is love. Its issue is not in laughter, but in still smiles which lie far deeper" (Quoted in BYU Speeches of the Year, 17 Mar. 1981, 47). Some humor does indeed result in quiet smiles, while some makes us laugh out loud. What's more, when it comes to jokes, one person's "chuckler" is another person's "groaner." We have considered each item in this collection in terms of its possible appeal to different readers, its usefulness and appropriateness for LDS speakers and teachers, and its overall fun value.

As in Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People and Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, material in this volume is arranged by topic for easy reference. Within each topic, entries are clearly identified as jokes, quotations, poems, or stories.

We gratefully acknowledge our debt to other compilers and editors. Because jokes are frequently retold, altered, and adapted, it would be impossible for us to identify the original authors or sources of jokes. In the case of quotations and anecdotes, however, we have made every effort to credit the original source where possible. We express our heartfelt appreciation to Ronald A. Millett, Sheri Dew, Kent Ware, Jennifer Adams, Patricia J. Parkinson, and Ronald O. Stucki at Deseret Book Company.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
