Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Accountability

Jokes

If we could kick the person who is responsible for most of our troubles, we wouldn't be able to sit down for six months.

A chaplain was walking through a prison and noticed a number of prisoners sewing laundry bags. He walked up to one prisoner and asked, "Sewing, are you?"

"No," said the prisoner sadly. "I'm reaping."

Police officer at scene of accident: Whose fault was this collision?

Bystander: Neither driver was at fault, sir. They hit each other at exactly the same time.

The judge looked at the defendant. "Young man, it is alcohol that is responsible for your present sorry state."

"I'm glad you said that. Everyone else says it's my fault."

As one person explained it, no one wanted to take responsibility for what happened in the Garden of Eden: "Adam blamed Eve, and Eve blamed the snake, and the snake didn't have a leg to stand on."

The bishop of a struggling little ward worried that the members were not living the gospel. So every week at the end of sacrament meeting he took a few minutes to exhort the people to greater diligence. One old man in the congregation was especially incorrigible. He was known to have a drink now and then, the bishop could smell cigarette smoke on his breath, and the fellow's language was always foul. One day the bishop spoke briefly about staying away from alcoholic beverages. After the meeting, the old man came up to him and said, "Boy, Bishop! You sure told them!"

Discouraged that the old man hadn't gotten the point, the bishop was even plainer the next Sunday as he spoke about drinking and smoking. Again the old man missed the point: "Wow, Bishop! You really told them today!"

The next Sunday there was a tremendous snowstorm, and no one showed up for church except the bishop and this one incorrigible old man. So the bishop took the whole sacrament meeting, and he spoke about drinking, smoking, and foul language. The old man could have no doubt that he was the target of the bishop's blunt remarks.

After the service, the old man came up to the bishop and said, "Boy oh boy, Bishop! You really told 'em today—if only they'd a been here!"

Quotations

J. Golden Kimball: I know a good deal more about this Church than the man did, one of those strangers that come in our midst, who went on a hill here recently and stood in an ant bed, and when the ants commenced to bite he commenced to curse the "Mormonsy" I suppose he thought they were "Mormon" ants, and he held us responsible for them (Conference Report, Oct. 1904, 57).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
