Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Action

Quotations

George A. Smith: There was [a man] by the name of Hawley. He was attacked by a spirit of revelation, somewhere in the State of New York, while he was ploughing; and it took him in such a hurry that he had not time to put on his boots, but travelled barefoot to Kirtland, some six hundred miles distant, to warn Joseph that he was a fallen Prophet; that God had cut Joseph off, and placed in his stead a man by the name of Noah; and the reason Joseph was cut off was, he had suffered the men to wear cushions on their coat sleeves, and the women to wear caps. He went through the streets of Kirtland with a dismal howl, crying, "Woe, woe to the people." On one occasion, about midnight, Brigham Young went out, and took with him a cowhide, and said to Hawley, "If you don't quit annoying the people with your noise, I will cowhide you;" upon which he concluded he had suffered persecution enough for his master's sake, and shut up his noise (Journal of Discourses 7:114).

J. Golden Kimball: It is not very difficult for a Latter-day Saint to believe all that has been revealed. To me it is all true, but the great trouble I am having is to make it work (Conference Report, Apr. 1915, 133).

Stories

King James the First would say to the lords of his council, after they sat upon any great matter, "Well, you have sat, but what have you hatched?"

A little girl anxiously told her mother that her brother was setting traps for birds. "He won't catch any birds in his traps, will he, Mother?" she asked.

The mother said, "Perhaps he will—you cannot be sure he will not."

"I have prayed about it and asked Heavenly Father to protect the birds," the girl said. Then, becoming more positive, she said, "I know he won't catch any."

The mother asked, "How can you be so positive?"

"Because after I said my prayers, I went out and kicked those old traps to pieces" (Packer, Teach Ye Diligently, 255).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
