Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Adversity

Jokes

A worker was leaning far out over the edge of a high building in the middle of a crowded city. Unfortunately, he slipped and fell. Fortunately, there was a haywagon proceeding slowly down the avenue just below him. Unfortunately, there was a pitchfork sticking, prongs up, in the middle of the load of hay. Fortunately, the man didn't hit the pitchfork. Unfortunately, he didn't hit the haywagon either.

Quotations

John Taylor: We feel that we are kind of half comfortable in these valleys of the mountains, but the devil is not dead yet (Journal of Discourses 25:347).

Ebenezer Robinson: We were taken [to prison] on the 28th of November. Winter set in early that season. A considerable snow had fallen, and the weather became severely cold by the first of December. An amusing scene occurred one cold night. Brother Luman Gibbs, of whom we have heretofore spoken, lodged in the same bed with the writer, and after retiring for the night, he put his feet out of the bed and said: "Stay there and freeze, it serves you right; bring me here all the way from Vermont to be in prison for murder and never thought of killing anybody in all my life." The act was so unexpected and so ludicrous, it convulsed his fellow prisoners with laughter, except Parley P. Pratt; he seemed to get out of humor, and gave him a good scolding (The Return 2:236).

David O. McKay: A dog's got to have a few fleas or he wouldn't know he was a dog (Conference Report, Apr. 1962, 83-84).

J. Golden Kimball: "I will fear no evil, for thou art with me," "there shall no evil happen to the just." You have read those things a thousand times, and so have I; and then we never think of them. . . . When I was sick, I read [a positive thinking book] from lid to lid, and I went trotting around, saying: "Every day, in every way, I am getting better and better." Every morning when I got up I was worse and worse (Conference Report, Apr. 1926, 61).

Stories

After a huge hurricane devastated the West Indies, a bricklayer who was sent to help repair the damage wrote the following letter to his employer:

"Respected Sirs:

"When I got to the building I found that the hurricane had knocked some bricks off the top. So I rigged up a beam with a pulley at the top of the building and hoisted up a couple of barrels full of bricks. When I had fixed the building, there was a lot of bricks left over. I hoisted the barrel back up again and secured the line at the bottom, and then went up and filled the barrel with the extra bricks. Then I went to the bottom and cast off the line. Unfortunately the barrel of bricks was heavier than I was, and before I knew what was happening the barrel started down, jerking me off the ground. I decided to hang on, and halfway up I met the barrel coming down and received a severe blow on the shoulder. I then continued to the top, banging my head against the beam and getting my finger jammed in the pulley. When the barrel hit the ground it bursted its bottom, allowing all the bricks to spill out. I was now heavier than the barrel and so started down again at high speed. Halfway down, I met the barrel coming up and received severe injuries to my shins. When I hit the ground I landed on the bricks, getting several painful cuts from the sharp edges. At this point I must have lost my presence of mind because I let go of the line. The barrel then came down, giving me another heavy blow on the head and putting me in hospital. I respectfully request sick leave" (in Speeches of the Year, 25 Sept. 1973, 105-6).

After recovering from surgery on his vocal cords, Spencer W. Kimball attended a conference in his home territory of Arizona, where he explained his long absence: "I went away to the East and while I was there I fell among thieves and cutthroats. They cut my throat and stole my voice" (Kimball, "Spencer W. Kimball," BYU Studies[25[4]: 66).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
