Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Aging

Jokes

Seminary teacher: Bill, when I was your age, I could name all the Church presidents in order.

Bill: Well, sure. Back then there were only two or three.

Three older sisters were sitting around a table at Relief Society homemaking meeting, working on crafts and chatting.

The first sister said, "You know, I'm getting really forgetful. This morning, I was standing at the top of the stairs, and I couldn't remember whether I had just come up or was about to go down."

The second sister said, "You think that's bad? The other day, I was sitting on the edge of my bed, and I couldn't remember whether I was going to bed or had just woken up!"

The third sister smiled smugly. "Well, my memory's just as good as it's always been—knock on wood." She rapped on the table, then looked up with a startled expression. "Oh," she said, "someone's at the door."

"I'll be a hundred years old this month," the oldest ward member announced to the bishop. "And I don't have one single enemy in the whole world."

"That's a wonderful attitude," said the bishop.

"Well, Bishop," said the old man, "The truth is, I've outlived every one of 'em."

You know you're getting old when . . .

After you get it all together, you realize you'd do better if you took it apart.

You get a little winded when you brush your teeth.

You reach the age when you know all the answers but nobody asks any of the questions.

Your crow's feet need orthopedic shoes.

Your appendix scar hits your knee.

While sitting in a rocking chair you have difficulty in getting it started.

After you get out of the shower, you're glad the mirror's fogged up.

You get up in the morning and you have one shoe on and one shoe off and you can't tell whether you are getting up or going to bed (Conference Report, Oct. 1983, 34-35).

You're never too old to grow up.

Grandchildren are God's way of rewarding us for growing old.

A mother and father watched their daughter, all dressed up and wearing a fragrant corsage, as she left for the junior prom with her date. The mother closed the front door and sighed wistfully. "It almost makes me wish we were young and foolish again, dear," she said.

"Hey!" the husband responded brightly. "One out of two ain't bad!"

Quotations

President J. Reuben Clark, age eighty-three, said to the students at BYU, "Recently some students who were questioned reported they felt anyone past teenage was ancient. That set me to thinking and I suppose that, the post-teenagers being ancients, I am not only antediluvian . . . , but I am likewise prehistoric. . . . I shrink from the final step—that I am a fossil" (Speeches of the Year, 20 Apr. 1954).

Arwell L. Pierce: I recall with much interest the visit of President George Albert Smith to the Mexican Mission in May of 1946. . . . I was so happy that President Smith could make that trip, for he seemed to enjoy it immensely. As you may know, President Smith had a keen sense of humor. Well, he was determined to climb to the top of the Pyramid of the Sun, so two missionary Elders, one on either side of the President, helped him climb those many steep steps to the top. About half way up President Smith stopped and with a smile looked at first one then the other Elder and said, "Well, I might help one of you up here, but why should I help two of you?" (Conference Report, Apr. 1951, 112-13).

German E. Ellsworth: Three years ago in President [J. Reuben] Clark's office, he said to me, "President Ellsworth, when a car has gone 77,000 miles, the bottom may drop out anytime. You slow down."

Facetiously, I said, "President Clark, I'm not as old as you are."

Then he said, "Well, what is the difference?"

I said, "Six weeks" (Conference Report, Oct. 1951, 95).

J. Golden Kimball: I am very glad that I am not so old as I feel (Conference Report, Apr. 1938, 29).

Stories

A young boy raced up the stairs in the Hotel Utah to catch President David O. McKay just as he was getting off the elevator. He asked President McKay how it felt to be ninety-four years old. The president replied, "It feels great when you consider the alternative" (see Speeches of the Year, 5 Feb. 1970).

After many years away, Spencer W. Kimball visited his home town in Arizona. "Is that direction south?" he asked. Someone told him it was. "I knew it used to be south," he said, "but so many other things have changed since we lived here that I thought they might have changed that, too" (Kimball, "Spencer W. Kimball," BYU Studies [5[4]: 69).

Driving down the road one day, Spencer and Camilla Kimball noticed vultures circling in the sky. "I wonder what they're looking for?" Sister Kimball said. Brother Kimball, who had been through a period of ill health, replied, "They're looking for me!" (Kimball, "Spencer W. Kimball," BYU Studies[25[4]: 69).

Spencer W. Kimball once attended an area conference where the local leader offered thanks that the president was well enough to attend, praying that he would "die in the saddle." The next day at the Church ranch, someone suggested that the Kimballs go horseback riding. President Kimball replied, "I don't know whether I want to or not" (Kimball, "Spencer W. Kimball," BYU Studies[25[4]: 69).

On one occasion, the aging President David O. McKay was driving along when a highway patrolman stopped him for speeding. "Oh, I'm sorry, President McKay," the patrolman said. "I didn't know it was you."

"No, I'm glad for it," President McKay responded. "Some people think I'm slowing down in my old age" (see West, Profiles of the Presidents, 229).

Elder Hugh B. Brown told about having his grandson on his knee. The boy felt the wrinkles on his grandfather's face, looked at his white hair, and asked, "Grandpa Brown, were you on Noah's ark?"

President Brown replied, "No, son, Grand-daddy Brown wasn't on Noah's ark."

"Well," the boy asked, "how come you weren't drowned?" (Speeches of the Year, 3 Nov. 1970, 2).

One of Joseph Fielding Smith's sisters came to visit him on a holiday only to find the elderly man working in his office. She scolded him for not taking a day off, saying, "I want you to go home and take a nap. George Albert Smith, Stephen L Richards, and J. Reuben Clark always did."

"Yes," President Smith countered, "and look where they are now" (Joseph Fielding McConkie, True and Faithful, 74).

A little old lady once approached the elderly Hugh B. Brown. "Oh, President Brown," she said, "I've always wanted you to speak at my funeral."

Smiling, he said, "Sister, if you want me to speak at your funeral, you'd better hurry" (see Speeches of the Year, 3 Mar. 1974).

President Marion G. Romney's good-humored love for his wife Ida was manifested in many ways. He delighted in telling of her hearing loss. Once he tried to get Ida to go to her doctor for a hearing check-up, but she didn't think she needed one. Convinced that there was a problem, but not being able to convince Ida, he finally decided to go see her doctor himself and consult about what should be done.

President Romney explained, "He asked me how bad it was, and I said I didn't know. He told me to go home and find out. The doctor instructed me to go into a far room and speak to her. Then I should move nearer and nearer until she did hear." In this way he could learn how bad the hearing loss was. President Romney went home to try his experiment.

"Following the doctor's instructions, I spoke to her from the bedroom while she was in the kitchen—no answer. I moved nearer and spoke again—no answer. So I went right up to the door of the kitchen and said, 'Ida, can you hear me?'

"She responded, 'What is it, Marion? I've answered you three times'" (adapted from Howard, Marion G. Romney, 144-45).

Hugh B. Brown: During the recent conference held in the Tabernacle in Salt Lake City, after two of the younger brethren of the General Authorities had spoken, I whispered to the President [David O. McKay] and said, "President McKay, I believe this Church is going to carry on after you and I are gone."

He said, "Gone where? I am not going any place." Then he added, "Where are you going?" (Speeches of the Year, 10 Oct. 1962, 12-13).

Oscar W. McConkie, Jr.: With a whisper of his ever-present dry humor President [J. Reuben] Clark complained to me: "Oscar, I can't work as hard as I did when I was seventy-five." He was then only eighty-five years old (BYU Studies [3[3]: 452).

Once a friend saw the aged John Quincy Adams on the street. "And how is John Quincy Adams today?" the friend asked.

"Thank you," the ex-President responded, "John Quincy Adams is well, quite well, I thank you. But the house in which he lives at present is becoming quite dilapidated. It is tottering upon its foundations. Time and the seasons have nearly destroyed it, its roof is pretty well worn out. Its walls are much shattered, and it trembles with every wind. The old tenement is becoming almost uninhabitable, and I think John Quincy Adams will have to move out of it soon. But he himself is quite well."

Once an elderly neighbor came to J. Golden Kimball for advice. "Brother Kimball," he said, "me and Sister Swensen, we want to get married. What do you think?"

"Well, now, Brother Sorensen, I don't know! Why do you want to get married?"

"Well, you see, we want an heir! I want an heir, and Sister Swensen, she wants an heir too."

Brother Kimball looked the old man up and down. "But Brother Sorensen, how old are you and how old is Sister Swensen?"

"Well now, let me see! I turned seventy-three last May, and Sister Swensen, she will be sixty-two right away now."

"Well, Brother," Elder Kimball replied, "you and Sister Swensen may be heir-minded, but I'm afraid you aren't heir-conditioned" (adapted from Fife and Fife, Saints of Sage and Saddle, 307).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
