Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Attitude

Jokes

Just before the young army recruit made his first parachute jump, he received instructions from his sergeant: "Now, remember these three things: First of all, count to ten, then pull the first rip cord. And second—if nothing happens, pull the second cord, which releases the auxiliary chute. Third—when you land, our truck will pick up you and your gear."

"Yes, sir," said the recruit and then jumped out of the plane. After counting to ten, he pulled the first cord. The chute didn't open. He pulled the second rip cord, and the chute still didn't open.

"Oh, great," he muttered as he plummeted toward the earth. "Now I suppose that truck won't be there either!"

Complaining ward member: How can I be thankful, Bishop? What have I got to be thankful for?

Bishop: Surely there must be something.

Complainer: Why, I can't even pay my bills!

Bishop: Then be grateful you're not one of your creditors.

Optimists stay up to see the new year in. Pessimists stay up to make sure the old year leaves.

Wife (reading newspaper article): This article says we exercise more than a hundred muscles when we laugh!

Husband: Those doggone fitness experts! They take the fun out of everything, don't they?

Quotations

Howard W. Hunter was confined to a wheelchair during his old age. At the beginning of one conference address he remarked, "I notice that the rest of you seem to enjoy the conference sitting down, so I will follow your example" (Conference Report, Oct. 1987, 68).

"We should not yield or surrender to [physical limitations], or give up in despair with the first twinge of stiffening joints in mind or body," said the apostle Hugh B. Brown. "Life will continue to have an alluring and increasing wealth of interest all the way down its western slopes for him who keeps a cutting edge on his awareness." The apostle suffered a painful medical condition for nearly fifty years, but he somehow managed to preserve his sense of humor, often quoting this poem:

My bifocals are wonderful My hearing aid's a find My dentures come in handy But how I miss my mind!

(see Van Wagoner and Walker, A Book of Mormons, 38-39).

Orson F. Whitney: The spirit of the gospel is optimistic; it trusts in God and looks on the bright side of things. The opposite or pessimistic spirit drags men down and away from God, looks on the dark side, murmurs, complains, and is slow to yield obedience. There is a story told of two buckets that hung in a well, on either end of a long chain, so that when one went up the other went down, and vice versa. They were both drawing water out of the well, both doing precisely the same kind of work, but one of the buckets was an optimist, and the other was a pessimist. The pessimistic bucket complained of its lot, saying: "It doesn't matter how full I come up, I always go back empty." The optimistic bucket, with a bright smile, retorted: "It doesn't matter how empty I go down, I always come back full." . . . Much depends, you see, upon the spirit in which a thing is viewed (Conference Report, Apr. 1917, 43).

Moses W. Taylor: I am going to tell you the part of President Smith's talk yesterday that made a great impression on me. It was that we should talk about the good things, and not all the time be talking about evil things. You know some people think it is a virtue to be sick. I met President Duckworth yesterday with a big rag around his neck and told him to take it off, it was a sign he was weak, and we want people to look beautiful and strong. . . . I often think of my father [President John Taylor]. You know he filled many missions in the world, and met many great men and many rich men, among others he met Baron Rothschild. One time Rothschild was traveling around the world and he came to Salt Lake City. Father was just about as poor at that time as he ever was in his life, but he had an old carriage and he got the boys out and we had to polish it and fix it up just as good as we could. He bought thirty cents worth of oil to black the harness, and we blacked the harness and worked at the old carriage and harness for about a day. Finally Baron Rothschild called on him. Father had a big black cloak and a silk hat that he had got in France. He had them cleaned and fixed up, and when he and the Baron walked out of the house to the carriage father looked better to me than Baron Rothschild (Conference Report, Apr. 1913, 36).

Hugh B. Brown: I would like to have you smile because after all we must keep a sense of humor whatever comes. I think of all the people in the world we should be the happiest. We have the greatest and most joyous message in the world. I think when we get on the other side, someone will meet us with a smile (unless we go to the wrong place and then someone will grin) (Abundant Life, 83-84).

Hugh B. Brown: Let your smiles come from the heart and they will become contagious. You may see men on the street any day whose laugh is only a frozen grin with nothing in it but teeth. Men without humor tend to forget their source, lose sight of their goal, and with no lubrication in their mental crankshafts, they must drop out of the race. Lincoln said, "Good humor is the oxygen of the soul." And someone paraphrased, "The surly bird catches the germ" (Speeches of the Year, 24 May 1962, 8).

J. Golden Kimball: I am trying to be optimistic, and I am having quite a time of it. I cannot work myself up quite as well as the man who fell from a twenty-story building, and as he passed a window of the tenth story, a drummer in the room said to his wife: "Gee, that fellow is optimistic." His wife said, "What do you mean?" "Why, as the fellow passed the window, he said: 'I'm all right yet'" (Conference Report, Apr. 1915, 78).

Franklin D. Richards: On the green Isle of Ireland, where the poor and afflicted are numerous there are people who have to pay a rent of five pounds an acre for land, and they must raise sufficient off it to support their families, and raise the money to pay the rent. But here we can buy or take up land, and have it, too, for the taking, but some of us consider it an awful job to fence it (Journal of Discourses 26:255).

Brigham Young: The persons who enjoy [the spirit of the gospel] are never sorrowful nor cast down. They never endure afflictions and mourn because they suppose that they have sacrificed for the Gospel, but they are always joyful, always cheerful, with a happy smile on their faces, and, as brother Robert said, it does make the devil mad (Journal of Discourses 4:299).

J. Golden Kimball: I feel happy, just as happy as a man can feel with the rheumatism (Conference Report, Oct. 1906, 117).

Orson F. Whitney: The fall and winter conferences of the British Mission—fourteen in number, held one week apart—were just beginning, the first one in Ireland, where things were in a turmoil, men being shot down every few minutes or so. I was kind-o'-glad I couldn't go, and Brother Morton was none too happy at being sent. But he went, and had a good time—there's always a good time where Brother Morton goes—and came back rejoicing; the return trip being particularly delightful (Conference Report, Apr. 1924, 37).

Matthew Cowley: When I was first called to the Council of the Twelve, before one of my visits to the Pacific, President [J. Reuben] Clark called me into his office. I shook hands with him to say good-bye, and he said, "Now, my boy, kid"—he calls me kid—"Now, kid, don't forget rule six." I said, "What's rule six?" He said, "Don't take yourself too darn seriously." I said, "What are the other five?" He said, "There aren't any" ( Matthew Cowley Speaks, 132-33).

Stories

Elder LeGrand Richards of the Quorum of the Twelve had a droll sense of humor that stayed with him throughout his long life. At a birthday party held in his honor on the occasion of his ninetieth birthday, President N. Eldon Tanner asked Elder Richards, "Have you lived all your life in the United States?"

"Not yet!" answered Elder Richards (Tate, LeGrand Richards, 279-80).

Even in his old age, President David O. McKay retained his sense of courtesy—and his humor. Throughout his life he always rose when Emma, his wife, came into the room.

Robert Lawrence McKay, one of President McKay's sons, recalls that later in life, when both President and Sister McKay were confined to wheelchairs, they would good-humoredly challenge each other to a "race to the elevator" (see West, Profiles of the Presidents, 219).

In her nineties, Camilla Eyring Kimball, wife of President Spencer W. Kimball, noted, "A few months ago I took up painting. When someone asked why, I had to say, 'What else can you take up at ninety-two?'" (Edward L. Kimball, ed., Writings of Camilla Eyring Kimball, 137).

Charles Ora Card founded the Mormon settlement of Cardston, Alberta, on the windswept plains of Canada. One blustery morning, Brother Card was walking to church with his father. "Isn't the air fresh and invigorating?" he asked.

"Yes," said his father, "and isn't there a lot of it?" (see Ward, New Era, July 1994, 38).

As William Dean Howells and Mark Twain were coming out of church one morning, it commenced to rain heavily.

"Do you think it will stop?" asked Howells.

"It always has," answered Twain.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
