Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Music

Jokes

An LDS vocalist decided to sing "Come, Come Ye Saints" as her entry in a national talent contest. During her somewhat overblown performance, she noticed a man in the audience who was weeping profusely. After the competition, she sought him out. "Pardon me," she asked. "Are you LDS?" "No," he replied, shaking his head. "I'm a musician."

A young boy was practicing the violin, and the family dog joined in with repeated loud howling. Finally the father couldn't stand the racket any longer. "Son," he hollered above the din. "Couldn't you play a tune the dog doesn't know?"

Quotations

Spencer W. Kimball: I am comforted with the assurance that there will be beautiful music in heaven, for which I am most grateful. Some say there will be no music in that other place—but then some sounds that are passed off as music seem to belong in that other place (Church News, 2 Oct. 1982, 3).

Hugh B. Brown: I think nothing finer can be or has been given than these numbers tonight by this chorus. Of course, I don't profess to be much of a judge of music. I fear I may be a little like a couple of fellows who were sitting in a bandstand where a band was playing. Each wanted to impress the other with his knowledge of music. One said, "Do you know what the band's playing?"

"Why, yes! That's Tannhauser!"

"No, it's the second movement of Chopin."

The other said "I'll go down and find out." He went down toward the bandstand, came back shortly, and said, "We're both wrong. That was the 'Refrain from Spitting.' I saw it on the sign out there" (Brown, "Father, Are You There?" 1959, audio tape).

Heber J. Grant: Upon my recent trip to Arizona, I asked Elders Rudger Clawson and J. Golden Kimball if they had any objections to my singing one hundred hymns that day. They took it as a joke, and assured me that they would be delighted. We were on the way from Holbrook to St. Johns, a distance of about sixty miles. After I had sung about forty times, they assured me that if I sang the remaining sixty they would be sure to have nervous prostration. I paid no attention whatever to their appeal, but held them to their bargain and sang the full one hundred. One hundred and fifteen songs in one day and four hundred in four days, is the largest amount of practicing I ever did (Improvement Era 3:886-90).

George Albert Smith: The music, as we have already been informed, for this session of the Conference, is by the Manti Choir, 120 voices strong. The hymns that are to be rendered by this choir have been sung by this organization for upwards of sixty years. Among them are the compositions and arrangements of Professor A. C. Smyth, the first leader of the choir. I remember Brother Smyth very well. He is one of the men who tried to teach me how to sing (Conference Report, Apr. 1946, 55).

Heber J. Grant: I am perfectly willing to go along as slowly as the Lord wants, but the quicker I get so that I can talk faster and get more accustomed to these false teeth, the better I will like it. . . .

I am free to confess that I do not like the sound of my own voice worth a cent. . . .

I am very sorry, after laboring more diligently, I believe, than anybody else ever did to try to learn to sing a song, that I cannot sing any more. But I have been practicing bass sitting next to Brother McKay here today, and I have concluded that I had better join the bass choir, . . . and say goodbye to the lead (Conference Report, Apr. 1941, 128).

President Ulysses S. Grant had a heartfelt dislike for all music. Once at a concert in Baltimore, his companion asked him if he recognized a particular piece. "Actually," Grant said, "I know only two tunes. One is 'Yankee Doodle' and the other isn't."

Stories

When President Joseph Fielding Smith and his wife Jessie visited wards or stakes, they often ended up singing musical duets together. Jessie, a former member of the Tabernacle Choir, had a beautiful singing voice and accompanied them on the piano. President Smith often turned to the congregation and said, "She calls this a duet; I call it a Do-It. I have to do it whether I want to or not." At the conclusion of the musical number, President Smith would say to the congregation, "I appreciate that you folks didn't walk out on me."

Once as they were driving back to Salt Lake City after an impromptu musical number had been performed at a BYU devotional, President Smith's secretary, Arthur Haycock, turned to him and said, "President Smith, those people loved you, and they enjoyed your singing. Did you see they were weeping during your duet?" President Smith quickly responded, "I can understand that. My singing is enough to make anybody cry" (Swinton, In the Company of Prophets, 62).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
