Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

How Parents Mature

When you're 4 years old: My parents can do anything.

When you're 7 years old: My parents know a whole lot.

When you're 9: My parents don't know quite everything.

When you're 12: Parents just don't understand.

When you're 14: Parents are old-fashioned.

When you're 19: My parents are out of touch.

When you're 25: Parents are okay.

When you're 30: I wonder what my parents think about this?

When you're 35: I must get my parents' input first.

When you're 50: What would my parents have thought about that?

When you're 60: I wish I could talk it over with my parents once more.

The mother of a teenaged boy was talking to a ward member whose son was always well-groomed and tidy. "My son just leaves his shirt hanging out all the time," the first woman complained. "How do you get your son to tuck his in?"

"It's easy," answered her friend. "I just sew lace onto the bottom of all his shirts."

You know you're an experienced parent if . . .

You count the sprinkles on each kid's cupcake to make sure they're equal.

You hide in the bathroom just to get some private time.

You consider fingerpaint to be a controlled substance.

You've mastered the fine art of placing huge quantities of scrambled eggs and pancakes on the same plate without anything "touching."

You hope ketchup is a vegetable because it's the only one your child eats.

You con your kid into thinking that "Toys R Us" is a toy museum and not really a store.

You fast-forward through the scene where Bambi's mom gets killed.

You hire a sitter because you and your spouse haven't been out in ages, then spend half the night calling home to check on the kids.

You start offering to cut up other people's food for them!

A mother was worried because her teenage daughter had been calling a certain boy too often. So she posted a sign over the telephone: "Is this call necessary?"

The next day another sign appeared, directly below the first: "How do I know until I've made the call?"

A young father carried his screaming baby out of sacrament meeting and into the foyer. "There, there," he said. "Take it easy. Control yourself. Calm down."

The baby immediately became quiet.

Another father in the foyer said, "Boy, you sure know how to talk to a baby."

"Baby!" the first father said. "I was talking to myself!"

Quotations

Brigham Young: Through imbibing false ideas, principles and teachings, children become as the old [man] said. The missionary had been trying to instruct him in the saying, "Bring up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it;" the old [man] gave it a little different interpretation. Said he, "Bring up a child and away he goes." So it is now—we bring up children and away they go (Journal of Discourses 13:251-52).

David O. McKay: After a lecture by the late Francis Wayland Parker, a great Chicago educator, a woman asked:

"How early can I begin the education of my child?"

"When will your child be born?" asked the educator.

"Born?" she gasped. "Why, he is already five years old."

"My goodness, woman," he cried, "don't stand here talking to me—hurry home; already you have lost the best five years" (Relief Society Magazine, Dec. 1953, 792).

N. Eldon Tanner: We have five daughters. Four of them were courting at one time, or being courted. I do not know which it was. One of those girls had a girl friend in the house this evening and two young men called for them. I sat and talked to them. . . . and just before they were ready to leave, I said, "Now, have a good time." Then just as they were going out of the door I went over to my daughter and I said, "Now, behave yourself."

She said, "Well, Dad, make up your mind" (Speeches of the Year, 27 Mar. 1963, 9).

Stories

Lord Rochester, John Wilmot (1647-1680), said to a group, "When I was young, I had six theories on how to bring up children."

"And, pray, what are your theories?" asked someone.

"There is no use in asking," replied Rochester. "Now I have six children and no theories."

1999 Deseret Book Co.
