Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Bible

Jokes

After the flood, Noah went back to the ark to make sure all of the animals had left. All the stalls were empty, but he found two snakes coiled snuggly in a corner.

"What are you doing here?" he asked. "You're supposed to go forth and multiply."

"We can't," one of them said. "We're adders."

"Just the same," insisted Noah's wife, "I'd feel a lot better about it if we locked up those termites in a metal box."

Primary teacher: And then Lot's wife turned back to look, and she suddenly turned into a pillar of salt.

Young class member: That's nothing! One day my dad turned back to look while he was driving, and he turned into a telephone pole!

A Primary class was studying the Old Testament. When little Jill came home, she said, "Daddy, there's something I don't understand about the Bible. Could I ask you a question?"

"Of course, sweetheart," said her father. "What is it?"

"Well, the children of Israel built the temple, the children of Israel were slaves of Pharaoh, the children of Israel crossed the Red Sea, the children of Israel got the Ten Commandments from Moses. I just wondered—didn't the grownups do anything?"

Q: What time of day was Adam created?

A: A little before Eve.

Q: What did Adam and Eve do after they were cast out of the Garden?

A: They raised Cain.

Q: Who was the best financier in the Bible?

A: Noah. He floated his stock while the rest of the world was in liquidation.

Q: What did Noah say to his sons when they were fishing off the side of the ark?

A: You're not using worms, are you?

Q: Where is baseball mentioned in the Bible?

A: When Rebekah carries the pitcher to the well and when the Prodigal Son runs for home.

Q: Where is the first mention of tennis in the Bible?

A: When Joseph served in Pharaoh's court.

Q: What made Pharaoh's daughter such a financier?

A: She pulled a prophet from the rush on the bank.

Q: Besides Adam, who does the Bible say had no father?

A: Joshua, the son of Nun.

Q: What ailment killed Samson?

A: Fallen arches.

Q: How did Jonah's whale show charity?

A: Jonah was a stranger, and he took him in.

Q: How did Jonah feel after being swallowed by the whale?

A: Not too well. He was a little down in the mouth.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
