Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Perspective

Jokes

Isn't it funny—when the other fellow takes a long time to do something, he's slow. But when I take a long time to do something, I'm thorough. When the other fellow doesn't do it, he's too lazy. But when I don't do it, I'm too busy. When the other fellow goes ahead and does something without being told, he's overstepping his bounds. But when I go ahead and do something without being told, that's initiative! When the other fellow states his side of a question strongly, he's bullheaded. But when I state a side of a question strongly, I'm being firm. When the other fellow overlooks a few of the rules of etiquette, he's rude. But when I skip a few of the rules, I'm original. When the other fellow does something that pleases the boss, he's polishing the brass. But when I do something that pleases the boss, that's cooperation. When the other fellow gets ahead, he sure had the lucky breaks. But when I manage to get ahead, man! Hard work did that! Funny, isn't it—or is it?

Ed was having trouble with a tooth and finally decided to visit the dentist.

"It's beyond help," the dentist said. "We're going to have to pull that tooth."

"How much will it cost?" asked Ed.

"Two hundred dollars," answered the dentist.

"Two hundred dollars! For five minutes' work?" asked Ed, outraged.

"Calm down," said the dentist. "I'll make you a deal. If you'd like me to, I'll extract the tooth very slowly."

The day of a big snowstorm, the country schoolteacher felt called upon to warn her charges against playing too long in the snow. She said, "Now, children, you must be careful about colds and over- exposure. I had a darling little brother only seven years old. One day he went out in the snow with his new sled and caught cold. Pneumonia set in, and three days later he died."

The room was silent. Then a youngster in the back row raised his hand and asked, "Where's his sled?"

1999 Deseret Book Co.
