Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Philosophy

Quotations

Marion D. Hanks: Some weeks ago it was my privilege to go into one of the great subterranean caverns in the southwestern part of our land. . . . We came into an area where there was . . . [a] vast vaulted dome, but the debris from that cavity lay below it in a mountainous pile. . . . There were comments along the trail. One said: "My, I'll bet there was a tremendous clap of noise when that fell!" An army man replied, "Do you really think there was? After all, there was no one here to hear it!"

They discussed this issue at some length, whether or not in the absence of someone to hear, noise actually occurs. I listened and said nothing, but thought of Bishop Berkeley, Irish philosopher, whose theory was that "to be is to be perceived," that is, that so-called material things exist only in being perceived—if it is not perceived, it does not exist. It is said that a group of the bishop's students at Oxford taught him the true nature of reality one very dark evening when they placed a tree stump on a certain unlighted path where he habitually walked. His perception of the stump was said to be a realistic shock to George Berkeley (Improvement Era, June 1957, 446).

John Taylor: Speaking of philosophy, . . . I was almost buried up in it while I was in Paris. I was walking about one day in the Jardin des Plantes—a splendid garden. There they had a sort of exceedingly light cake. It was so thin and light that you could blow it away, and you could eat all day of it, and never be satisfied. Somebody asked me what the name of that was. I said, I don't know the proper name, but in the absence of one, I can give it a name—I will call it philosophy, or fried froth, whichever you like. It is so light you can blow it away, eat it all day, and at night be as far from being satisfied as when you began (Gospel Kingdom, 78).

Brigham Young: Now if philosophers will point out where empty space is, I will pay them for their trouble, because all the wicked will be running to me to know where it is, that they may be where God does not dwell, for they will want the rocks and mountains to fall on them to hide them from His presence. I could make money by directing poor devils where empty space is (Journal of Discourses 3:279).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
