Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Prayer

Jokes

A little girl had some blocks with letters on them. She was learning the ABCs with the use of her blocks, and one night just before bedtime she was playing with them. When she got into bed she started to say her prayers, but she was so sleepy that all she could say was, "Oh, Heavenly Father, I am too sleepy to say my prayers. Here are the blocks and the letters. You spell it out."

Little Susie concluded her prayer by saying: "Dear God, before I finish, please take care of Daddy, take care of Mommy, take care of my baby brother, Grandma, and Grandpa . . . and please, God, take care of yourself, or else we're all sunk!"

A teacher handed out the test papers, then looked around the room after telling the children to begin. One little girl sat with her head down.

"Megan, do you understand the directions?" the teacher asked.

"Yes, ma'am," Megan whispered. "I don't know if it's unconstitutional or not, but I always say a little prayer before I take a test."

Quotations

Charles W. Penrose: I remember a story told of a man who made a bet that a friend of his did not know the Lord's Prayer, and the bet was taken up, the money was deposited, and the man who laid the money down was very confident. When he was asked to repeat the Lord's Prayer he said:

"Now I lay me down to sleep,

I pray the Lord my soul to keep;

And if I die before I wake,

I pray the Lord my soul to take."

The other man said, "Well, the money is yours; but I didn't believe you could do it" (Conference Report, Oct. 1906, 52).

Joseph Fielding Smith: Our prayers are not for the purpose of telling [the Lord] how to run his business (Take Heed to Yourselves! 343-44).

Brigham Young: How gladly I would tell the people what to pray for. But if I tell them, in ten minutes afterwards they pray for something else (Journal of Discourses 6:46).

J. Golden Kimball: The father almost needs the patience of Job to get a family together for morning prayer. That is pretty plain talk, but you seem to understand what I mean. I guess you have tried it (Conference Report, Apr. 1913, 89).

Brigham Young: Do you want to know how to pray in your families? I have told you, a great many times, how to do when you feel as though you have not a particle of the Spirit of prayer with you. Get your wives and your children together, lock the door so that none of them will get out, and get down on your knees; and if you feel as though you want to swear and fight, keep on your knees until they are pretty well wearied (Journal of Discourses 4:200).

Stories

Once while on assignment to a conference in Southern Utah, President [George Albert] Smith and Arthur [Haycock] stayed at the home of a rancher who raised sheep and turkeys. Very successful in his enterprises, the rancher had little time for observing the Sabbath Day or attending church.

Still, when the two visitors came to breakfast in the morning, all the chairs had been turned out from the table in preparation for family prayer. The rancher's six-year-old boy took one look at the arrangement of chairs and started to giggle. He was obviously trying to figure out how he was going to get his father's attention. But his father hushed him up as President Smith proceeded to kneel and pray. After the prayer, the little boy piped up, "Daddy, what was that man saying to the chair?" (Swinton, In the Company of Prophets, 40-41).

A story is told that while hiding from persecution during the early days of the Church, Elder Heber C. Kimball had to stay in the home of a widow. When he retired to his bedroom, she thought, "Here's the chance to see what wonderful things an apostle says during his prayers," and she listened quietly at his door. She heard him sit on the bed. Then she heard each of his boots drop to the floor. Finally she heard Elder Kimball's prayer: "Oh, Lord, bless Heber, he is so very tired."

President Dwight D. Eisenhower usually opened his Cabinet meetings with a prayer by Secretary of Agriculture Ezra Taft Benson. On one occasion, however, Eisenhower forgot to do so. When he was reminded of his oversight by Secretary of State Dulles, he remarked, "Oh, no! And I really need all the help we can get from up there this morning."

In 1974, while attending the open house of the Washington Temple, Spencer W. Kimball was invited to offer the invocation in the United States Senate. Only a few senators were present, however, while most of the others were in a committee meeting. When someone apologized that so few were there to hear the prayer, President Kimball responded, "That's all right. I was not going to pray to them, anyway" (Kimball, "Spencer W. Kimball," BYU Studies [5[4]: 68.)

Orson F. Whitney: It is a common remark to this day that such prayers are seldom heard as were wont to issue from the heart and lips of Heber C. Kimball. Reverence for Deity was one of the cardinal qualities of his nature. Nevertheless, it was noticeable that the God to whom he prayed was a being "near at hand and not afar off." He worshiped not as "a worm of the dust," hypocritically meek and lowly, or as one conscious of naught but the meanness of his nature and the absence of merit in his cause. But in a spirit truly humble, confessing his sins, yet knowing something of the nobility of his soul, he talked with God "as one man talketh with another"; and often with the ease and familiarity of an old-time friend.

On one occasion, while offering up an earnest appeal in behalf of certain of his fellow creatures, he startled the kneeling circle by bursting into a loud laugh in the very midst of his prayer. Quickly regaining his composure and solemn address, he remarked, apologetically: "Lord, it makes me laugh to pray about some people" (Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 426-27).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
