Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Bishops

Jokes

How many bishops does it take to change a light bulb?

Only one, but the light bulb really has to want to change.

It was time for sacrament meeting to begin and a mother couldn't find her son. She searched all through the meetinghouse; then she looked outside. Finally she found him sitting on the curb with his head in his hands. "Son, we have to go in now," she said. "Church is about to start."

"I don't want to," he said.

"Why not?"

"Because nobody likes me. Nobody cares if I'm there or not. I'll bet you can't give me one good reason why I should."

"Oh, yes, I can," said the mother. "You're the bishop!"

One evening Bishop Limbergh was walking down the street to the chapel. On his way he saw little Tommy Taylor trying to reach the doorbell of a ward member's home. The bishop watched him for a moment, saw that the doorbell was too high, and went up to help him. "Hello, Tommy," the bishop said. He reached over the boy and pressed the doorbell for him. "There you go," the bishop said, "is that all you need?"

"Yeah, thanks," Tommy said. "And now we gotta run like heck!"

A Mormon bishop, a high priests group leader, and an elders quorum president were fishing from a boat in the middle of a small lake when the high priest realized he'd left his tackle box in the car. Not wanting to disturb the other two, he got out of the boat, walked over the water to the shore, got his gear, walked back, and started fishing.

An hour or so passed, and the bishop began to feel a little hungry. Unfortunately, he'd forgotten his lunch in the car. He excused himself, got out of the boat, walked over the water, got his lunch, came back, and nibbled on his sandwich.

The elders quorum president, not to be outdone, decided he'd go for a walk as well. He mumbled something about going to the bathroom, stood up, stepped over the side of the boat . . . and splashed into the lake.

The high priest, chuckling, said to the bishop, "Think we should've told him about the hidden stepping stones?"

The bishop raised his eyebrows in surprise. "What stepping stones?"

Question: How are bishops chosen?

Answer: The stake leaders find the most righteous, most spiritual, most loved person in the ward—and then they call her husband.

Quotations

Orson F. Whitney: I was a ward bishop for nearly twenty-eight years; and the highest compliment I ever received from our beloved President Joseph F. Smith, and about the only one, as a bishop, was when he told the people of my ward that there must be something to a man when they could "stomach him" for twenty-eight years as their bishop (Conference Report, Apr. 1917, 44).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
