Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Pride

Jokes

A man all wrapped up in himself makes a very small package.

A fierce young lion, wanting to establish his leadership, went through the jungle asking the other animals, "Who's king here?"

The first animal, the gazelle, answered, "You, O mighty lion."

The next animal, a chimpanzee, answered the same way: "You, O mighty lion."

The third animal, an irritable old elephant, took the lion in his trunk, whirled him around, and threw him twenty feet. The lion staggered to his feet, brushed himself off, and said shakily, "Just because you don't know the answer doesn't mean you have to lose your temper."

The moral: Pride goeth before a fall, but it goeth a lot quicker after one.

Two men parachute from an airplane. The first pulls the ripcord, and the chute opens perfectly. The second pulls the cord—and nothing happens. He keeps falling straight down.

As the second man passes his friend, the first guy gets mad, unbuckles his harness, and shouts, "So you wanna race, huh?"

A young girl came to Father Healey of Dublin and confessed that she feared she had committed the sin of vanity. "What makes you think that?" asked her father confessor.

"Because every morning when I look into the mirror I think how beautiful I am."

"Never fear, my girl," was the reassuring reply. "That isn't sin, it's only a mistake."

An aspiring author who took himself quite seriously was having lunch with a friend. "Guess whose birthday it is today?" he asked.

"Yours?" guessed the friend.

"Nope, but you're getting close. Shakespeare's."

Cameron had just moved into his shiny new office and was awaiting his first client. Suddenly he heard footsteps coming down the hall towards his office. He couldn't resist showing off a little; he picked up the phone and began talking to nobody.

"I'm quite busy right now," he said. "Well . . . yes, I see. I could probably work you in sometime next week."

He looked up and saw a man waiting in front of his desk. Then he turned back to his bogus conversation: "What's that? Next Thursday, then? Two o'clock? All right, I'll see you then."

Cameron hung up the phone and looked up at the man waiting to see him. "Hello. And how may I help you?"

"I don't really need any help, sir," the man answered. "I just came to connect your telephone."

Quotations

J. Golden Kimball: I feel a good deal like the story I read the other day. Some fellow was sitting on the pier that reached out into the ocean—and he fell in, and he yelled, "Help! help! I can't swim." And an old fellow was sitting on the pier fishing, and he said: "Neither can I, but I wouldn't brag about it" (Conference Report, Oct. 1922, 170).

Rudger Clawson: Day before yesterday, I was proud and high-minded and lifted up in my feelings. Through some strange accident, I got hold of the hat of President Penrose and wore it all the afternoon. I am free to confess that I could not fill his shoes, but I filled his hat (Conference Report, Oct. 1922, 180).

Joseph S. Geddes: Now, I feel, my brethren and sisters, that my time is about up. I am interested in the work of the Lord. My stake is located in southern Idaho. The northern boundary of Utah is our southern line. We are bounded on the south by the Benson stake, on the west by the Malad, on the north by the Pocatello and Bannock, and on the east by the Bear Lake stake; so you see Oneida is located on the map directly in the center of the earth, and all the important stakes are close by and paying tribute to it (Conference Report, Apr. 1914, 64).

Hugh B. Brown: The Lethbridge Stake, brethren and sisters, comprises the whole of the north end of the world (laughter). The southern boundary of the Lethbridge Stake is fifteen miles north of the international boundary line, between Canada and the United States. I think the northern boundary of our stake is, perhaps, the southern boundary of South America. We have a very large stake, geographically speaking; and I believe, if we were able to discover all of our people there, we would have the largest stake in the Church, numerically speaking, because I believe we have in our stake the Ten Tribes. They are up there somewhere, although we haven't found them yet (Conference Report, Apr. 1922, 106).

Richard L. Evans: A smart young man had just returned from college, and at the table he wished to show his parents what extraordinary advancement he had made. "Why, father," says he, "you can hardly conceive of the advance I have made."

"Well, my son," says the father, "I am sure I am glad to hear you say so, and I trust you will make a great man."

There happened to be two ducks on the table for dinner, and this young man proposed to give his father a specimen of his smartness.

"Now," he says, "you see there are only two ducks, don't you?" "Yes," answered the father.

"Well, I can prove to you that there are three ducks."

"Can you?" says the father. "That's quite extraordinary, really. How can you do it?"

"Well," says the son, "I will show you. That's one?" "Yes." "That's two?" "Yes."

"Well, two and one make three, don't they?"

"Quite so," says the father. "It is very extraordinary, and to show you how much I appreciate it, I will eat one of these ducks, and your mother will eat the other, and we will leave the third for you" (Conference Report, Oct. 1943, 38).

H. David Burton: A ship's captain . . . saw what looked like the light of another ship heading toward him. He had his signalman blink to the other ship: "Change your course 10 degrees south." The reply came back, "Change your course 10 degrees north." The ship's captain answered: "I am a captain. Change your course south." To which the reply came, "Well, I am a seaman first class. Change your course north." This so infuriated the captain, he signaled back, "I say change your course south. I am on a battleship!" To which the reply came back, "And I say change your course north. I am in the lighthouse" (Ensign, May 1994, 68).

Stories

At age ten Queen Elizabeth II (1926- ) of England was at Glamis Castle and received a visit by a preacher. When he was leaving, he promised to send "Lillibet" a book. The future queen replied, "Oh, thank you so much. But please let it be not about God. I know everything about Him."

Clyde Fitch tells the following story of the famous artist Whistler. Whistler was in Paris at the time of the coronation of King Edward, and at a reception one evening a duchess said to him, "I believe you know King Edward, Mr. Whistler."

"No, madame," replied Whistler.

"Why, that's odd," she murmured, "I met the King at a dinner party last year and he said that he knew you."

"Oh," said the painter, "he was just boasting."

Oscar Levant is noted for his self-esteem. Occasionally he would tell this story on himself. "Once I was saying to an old friend how remarkable was our congeniality since we had practically nothing in common."

"Oh, but we have, " replied the friend, "I think you're wonderful and you agree with me."

While D'Annunzio was living in France, a letter was addressed to him simply with the words: "To Italy's Greatest Poet." He declined to accept it, saying that he was not Italy's greatest poet—he was the world's greatest poet.

Paderewski was once traveling incognito through Germany. He stopped for the night at a small inn in the Black Forest. In the main room of the inn was an old battered piano. Paderewski asked the landlord if he might try it. Upon doing so, he found that the instrument was not only badly out of tune but that a number of the keys were stuck and would strike no sound at all. He remarked upon this to the landlord. The latter, offended at the criticism of his piano, replied, "If you were a good pianist you could skip over those keys so it wouldn't matter."

One of Emerson's rural neighbors at Concord borrowed from him a copy of Plato. "Did you enjoy the book?" asked Emerson when it was returned.

"I did at that," replied his neighbor. "This Plato has a lot of my ideas."

1999 Deseret Book Co.
