Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Progress

Jokes

A young girl took a trip to the lake with her family. Watching a water-skier, she said to her mother, "Look at that man. He'll never catch that boat."

A young teenager felt she could do nothing right. Whether it was her chores, her homework, or her eating habits, it seemed her parents and others were always criticizing her. Finally she made a large button and pinned it to her blouse:

"Please be patient. God has not finished with me yet."

Quotations

J. Golden Kimball: We see your red lights, we see your green lights, and the officers of this city are doing everything in their power to protect the people, but the people do not pay any attention to the signals—some of them do not. There is nothing else annoys me so much as for a man to run on to me with one of those great, powerful machines, and just before hitting me, honk his horn. My legs go right from under me. I can't even hit a trot, and the feeling I have is that he is saying: "Get out of the way, we are coming." I got that the other night on First North street here. I can see only one way at a time, and then I am not quite clear, but I had to see four ways that night. Here came two machines around that corner, with these cars all parked right up to the corner, and they tried to beat each other through and caught me in the center. The only thing that saved my life was my being thin (Conference Report, Oct. 1926, 129).

Mark Twain: Training is everything. The peach was once a bitter almond; the cauliflower is nothing but a cabbage with a college education.

Joseph Fielding Smith: The people in our land, as well as in foreign lands, are all going crazy over getting to the moon, setting up headquarters there, and so forth. I think the Lord sits in the heavens and laughs at our foolishness. He does not have to do like He did in the days of the building of the Tower of Babel, come down to take a look. But I think he sits in the heavens and smiles at the foolishness of mortal men. Now I did not intend to say that, but I have something I am going to read. . . . I forgot to get the man's name who wrote this:

Twinkle, twinkle, little star, I don't wonder what you are. I surmised your spot in space When you left your missile base. Any wondering I do Centers on the price of you. And I shudder when I think What you're costing us, each wink. (Speeches of the Year, 25 Oct. 1961, 5).

Robert L. Simpson: After I had been in New Zealand for just a short time, I went down to a place called Judea, in Tauranga. The mission president said, "I want you to go down there and learn how to speak Maori." He didn't say anything to the branch president, but the branch president had assigned all the Primary children to teach me how to speak Maori. I was helping to build a small chapel. While we were up there hammering nails, these Primary children would sit down on the grass and jabber Maori to me all day. They wouldn't speak any English. They knew how to speak English—they knew more languages than I did. But, they wouldn't answer me if I spoke to them in English. I had to speak Maori to them. They were forcing me to learn this language, that I might be a more effective missionary.

I remember they taught me a little song. Oh, how grateful I was to them! I thought to myself as I was learning this little ditty, "Here I am, learning the great chants of the old Maoris, passed down through hundreds of years. I have just been in New Zealand a few weeks and already I can sing this old time song." I didn't know at the time what it meant, but I will never forget it as long as I live. . . .

Imagine my surprise when I found out it was "Hey diddle diddle, the cat and the fiddle, the cow jumped over the moon"! The world is getting pretty small, and I think that is a fairly good indication (Speeches of the Year, 19 Oct. 1965, 3-4).

Ardeth Greene Kapp: Every year I find myself becoming more and more concerned about health, perhaps because a friend warns me that after forty years of age, it's patch, patch, patch. . . . I heard the other day of a lady much older than I who had completed fifty pushups that very morning. That was distressing to me until I learned that she had begun them a year ago! (My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend, 91).

Stories

Elder Ronald Poelman was returning from a conference in St. Louis on the same plane as President Spencer W. Kimball. When Elder Poelman got up to walk for a minute, President Kimball caught his arm. "Where are you going?" he asked.

"I was just stretching my legs."

"You don't need to do that; they're long enough already. It's little people like me who need to stretch their legs" (Kimball, "Spencer W. Kimball," BYU Studies [5[4]: 64).

When James A. Garfield was president of Hiram College a man brought up his son to be entered as a student. He wanted the boy to take a course shorter than the regular one.

"My son can never take all those studies," said the father. "He wants to get though more quickly. Can't you arrange it for him?"

"Oh, yes," said Mr. Garfield. "He can take a short course; it all depends on what you want to make of him. When God wants to make an oak he takes a hundred years, but he takes only two months to make a squash."

1999 Deseret Book Co.
