Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Prophecy

Quotations

J. Golden Kimball: I have been told that I should prophesy. I want to say to you Latter-day Saints that to be a prophet of God all fear and all doubt have to leave your mind, and you then open your mouth and God gives you the words. But I have become so fearful about things I would be afraid to let it loose. I want to tell you there are a lot of us in the same fix. We are afraid of what people will think and are doubtful about its fulfillment.

When Heber C. Kimball prophesied that goods would be sold as cheap in the streets of Salt Lake as in New York, he himself turned to President Young and said:

"Brother Young, I think I have made a mistake." Brother Young said: "Never mind, Heber. Let it go."

Charles C. Rich, after the meeting, said: "Heber, I don't believe a word you said."

Heber said: "Neither do I." . . . But he said: "God has spoken." And God had spoken.

No wonder he was frightened, for the people were in the depths of poverty, a thousand miles away from nowhere.

My testimony to you is that those gifts and promises are the heritage of God's children. I am not a visionary man, I am not a dreamer. I sometimes wonder what my gift is. I have never seen an angel, but I have the assurance that comes to me and is burned in my heart like a living fire by the power of the Holy Ghost, that God is the Father, that Jesus is the Christ. I believe with all my soul that Joseph Smith was a prophet and is a prophet of God, and God knows there is ample proof to substantiate it. I also believe that Heber J. Grant is a prophet of God, and whenever God gets ready to give him something to tell you I promise you in the name of the Lord you will get it, and you will get it straight, too (Conference Report, Oct. 1932, 20-21).

James G. Duffin: I want to call your attention to a remark that was made by a son of Heber C. Kimball, some years ago in speaking at a conference in this great Tabernacle. He said: "If you Latter-day Saints would but put yourselves in a position to fulfill prophecy, after it had been made by the servants of God, they would not be so afraid to prophesy!" (Conference Report, Apr. 1908, 85).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
