Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Punctuality

Jokes

The owner of a large fruit stand hired a boy who was required to show up by three o'clock every morning to receive the farmers' deliveries. The owner himself wasn't supposed to arrive until opening time hours later. For the sake of checking up, though, the owner unexpectedly came to his stand at three o'clock one morning and saw that the boy wasn't there. Finally, at 3:05, the boy rushed through the door. "So!" shouted the employer. "Banker's hours!"

Quotations

Times and Seasons: Pres't Washington was the most punctual man in the observance of appointments ever known to the writer. He delivered his communications to Congress at the opening of each session, in person.—He always appointed the hour of twelve for this purpose, and he never failed to enter the hall of Congress while the state-house clock was striking that hour. His invitations for dinner were always given for four o'clock, p.m. He allowed five minutes for variation of time pieces, and he waited no longer for any one. Certain lagging members of Congress sometimes came in when the dinner was nearly half over. The writer has heard the President say to them with a smile, "gentlemen we are too punctual for you—I have a cook who never asks whether the company has come, but whether the hour has come" (Times and Seasons, 2:270).

Ezra Taft Benson: Orson F. Whitney . . . was a great man to concentrate. One day when he was traveling by train, he was so preoccupied that he did not notice the train pass the station where he was to get off. So he had to [be driven] back to where he should have been. Meanwhile the stake president waited and waited. . . . Finally when he decided that something had more than likely happened to Brother Whitney and he was not going to make it, they commenced the meeting. As Elder Whitney approached, he was greeted by the opening hymn, which was "Ye Simple Souls Who Stray" (Ensign, May 1993, 39).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
