Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Purpose

Quotations

J. Golden Kimball: I have worked in the Church, perhaps not as well as I might have done, but I have staked everything on it. As I told a man one day, I had fifty-two cards in the beginning. I never played cards in my life—only smut. But to illustrate: I am not a card player, but in the beginning I had fifty-two of them—that is a deck, I think. Some of you seventies are better informed, perhaps, than I, but at the present time I have only one card left. Do you know what I have staked it on? Eternal life; and if I fail in that I have failed in everything. Why? Because "salvation is the greatest gift of God to his children." Of all the gifts and all the blessings that God can give to his children, the "greatest gift is salvation." If you leave your father and if you leave your mother, your wife and your children, and your flocks and your herds, and all that you have, and go out as a witness for God, he has promised you an hundred fold. All the investments I ever made in my life, except the one of two Liberty Bonds I have been able to pay for, at four per cent, I have paid from eighteen per cent down, and all I got out of it was experience; the other fellow got my money. . . . But this investment we have started out for, the Lord has promised you an hundred fold, and I pray God that this spirit may burn in the hearts of the priesthood of God (Conference Report, Oct. 1918, 31).

Stories

When David O. McKay was nearly fourteen, he received his patriarchal blessing, in which he was told that he would sit in council with his brethren and preside among the people. After giving the blessing, the stake patriarch rested his hands on David's shoulders and said, "My boy, you have something to do besides playing marbles."

Apparently young David did not grasp the full import of his blessing. He went into the kitchen, where he found his mother preparing dinner, and announced, "If he thinks I'm going to stop playing marbles, he is mistaken" (see Morrell, Highlights from the Life of David O. McKay, 26).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
