Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Book of Mormon

Quotations

Marion D. Hanks: I do not know whether I would be encouraged to say what I am going to quickly say to you now, but nobody is up here discouraging me, so I am going to do it. I have never heard anybody say there is anything very funny in the Book of Mormon but so far as I am concerned there is a lot of humor in it, because there are people involved. They are people like we are.

Here is one example. You all know that the book of Omni has five different writers. Now you are going to have to be alert to get this humor, but so far as I am concerned it is there. . . . Omni begins to write, then he passes the record on to his son, Amaron. After only a few verses Amaron writes, [then] passes them on to his brother Chemish. This is where I think there is something funny because it is about people. If any of you have ever kept records, or have been responsible for those who do, then this I think will find response in you.

"Now I, Chemish, write what few things I write, in the same book with my brother; for behold, I saw the last which he wrote, [Now he has had these records for years.] that he wrote it with his own hand; and he wrote it in the day that he delivered them unto me. [The next sentence immediately after is:] And after this manner we keep the records, . . . (Omni 1:9)" (Speeches of the Year, 4 May 1960, 6).

Stories

President George Albert Smith visited New York Governor Charles Whitman and presented him with a Book of Mormon; then later he visited the governor again during the time of World War I. "The conversation," President Smith later related, "turned to the war, and the governor was happily surprised at the number of LDS boys that I told him were in the services." The governor then asked President Smith, "But, how is this war coming out?"

"Don't you know, Governor?" President Smith asked.

"No," said the governor. "I don't know who is going to win it."

"Well," said President Smith, "where is your Book of Mormon?" The Church leader then read, "There shall be no kings upon this land. . . . I, the Lord, the God of heaven, will be their king." President Smith then explained that as long as the people of the United States of America keep the commandments, they will have the Lord's protection and watchcare.

"I had not seen that," said the governor.

President Smith replied, "You are not doing a very good job reading your Book of Mormon" (adapted from Classic Stories from the Lives of Our Prophets, 257).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
