Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Repentance

Jokes

Reading the paper one morning, a man was startled to find his name on the obituary page. He quickly called the editor to protest. "I'm awfully sorry," the editor replied. "And it's too late to do much about it. The best thing I can do for you is to put you in the 'Birth Column' tomorrow morning, and give you a fresh start."

An elderly sister wanted to get her temple recommend renewed—and she planned to tell the bishop about all her shortcomings. To make sure she didn't forget anything, she wrote it down on a list. When she got to the bishop's office that Tuesday night, she handed him the paper. "Here's what I need to talk to you about," she said.

The bishop glanced down at the paper. "Eggs?" he said. "Cheese?"

The woman grabbed the paper back, looked at it, and exclaimed, "Good gracious! I must have left my sins at the grocery store!"

A young man inherited his uncle's very intelligent Amazon parrot. The parrot was no prize, however; he had a bad attitude and a worse vocabulary. It seemed that every other word was either an expletive or extremely rude. The nephew tried everything he could think of—talking sweetly to the parrot, playing soft music on the radio, making sure the bird could hear conference and the weekly Tabernacle Choir broadcast.

None of it made a bit of difference. If he yelled at the parrot, the parrot squawked back. If he shook it, it bit him. If he asked politely, the bird mimicked his nice words but interspersed them with profanities.

Finally, absolutely exasperated, the nephew stuck the parrot in the freezer. "This will teach him a thing or two," he said.

The bird kicked and banged and squawked and swore—then, suddenly, turned quiet. The nephew listened, worried and expectant. There wasn't a sound. Oh, no! he thought. Have I killed my uncle's parrot? He quickly flung open the freezer door. The parrot stepped out onto his outstretched arm. "I must say," the parrot said, "I am truly sorry that I have offended you with my language and my attitude. Please forgive me. I assure you I will never behave in such a manner again."

The nephew was amazed. How could the bird have changed so suddenly and so completely? He was about to ask when the parrot continued. "I have just one question. May I ask what the chicken did?"

Quotations

J. Golden Kimball: I thank God the Eternal Father that up to the present I have had the spirit of repentance, and while it has kept me pretty busy repenting, I hope I will always have that spirit (Conference Report, Oct. 1910, 31).

Stories

A young boy came down to breakfast one morning and said, "Dad, I dreamed about you last night."

"About me? What did you dream?"

"I dreamed I was climbing a ladder to heaven, and on the way up I had to write one of my sins on each step of the ladder."

"Where did I come into your dream?" the father asked.

"When I was going up, I met you coming down for more chalk" (see New Era, Jan. 1973, 22).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
