Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Scripture

Jokes

Scholars disagree—does the Bible set a precedent for food fights or for "toilet papering" someone's house? Wrote Zechariah, "Then I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold a flying roll. And he said unto me, What seest thou? And I answered, I see a flying roll" (Zech. 5:1-2).

Q. What is Laman and Lemuel's favorite TV show?

A. Diagnosis: Murmur.

Q. When people go past Temple Square, why do they like to look up to Moroni?

A. Because he's always on the ball.

Q. Why did the Lamanites have bruised knees?

A. Because of all the Nephites.

Q. How do we know that Ether was a little dentist?

A. Because he "dwelt in a cavity."

Q. Where do Lamanites go to dance?

A. To Laman Nite clubs.

Q. What was the name of Nephi's horse?

A. Beunto—Nephi called out to him, "Whoa, Beunto" (2 Ne. 28:24-29).

A little boy asked his grandfather, "Why do you spend so much time reading the scriptures?"

"Well, my boy," answered the grandpa, "I guess you could say I'm cramming for the final examination."

An elderly woman had just returned to her home from homemaking meeting when she was startled by an intruder. "Stop," she yelled. "Acts 2:38." The burglar turned and pointed his gun at her, but she yelled again "Stop! Acts 2:38." The man dropped his gun to the floor and raised his hands to the air. He didn't move an inch while the woman called the police and explained what she had done.

As the officer handcuffed the man to take him in, he asked him, "Why did you give up so easily? All the old lady did was yell a scripture to you."

"Scripture!" the burglar exclaimed, "I thought she said she had an ax and two 38s."

A sister in the ward asked the bishopric to stop by her home to help her. When they came, she poured out her troubles. Finally the bishop said, "Sister Peters, there's a scripture I'd like to share with you. Can you get your copy?"

Sister Peters called to her young daughter, who was playing in the next room, "Amber, will you please bring me that dear old book I read every night?"

Amber was back in a flash—holding a copy of TV Guide.

Question: Don't you think the scriptures should be rewritten?

Answer: No, they should be reread.

Quotations

J. Golden Kimball: I am going to read to you a little that has been culled from the Bible as to the mission of Christ. I would quote it, but I never dare quote scripture, for after I get through quoting you wouldn't recognize it.

I am a little like father, when he used to quote scripture, he would say, "Well, if that isn't in the Bible, it ought to be in it" (Conference Report, Oct. 1910, 31-32).

Orson F. Whitney: I had a conversation with another would-be censor of our sacred books. He accosted me on the street with the question: "Bishop Whitney, do you believe the Book of Mormon to be the word of God?" "I certainly do," said I. "Well, can't God speak grammatically?" "Of course he can." "Then why was this grammatical error left in the Book of Mormon?"—and he quoted it. "Do you really want to know?" "Yes," he said. "Well, I think that was left there just to keep you out of the Church."

He seemed surprised: "Doesn't God want me in his Church?" "No," I said; "he only wants honest seekers after truth; and if you think more of a grammatical error than you do of your soul's salvation, you are not fit for the kingdom of heaven, and the Lord doesn't want you."

He was astonished. It was something he hadn't thought of. He felt very much as Goliath did when the stone sank into his fore-head—such a thing had never entered his head before (Conference Report, Apr. 1926, 34-35).

Richard L. Evans: There are some who come and say they have not been taught, that they wish they had known differently. But the commandments are pretty plain. I would not worry too much about the obscure passages of scripture. We will not be held accountable for things we do not know, but we will be for those we do know.

(I think of a sentence from Mark Twain. One would always expect a bit of humor from him, and there is something of whimsy in this sentence of his: "The scripture passages that bother me the most are the ones I understand." I think we do not need to worry too much about the ones we do not understand) (Conference Report, Apr. 1958, 77).

Stories

Heber J. Grant: I happened to be the chairman of the committee that raised their proportion of the six-billion-dollar fund during the [first] World War. . . . There was a great meeting held in California, and the presidents of the various state organizations of defense and the chairmen of the Liberty Loan drive were invited to that meeting. . . . In that brief meeting there were many doubts expressed as to the war's being won by the allies. I said: "So far as the Mormons are concerned we have no fear whatever as to the outcome. Every Mormon believes in the Book of Mormon, and the Book of Mormon teaches that this is a land choice above all other lands, and that no king, or kaiser for that matter, will ever reign here."

Several said, "My gracious, we had better join the Mormon Church" (see Grant, Gospel Standards, comp. Durham, 242).

In one Primary's sharing time, the students played a "Who Am I?" game using a figure from each of the standard works. The answer to the "Who Am I?" for the Book of Mormon was the Brother of Jared, which the students finally guessed. "But what is his real name?" the teacher asked. "It's long and hard to pronounce." Without hesitation, one of the boys on the back row called out, "John Jacob Jingleheimer Schmidt!"

One evening a sister missionary called her district leader in tears.

Sister missionary: Oh, Elder, I think we really lost our golden investigators this evening!

District leader: What's the matter, Sister?

Sister missionary: Well, in our discussion tonight, we challenged them to read in the Book of Mormon. But instead of asking them to start with 1 Ne. 3:7, I mistakenly asked them to read 3 Ne. 3:7.

District leader: What could be so bad about that?

Sister missionary: Oh, Elder! The first words this investigator is going to read in the Book of Mormon are "Yield yourselves up unto us, and unite with us and become acquainted with our secret works, and become our brethren that ye may be like unto us—not our slaves, but our brethren and partners in all our substance."

One family experimented with different times to read scriptures together. They tried dinner time, bedtime, and right after school. None of their efforts worked very well. Finally they decided to do it first thing in the morning, at 7:00 a.m., before everybody left for school.

On the first day of their new schedule, Dad had a hard time getting the kids up. He poked and prodded and pulled, tickled and sang and finally shouted. At last they all dragged into the living room, in various stages of disarray, opened their pages, and began at the top of the page. It was Dad's turn to start, and he read,

"Awake! and arise from the dust, and hear the words of a trembling parent, whose limbs ye must soon lay down in the cold and silent grave" (2 Ne. 1:14).

One of Abraham Lincoln's favorite stories concerned a housewife who would not purchase a Bible from a traveling minister; she claimed she already had a Bible. When the minister asked her to show him the book, the housewife and her son looked all over and finally found only a very few worn pages of the Bible.

The woman would not change her story that she had a Bible, but she did say to the minister, "I had no idea we were so nearly out."

1999 Deseret Book Co.
