Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Self-Reliance

Quotations

J. Golden Kimball: I am very thankful this morning, notwithstanding the condition of my physical body, that I have been busily engaged cleaning up my own door-yard. I could not get the boy to do it, so I got busy and did it myself (Conference Report, Apr. 1914, 110).

Joseph F. Smith: The brethren who will follow, through the conference, will be led by the Spirit of the Lord. . . . We expect them to speak about home industry, for if any people in the world should believe in the propriety and necessity of home industry, it is the Latter-day Saints. On the back of that, if there is a people anywhere in the intermountain region, or anywhere else, who have failed more completely in maintaining and supporting some kinds of home industry, than we have, I do not know them. . . . Every one of these institutions has gone by the board; because labor was a little higher here, and cloth could not be produced here quite as cheap, within a few cents per yard, as the shoddy that is produced in the east could be made and sent here. We preferred the shoddy to the real goods, and we bought the shoddy and wore it, and let home manufacture go to the wall, and yet we believe in home manufacture! . . . I do not want to boast, but I want to tell you that I have the honor of wearing part of the last piece of home-made goods produced in Utah. I look about as well as some of you in your shoddy. (Laughter.) . . .

John R. Winder: I am proud to say, my brethren and sisters, without boasting at all, that I have the honor and the pleasure of wearing a coat, this morning, made from the same piece of cloth that the President's coat was made from, (laughter) and I leave you to judge as to how I look. . . .

Francis M. Lyman: In regard to home industries: I thought I had the last suit myself, President. (Laughter.) I thought, I had the last silk that was produced in Utah; and I thought I had the last cloth made at Provo; but I do not know how many last pieces have been made. (Laughter.) But here is the last silk ever made in Utah, (displaying a handkerchief.) . . .

Joseph F. Smith: I don't want Brother Lyman to think he has the last silk handkerchief; (laughter) I have a number of them at home (Conference Report, Oct. 1909, 6-7, 10, 19-21).

Brigham Young: You hear the remark that such and such a man is not fit to be a Bishop? I acknowledge that many who are called to be Bishops are not fit for the office, for it is one of the most important offices in the Church to rightly administer in temporal things. A Bishop also ministers in spiritual things, and is required to devote time to the wellbeing and prosperity of his ward, like a father to a family. It is an office that keenly tries the patience, faith, and feelings of a man. If the brethren and sisters prayed for that man continually, and lived their religion, he would know how to settle certain business transactions without running to me about this, that, and the other. Brethren would not run to me about things as simple as, "So-and-so has been building a fence on the line between us, and has put his polls wrong end foremost. Will you not counsel him to turn them?" And sisters are running to me about things as simple as, "Sister So-and-so's hens have laid on my premises, and they do not lay with their heads in the right direction." Does such conduct proceed from true knowledge among the Latter-day Saints? No. I do not wish to talk about such folly, neither to have my time wasted by visits upon such unimportant subjects. I do not wonder that the Lord suffers us to be more or less abused by our enemies. I do not wonder that the devils laugh at our folly (Journal of Discourses 7:279).

Heber J. Grant: We all have temptations, we all have things come into our lives—which if we give them proper consideration, we will reject.

Brother Ballard has referred to the invitation that was sent to President Ivins to accept the nomination as governor of the state of Utah, which reminds me that a telegram came to me from Ogden at that time asking me where they could find Anthony W. Ivins. It said, "We will nominate him by acclamation to be the first governor of the state of Utah or the first representative to Congress."

I answered to the effect that he was on the Kaibab mountain and had accepted a call to go to Mexico. Nothing in the world would cause him to fail to fulfil that call.

I received another telegram telling me that they could not nominate me by acclamation, but that they had the majority pledged to me, and believed it would be by acclamation before the voting was through.

I showed the telegram to Heber M. Wells, who had been nominated by the Republicans. He said: "Well, my name is 'Dennis', the people don't know me. You are sure to be elected."

I said: "Well, I am not sure that I am going to run, I will let you know later."

I went to President Wilford Woodruff and handed him the telegram. I said: "How shall I answer that?"

He said: "What are you bothering me with your affairs for? Haven't you got enough inspiration as one of the Apostles to know what your duty is?"

I said: "Thank you. If you had wanted me to run, you would have said so. Good-bye" (Conference Report, Oct. 1934, 125-26).

Joseph F. Smith: We ought to live within our means if possible, and if it is not possible and we keep living beyond our means, it is only a question of time when we won't trust us, and we will have to live within our means or die, or steal, as some one has added. When it comes to that kind of thing I feel as Dr. [Samuel] Johnson did when the beggar accosted him, "Why don't you go to work?" said the Doctor. "I cannot get any work, I cannot get anything to do, and you know, Doctor, I must live." "Well," said the Doctor, "I don't see the least necessity for it" (Journal of Discourses 25:247-48).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
