Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Service

Jokes

A mother was teaching her little son about service. "We need to remember," she explained, "that we're here on earth to help others."

The little boy looked puzzled. "But, Mommy," he asked, "Why are the others here?"

For the fourth time, Henry came home from school with a black eye. Disappointed, his mother said, "Oh, Henry, you've been fighting again."

"But, Mom," he sniffled, "I was just trying to keep a little boy from getting beaten up by a bigger one."

"Well, that's different," said his mother. "What little boy was that?"

"Me, Mommy."

There is a story that tells of a rabbit being chased by a dog, and the people following and telling the rabbit to run hard and escape.

"Thank you for you kind encouragement," said the rabbit, "but for goodness' sake stop the dog."

A Cub Scout troop was half an hour late to its den meeting. The den mother asked them severely, "Why are you so late?"

"Oh," said one boy, "we were helping an old man cross the street."

"That's a nice thing for Scouts to do," said the mother. She paused. "But it shouldn't make you half an hour late."

"Well, you see," said another boy, "he didn't want to go."

Widow: Thank you, Trent. I'll get on the phone right away and thank your mother for sending you over with these six big blueberry muffins.

Trent: Sister Jones, . . . when you call my mother, could you possibly thank her for those twelve muffins?

Visiting teacher (over the phone): How are you doing?

Woman: Not very well. I have a terrible cold, and yesterday I sprained my arm, so I can't do a thing.

Visiting teacher: You poor thing. Why don't you let me bring dinner over? What time does Fred get home?

Woman: Fred?

Visiting teacher: Your husband.

Woman: My husband's name is Larry.

Visiting teacher: Oh! I must have the wrong number.

Woman: Does that mean you won't be bringing dinner over?

Quotations

Matthew Cowley: Believe it or not, I'm a cook. I stopped it lately because I sample everything I cook. That doesn't help my diet. But nothing would please me more than to have my bishop call me up and say, "Brother Cowley, this is an emergency; we have a sister up here with a family of children; the husband's an invalid; and she has to be with him all the time. How about coming up and cooking the dinner for the next three nights?" I don't know how long that invalid would last, but I'd be glad to go up ( Matthew Cowley Speaks, 304).

Derek A. Cuthbert: I think of dear Sister Amy Gent, whom I was privileged to visit for several years as branch president, home teacher, and friend. The first time I visited her, she was 87 years of age. Widowed twice, she was the only member of the Church in her extended family. Was she lonely? Never!

. . . Once she asked me to bring her some missionary tracts, which I thought were to vary her reading. I gave them to her saying, "You will enjoy reading these, Sister Gent."

"Oh, they are not for me," she replied. "I visit an old lady, and I want to share the gospel with her!" (New Era, Nov. 1985, 49).

Ardeth Greene Kapp: One day I . . . was in a second grade elementary classroom. The student-teacher held the children captive with her storytelling skills. In great detail she told of a cross old man whose name was Mr. Black. In contrast, the account was given . . . of a Mr. Brown who was kind and thoughtful and loved by everyone. At the conclusion of the story, the teacher asked the children, "How many of you would like to be a neighbor to Mr. Brown?" Every hand was raised high. Then almost as an afterthought, she inquired if there was anyone who would like to have Mr. Black for a neighbor.

A little boy in a faded green shirt near the back of the room began to raise his hand, which brought a ripple of quiet amusement from the children. . . . When called on for an explanation to his single vote, he spoke in a soft tone. "Well," he said, "I'd like Mr. Black to be my neighbor, because if he was, my mom would make a cake for me to take to him, and then he wouldn't be that way anymore." A hush fell over the room. Everyone felt something wonderful that they couldn't explain. A little child broke the silence like a benediction: "Oh, I wish I'd said that!" (New Era, Apr. 1982, 44).

Stories

Spencer W. Kimball seldom helped in the kitchen, but once a neighbor came in while he was drying the dishes. He said, "Saundra, I want you to be sure to write in your journal that I did the dishes for Camilla" (Kimball, "Spencer W. Kimball," BYU Studies [5[4]: 64).

In Arizona, Spencer W. Kimball sometimes visited "Grandma" Craig, an elderly woman who was one of his many friends, always joking that he was the Fuller Brush man. Years later, when she was her on her deathbed, he came to say good-bye. At first she didn't recognize him. But when he mentioned Fuller brushes, she smiled and pressed his hand (Kimball, "Spencer W. Kimball," BYU Studies[25[4]: 61).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
