Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Sickness

Jokes

Doctor to sick man: Well, Herman, I'm sorry to say it. You don't have more than six months to live.

Herman: Six months! I could never pay my doctor bill in just six months!

Doctor: Well, all right. I guess I could give you another six months then.

Stories

Orange Wight (son of Lyman), heard his father describe the escape of Joseph Smith and others from the Missouri jails and their successful flight to the safety of Illinois, including this anecdote: "They all changed their names and started out as land seekers, men from the East hunting homes. They left the main road and traveled through the sparsely settled country on by-roads and at times without a road. . . .

"Now with all their trouble they at times had some amusements. . . . They came to a ranch in an out-of-the-way place and stopped for the night. [They] told their names [fictitious ones]. The next morning they were looking about and walking around, all but Bro. McRay, who was in the house. The proprieter came in and asked his name, said he had forgotten it. And Bro. McRay had also forgotten it—and it had the effect to cause Bro. McRay to take a terrible cramp in his stomach; it came near throwing him into spasms.

"The man ran out where some of the other brethren were and told them that their friend was sick. They went in and said, 'Mr. Brown, what is the matter with you? What have you been eating?' That relieved Mr. Brown to such an extent that he began to get better right away" (BYU Studies [3[1]: 6-7).

After surgery on his vocal cords, Spencer W. Kimball gained a new voice, soft and hoarse and instantly recognizable. One evening Ned Winder, who worked with the Church missionary committee, called him about a mission problem. Having caught a cold, he apologized for his hoarseness, but Elder Kimball responded, "Who is this?" When Brother Winder repeated his name, Elder Kimball responded, "For a minute I thought that I was on both ends of the line" (Kimball, "Spencer W. Kimball," BYU Studies [5[4]: 66).

Spencer W. Kimball had to take several kinds of medication for various conditions, but he didn't like the fact. When his son suggested that he take some aspirin for pain, he replied, "I don't want to take any more pills; I'm already the 'piller' of the Church" (Kimball, "Spencer W. Kimball," BYU Studies [5[4]: 66).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
