Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Sin

Jokes

Farmer Jones was a simple-minded man with an exceptionally beautiful horse named Star. One day he rode the horse into town, tied him to the hitching post, and went into the variety store.

While he was inside, two thieves came by. They knew they couldn't just take the horse—Farmer Jones would report it to the sheriff—so they decided to trick the old farmer. One stole the horse and the other slipped the halter over his neck and remained by the post.

When the farmer emerged from the store, the thief immediately spoke up. "Good farmer," he said, "don't be dismayed that your horse is gone. I am your horse. Years ago I sinned and for my sins I changed into a horse. But today my punishment is over, and I can be released if you will allow it."

Farmer Jones was astounded by the story, but with a good heart he sent the man away, wishing him luck in his new life.

The next week Farmer Jones went to a horse auction in a neighboring town, looking for a new horse. There, to his amazement, was his horse, available to the highest bidder! The farmer stared at the horse for a long time to make sure he wasn't mistaken, then finally walked over and whispered in the horse's ear. "So, Star—you've sinned again."

Stories

Although Brigham Young appeared to be serious-minded and firm, he also loved a good time. He was jovial and fun-loving, and his sense of humor endeared him to the Saints.

To an embittered woman who had written him asking that her name be removed from the records of the Church he dictated the following: "Madam . . . I have this day examined the records of baptism for the remission of sins in the Church . . . and not being able to find [your name] recorded therein, I was saved the necessity of erasing your name therefrom. You may therefore consider that your sins have not been remitted you and you can enjoy the benefits thereof" (West, Profiles of the Presidents, 72-73).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
