Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Speaking

Jokes

A Sunday School teacher asked one of her little students to briefly tell the biblical story of Elisha and the bear. "All right," she said. "Elisha had a bear and the children made fun of him, and he said, 'If you make fun of me, I'll set the bear at you, and it will eat you up.' And they did, and he did, and it did."

A young girl said to her friend after a spelling test, "Sure, I know how to spell banana; I just don't know when to stop."

A newly sustained bishop and his young wife had a long talk about being supportive of each other. "I need you to be more positive about my talks," he said.

"And I need you to back me up more when I discipline the kids," she answered.

They agreed, but the wife made one further stipulation: "You must never look in the shoebox in the attic."

Many years later, after fifty years of marriage, their children threw a huge party at their home to celebrate the anniversary. During all those years, they had kept their agreement—but on this night, when the bishop went to the attic to get some chairs for their guests, the temptation was suddenly too great. He lifted the lid. Inside were three eggs and $10,000 in cash. What could it mean? He couldn't figure it out. He closed the box and went downstairs with the chairs.

Late in the evening, after the guests were gone, the bishop sat down with his wife. "Honey, I have a confession to make," he said. "I looked in the box."

"Oh, it's okay," his wife said. "But I'm sorry you learned the secret."

"But I don't know what it means," he answered.

"Well, you remember our agreement all those years ago. I resolved I would never be critical of one of your talks. But I also told myself than whenever you gave a real yawner, I would put an egg in the box."

"Oh, my," the bishop said, greatly relieved. "Fifty years and only three eggs. That's not bad at all. But what about the $10,000?"

"Well," the wife answered, gently taking his hand, "every time I got a dozen eggs I sold them."

If you keep your mouth shut, you'll get credit for knowing what you're talking about.

Isn't it wonderful how the moment you get up in the morning, the mind begins working, and it doesn't quit until you stand up to give a talk in sacrament meeting?

The sacrament meeting speaker got sick and canceled out at the last minute, so the bishop called upon a visiting high councilor to speak in his place. The speaker began by discussing the word substitute. "When you break a window and then place a piece of cardboard there instead," he said, "that's a substitute."

He compared himself to the cardboard, apologized for the absence of the designated speaker, and then went on to give a long and scholarly talk. After the meeting, a good woman of the congregation, wanting to compliment him, rushed up, shook hands, and said, "You were no substitute—you were a real pane!"

Every talk has three basic elements: faith, hope, and charity. When the speaker begins the audience must have faith—faith that the talk will be interesting. After he has spoken for a few minutes, they display hope—hope that the end of it is drawing nigh. When the speaker is finally done, the congregation says "Amen." That is charity.

The speaker stood up in sacrament meeting. "Good afternoon," he said, speaking loudly. "Can you in the back hear me?" He continued with his talk. Every few minutes he repeated his question: "Can you hear me in the back?" Finally a deacon on the front row stood up. "I don't know about them, but I can hear fine if someone wants to trade places."

At a banquet, a speaker was ranting on about a subject which held very little interest for most of the audience. Unable to stand it any longer, one of them slipped quietly out. Just outside the door he bumped into another sufferer who had gone out just before him.

"Has he finished yet?" he was asked.

"Yes," said the man who had just escaped, "long ago, but he won't stop talking."

A bishop tells of the Sunday morning when he was approached after church by an old woman, who said in a tone of appreciation, "Bishop, you'll never know what your talk meant to me. It was just like water to a drowning man!"

A woman asked her husband, a high councilor who had been speaking at another ward, "How did your talk go?"

"Which one?" he asked. "The one I was going to give, the one I did give, or the one I delivered so brilliantly on the way home in the car?"

A bishop tended to talk too long in church, and the ward members were looking for a tactful way to tell him. One Sunday he came to church with a bandage on his finger, and someone asked him, "Bishop, how did you cut yourself?"

He replied, "I was thinking about my talk, and I cut my finger."

"Oh, I see," said the member. "Well, next time maybe you should think about your finger and cut your talk."

One Sunday in January, it was so cold and snowy that a Wyoming bishop found that only one person had arrived at church for sacrament meeting. "What do you think we should do, Brother Lewis, since we only have a congregation of one?"

"Well, Bishop," drawled the cattle rancher, "I don't know much about being a bishop. But one thing I know: when I promise my cattle a load of hay, I always keep my promise."

"You're right, of course," said the bishop. "Sit down in the first row here, and we'll have a meeting."

When it came time for the speakers on the program, the bishop, being the only ward leader present, took the place of all the sacrament meeting speakers. In fact, he got so long-winded that the meeting went on and on, far past the usual hour and ten minutes. After the closing prayer, the bishop said, "Well, Brother Lewis, what did you think of my talk?"

"Well, Bishop," said the rancher, "I don't know all that much about sacrament meeting talks—but one thing I know: when I promise my cattle a load of hay and only one shows up, I don't give it the whole load."

Poems

I hold that speaker great— A truly fine narrator— Who says, "It's getting late" And doesn't make it later; Whose talk is no infusion Of long, trite platitudes, Who says, "And in conclusion," And truly does conclude. I love a finished speaker, I mean I really do. I don't mean one that's polished— But one that's really through.

Quotations

J. Golden Kimball: Now, what I am trying to get at is this: It takes intelligent people to understand what I am trying to get at. I do not do your thinking for you; you have to do your own thinking. If I give you a little chaff to get you to take a little wheat, my trouble has always been, you choose the chaff and leave the wheat (Conference Report, Apr. 1932, 78).

Mark Twain: What a good thing Adam had: When he said a good thing, he knew nobody had said it before.

Josh Billings: I don't care how much a man talks, if he only says it in a few words.

J. Golden Kimball: I am not accustomed to speaking to audiences out of doors. I have always had them closed in where they could not get away (Conference Report, Oct. 1918, 133).

J. Golden Kimball: If the brethren and sisters desire me to run smoothly and make no breaks, it will be advisable to keep awake until I finish my speech. . . . For me to be my natural self is somewhat dangerous, and to be original would cause the very air to resound with criticism. I fully realize that brevity, and to the point, should be added to the virtues. Horace Greeley used to say that the way to write a good editorial was to write it to the best of your ability, then cut it in two in the middle and print the last half. I am going to follow this suggestion (Conference Report, Apr. 1923, 125).

J. Golden Kimball: A little fellow was sick and he went to the doctor who was a herbalist. The doctor gave him four herbs and told him to boil them in a quart of water and drink it all. The little fellow said: "I can't. I only hold a pint." I am wondering how much you people hold? (Conference Report, Apr. 1929, 127).

J. Golden Kimball: I am ready to confess that I am keyed up to a pretty high tension, and the only thing I am afraid of is that I will say just what I think, which would be unwise, no doubt (Conference Report, Apr. 1904, 28).

Brigham Young: It is a great fault in the Elders of Israel, when they talk to a congregation, that they speak a great while about something, but you cannot always easily tell what. It may be more or less natural for some to do this, but it is a habit which can be overcome (Journal of Discourses 4:368).

Brigham Young: Brethren and sisters, I will make one request of you. When you speak, speak so that we can hear and understand you, whether it be much or little, good or bad. If you have nothing to say, take my counsel, and keep your seat. If you have anything to say, say it; and when you get through, stop (Journal of Discourses 7:270).

Brigham Young: I will take the liberty of suggesting to my brethren who address the congregation that our sermons should be short, and if they are not filled with life and spirit let them be shorter (Journal of Discourses 12:27).

George Eliot: Blessed is the man who, having nothing to say, abstains from giving us wordy evidence of the fact.

Rudger Clawson: There is a large clock in the other end of this building, that is greatly illuminated. It is placed there for the benefit and help of the speakers. When I am sitting on my seat I can see the time clearly, but when I arise to speak in this great building, in the midst of this great congregation, I regret to say I go blind and cannot see the time (Conference Report, Oct. 1922, 180).

Richard L. Evans: When I came to my present calling in the Church I thought perhaps I should make something of a reputation in some field or another, and I looked around to see what records might be available that could be acquired. I saw that some of my brethren had acquired, justifiably, a reputation for being authorities in the field of doctrine—some were trained in the professions—some in law, some in the sciences; and I concluded that about the only record that was left for me to strive for was that of brevity of expression, but I anticipated no such cooperation from the presiding officer in helping me to achieve this record as I have had here today (Conference Report, Apr. 1940, 145).

Joseph F. Smith: As a boy I used to marvel when my father said that at the general conference he lost his appetite, and when he was called upon to speak, his arms, his elbows, and his hands went numb. I now look upon my father as a man of unusual fortitude. . . . I have felt that I was in danger of imminent disintegration south of my Adam's apple (Conference Report, Apr. 1943, 75).

George A. Smith: When I was about twenty-one years old I went on a mission, in company with Elder Don C. Smith, the youngest brother of the Prophet Joseph, through the States of Kentucky and Tennessee. When he rose to preach he wished to see a pretty good sized assembly, and to talk at least a couple of hours; when it was my turn to speak, some thirty minutes, perhaps, was as much time as I would wish to occupy. We occasionally had a small assembly, then Don would say, "Come, George A., you are good at preaching a picayune sermon; suppose you try this time."

It would seem to-day as though a picayune sermon would not answer the purpose, if the size of the congregation is the scale in which the discourse should be weighed (Journal of Discourses 3:280).

George A. Smith: I have offered these remarks, on the subject of policy, in rather a rambling manner, something like the parson, who was told that he did not speak to his text, "Very well," says he, "scattering shots hit the most birds" (Journal of Discourses 3:291).

Don B. Colton: A few Sundays ago in a conference a fine lady came up at the close of the meeting and expressed great appreciation of the services.

Some one asked her what part of the meeting she enjoyed best. She said, "Not the main speaker" (I was he) (Conference Report, Apr. 1936, 111).

Charles W. Nibley: My brethren and sisters, I suppose one could never grow old enough, at least I never expect to, to get entirely over stage fright. This is the third day that I have been sitting before this congregation, not knowing at what hour I might be called upon; and when one has gone through that experience for two or three days the stage fright becomes accentuated.

It is recorded of Thomas Carlyle, who could not do his thinking if there were any great noise about, that he had a neighbor, a lady, who kept some chickens; and the crowing of the roosters was a source of annoyance to him. He sent a kind letter to his neighbor and offered to buy the chickens so that he might kill them. She refused to let him have them, and said: "Besides I don't see why they bother you. The roosters crow only at stated intervals." He replied: "Yes, madam, that is true; but you don't know what I suffer waiting for them to crow" (Conference Report, Oct. 1924, 93).

Ezra T. Benson (after waiting for his turn to speak in general conference): I think I know now, brethren, how effectively suspense might be used as a tool of punishment (Conference Report, Apr. 1944, 54).

Marvin O. Ashton (upon being called upon to speak): I once heard of a man who put on his tombstone, "I expected this, but not so soon" (Conference Report, Oct. 1943, 21).

Heber J. Grant: I should very much like to occupy the other twenty minutes, but I firmly believe that if you hire a man to do a certain work, and he knows how to do it and you do not, it is a wise thing to let him do it. Now, I have a very dear friend who is my doctor, George W. Middleton, and he tells me that 40 or 45 minute speeches should be about my limit, and I have only two more minutes (Conference Report, Apr. 1937, 18).

Brigham Young: The kingdom of our God, that is set upon the earth, does not require men of many words and flaming oratorical talents, to establish truth and righteousness. It is not the many words that accomplish the designs of our Father in heaven, with Him it is the acts of the people more than their words; this I was convinced of, before I embraced the Gospel. Had it not been that I clearly saw and understood that the Lord Almighty would take the weak things of this world to confound the mighty, the wise, and the talented, there was nothing that could have induced me, or persuaded me to have ever become a public speaker (Journal of Discourses 4:20-21).

Marvin O. Ashton: A typical young Mormon boy in one of the wards the other night made a talk. I had a copy of that talk given me by a friend, because she thought that maybe I might be interested in it. The boy started out something like this:

"I am going to be frank, I want to be. I hope that I am understood." . . . He continued: "Generally when I am asked to give a talk in Church—a few days ahead Pa writes it, Ma corrects it and then Bill runs it off on the typewriter. Then, of course, I learn it off by heart. Now tonight I am not going to do that. I am going to speak just the way I feel." And by the way, I think we ought to encourage more of that kind of talks than we do; we ought to encourage originality; we ought to encourage people to have the courage of their convictions and say what they think. You know, if more talks were given extemporaneously we would get closer to the hearts of the people. Even Mark Twain said he believed in extemporaneous talks. He said he had been studying on one for fifteen years. When he got a chance, he said he wanted to give it. . . . Now, I believe that (Conference Report, Apr. 1943, 30-31).

Hugh B. Brown: For a speech to be immortal it does not need to be everlasting (Conference Report, Apr. 1956, 103).

Speaking of a lawyer, Abraham Lincoln said, "He can compress the most words into the smallest ideas better than any man I ever met."

Heber J. Grant: I am going to take as long as I want, you know, and if anybody gets tired and wants to go out he or she has my permission. Being an insurance agent I am not easily offended (Conference Report, Oct. 1941, 145).

Thomas E. McKay: While at luncheon today with my family, there was a lull in the conversation, and one of my daughters remarked that she hoped daddy would be called upon in this afternoon's session, so he could quit worrying and "join with us in conversation" (Conference Report, Oct. 1943, 60).

Marion G. Romney: A grandfather I once knew . . . was getting along in years and some people thought he didn't know when to quit talking. At a ward gathering they thought they shouldn't call on him because he would speak too long. Their final decision was, however, that they couldn't pass him by, so they called on him and asked him to stand and tell them in just a word how they could live to be as old as he was and still be of service. So he got up and said, "Keep breathing" (Ensign, Nov. 1982, 91).

Stories

U.S. President Woodrow Wilson was once asked how long he took to prepare a ten-minute speech.

"Two weeks."

"How long for an hour speech?"

"One week."

"How long for a two-hour speech?"

"I am ready now."

President Franklin Delano Roosevelt gave the following advice to his son regarding making speeches: "Be sincere; be brief; be seated."

Sir Josiah Stamp, in a speech at the Chicago Club, expressed a hope that he wasn't talking too long. "I wouldn't like to be in the position of the parson," he explained, "who in the midst of an interminable sermon, suddenly stopped to chide: 'You know I don't mind a bit having you look at your watches to see what time it is, but it really annoys me when you put them up to your ears to see if they are still running."

When Dr. Walter Williams spoke in a Chinese university, an interpreter translated into Chinese symbols on a blackboard. Dr. Williams noted that the interpreter stopped writing during most of the speech and at the conclusion he asked why. "We only write when the speaker says something," was the reply.

Chauncey Depew once played a trick upon Mark Twain on an occasion when they were both to speak at a banquet. Twain spoke first for some twenty minutes and was received with great enthusiasm. When Depew's turn came, immediately afterwards, he said, "Mr. Toastmaster, Ladies and Gentlemen, before this dinner, Mark Twain and I made an agreement to trade speeches. He has just delivered mine and I'm grateful for the reception you have accorded it. I regret that I have lost his speech and cannot remember a thing he had to say."

He sat down with much applause.

"I ought not to be surprised by anything at my time of life," said an aging bishop, "but one ward member did manage to take my breath away. I was giving a talk in Sacrament meeting about the Father's tender wisdom in caring for us all; illustrated by saying that the Father knows which of us grows best in sunlight and which of us must have shade. 'You know you plant roses in the sunshine,' I said, 'and heliotrope and geraniums; but if you want your fuchsias to grow they must be kept in a shady nook.' After my talk, which I hoped would be a comforting one, a woman came up to me, her face glowing with pleasure that was evidently deep and true. 'Oh, Bishop, I am so grateful for that talk,' she said, clasping my hand and shaking it warmly. My heart glowed for a moment, while I wondered what tender place in her heart and life I had touched. Only for a moment, though. 'Yes,' she went on fervently, 'I never knew before what was the matter with my fuchsias.'"

In J. Golden Kimball's day, the General Authorities were not told in advance when they would be called on to speak in general conference. In 1921, toward the end of three days of meetings, Brother Kimball's call finally came. He began, "My brethren and sisters, I have been hanging on the hook so long during this conference that I am nearly exhausted. I have had some wonderful thoughts, but have waited so long they have nearly all oozed out of me" (see Conference Report, Apr. 1921, 178).

General Alexander Smyth of Virginia was a man of much learning who filled his over-long speeches with far too many quotations. After giving one of his tiresome speeches in the Senate, he turned to Henry Clay, one of his colleagues, and said, "You, sir, speak for the present generation; but I speak for posterity."

"Yes," said Mr. Clay, "and you seem resolved to speak until the arrival of your audience."

The story is told of Wilton Lackaye who was scheduled to speak late on the program at a banquet at which all the speakers had been deathly long-winded.

The chairman introduced Lackaye, saying, "Wilton Lackaye, the famous actor, will now give you his address."

Lackaye faced the haggard audience and said, "Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, my address is the Lambs' Club, New York."

He sat down and received a tremendous ovation.

The well-known preacher, Charles Spurgeon, taught a class of religion students to be sure that their facial expressions harmonized with their message when they delivered sermons. "When you speak of heaven," he said, "let your face light up and be irradiated with a heavenly gleam. Let your eyes shine with reflected glory. And when you speak of hell—well, then your everyday face will do."

Governor Al Smith of New York agreed to speak to the inmates of Sing Sing prison. But when he stood on his feet he suddenly realized that he didn't know how to address them. "My fellow citizens," he said, then remembered that the prisoners had all lost their citizenship. Embarrassed he said, "My fellow convicts," but knew as soon as he said it that he had made another mistake. Finally he gave it up and said, "Well, in any case, I'm glad to see so many of you here."

A railroad maintenance man was notorious for his lengthy reports. Finally his supervisor wrote him an exasperated note: "For goodness sake, man, be brief!"

The reprimanded employee complied. His next report described the results of a flash flood: "Dear sir: Where the railroad was, the river is."

1999 Deseret Book Co.
