Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Statistics

Jokes

A hundred men and two women cooks worked at a logging camp. The foreman had been so wordy in his weekly reports that an executive wrote to him, "We don't have time to read so many details. Boil it down. Just give us the percentages—that's what matters."

In his next report the foreman wrote, "Last month 1 per cent of the men married 50 per cent of the women."

Quotations

Richard L. Evans: I should like to close with one story, and I think maybe this is a good time to tell it. It is my favorite story on statistics. I have told it in a number of places. It is not my story, but it belongs to Brother Roscoe Eardley. . . . Knowing of my interest in the subject, he stopped me one day and said, "I have the latest story on statistics for you. We were coming from California by automobile and we had all been over the road a number of times and were somewhat bored with it, and, as travelers often do to pass time, we began counting service stations. And we counted one for almost every mile along that almost eight hundred mile journey. But that is not the story. We were so busy counting service stations that we ran out of gas!"

I did not sympathize with him too much because he had already told me there was one service station for about every mile. Then he said, "That's statistics for you. Where we ran out it was about fifteen miles to the nearest gas pump!" (Conference Report, Apr. 1948, 169).

Stories

You have probably heard the story of the father who had four daughters. As each of them left on a date one evening, he cautioned them to be home by midnight. The first returned at 11:45, the next at 11:50. The third came home at midnight, whereupon he locked the doors, turned out the lights, and went to bed. His wife reminded him that Mary had not come in yet. He said with great satisfaction, "Seventy-five percent of them are home—isn't that a pretty good percentage?" (Victor L. Brown, "Priesthood Activation," Ensign, May 1982, 34).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
