Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Sustaining

Quotations

Brigham Young: The first name I shall present to you is that of Brigham Young, President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. If any person can say that he should not be sustained in this office, say so. If there is no objection, as it is Â¸sual in the marriage ceremony of the Church of England, "Let them for ever afterwards hold their peace," and not go snivelling around, saying that you would like to have a better man (Journal of Discourses 7:228).

In the October 1954 General Conference, President J. Reuben Clark, during the sustaining of officers, presented the name of David O. McKay as prophet, seer and revelator, and president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. All present voted in the affirmative. President Clark overlooked asking for a negative vote, and upon being reminded by President McKay that he should do so, he made the following comment: "Excuse me, I did not see anything but all upraised hands. If anybody wants to vote negative, now is your opportunity." President George Albert Smith, on a similar occasion, said, "All who want to vote negatively, raise the left hand" (Conference Report, Oct. 1954, 115).

J. Golden Kimball: I sustain and uphold with all my heart and soul President Heber J. Grant as prophet of God. It was only two months ago that a young lawyer—I suppose he considers himself one of the brilliant young lawyers—undertook to criticize severely the President of the Church. I was somewhat disturbed. I said, "I am going to take out my watch and give you five minutes to name a better man." I haven't heard from him yet (Conference Report, Apr. 1930, 61).

Marion G. Romney: It is an easy thing to believe in the dead prophets, but it is a greater thing to believe in the living prophets. I will give you an illustration.

One day when President [Heber J.] Grant was living, I sat in my office across the street following a general conference. A man came over to see me, an elderly man. He was very upset about what had been said in this conference by some of the Brethren, including myself. I could tell from his speech that he came from a foreign land. After I had quieted him enough so he would listen, I said, "Why did you come to America?" "I am here because a prophet of God told me to come." "Who was the prophet;" I continued. "Wilford Woodruff." "Do you believe Wilford Woodruff was a prophet of God?" "Yes, I do." "Do you believe that President Joseph F. Smith was a prophet of God?" "Yes, sir."

Then came the sixty-four dollar question. "Do you believe that Heber J. Grant is a prophet of God?" His answer, "I think he ought to keep his mouth shut about old age assistance" (Conference Report, Apr. 1953, 125).

J. Golden Kimball: I was conversing with a prominent stranger yesterday, and he told me he was prejudiced when he came here, and I said: "I wish you had known our leading men. I wish you had been acquainted with Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball; you would have liked them."

He said, "Do you think so?"

I replied, "I know you would, or else you are not a man like I am" (Conference Report, Oct. 1912, 29).

Ben E. Rich: May God bless this work; may God bless the prophets, seers, and revelators who rule over it. May we always love them, and let the world know that we do love them, and not be ashamed of it. I would rather take the counsel and advice of President Joseph F. Smith than that of any man on this earth; and if some people don't like it, they can lump it (Conference Report, Apr. 1910, 92).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
