Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Tithes and Offerings

Jokes

On Sunday morning a father gave his son two quarters and a dollar. "Give the bishop the dollar for our fast offerings," the father said. "You can keep the quarters for your allowance."

When the dad saw the boy in sacrament meeting he still had the dollar. "Why didn't you give the dollar to the bishop like I asked?" the father asked.

"Well, in Primary Sister Goode said that God loves a cheerful giver. So I gave the bishop the fifty cents. I knew I could be a lot more cheerful about that than giving him the whole dollar."

Bishop's encouragement for members to increase fast offerings: I would like to remind you that what the Lord asks you to give is deductible; it cannot be taken with you; and the love of it is the root of all evil.

As a young man, Brother Jones made $100 a week and faithfully paid $10 tithing. As he grew older, his business prospered. When he earned $500 a week, he paid $50 tithing. When he earned $1,000 a week, he paid $100 tithing. Soon, his tithing amounted to $500 a week. When his bishop visited his palatial home, Brother Jones complained, "I just don't feel good about paying $500 tithing a week. That's a lot of money." The bishop replied, "I can understand that, but why don't we pray about it?" "What good would that do?" "Well, we could ask the Lord to reduce your income to the point where you felt good about paying tithing again."

Quotations

Alexander Toponce: In [pioneer] days if you wanted to go to the theatre you took butter, eggs, chickens, potatoes, wheat, anything like that to a tithing house, and they would give you script for it. Then you took the script to the theatre or to any store and bought what you wanted with it. On one occasion, I took a big fat turkey up to the tithing yard to sell for script and the tithing clerk had gone to supper. I waited and he did not return, so I had to go and get the young lady I had invited to go with me, and I carried the turkey into the window of the box office and asked for two balcony seats. That clerk at the window handed out the two tickets and two spring chickens for change and I had to sit there all through the performance with a chicken under each arm and the young lady I was with was quite peeved that I paid so little attention to her. I was never so embarrassed and uncomfortable in all my life (Reminiscences of Alexander Toponce, 186-87).

Charles W. Nibley: I think it is Brother Golden Kimball who tells the story of his father's owning a beautiful horse. Tithing was paid with horses, cattle, sheep, and everything obtainable in those days. The horse Brother Kimball had was a very fine one, and he said to the boys: "I believe I will turn that horse in for tithing; pay it to Bishop Hunter." The next morning one of the boys paraded the beautiful animal around and wanted to keep it, but President Kimball said: "See here, you take that horse right down and pay it in for tithing, before my heart puckers up" (Conference Report, Oct. 1924, 97).

Brigham Young: Talk about this people being poor, why we will get so rich by and by that we will refuse to pay our taxes; we have got so rich now that we cannot pay our tithing (Journal of Discourses 15:20-21).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
