Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Work

Jokes

God put me on earth to accomplish a certain number of things. Right now I am so far behind, I will never die!

A poor but learned man was working on a Bible commentary. His pragmatic friend said, "How impractical! Why don't you stop writing? It will get you nowhere!"

"And if I stopped writing—would it get me anywhere?" asked the scholar.

Quotations

J. Golden Kimball: Do you want eternal life? Almost everybody here would be awfully keen for it, if it did not cost anything. We would accept the whole world if it did not cost anything; I would be willing to take half of it myself (Conference Report, Apr. 1915, 79).

Stories

When Spencer W. Kimball visited Italy, he asked why no one had arranged for him to meet with the missionaries. He was told they were trying not to overtax him. He said, "I know what you are trying to do, you are trying to save me. But I don't want to be saved, I want to be exalted" (Kimball, "Spencer W. Kimball," BYU Studies[25[4]: 70).

Once when Paderewski played before Queen Victoria, the sovereign exclaimed with enthusiasm, "Mr. Paderewski, you are a genius!"

"Ah, Your Majesty," he replied, "that may be, but before I was a genius, I was a drudge."

A woman from Ogden traveled for the first time over the mountains from Logan, Utah, to Bear Lake. She was struck with the lake's beautiful turquoise color. Later, in general conference, she heard J. Golden Kimball say he had pioneered on a ranch near Bear Lake. Buttonholing him after conference, she asked, "Wasn't it wonderful to go over the mountain and see that exquisite lake?"

Brother Kimball answered, "If I had known it was going to be famous for its beauty, I'd have looked at it" (Cheney, Golden Legacy, 109).

Spencer W. Kimball was always humble about his position. After serving for five years as president of the Church, he said, "I still wonder what was the Lord thinking about, making a little country boy like me [president of his church], unless he knew that I didn't have any sense and would just keep on working" (Kimball, "Spencer W. Kimball," BYU Studies [5[4]: 62).

The great inventor Thomas Edison showed his love of work when his wife complained that he was working too hard and needed a rest. "You must go on a vacation," she declared.

"But where would I go?" asked the inventor.

"Just decide where you'd rather be than anywhere else on earth, and then go there," Mrs. Edison suggested.

"Very well," Edison said. "I will go there tomorrow."

The next morning Mrs. Edison found him back at work in his laboratory (see Reading, Joy, 177).

President Heber J. Grant, concerned that Elder James E. Talmage was working too hard, constantly urged him to take up golf. Finally, Elder Talmage agreed to play until he hit a shot that President Grant rated as a "real golf shot." After that, he could decide for himself whether to continue.

The two went to a golf course, where President Grant gave a brief lesson on addressing the ball. Elder Talmage stepped up and hit it, and the ball sailed more than two hundred yards straight down the fairway. After President Grant had congratulated him on hitting "a real nice golf shot," Elder Talmage said, "If I have carried out my part of the agreement, then I shall call on you to live up to yours. I should like to get back to the office, where I have a great deal of work waiting." Then he put down the golf clubs and walked away (Van Wagoner and Walker, A Book of Mormons, 347).

[When Elder Spencer W. Kimball traveled] on weekend assignments to stake conferences he would stay in the home of the stake president or one of his counselors. . . .

At Rigby, Idaho, President Christensen put him up on Saturday night. When they got home about 10:00 p.m. from the chapel, Spencer asked his host for a jumper, overalls, old shoes and a hat. "Under a little pressure he agreed," said Spencer.

"I milked two of the three cows while he milked the other and did some feeding and then we went in and went to bed. Next morning I was up and dressed again in my old clothes with the milk bucket on my arm. In conference when he introduced me he told about my help. After the meeting people came up to shake hands and said,

'When you come next time you can stay with us'" (Kimball and Kimball, Spencer W. Kimball, 232).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
