Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Youth

Jokes

Jason had just received his driver's license. "Dad," he said, "I'd like to be able to use the car."

"Well, son," his dad said, "I'll make a deal with you. Bring your grades up, study your scriptures better, and get your hair cut. Then we'll talk about it."

Three weeks later Jason pulled his dad aside. "Dad, can we talk about me using the car?"

"Son, I've been real proud of you," the father said. "You've brought your grades up and you've studied your scriptures diligently. But you didn't get your hair cut!"

Jason was ready with an answer. "Well, Dad, I've been thinking about that. Samson had long hair; Moses had long hair; even the first Twelve Apostles had long hair . . ."

"That's fine, Son," the father replied. "Of course, they walked everywhere they went."

A young woman went to visit her grandmother. The old lady was distressed by what she considered the girl's wild and unruly manners and speech. Not wishing to appear stern and demanding, she decided nevertheless that she should reprimand her granddaughter.

One evening as they were sitting together the old lady said gently, "Dear, there are just two words I want you to refrain from using. One is 'swell' and the other is 'lousy.'"

"All right," replied the girl agreeably, "What are they?"

A college-age daughter wrote home, "Dear Dad and Mom. I'm really worried about you. Haven't heard from you in weeks. Could you please put a check in the mail so I'll know you're all right?"

A family's college-age daughter called from BYU: "Mom, I need a hundred dollars. I've met this wonderful returned missionary. I've spent five Sundays in a row with him, and each time I wore one of the dresses I brought to college with me. Now it's coming up on the sixth Sunday, and I don't have any more dresses! Could you please send money for another dress?"

"I've got a better idea," her mom answered. "Get a new boyfriend, and you can start all over."

1999 Deseret Book Co.
