Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Children

Jokes

Primary teacher: So your mother says prayers with you every night? What does she say?

Little boy: Thank heavens, he's in bed!

A young mother put her little Jacob in bed for the night, but he toddled after her down the hall. "No, Jacob," she said. "You have to stay in bed."

She put him back in bed, turned off the light, and started to leave. "Mommy, Mommy!" Jacob called.

"What do you want?"

"Uh—how many days before Christmas?"

"Three months," she said. "Now go to sleep."

She walked down the hall again. "Mommy, Mommy!" he called.

"What?"

"Can I play with Todd tomorrow?"

"We'll see."

Again: "Mommy, Mommy."

"Jacob, this is the last time. What do you want?"

"Uh—where's Daddy?"

"He's at a meeting. Now if you yell 'Mommy' again you'll be in real trouble."

She was almost to the end of the hall when he called again: "Sister Green! Sister Green! May I have a drink of water?"

When a bishop telephoned one of the families in the ward, their little girl answered. "My parents are busy," she said politely. "May I take a message?"

"This is the bishop."

"How do you spell bishop?"

The bishop spelled out the word, then waited.

"How do you make a B?"

Lance, age four, was very cross at the supper table.

"The trouble with you is," said his mother, "you didn't take a nap this afternoon."

Lance looked at his mother directly and said, "Yes, and what's your trouble?"

It was Kindness to Animals Week at school, and a fourth grader came home full of pride. His parents asked him why he was so happy, and he told them that each student had to do something special for the week and that what he did had really worked.

"And what did you do?" asked his mother.

"I kicked a boy for kicking his dog."

Two men were catching up at a missionary reunion.

"I have three children now," one of them said.

"I sure wish I had three children."

"Don't you have children yet?"

"Yes, six!"

The tornado touched down, uprooted a tree in the family's front yard, and completely demolished the house across the street. The father went to the door, glanced out, and muttered, "Darn kids!" Then he went back to reading the paper.

The best years of a parent's life are when the kids are old enough to mow lawns and shovel snow but too young to drive the car.

On the way home from church, little Ethan asked his mother, "Are we really made of dust?"

"Yes, we are," she answered.

"Do we really return to dust again when we die?"

"Yes, that's what the scriptures say."

"Well, Mom," said Ethan, "Last night when I said my prayers, I looked under my bed, and somebody under there is either coming or going."

Recently there were tremors in a California town, and the townspeople got nervous. One couple sent their little boy to stay with an aunt and uncle in another town, explaining that the impending earthquake was the reason for the visit.

A few days later the parents got a short letter: "We're returning your boy. Send the earthquake."

Aunt Barbara: Does your baby sister talk yet, Susan?

Susan: No, she doesn't have to. She gets everything she wants just by howling and yelling.

First little boy: Hi, my name is Billy. I'm five. How old are you?

Second little boy: I'm Tommy, but I don't know how old I am.

First little boy: Do girls drive you crazy?

Second little boy: Nope.

First little boy: Okay. You're four then.

After reading the parable of the prodigal son, the Primary teacher wanted the class to understand the feelings of the prodigal's elder brother. She said, "During the rejoicing, there was someone who felt no joy; among the happy people, there was one who felt only bitterness; among all those going to the feast, there was one who had no wish to attend. Who do you think this was?" After several moments of silence a child replied, "The fatted calf?"

A new baby wailed in his crib while his five-year-old sister tried to comfort him.

"Are you sure he came from heaven?" she asked her mother.

"Yes, dear," her mother replied.

"No wonder they sent him down here!"

The Primary was holding a party to teach the older children to dance. One of the teachers watched beamingly as she helped a ten-year-old boy ask a girl for a dance. Half an hour later, the boy asked, "Now how do I get rid of her?"

A home teacher called to make an appointment. The phone rang and the family's little boy answered in a whisper. "Hello."

Home teacher: Is your daddy there?

Boy (whisper): Yes.

Home teacher: Can I speak with him?

Boy (whisper): He's busy.

Home teacher: Is your mommy there?

Boy (whisper): Yes.

Home teacher: Can I speak with her?

Boy (whisper): She's busy.

Home teacher: Is there anyone else there I could talk to?

Boy (whisper): The fire department.

Home teacher: The fire department!

Boy: (whisper) Yes, they're busy too.

Home teacher: Is there anybody else there?

Boy (whisper): The police department.

Home teacher: What, them too?

Boy (whisper): Yep. But they're busy.

Home teacher: Let me get this straight: your mother, your father, the fire department, and the police department are all in your house and they're all busy. What's going on over there?

Boy (whisper): Everyone's looking for me.

Little Justin was saying his prayers one night, and as his mother tiptoed near his bedroom door, she heard him say, "Please bless Jeremy that he'll stop hitting me. You might remember that I've mentioned this before. Well, he's still doing it."

A little girl complained that she didn't want to go back to school.

"But why, Jenny?" asked her mother.

"Well, I can't read, I can't write, and they won't let me talk."

Primary teacher: Billy, what do you think a land flowing with milk and honey would be like?

Billy: Sticky!

Quotations

Jedediah M. Grant: Brother Brigham is a father to the Quorums of this Church; and when the people are right, has he a disposition to chastise them? No, he has a fatherly feeling to bless them, and so has brother Heber. I do not know whether I have as much of that feeling as either of them, with regard to the Church, but I do not suppose that there is a man on the earth that is fonder of children than I am. If I do not like old people so well as some do, I like children well enough to balance the deficiency (Journal of Discourses 4:86).

Orson F. Whitney: I am reminded of another story, told by the famous temperance orator, John B. Gough, in a lecture delivered at the Salt Lake Theater many years ago. He was deprecating the practice of simplifying the Bible for the study of children. "Children," said he, "understand much better than we give them credit for. Let them read the Bible just as it is; they will understand it." To illustrate the point, he told of two little boys, Johnny and Billy, who were engaged in conversation. Johnny was seated on his mother's door-step, whittling a stick, and Billy had just caught a fly. He came with it to Johnny, and said: "What a funny thing a fly is. See what lots of legs he's got: and every time I blow him he buzzes." Then he would blow on the fly, and hold it up to his ear, to hear it buzz, grinning with delight at the sound. Finally he remarked, "I wonder how God made him." And the great orator paused long enough to observe, "Many a learned man has asked the same question, and could not answer it." But Johnny had an idea of how God made the fly. "Well, Billy," said he, as he whittled away. "God don't make flies like men make houses. When He wants flies, he says, Let there be flies: and then there is flies" (Conference Report, Apr. 1911, 50).

Hugh B. Brown: An influence on my upbringing was my older brother Bud. One day Bud and I saw a weasel. The little animal ran into his hole, and we got a spade and began to dig him out. We dug down quite a ways, and Bud said, "I think I can hear him down there, we are pretty close to him. Maybe you'd better reach in and see what he's doing." I rolled up my sleeve and reached down into the hole. Well, the weasel got me by the finger, and I still have a scar.

On another occasion, Bud and I went out to the barn, where he helped me up until I could get ahold of the rafters across the top with my hands. Bud said, "I will swing you back and forth. When you get going pretty good, I will tell you when to let loose of that rafter and when to grab the next one." He gave me a good long swing and then said, "Now." I let loose of the rafter, but the other one was not within reach. It took me six hours to wake up as I landed on the back of my head. Needless to say, mother was very concerned for my welfare.

So things went on between Bud and me. But I never felt any animosity or ill-will towards him. It seemed to be part of my education, although he certainly had me in trouble most of the time. But the time soon came when I wanted to get even with Bud for all of his mischief. I had read a story in which a man died, was put in a big vault, and then came to life again. He got out of his casket in the night and walked around, trying to find his way out, but he kept placing his hands on the faces of the other dead men around him. It was a terrible, horrifying story. I knew if I could get Bud to read it he would react as I had. So I asked him to read it. As he read and marked the book I watched him carefully. When he got to the place where the man was walking around among the dead men, Bud was very excited, to say the least.

At the time, we slept on some hay in the basement of a big barn at Lake Breeze (where my father managed a fourteen-acre orchard between North Temple and 200 South streets on Redwood Road). When Bud got to this place in the book, I said, "Leave your book now and we'll go to bed." He put it down reluctantly and we went out to the barn. I pulled the barn door open. Inside was as dark as a stack of black cats. I had previously arranged for a cousin to be in the basement in a sheet. When we opened the door and he saw this ghost standing at the bottom of the steps, Bud gave an unearthly scream and started to run. I overtook him and brought him back. "That's just the result of the book you've been reading," I said. "Don't be so foolish. I'll show you there's no ghost there." I went down the steps, felt all around, and could not feel the ghost.

Bud decided to trust me. He went down, got into bed, and covered up his head, but he was shaking all over. I said, "Don't be so foolish, Bud. Uncover your head and look around you. You'll see that there are no ghosts here." He uncovered his head and the ghost was standing right at the foot of his bed. He let out another unearthly scream, covered his head again, and began to pray. I felt very guilty because he told the Lord all the bad things he had done and promised never to do any more. Finally, the ghost went away. I guess Bud's prayer had a great effect on him, as well (Firmage, An Abundant Life, 2-4).

Stories

During gold rush days in California, a woman took her infant to the theatre one evening and it started crying just as the orchestra began to play.

"Stop those fiddles and let the baby cry," called a man in the pit. "I haven't heard such a sound in ten years!"

The audience applauded the sentiment wildly, the orchestra was stopped, and the baby continued its performance amid unbounded enthusiasm.

Once a kindergarten teacher was helping her young student put on his galoshes. They seemed far too small. She pushed and tugged and pulled and stretched the boot until she finally got it on. Then she went through the whole procedure for the other boot. She was tired and sweaty but satisfied when she was done. "There you go, Billy," she said. "You're all set."

"These are not my galoshes," he said.

"Oh, my word," the teacher said. She yanked and pulled and struggled and finally got both boots off again.

"They're my sister's," he explained, "but my mother made me wear them today" (adapted from Conference Report, Oct. 1987, 31).

A little girl once asked Herbert Hoover, president of the United States from 1929 to 1933, what he had enjoyed most about his presidential years. President Hoover replied, "The thing I enjoyed most was visits from children. They did not want public offices."

Not long after [Harold B.] Lee was sustained as the president of the Church, he received a note from a Primary president with a touching story: "I held up your picture and said to the children that this was our new president of the Church, Harold B. Lee. A little hand shot up quickly. 'Oh, I know him,' said the little boy. 'We sing about him all the time in church: Reverent-lee, quiet-lee . . . '" (Swinton, In the Company of Prophets, 72-73).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
