Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Communication

Jokes

A man walked into a doctor's office. The receptionist asked him, "What do you have?"

"Shingles," the man answered.

The receptionist gave him a long medical form to fill out. A nurse walked by and asked him, "What do you have?"

"Shingles," he answered again.

The nurse sent him back to the examination room, and the doctor appeared and asked, "What do you have?"

"Shingles!" the man practically yelled.

"Where?" asked the doctor.

"For heaven's sake! They're out in the truck! Where do you want me to put them?"

The chapel was full to overflowing. Shortly after the meeting started the bishop noticed that the stake presidency had made a surprise visit and were standing by the back door. Since there were no empty seats on the stand, he leaned forward and whispered to one of the deacons on the front row: "Jimmy, please get me three chairs."

Jimmy, an athletic little lad who was willing to do almost anything for the bishop, couldn't quite hear what the bishop had said. So he replied, "What?" in a rather loud whisper. The bishop whispered back, "Get me three chairs."

Jimmy, a bit confused, looked at the bishop and asked again, "What?" Again the bishop said, "Get me three chairs." Jimmy smiled, leaned back, and winked at the bishop. The bishop, a little puzzled, looked at Jimmy. "Did you understand what I said?" he asked. Jimmy smiled, winked again, and nodded his head. "Well, then do it now!" the bishop said with some exasperation.

Jimmy looked at the bishop. "Now? Well, okay . . ." Then he shrugged his shoulders, jumped to his feet, and yelled, "Rah, rah, rah, Bishop!" (see A Time to Laugh, 51-52).

A ward had some money left over at the end of the year, and the ward council was discussing how to spend it.

"I think we need new scriptures for the library," one member said.

"How about replanting the flowers outside," suggested another. "They're looking pretty dingy."

"Those are good suggestions," the bishop said, "but what I'd really like to see is a nice chandelier in the west foyer."

Before he could put it to a vote, however, the ward clerk raised his hand. "With all due respect, Bishop, I think we should do something else. In the first place, no one here knows how to spell it, so I don't know how to order it. In the second place, I doubt the foyer is big enough for any chandelier. In the third place, there's not a single soul in the whole ward who will know how to play it. And finally, Bishop, what we really need in that foyer is some lights!"

City cousin: Look at that bunch of cows.

Country cousin: Don't you know anything? Not bunch. Herd.

City cousin: Heard what?

Country cousin: Herd of cows.

City cousin: Of course I've heard of cows! How stupid do you think I am?

Country cousin: No! A cow herd.

City cousin: Why should I care if a cow heard? I've got no secrets from a cow!

A farmer had a wife who was very critical of his vocabulary. One evening he told her he had a friend named Bill he would like for her to meet. "Don't call him 'Bill,'" she insisted. "Call him 'William.'"

When the friend arrived, the farmer said, "Let me tell you a tale."

"Not tale," the wife interrupted. "Say 'anecdote.'"

That night, upon retiring, the farmer told her to put out the light.

"Not 'put out,'" she exclaimed. "Say 'extinguish' the light."

Later in the night she awakened her husband and sent him downstairs to investigate a noise. When he returned, she asked him what it was.

"It was," he explained carefully, "a William goat which I took by its anecdote and extinguished."

"When my husband was on his death bed," Sister Heltzer explained to her friends, "he told me he had three envelopes in his desk drawer. He said they would take care of everything.

"Not long after he died, I got out the envelopes. The first one said 'For the casket.' It had $5,000 in it, and I used it to buy a nice casket. The second envelope said, 'For the expenses.' It had $4,000 in it, which was just enough to take care of the other bills from the funeral. The last envelope said 'For the stone.' It had $3,000 in it. And look!" she exclaimed, holding her hand out to her friends, fingers extended, "isn't it beautiful!"

A family was eating dinner.

Son: Dad, is it okay to eat caterpillars?

Dad: Billy! You know better than to talk like that at the table.

Son: Sorry. It's just that a minute ago there was one on your salad. But it's gone now.

A son went to ask his father for money. Their conversation went like this:

Father: I'm busy. Be short.

Son: I will. I am.

"How is your wife?" one man asked another.

"She is in heaven," replied the friend.

"Oh, I'm sorry," stammered the man. Then he realized this was not the thing to say. "I mean," he stammered, "I'm glad." That seemed even worse so he blurted, "Well, what I really mean is, I'm surprised."

A customer settled himself and let the barber put a towel around him. Then he told the barber, "Before we start, I know the weather's awful. I don't care who wins the next big fight, and I don't bet on the horse races. I know I'm getting thin on top, but I don't mind. Now get on with it."

"Well, sir, if you don't mind," said the barber, "I'll be able to concentrate better if you don't talk so much!"

Brother Blicker came home from work with a joke to tell his wife. "Did you hear the one about the window that needed cleaning?" he asked.

"No, I don't believe I have," she answered.

"Well, I guess I shouldn't tell you—you couldn't see through it anyway."

Sister Blicker thought that was pretty clever. When she went visiting teaching she said, "Have you heard the story about the window you couldn't see through?"

"No, tell me," the sister answered.

"Oh, I'd better not," Sister Blicker said. "It's too dirty to tell" (see Brown, BYU Speeches of the Year, 16 Feb. 1954, 1-2).

Quotations

Orson Hyde apparently sometimes had trouble with people misspelling and mispronouncing his name—particularly in England, where the custom was to drop the "H" at the beginning of a word. To clarify matters, Elder Hyde put the following notice in the Millennial Star:

"Persons procuring post-office orders to send us are requested to be particular in giving our name correctly. Some orders have come payable to 'Horse and Hide,' some to 'Horson Ide.' . . . Remember that our name is—ORSON HYDE" (quoted in Taylor, Kingdom or Nothing, 121).

Jacob de Jager: A friend taught me a lot about ballooning. . . . I also heard from my friend many delightful stories about previous balloon flights. On one occasion, as the story goes, clouds developed unexpectedly during a flight, and the two men in the wicker basket had not the faintest idea over which part of the country they were sailing.

They decided to lower the balloon, and all of a sudden they saw a Dutchman walking on a lonely country road. When they were able to draw his attention, one of the men in the basket shouted: "Where are we?" And the lonely walker looked up, cupped his hands around his mouth, and shouted back, "You are in a balloon."

To make their urgent request for direction more clear, the man in the balloon cried vigorously, "Where are you?" And the man called back at the top of his voice, "I am on the ground!" (Ensign, May 1983, 75).

Stories

The late General Smedley D. Butler, always an impulsive man, was generally careful of the welfare of his men. One time in France he encountered two soldiers emerging from the kitchen with a large soup kettle. "Let me taste that," he ordered.

"But Gen— . . ."

"No buts! Give me a spoon." Taking a taste, the General sputtered, "You don't call that soup, do you?"

"No, sir," replied the soldier, "I was trying to tell you, sir, I call that dishwater."

Once, when Abraham Lincoln's secretary of state suggested that a message Lincoln was sending to the British prime minister be put in more diplomatic terms because of the prime minister's high position, Lincoln said, "Mr. Secretary, do you suppose Palmerston will understand our position from my letter, just as it is?"

"Certainly, Mr. President."

"Do you suppose the London Times will?"

"Certainly."

"Do you suppose the average Englishman of affairs will?"

"Certainly. It cannot be mistaken in England."

"Do you suppose that a hackman on his box will understand it?"

"Very readily, Mr. President."

"Very well, Mr. Secretary. I guess we'll let her slide just as she is."

A melancholy man, always quoting death statistics, once accosted Mark Twain, commenting, "Mr. Clemens, do you realize that every time I breathe, an immortal soul passes into eternity?"

Twain asked sweetly, "Have you ever tried cloves?"

Camilla Kimball's deaf sister stayed with the Kimballs for twenty-five years. After her death, Elder Kimball's son Ed, meaning to be helpful, asked him, "Do you want me to call [my brothers] Andy and Spencer to tell them about Aunt Mary's death?"

"Yes," he replied, "would you please."

"Would you like me to call one of them before the other?"

Elder Kimball paused. "Yes" (Kimball, "Spencer W. Kimball," BYU Studies [5[4]: 68).

Back when bishops were responsible to raise budget money from ward members, a ward had a project of selling bags of lawn fertilizer. The bishop, who was quite hard of hearing, stood at the pulpit and made the announcement, then sat down.

His counselor stood to conduct the meeting. "We want to remind you that next week is fast Sunday. We've noticed that we have quite a few new mothers, with babies to be blessed, so remember that next week is the time."

At that the hard-of-hearing bishop, who thought the counselor was still talking about fertilizer, piped up from behind him. "And don't forget that if you haven't got yours yet I can get them for five bucks apiece!"

1999 Deseret Book Co.
