Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Contention

Jokes

Nine-year-old Travis came home from school with a black eye and a bloody nose.

Dad: You look terrible! What happened?

Travis: I challenged Jeremy to a duel, and he got to choose his weapon.

Dad: Well, that seems fair.

Travis: Yeah, but I didn't know he'd choose his sister!

Dad: Shawn, what did you do when Erik called you a liar?

Shawn: Well, Dad, I remembered what you taught me about a soft answer turning away anger.

Dad: That's wonderful! What did you say to him?

Shawn: Well . . . I answered him with a soft tomato.

Quotations

J. Golden Kimball: Educated as we are, and breathing this mountain air for twenty years, it takes a little training before you can turn the other cheek and treat those kindly who spitefully use you. It takes a little education to learn how precious are the souls of the children of men in the sight of God. So we need some older men to put their hands on us younger boys and hold us down. We are a good deal like Peter. I was that way. I would have cut more than one of their ears off, if there had been someone to stick them on again (Conference Report, Apr. 1902, 9).

B. H. Roberts: I really never had, in my boyhood days, a fight in my life but what it was forced on me. . . . Personally I was just in the same condition that the nations of Europe are now in, I was forced to fight; and generally, in fact so far as I can remember always, I entered every engagement that fell in my way with a good deal of anxiety, even fear, but there was this peculiarity about it—I don't know that it is peculiar, however; perhaps it is a common inheritance to all men—but the first blow struck, I was always very comfortable after that (Conference Report, Oct. 1914, 108).

Hugh B. Brown: A middle-aged couple on the farm had a violent quarrel at breakfast time. Later in the day they started for town in the buggy, with a fine team of horses to sell their vegetables and eggs. As the horses trotted along, Mary said, "John, why can't we travel together like these horses do? They don't quarrel and fight." John said, "Mary, we could if there was only one tongue between us" (Conference Report, Oct. 1954, 16).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
