Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Courtesy

Quotations

David O. McKay: Yesterday morning when our President suggested to this vast assemblage that they move nearer together in their seats, in order to give brethren and sisters who were standing a little room to sit down, there was a universal movement throughout this tabernacle. It was surprising to those who could look over the audience, to see how just a little one-sixteenth of an inch, multiplied by probably ten thousand, made room for so many people. There was a universal response to that suggestion. Some were unable to give even the sixteenth of an inch, but they wiggled all the same (Conference Report, Oct. 1909, 88).

George Albert Smith: You have done such fine teamwork during the day, brethren, you have collapsed sufficiently two or three times, by moving closer together so that many people who were standing could have seats. I am going to ask you if you will do that tonight, if you will all move to the center of the seats. And when I say move to the center, I do not mean just to go through the motion, I mean move (Conference Report, Apr. 1946, 103).

Cornelius Zappey (former president of the Netherlands Mission): Six months ago, my brothers and sisters, I was standing in the aisle, behind the rope held by the usher, wishing, as many of us have done, that all Stake Presidents and Bishops would not be on time. Standing in the end of the row two sisters behind me were speaking the Scandinavian language. It did not take long before they were in front of me, and in some way, soon they were at the very front but while they were yet in front of me speaking their native tongue, a brother in front of them turned around and asked: "Swensk?" and the sisters said "Ja, Ja." This brother, putting his hand upon his chest said, "Norsk." It did not take long until the sisters were in front of this brother also. . . . I never before understood better and more fully the statement that "The race is not to the swift but to the one that endureth to the end" than I did at that time (Conference Report, Apr. 1951, 132-33).

George Albert Smith: It is evident that we have more people in the building this morning than we had yesterday. We will appreciate it if those who are comfortably seated now will take a little less space, crowd toward the center of the benches, and I think we can probably make room for most of those who are now standing. There are probably 150 or 200 standing. We will ask the ushers to bring you to your places. I would like to suggest that there is room for twelve or fifteen people on the steps of the stand here, and for the information of those of you who are in the habit of sitting on the stand, I should like to suggest that that is where I sat a few years ago because there wasn't any place that I could see that somebody else did not have. I sat on the steps of the stand and before that Conference was finished, I was sustained as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve. . . . We shall all be happier if everybody can be seated, and I am sure you are making good progress, and I thank you for it (Conference Report, Apr. 1946, 55).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
