Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Creativity

Quotations

William J. Critchlow, Jr.: This mother skunk had twin babies. They gave her a lot of trouble. She named one of them IN—and the other she named OUT. Now it seemed that whenever IN was in—OUT was out, and when OUT was in, IN was out. One day she called OUT in and said to him, "OUT, go out in the forest and find IN and bring IN in." So OUT went out in the forest and found IN and brought IN in. "Wonderful," said the mother. "How did you do it?" "It was easy," said OUT. "Instinct" (Speeches of the Year, 28 Apr. 1964, 6).

Moses W. Taylor: We believe in temperance. Some of the Saints in our stake will hardly drink hot water, and some almost hesitate to use hot gravy. . . . Let me tell you what one of the bishops of one of our wards did, and the Relief Society helped him in it. There was a saloon started in the ward, and made us all kinds of trouble. Some time passed, and the members of the Church bought a lot just opposite the saloon on which to build a meeting house. Then the bishop came to the presidency of the stake and said, "What shall we do about that saloon?" The presidency of the stake said, you go on hauling and cutting rock every day, right along. So they did it, and in about three weeks, he telephoned the presidency of the stake, and said, This saloon man has got quite friendly, he comes out, and talks with me. The people don't patronize him very much, and he says he will sell his saloon for so much, what shall we do? I told him to offer $50 less, and I will give you the money. Then the Relief Society bought it; and the women went into the vacated saloon, and they got lime and made it into whitewash, and they whitewashed floors and everything else nearly; they wanted to wash the sin away, you know. And then they erected a long board table in it, and every day they got up a big dinner in that old saloon building. Now they have got as fine a meeting house right opposite that former saloon building as there is any where, and the people built it, and it didn't cost them very much money. Thus sometimes you see, a saloon building is a very nice thing to have, if it is used by the Relief Society (Conference Report, Apr. 1908, 65-66).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
