Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Dating and Courtship

Jokes

Amy: I'm engaged! Look, he gave me a diamond ring!

Tiffany: How nice. I'm glad to see you're marrying a thrifty man.

College student to date at a basketball game: Look at that tall player who just made the hook shot. He'll be our best man before the season's finished.

Date: Sweetheart! What a creative way to ask me to marry you!

She said: The man of my dreams is as brave as a lion, as handsome as a movie star, but still humble. He's as smart as a whip, as wise as Solomon, as strong as Samson but as gentle as a lamb. He's kind to all women but loves only me.

He said: How lucky we met!

He said: You're the sunshine of my life. When you're near me, the gray clouds disappear and the radiant beams of light chase away the dark and the cold. When you leave me, the world is chilly and the clouds appear . . .

She said: Is this a marriage proposal or a weather report?

Chad: I think my girlfriend is taking advantage of me.

Zach: What makes you say that?

Chad: The other night when I invited her out to dinner, she asked if she could bring a date.

John: Will you marry me?

Marsha: No, dear, but I'll always admire your excellent taste.

Boy, with one hand cupped over the other: If you can guess what I have in my hand, I'll take you out tonight.

Girl: An elephant!

Boy: Nope! But that's close enough. I'll pick you up at 7:30.

He said: Do you love me?

She said: Yes, you know I do.

He said: Would you be willing to live on my income?

She said: Of course. That is—if you can get another one for yourself.

Chaz: So . . . how did it go when you asked that good-looking girl to dance?

Brett: Not bad, really.

Chaz: Yeah? She gave you some encouragement, then?

Brett: Well, she looked at me twice before saying no.

Boy: Meet me at La Caille at seven o'clock tonight.

Girl: La Caille? Wow! That's a really classy restaurant!

Boy: Yeah. And besides, it's really close to the hamburger joint where we're going to eat.

Dad: Well, Son, I'll bet you feel pretty grown-up now that you've turned sixteen and gone on your first date!

Todd: I'd feel a lot more grown-up if Mom hadn't taken pictures and recorded it in my baby book!

A single man was visiting a new ward and saw only one empty seat—between two attractive ladies. He felt timid about taking that spot and held back at the doorway. The greeter, a fatherly type, saw him hesitating and said encouragingly, "You go on in and sit down. They won't mind."

The fellow gulped. "But what would I say to them?"

"Just be friendly," the older man suggested. "Ask them if they're married and if they have any children."

He nervously sat down between the two ladies, turned to the one on the right, and asked, "Do you have children?"

"Yes," she replied.

"Are you married?" She glared at him; then turned away.

Hoping for better results with the other lady, he turned to her and asked, "Are you married?"

"No," she answered.

"Do you have any children?"

Susan: Don't worry, darling. I love you so much I'm willing to share all your troubles.

Sam: But, baby, I don't even have any troubles.

Susan: I don't mean now—I'm talking about after we're married.

Every time a certain young woman went to Church, she'd walk up to the men and give them a big kiss. Finally the bishop told her she'd have to stop. "I'm just following the scripture," she said.

"What scripture is that?" the bishop asked.

"Matthew 7:12: 'All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them.'"

Later, the bishop also counseled her about dancing too close with all of the men at a ward social. She replied, "1 I Thes. 5:21: 'Prove all things; hold fast that which is good.'"

One young woman who dated a lot was distraught because none of her boyfriends wanted to get married. "They draw near unto me with their lips," she said, "but their hearts are far from me."

Karen: I understand John has finally asked you to marry him. Did he mention that he once proposed to me?

Kristin: Not specifically. But he did say he'd done a lot of foolish things before he met me.

Quotations

Clarissa Young, one of Brigham Young's daughters: On Sunday evenings the older girls were permitted to entertain their beaux in the parlor. The oldest members of the group became rather famous as the "Big Ten," because there were just that number who seemed to have grown up about the same time. There was only the one large parlor for them to entertain their young men in, and twenty did seem a large number when there were only four corners, so, one evening, the happy suggestion was made that some semblance of privacy might be obtained by turning down the coal-oil lamp that stood on the table in the center of the room. A second thought was that the light might be more effectively dimmed by placing a barricade of books around it. The main idea, anyway, was to get rid of the light, so everyone lent a hand, and soon there was but one shaft of light that played upon the ceiling where no one minded it. The couples then went back to their chairs and the sofa, which seemed so much more cozy in the semidarkness.

All went very well for a time until the door slowly opened, and there stood Father with a candle in his hand. He gave one look around the room and then walked to the table where he removed the books one by one until the proper light shone forth on faces that would have preferred the darkness for a different reason now. Then turning to the very much subdued group, he said, "The girls will go upstairs to their rooms, and I will say good night to the young men" (Spencer, Brigham Young at Home, 33-34).

Stories

When Spencer W. Kimball was courting his wife, Camilla, he ate with her family quite regularly. He later said, "Father Eyring gave his consent to our marriage just to get rid of me" (Kimball, "Spencer W. Kimball," BYU Studies [5[4]: 62).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
