Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Death and Immortality

Jokes

An elderly sister passed away having never married. On top of her dresser was a paper with complete instructions for her funeral—the songs, the speakers, the prayers. At the bottom, as a special addendum, was the following note: "You must have no male pallbearers. Since they wouldn't take me out when I was living, they can't take me out when I'm dead."

Quotations

J. Golden Kimball: I like to preach a man's funeral sermon while he's living. You can't tell the truth about a man when he is dead. I've given many a man a ticket to the celestial glory that I knew wouldn't take him halfway there (Cheney, Golden Legacy, 96).

Garrison Keillor: They say such nice things about people at their funerals that it makes me sad to realize that I'm going to miss mine by just a few days.

J. Golden Kimball: When it comes to self-sacrifice, fighting for the truth, [some people] are like the dying man who was asked by the minister, "Will you denounce the devil and all his workings?" The dying man looked up in a feeble and distressed way and said, "Please don't ask me to do that. I am going to a strange country, and I don't want to make any enemies" (Conference Report, Oct. 1912, 27).

Stories

President David O. McKay entered the elevator in the Hotel Utah one day to find a boy who shook the president's hand with admiring awe. The young man got off the elevator a floor below Brother McKay's apartment. But when the Prophet, who moved very slowly with the help of a companion, finally exited on his floor, he was surprised to see the same boy standing in the hall panting from his race up the stairway, and with his hand extended for another shake. "I just wanted to shake hands with you once more before you die," the boy explained (Gibbons, David O. McKay, 232-33).

Charles Dillingham and Florenz Ziegfeld, both eminent producers and both now deceased, were pallbearers at the funeral of the great escape artist, Houdini. As they lifted the beautiful and heavy casket to their shoulders, Dillingham whispered to Ziegfeld, "Suppose he isn't here."

The great American actor W. C. Fields was famous for his raspy voice, his bulbous nose, and the drunken, rascally characters he played. It is said that when he was on his death bed, a friend came to visit him and was astonished to find him reading the Bible. His friend asked, "Bill, what in the world are you doing reading the Bible?"

Fields's reply was, "Looking for loopholes."

Mark Twain once went to a dinner party where the chief subject of conversation was heaven and hell. Twain sat in silence throughout the conversation. Finally a woman asked, "Why do you not say anything? I would like to hear your opinion."

"Madam, you must excuse me," Twain replied. "I am silent of necessity—I have friends in both places."

Spencer W. Kimball and Bruce R. McConkie once traveled to Mexico City to visit the mission. The heat was oppressive, so they took off their coats during a break in the meetings. When it was time for the next session, Elder Kimball put on Elder McConkie's coat, which hung down past his hands, and Elder McConkie pulled on the small coat, which came just to his forearms. The missionaries raced for their cameras.

Later, at Oaxaca, a guide showed the two men a large column and explained its folklore: if a man reached his arms around the column, the number of finger widths between his hands would equal the number of years he had remaining. Elder McConkie's long arms actually overlapped by sixteen years. "That," Elder Kimball explained, "means that you are already dead and don't know it" (Kimball, "Spencer W. Kimball," BYU Studies [5[4]: 64).

It seems that two members of a stake, both endowed, were critically ill and neither was expected to live. The person in charge of burial clothes telephoned the stake president one night, exercised over the possibility of two funerals and only one set of burial clothes. "What shall I do?" he asked the president.

The president, seeing no solution, said he would just have to work it out himself, for there would not be time to send to Church headquarters for the clothing. Then he forgot the incident. He was reminded of it when he saw that person at a meeting some weeks later. "How did you come out with your problem?" he inquired.

"All right," said the man, "no trouble."

"What did you do?" the president inquired.

"Oh," he answered, "I went out and administered to one of them" (Packer, Teach Ye Diligently, 251-52).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
