Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Direction

Jokes

If you think you're confused, think of Christopher Columbus. First off, he didn't know where he was going. When he got there, he didn't know where he was. And when he got back home, he didn't know where he'd been!

"Caddy, why do you keep looking at your watch?"

"Pardon me, sir. This is not a watch; it's a compass."

Quotations

Orson Hyde: I like to hear an energetic speaker; but one who speaks very loud is apt to injure himself. When I have spoken too loudly, I have done injustice to myself and probably to the congregation. . . . At the same time, I do not want my mind so trammelled as brother Parley P. Pratt's once was, when dancing was first introduced into Nauvoo among the Saints. I observed brother Parley standing in the figure, and he was making no motion particularly, only up and down. Says I, "Brother Parley, why don't you move forward?" Says he, "When I think which way I am going, I forget the step; and when I think of the step, I forget which way to go" (Journal of Discourses 6:150).

Marvin J. Ashton: Our journey through life must be charted. We must know where we're going.

I'm reminded of a man in New York who jumped into a taxicab and said, "Hurry, hurry, I'm late!" The cab driver took off with a lurch and wove rapidly through traffic.

Suddenly his passenger said, "Oh, I forgot to tell you where to go."

"I know," said the cabbie, "but we are surely making good time" (New Era, July 1981, 17).

George Durrant: I have been told that a traveler driving through Manti, Utah, stopped, rolled down his car window, and asked a farmer . . . , "How do I get to Salt Lake from here?"

The farmer replied, "You can go up several miles, then turn left and go through Moroni, then continue on to Nephi. Get on the freeway and head north to Salt Lake. Or you can go past the turnoff and go up through Thistle and then down Spanish Fork Canyon to the freeway. Go north and you'll get to Salt Lake."

After considering the alternatives, the visitor asked, "Does it matter which way I go?"

The farmer . . . replied, "Not to me it don't" (Durrant, Look at the Sky, 1).

George Durrant: Two beginning but lucky deer hunters had shot a big buck. They were dragging it to camp when an experienced hunter coming up the trail observed that they were pulling it by its hind legs. He helpfully suggested, "If you fellers would pull the deer by the horns, you'll be dragging it with the grain of the hair, and it will go more easily."

Taking this advice, the hunters took hold of the horns and dragged the deer for another hour. Finally one said to the other, "He was right; it does drag easier this way."

"Yes," replied the other, "but we're getting farther and farther away from camp" (Durrant, Look at the Sky, 2).

Stories

During his 1846 campaign for Congress, Abraham Lincoln attended a sermon by evangelist Peter Cartwright, who called for all who wanted to go to heaven to stand. Everyone rose but Lincoln. Then the preacher gave a call for all who wanted to avoid hell. Again everyone stood but Lincoln.

"I am grieved," said the preacher, "to see Abe Lincoln sitting back there unmoved by these appeals. If he doesn't want to go to heaven and doesn't want to escape hell, will he tell us where he does want to go?"

At that, Lincoln stood. "I'm going to Congress," he said.

Because David [O. McKay] and [his wife Emma] Ray lived the ideals of the Church in their home, spiritual things came naturally to their children. Typical of this is the experience of one of the sons when he was a small boy. One day he was visiting his grandfather's home, which was next door, while spring house cleaning and re-papering of the rooms were in progress. The little fellow . . . stood in a doorway watching the work and attracted the attention of a workman [who] asked him, "When you are a man, would you like to be a painter and paper-hanger?" Without hesitation the child answered, "No, sir." The workman persisted, and said, "Then what would you like to be?" The boy . . . replied seriously, "I should like to be a 'Twelve Apostle'" (Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay, 42).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
