Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Example

Quotations

Spencer W. Kimball: Long years ago when I was in the presidency of the St. Joseph Stake in Arizona, one Sabbath day I filled an assignment in the Eden Ward. . . .

As the meeting proceeded, my eye was attracted to seven little boys on the front seat of the chapel. I was delighted that they were in this ward conference. I made a mental note, then shifted my interest to other things. Soon my attention was focused on the seven little boys again.

It seemed strange to me that each of the seven raised his right leg and put it over the left knee, and then in a moment all would change at the same time and put the left leg over the right knee. I thought it was unusual, but I just ignored it.

In a moment or two, all in unison brushed their hair with their right hands; then all seven boys leaned lightly on their wrists and supported their faces by their hands, and then simultaneously they went back to the crossing of their legs again.

It all seemed so strange, and I wondered about it as I was trying to think of what I was going to say in the meeting. And then suddenly it came to me like a bolt of lightning: These boys were mimicking me!

That day I learned the lesson of my life—that we who are in positions of authority must be careful indeed, because others watch us and find in us their examples (Ensign, Nov. 1974, 79).

N. Eldon Tanner: The Singing Mothers this afternoon, pardon me, the singing for this afternoon session will be furnished by the Brigham Young University. I hope you do as well as your mothers (Conference Report, Oct. 1964, 61).

Stories

In 1928 N. Eldon Tanner, then thirty years old, was called as second counselor in the bishopric of his Cardston, Alberta, ward. He was directly responsible for the deacons and also served as Scout leader. He soon noted that not many of the young men were attending priesthood meeting. Visiting with some of the deacons, he learned that many of them had only overalls or coveralls to wear, and few had Sunday clothes. For Brother Tanner, "principle was absolute but fashion was negotiable." He therefore went to each deacon and offered a deal. If they would come to priesthood meeting, he too would wear coveralls. The result was one hundred percent activity among the three deacons quorums of his ward (Durham, N. Eldon Tanner, 43-44).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
