Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Faith

Jokes

In a rural, quite religious farm community, there was a disastrous drought and the crops were dying. In desperation, the local preacher announced that the whole community would assemble at the edge of one of the fields and pray for rain. A large crowd gathered, and the preacher climbed on a bale of hay and surveyed the flock. He said, "Brothers and sisters, you have come here to pray for rain."

"Amen!" responded the crowd.

"Well," said the preacher, "do you have sufficient faith?"

"Amen! Amen!" shouted the crowd.

"All right, all right," said the preacher, "but I have one question to ask you."

The crowd stood silent, puzzled, expectant.

"Brothers and sisters," said the preacher, "where are your umbrellas?"

A man was mountain climbing when he stumbled and fell over the edge of a cliff. He grabbed onto a thin tree branch and hung there in midair. He'd never been a praying man, but now, frightened, he looked up to heaven and called, "Is anybody up there?"

A peaceful voice came to him. "Yes, my son. Let go of the branch, and I will save you."

The man paused a moment, then asked, "Uh . . . is anyone else up there?"

A very religious man lived in a house by a great river. One night there was a terrible flood and the man had to climb up on the roof of his house to escape being drowned.

After a time some men came by in a boat to rescue him, but he refused. "I have faith that God will rescue me." Soon after, another boat came to rescue him, and again he refused: "I have faith in God."

Considerably later a helicopter flew over and let down a rope ladder, but the man waved them away, shouting, "I have faith in God to rescue me!"

At last, the force of the water broke up the house and the man was drowned. He went to heaven, and when he saw God he said, "I had such faith in you, and you let me drown. Why?"

"What do you mean, let you drown? I sent you two boats and a helicopter."

A young girl's father had been in the hospital for a serious operation, and for several days he could not receive visitors. Still in pretty bad shape, he was finally allowed a visit from his family. His young daughter was baffled by her father's condition. "But, Dad, you look awful! Didn't you get my get-well card?"

A gala crowd gathered for the test run of Robert Fulton's outlandish steamboat contraption The Clermont. For hours the strange craft belched smoke and sparks from its tall, thin stack as his engineers attempted to get up the necessary head of steam. When the time to cast off had come and the engines were being limbered up, the boat vibrated violently and made a loud racket. A group of doubting Thomases in the crowd had been shouting loudly and scornfully, "She'll never start! She'll never start!" But the boat pulled itself together and started to move up the river. After a moment of astonished silence, the voices of the scoffers resumed their shouts, this time crying with all the scorn they could muster, "She'll never stop! She'll never stop!"

An old woman on a sinking ship was told they had no other hope but to trust in Providence.

"Oh dear," she said. "Has it come to that?"

Quotations

George Albert Smith: I went on my Mission to Washington in full faith to ask for the admission of Deseret [as part of the United States], never asking myself the question whether I would accomplish it or not, striving to believe with all the power and faith I could command, that we could accomplish our Mission.

I sometimes sat in the gallery of the House of Representatives and heard the members wrangle, and asked myself if it was possible that the Lord wished us to join hands with such unhallowed confusion and political chicanery. After my return home, some of the brethren asked me how much faith I had that we should be admitted. I concluded my faith had been like that of a certain pious lady, whose minister called upon her and inquired concerning her religious welfare. She replied that she was well satisfied with her spiritual progression, but in her temporal welfare she was not equally prosperous. She was destitute of bread and had nothing to sustain life. The minister kindly told her to exercise faith and she could make stones into bread. She thanked him for his timely advice, she had never thought of that, and accordingly went and procured some stones of suitable size for loaves of bread, washed them, put them in pans, heated her oven in which she placed them, closed the door, exclaimed "I have firm faith, that when these stones come out of the oven they will be good bread." After patiently waiting the proper time, she opened the oven door and looked anxiously in; "there!" she declared, "they are stones yet, and I knew they would be all the time" (Journal of Discourses 9:263-64).

Stories

Elder Matthew Cowley went to visit eight-year-old Joe, lying unconscious in a hospital, and gave him a blessing. The boy was breathing with the aid of an iron lung after having contracted polio and pneumonia.

A short while later he visited little Joe again, and lying in an adjoining bed was another young fellow. Elder Cowley visited with Joe for a few moments, and as he was about to leave, Joe asked Elder Cowley to give his roommate a blessing too.

Two weeks after that, Elder Cowley visited young Joe a third time in the hospital, and this time Joe was rather sad.

"I am lonely," he said. "Maybe I shouldn't have asked you to bless my partner. He got well so soon and has gone home" ( Matthew Cowley Speaks, 69).

A Church member who was lying in the hospital waiting for surgery was visited by Elder J. Golden Kimball. This is the record written of the visit: "The day before the dreadful ordeal, a mutual friend brought Brother J. Golden Kimball to administer to me. First, he talked and visited a considerable time and then blessed me. There was nothing frivolous about his talk, and yet he soon had me smiling. Later, the smiles were interspersed with laughter. I began to see things in proper perspective and to realize that all was well with the world and that the sky for me, after all, had but one dark cloud in it which, probably, would soon roll away. I felt I was in the presence of a sane, well balanced man and a man of exceptionally strong faith. In truth, never did I feel the power of faith more than that day" (Richards, J. Golden Kimball, 102).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
