Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Family

Jokes

Teenage son: Mom, I really love you. I appreciate all that you do for me.

Mother: Why, thank you, Nate. It's nice to hear a young man express such tender feelings.

Teenage daughter: So, Nate—your teachers quorum adviser gave out an assignment, huh?

Father: Son, when I was your age, my family was so poor that all I had to wear was hand-me-down clothes!

Son: That's not so bad, Dad. I wear hand-me-downs sometimes.

Father: Yes, but all I had was older sisters!

Emily was an only child and badly wanted a sister or brother. She prayed night after night that God would send one to her home. Nothing changed, so at length she gave up praying for that particular blessing. After quite some time, her mother learned she was expecting. She went to the hospital and gave birth to not one baby but twins.

When she heard the news, Emily exclaimed, "Well, it's a good thing I stopped praying when I did!"

Quotations

Heber J. Grant: The first great commandment is to "multiply and replenish the earth;" and Utah's best crop is babies (Conference Report, Apr. 1921, 211).

John M. Knight: My grandfathers and great grandfathers and grandmothers, and my father and mother passed through all the trials incident to the pioneering of this great western wilderness, and they were faithful to the truth. I ask for no greater legacy than that, because their lives were an inspiration to me, and they encouraged me in living the principles of the gospel. I mentioned this fact in Denver, that I represented the fourth generation in the Church, and our baby, a little fellow of seven years, went to his mother and said: "What do you think father called us in meeting?" And she said: "I don't know, son, what was it?" He said: "Father said that we were the fifth amendment" (Conference Report, Oct. 1922, 42).

Elaine Cannon: You've no doubt heard about the young girl who complained to her teenage brother about the terrible blows that life had dealt her. And she said, "It just isn't fair; you got the curly hair and the straight nose."

And he said, "Well, you got the curly nose and the straight hair!" (Ensign, May 1982, 95).

Ogden Nash: A family is a unit composed not only of children, but of men, women, an occasional animal, and the common cold.

Will Rogers: Live that you wouldn't be ashamed to sell the family parrot to the town gossip.

Stories

Once when Abraham Lincoln was carrying two of his sons, Willie and Tad, and both were yelling at the top of their lungs, he was asked what was wrong.

"Just what's the matter with the whole world. I've got three walnuts and each wants two."

1999 Deseret Book Co.
