Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Gratitude

Jokes

Many years ago, an Idaho farmer bought a horse from his bishop.

"Now, this is no ordinary horse," said the bishop, a very religious man. "He doesn't respond to 'Giddyap.' When you want him to get moving, you've got to say 'Thank heaven!' And when you want him to stop, don't say 'Whoa.' Say 'Amen' instead."

The farmer thanked the bishop, paid him for the horse, and went on his way, with a cheerful "Thank heaven!" to get the horse going. Pretty soon the farmer noticed that the wooden bridge ahead had washed away, leaving a hazardous dropoff to the river fifty feet below. In a panic, the farmer tried to remember his instructions. After saying, "Whoa!" and "Stop!" and "Halt!" he finally remembered and called out, "Amen!" The horse stopped short right on the edge of the steep riverbank. That's when the farmer, relieved that he had averted disaster, called out, "Thank heaven!"

There's something kind of sad about atheists: when they feel grateful for their blessings, they have no one to thank.

In some parts of Mexico hot springs and cold springs are found side by side. The women often boil their clothes in the hot springs and rinse them in the cold springs. A tourist, who had been watching this procedure, remarked to his Mexican friend, "I guess they think old Mother Nature is pretty generous."

"No, señor," the other replied. "There is much grumbling because she supplies no soap."

A merchant was carrying some goods to market in his wagon. On the way he met a beggar trudging along with a heavy pack on his shoulders. The merchant felt sorry for him and asked him to get into the wagon.

As they rode on in silence the merchant saw that the beggar was sitting with his pack still on his shoulders.

"Why don't you put your pack down?" he asked in surprise.

"Bless you," said the man, "it's enough that you're carrying me! Do I have to burden you with my pack besides?"

Aunt Lois: Johnny, I'm shocked that you don't appreciate my birthday gift to you. After all, I did ask whether you wanted a big check or a small one.

Johnny (sheepishly): Sorry, Aunt Lois. I just didn't realize you meant neckties!

A mother gave her son two neckties for his birthday, and the next Sunday when he dressed for church, he wore one of the ties. His mom noticed it and instantly got all cross and huffy. "What, you don't like the other tie?" she asked.

Stories

It was said that Oliver Cromwell, the English statesman and soldier, usually said the following blessing before meals: "Some people have food but no appetite; others have appetite, but no food. I have both. The Lord be praised."

A rancher in Kamas, at the base of Utah's Uinta mountains, decided he wanted to sell his ranch. He hired a real estate agent, who came out to inspect his property and write up an ad.

Later the realtor called the rancher to go over the ad copy with him before placing it in the paper. "For sale," read the realtor, "Picturesque white frame ranch house with white picket fence and eighty acres of rich farmland in the middle of beautiful Kamas Valley. Clear streams of mountain water flow nearby, well stocked with rainbow trout. House faces rugged mountain peaks and is located in a small, friendly farming community with good schools and a new church."

"Stop!" said the rancher. "The deal's off! This is the kind of place I've wanted all my life!" (Nash, Lengthen Your Smile, 205).

Mom was helping two-year-old Henry with his prayers one night. She would say a line, then have him repeat it. The prayer was going well until Mom said, "I thank thee for all thy blessings." Henry responded graciously, "You're welcome."

1999 Deseret Book Co.
