Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Humility

Jokes

The hardest thing about being humble is that you can't brag about it.

Quotations

Rudyard Kipling: Adam was a gardener, and God, who made him, sees that half of all good gardening is done upon the knees.

Neal A. Maxwell: The Duke of Wellington had a refrain, "I am but a man," which is not unlike the story of Washington riding through a small town and overhearing a girl of seven who had been brought out to see him, the hero, exclaim, "Why, he is only a man!" whereupon General Washington swept off his hat, bowed, and said, "Yes, miss, that's all I am."

Wellington, who was frequently plied with questions for years after his great victories, particularly the victory at Waterloo, reflected his humility even in his humor. Asked whether he'd had a particularly good view of the Battle of Waterloo, Wellington replied, "I generally like to see what I'm about." Another inquiry asked if he was "surprised at Waterloo." Wellington replied, "No, madam, but I am now!" (Meek and Lowly, 27).

Rudger Clawson: You see here on the pulpit a movable platform that can be raised up and let down to suit the speaker. It is not a Republican platform; it is not a Democratic platform; it is a Church platform and I can hardly reach up to it (Conference Report, Oct. 1940, 121).

Sterling W. Sill: In listening to this very generous introduction of Dr. Bernhard's, I thought of a man who said to his wife, "How many really great men do you think there are in the world?"

And she said, "I don't know, but I am sure of this: There is one less than you think there is" (Speeches of the Year, 21 Feb. 1962, 1).

Stephen L Richards: I lay aside the beautiful lei made of baby orchids, presented to us so graciously by our Hawaiian sisters, while I speak, fearing too sharp a contrast between the brilliance of its beauty, and the drabness of what may follow (Improvement Era, June 1957, 392).

Stories

John Tyler, president of the United States from 1841 to 1845, wrote the following inscription over the grave of his horse: "Here lies the body of my good horse, 'The General.' For twenty years he bore me around the circuit of my practice, and in all that time he never made a blunder. Would that his master could say the same!"

At a White House reception during the Civil War, one of the visitors shook the president's hand and told him solemnly that the future of the country depended on God and Abraham Lincoln.

"You are half right," responded the president.

During the war, General Dwight D. Eisenhower spoke to a group of soldiers. As he left the platform from which he was speaking, he slipped in the mud. The soldiers roared with laughter, causing Ike to comment later, "You know, of all the things I said and did to raise the morale of those troops, it was that fall on the seat of my pants which did them the most good."

In 1858, Abraham Lincoln was debating against Stephen A. Douglas, his opponent in a campaign for the U.S. Senate. Not only was Lincoln not as great an orator as Douglas, he was also not what one would call a handsome man. At one point Douglas accused Lincoln of being two-faced. Lincoln replied, "I leave it to my audience. If I had two faces, would I be wearing this one?"

An old acquaintance of President Lincoln visited him in Washington. Lincoln desired to give him an appointed office. Thus encouraged, the visitor, who was an honest man but wholly inexperienced in public affairs or business, asked for a high office, Superintendent of the Mint.

The President was aghast and said, "Good gracious! Why didn't he ask to be Secretary of the Treasury, and have done with it?"

Afterward, Lincoln said: "Well, now, I never thought Mr. ______ had anything more than average ability, when we were young men together. But, then, I suppose he thought the same thing about me—and here I am!"

J. Golden Kimball was thin, but after an illness he was even thinner than usual. Standing to address a congregation, he said in his high voice, "Can you hear me?"

No one responded.

He continued, "Can you see me?" (Cheney, Golden Legacy, 107).

General Dwight D. Eisenhower enjoyed telling the story of two soldiers who saw him in Europe when he was Supreme Allied Commander.

"How would you like his job?" one of the GIs asked.

"Not me," the other soldier replied. "No chance of promotion."

Spencer W. Kimball liked to tell this story about an experience that occurred after his call as a new, and therefore relatively unknown, General Authority. After a stake conference meeting, someone said to him, "You know, Elder Lee, I was glad you came to visit our stake, because I keep getting you confused with Brother Richards" (Kimball, "Spencer W. Kimball," BYU Studies [5[4]: 63).

After Spencer W. Kimball was called as an apostle, but before he had been sustained, he continued to serve as stake president. He wrote, "We went up early yesterday morning to Franklin for Sunday School and testimony meeting, then to Duncan for testimony meeting at 12:30, then up to Virden for 2:30 meeting. All the meetings started out as testimony meetings regular and ended in testimonials for me. I told the boys as we went late to the last two meetings that I was the first corpse I had ever seen that had three funerals in one day and was late for two of them. I needed only pallbearers and an open grave to make it complete" (adapted from Kimball, "Spencer W. Kimball," BYU Studies [5[4]: 63).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
