Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

vitamin D added

One cow said, "Did you see that truck?"

"Yeah," mooed the other.

"Makes you feel pretty inadequate, doesn't it?"

A mother was teaching her young daughter about individual worth. "Everyone is a child of God," she said. "The children of God are everywhere!"

Puzzled, the daughter asked, "Then where are all the adults of God?"

Quotations

Sharlene Wells Hawkes: I once gave a lesson to a Sunday School class of sixteen- and seventeen-year-olds on the topic of personal integrity, in which I asked this question: "What do you think the Lord would say if he were to make a short statement about you?" I passed around paper and pencils and asked the class members to write down an honest, soul-searching answer. They didn't have to sign their statements, and I hoped they would feel free to respond candidly. I should have known that when teenagers are given an opportunity to write whatever they want, and do so anonymously, well, it's as though they've just discovered "free speech."

The first response simply read, "Awesome." . . . Another student . . . had written, "One of his most favorite kids—a real good guy with a small ego." . . .

"Struggling to define her beliefs and values, but walking in the right direction," one student wrote. . . .

And my personal favorite: "He is a little confused, but he will straighten out" (Hawkes, Living In but Not Of the World, 87-88).

Mary Ellen Edmunds: Years ago I heard a story about a large family that went on a vacation. Mostly they bought food in grocery stores . . . to save money, but once in a while they went into a restaurant. They always caused quite a stir, as there were so many of them. . . .

On one such adventure they finally got seated and the waitress was taking their orders. She took a few orders and then got to a little boy around eleven years old. "And what would you like?" she asked. He looked over at his mother. After all, she usually chose for him. It was an awkward moment, but the mother didn't say anything, so he looked at the waitress and said, "I'll have a hot dog!"

At that moment his mother regained her voice and said, "Oh, no, he'll have what the rest of us are having." The waitress didn't seem to hear that comment and continued looking at the little boy. "What would you like on the hot dog?" He squirmed a bit and looked again at his mother. She once again seemed to lose her voice. So the little boy excitedly told the waitress what he wanted on the hot dog. . . . She wrote it down, took the rest of the orders, and left.

The little boy was amazed. He couldn't believe it. He turned to everyone else at the table and said, "She thinks I'm real!" (Edmunds, Love Is a Verb, 30-31).

Norma J. Ashton: Oliver Wendell Holmes was only about five feet tall. In a large meeting he was the shortest person in attendance. A man said to him, "Don't you feel strange being so short among all these taller men?" "Yes," Mr. Holmes replied, "I feel like a dime among pennies" ("The Joys of Testimony," Joy, 31).

The young daughter of William Howard Taft III was assigned to write a short autobiography, as was each child at the start of a new grade. Here's what she wrote: "My great-grandfather was President of the United States [27th President, 1909-13]. My grandfather [Robert Alphonso Taft, 1889-1953] was Senator from Ohio. My father is Ambassador to Ireland. I am a Brownie."

Stories

When the Primary Children's Hospital was being built during the 1940s, the "Buy-a-Brick" campaign was one of the successful fund- raising drives. Each Primary child was asked to contribute ten cents to buy a brick for the hospital. The drive raised more than $20,000, which was used to buy 203,303 bricks and mortar.

Â¿t one time, a Primary board member was leading a tour of children through the finished building when a little boy asked her, "Lady, can you tell me which is my brick?" (see Madsen and Oman, Sisters and Little Saints, 130).

A family was giving a dinner party. Soon the adults of the family and their guests were engaged in animated conversation, to the complete exclusion of their four-year-old daughter. After a time the little girl tentatively plucked at her mother's sleeve and asked, "Remember me?"

1999 Deseret Book Co.
