Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Knowledge

Jokes

A young college student had stayed up all night studying for his zoology test the next day. As he entered the classroom, he saw ten stands with ten birds on them with a sack over each bird and only the legs showing. He sat right on the front row because he wanted to do the best job possible. The professor announced that the test would be to look at each of the birds' legs and give the common name, habitat, genus, species, and so on.

The student looked at the birds' legs. They all looked the same to him. He began to get upset. He had stayed up all night studying and now had to identify the birds by their legs. The more he thought about it the madder he got. Finally, he could stand it no longer. He went up to the professor's desk and said, "What a stupid test! How could anyone tell the difference between birds by looking at their legs?" With that the student threw his test on the professor's desk and walked to the door.

The professor was surprised. The class was so big that he didn't know every student's name, so as the student reached the door the professor called, "Wait, what's your name?"

The enraged student pulled up his pant legs and said, "You guess, buddy! You guess!"

In Primary one day, Sister Hanson asked Rob, a young sports fanatic, "Who defeated the Nephites?"

Rob's answer: "I dunno. If they don't play the Forty-niners, I don't keep track of them."

A teacher said, "Give me two personal pronouns," and she pointed to a certain child, who replied, "Who, me?"

Someone said about her friend, a Ph.D. candidate, "It seems to me that she's learning more and more about less and less, and I'm really afraid that by the time she has her degree she'll know everything about nothing."

Son: How did God make the world, Daddy?

Father: Hmmm, I don't know.

Son: What's heaven like?

Father: Well, I couldn't say.

Son: I'm not bothering you, am I, Daddy?

Father: Of course not. Why, you'll never learn anything if you don't ask questions!

A three-year-old girl used to reply to any statement made to her with, "I know." For example, "The world is round." ("I know.") "People should always tell the truth." ("I know.")

One day the girl's older brother said to her, "You always answer everything with 'I know.'"

"I know," answered the girl. "But what's wrong with that?"

"Well," said her brother, "only God knows everything!"

"I know."

The car simply would not run. The mechanic who was called in lifted the hood, reached inside, gave a twist of the wrist to a little mechanism—and all was well.

"What do I owe you?"

"One hundred and ten dollars," said the mechanic.

"Good heavens!" said the car owner. "That seems like an awful lot for just twisting a little gadget. How do you itemize it?"

"Well," said the mechanic, "ten dollars for twisting the little gadget. A hundred dollars for knowing which little gadget to twist."

Quotations

Charles W. Nibley: When a boy goes through the eighth grade and then the high school, then three or four years in a university, and then in a finishing off school, or something of that kind, the boy is twenty-five years old. There is a quarter of a century of his life spent in educating him. Somebody else has worked for the food he has eaten, and for the clothes that he has been supplied with for a full quarter of a century, which has been all spent in giving him education. He comes back home and he knows a lot; bless your soul, he can tell you pretty much about everything, but he doesn't know how to do scarcely anything (Conference Report, Apr. 1923, 148).

J. Golden Kimball: I am going to ask you a few questions, and will let you answer them. If you don't know enough to answer them, then you don't know as much as I do (Conference Report, Oct. 1917, 135).

Richard R. Lyman: I had a little pamphlet put in my hands the other day, and in it is a story something like this: ("It is up to You," by Parlette.) A newspaper man in a paper mill was watching the operations of a machine with interest, when along came a man with an oil can, squirting oil into the squirt holes in the side of the machine. He asked that man a few questions that he answered fairly well. Then he asked something about the process going on in the next room, and the man replied: "I don't know nothing about it, boss, I haven't worked there." So he said he asked him another process and the answer came the same: "I don't know nothing about it, boss, I haven't worked there." He asked him a question about the pulp mill: "I don't know nothing about it, boss, I have never worked there." He asked him a question about the office, the number of people employed in the plant: "I don't know nothing about it, boss, I haven't worked there." And so the newspaper man, to himself, said: "Nobody home."

The newspaper man asked: "I presume, my friend, that you are new in this plant?" "No, no," came the reply, "I have been squirting oil into this machine now for twelve years." Twelve years and "don't know nothing" about any other part of the institution. He said: "I took off my hat in the presence of the dead."

As he was leaving he asked the foreman: "You see that man standing over there with a can in his hand? Is he a human being, or do you just wind him up?" (Conference Report, Oct. 1921, 105-6).

Addison Everett: At Coleville, [Joseph Smith] and Oliver [Cowdery] were under arrest on a charge of deceiving the people. When they were at the justice's house for trial in the evening, all were waiting for Mr. Reid, Joseph's lawyer. And while waiting, the justice asked Joseph some questions, among which was this: "What was the first miracle Jesus performed?" Joseph replied, "He made this world, and what followed we are not told" (Young Woman's Journal, Oct. 1890, 75-76).

Stories

William Lyon Phelps, on a pre-Christmas examination paper, found written, "God only knows the answer to this question. Merry Christmas."

He returned the paper with the notation, "God gets an A; you get an F. Happy New Year."

The philosopher Aristotle was once asked how educated men were superior to those uneducated. His answer: "As much as the living are to the dead."

A lad once asked Mozart how to write a symphony. Mozart said, "You're a very young man. Why not begin with ballads?"

The aspiring young boy urged, "You composed symphonies when you were ten years old."

"Yes," replied Mozart, "but I didn't ask how."

Lincoln was told of a profound historian, "It may be doubted whether any man of our generation has plunged more deeply into the sacred fount of learning."

"Yes, or come up drier," said Lincoln.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
