Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Leadership

Jokes

A bishop of a small, struggling ward in a small town had the odd habit of rushing over to the train tracks every day to watch the daily train pass by. One day several ward members came up to him and said, "Bishop, we think it's a little odd that you have this habit of watching trains. We've noticed that every day you leave your chores, drop whatever you're doing, and rush over here to watch that train. Don't you think that fascination with the railroad is a little juvenile for a man of your age and responsibilities?"

"Well, brothers," the bishop said, "I lead the ward, settle neighborhood arguments, spearhead community causes, head up the fund raising for the Scouts, and even call on people for the yearly Church magazine drive. No, I won't give up seeing that Western Pacific train every day. It's the only thing in this whole town I don't have to push!"

A self-important man was made foreman of the construction job where he worked. His first act was to fire one of his fellow-workers. "Why'd you do that?" one of the other workers asked. "What did you have against him?"

The foreman replied, "Oh, I didn't fire him because I had anything against him. I fired him because I had the authority."

Woman (on telephone with highway patrol office): Are the roads safe today, with the snow storm and everything?

Officer: They're slippery but passable.

Woman: I don't want to pass anyone, sir. I just want to know—is it safe to follow?

Quotations

Brigham Young: To guide the minds of the people and to govern and control them is a greater miracle than to raise the dead (Journal of Discourses 13:32-34).

Stories

When George V was Prince of Wales, he held the rank of Lieutenant in the Marines. One day on the afterdeck of a battleship he was conducting drill under the supervision of a senior officer. The deck had been cleared even of its quadrails. The Prince was not well versed in drill and his superior was clearly put out at his awkwardness and slowness of command. At last the squad was marching full on for the stern and the unguarded edge and it seemed as though the Prince had either forgotten the command to stop, or face about, or else failed to realize the situation. As the men neared the edge, the officer snapped, "Good grief, sir, can't you at least say good-bye to your men?"

Willard L. Jones, a stake president in Nevada in the early 1900s, was a fast runner. One night he heard some noise in his melon patch and looked out to see several boys—all members of his ward—stealing watermelons.

When he stepped outside, the boys ran. The stake president was hot on their heels, but he wasn't fast enough to catch them.

The next day he passed one of the boys on his way to town. He tipped his hat, grinned, and said, "Nice run we had last night!" (adapted from The Fighting Parson, quoted in Ensign, May 1994, 48).

Shortly after having been sustained as President of the Church, a weary Spencer W. Kimball joked with his family, "If I had known it was going to be like this, I would never have run for the office" (see Kimball and Kimball, Spencer W. Kimball, 412).

An acquaintance once asked Abraham Lincoln, "You seem like a simple man. Don't you sometimes find the presidency, with all its trappings and ceremonies, rather tiresome?"

"Yes," Lincoln replied, "sometimes. In fact, I feel sometimes like a man who was ridden out of town on a rail, and said: 'If it wasn't for the honor of the thing, I'd rather walk!'"

1999 Deseret Book Co.
