Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Marriage

Jokes

Eve: Adam, do you love me?

Adam: Who else?

"I've made up my mind what we'll call the baby," a young mother announced to her husband. "We'll call her Eulalia."

The father didn't like the name and he quickly thought of a solution. "That's fine," he said. "The first girl I loved was named Eulalia, and it will bring back pleasant memories."

The wife was silent for a moment. "We'll call her Mary after my mother," she said.

You can always tell when a marriage is on the rocks. The husband and wife don't even talk to each other during television commercials.

First gossip: I don't think the Joneses' son was ready for marriage.

Second gossip: Why do you say that?

First gossip: I went to the wedding reception, and the groom cried for two hours because the bride got a bigger piece of cake than he did!

A young couple had argued, and later as they drove through the countryside they saw a donkey standing in a field. "Are you related?" the man asked his wife, nodding toward the animal. "Not by blood," said the wife. "Only by marriage."

The golden-wedding celebration was over, and the family was listening as Mom talked radiantly about what the day had meant to her. As she tried to express her feelings, Dad cut in: "Well, now, I promised that if you married me, something nice would happen."

Mary: Dear, I'm crushed! You forgot my birthday!

Harry: But, sweetheart, how can you expect me to remember it when you keep looking younger every day?

Although usually not given to romantic impulses, a young man decided to stop on his way home from work and pick up a dozen roses and a box of candy for his wife. When he presented them to his sweetheart, she burst into tears. "This has been the worst day of my life," she sobbed. "The baby fell down the stairs, the phone has rung off the hook, I burned the meatloaf, and the toilet is plugged. And to top it all off, you've started drinking!"

Brother Johnson: Bishop, it's my wife's tidiness. It's driving me crazy!

Bishop: I'm surprised at you, Brother Johnson. Don't we teach that cleanliness is next to godliness?

Brother Johnson: Yes, Bishop. But if I drop my socks on the floor, she puts them in the laundry basket. If I throw my shirt on the chair, she hangs it up. The other night I couldn't sleep so I got up at three a.m. and went into the kitchen to get a glass of water. When I came back to the bedroom, the bed was made.

Brother Hatch: I think my marriage is deteriorating, Bishop.

Bishop: Why do you say that?

Brother Hatch: The other night I had a quarrel with my dog, and my wife said the dog was right.

An elderly Mormon woman accompanied her husband to the doctor's office. After his checkup, the doctor called the wife into his office alone.

"Your husband is suffering from a severe disease and horrible stress," he said. "But you can prolong his life if you'll do a few simple things."

"What do I have to do?"

"Each morning, fix him a healthy breakfast. Be pleasant, and always treat him with deference. Fix him just what he likes for lunch and dinner. Don't ask him to do any chores around the house—it will be too much of a burden to him. And don't discuss your problems with him; that will only make his stress worse. Most important, be loving and romantic with him several times a week and satisfy his every whim. If you can do this faithfully for the next year, I think your husband will regain his health completely."

The drive home was rather silent. Finally the husband turned to his wife and asked, "I have to know; what did the doctor say?"

The wife thought for a moment and then replied, "You're going to die."

Poems

1999 Deseret Book Co.
