Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Miss Nanny, A Little Pettikiller, Though Not Hard to Please

I do not like a man that's fat— A man that's lean is worse than that; Nor do I like a man that's tall— A man that's little, is worse than all; Nor do I like a man that's fair— A man that's dark I cannot bear; A young man is a constant pest— An old man would my hours invest; A man of sense I could not rule— And yet I could not love a fool; A sober man I will not take— A drunken man my heart would break. Man's face half shaved I hate to see. But worse than all a great goatee. All things I most sincerely hate, And yet I love the married state.

(Deseret News, 13 July 1850; quoted in Davis Bitton, Wit and Whimsy in Mormon History, 23).

Wife: You're hopeless, dear. All you ever talk about is baseball!

Husband: Hah! You're way off base! Clear out in left field!

Quotations

David O. McKay: It is said that during courtship we should keep our eyes wide open, but after marriage keep them half-shut.

What I mean may be illustrated by a young woman who said to her husband, "I know that my cooking isn't good; I hate it as much as you do, but do you find me sitting around griping about it?" (Conference Report, Apr. 1956, 8-9).

Orson Hyde: There are many living now who are bachelors. I do not complain of the very old men, for they cannot help themselves at all times, but I am going to complain of the old bachelors; and I tell you what it is, if you do not step forward and marry, and try to carry on the great work of Jehovah, it will be left for a better man to do than you. [Voice in the stand, "There is but one old bachelor in the Territory, and he has gone to the States."] O! I beg your pardon; President Young says he does not know of but one old bachelor in all the Territory of Utah, and he has gone to the States; therefore I have nothing more to say on this particular point (Journal of Discourses 2:84).

Charles W. Nibley: I stood at my window, only the other day, and watched a couple going down the street—a big, strong young fellow and his wife, a beautiful woman, tagging behind him. I thought, "They are married, all right." If he had not been, why he would have had hold of her arm, showing her a little attention and courtesy, and I felt like I would like to go out there and kick that fellow (Conference Report, Apr. 1924, 48).

George Albert Smith: You know, when I was growing up I never saw a difference of opinion between my father and my mother. I used to think that was a miracle, and after I had been married for twenty years, I knew it was a miracle (in BYU Speeches of the Year, 1961, 5).

Reed Smoot: I have never left my home, when my wife was there, from the day that I had a home, up till this very morning, without kissing my wife goodbye. I never left her at noon-time, in my life, unless I kissed her goodbye. And I wish that every Latter-day Saint would follow this practice—not to kiss my wife, but his own (Conference Report, Oct. 1909, 72).

Hugh B. Brown: We are reminded of the young bride who, on her wedding day, said to her mother, "I am the happiest girl in the world. I have come to the end of all my troubles."

And the wise mother replied, "Yes my dear, but you don't know which end" (Conference Report, Apr. 1963, 6-7).

Stories

Bruce R. McConkie and his wife were talking one night about the many blessings membership in the Church had brought into their lives. Finally, Sister McConkie asked her husband to name his greatest blessing.

"Without a moment's hesitation," said Elder McConkie, "I said, 'The greatest blessing that has ever come to me was on the 13th day of October in 1937 at 11:20 a.m. when I was privileged to kneel in the Salt Lake Temple at the Lord's altar and receive you as an eternal companion.'"

"Well," replied his wife, "you passed that test" (see New Era, January 1975, 38).

When Joseph Fielding Smith and Jessie Evans were married in the Salt Lake Temple, President Heber J. Grant said at the conclusion of the ceremony, "Now, Joseph, kiss your wife." President Smith referred to that directive in an interview on their thirty-third wedding anniversary [in] 1971, commenting, "He said it like he meant it, and I have been doing it ever since" (Swinton, In the Company of Prophets, 61-62).

Years ago Elder Spencer W. Kimball, then a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, was visiting with a young man who was just about to complete his full-time missionary service. "When you get released, Elder," said Elder Kimball, "What are your plans?"

"Oh, I plan to go back to college," said the elder, "then I hope to fall in love and get married."

Elder Kimball offered this wise counsel: "Well, don't just pray to marry the one you love," said the apostle. "Instead, pray to love the one you marry" (see Joe J. Christensen, "Marriage and the Great Plan of Happiness," Ensign, May 1995, 64).

Spencer W. Kimball and his wife, Camilla, had a good relationship, but they occasionally had minor differences. Once they attended a party for another couple who were celebrating their golden wedding anniversary. When the speaker said the couple had never raised their voices at each other, Spencer whispered to a friend, "It must have been dull" (Kimball, "Spencer W. Kimball," BYU Studies [5[4]: 61).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
