Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Meetings

Jokes

If all the people who sleep in church were laid end to end, they'd be a lot more comfortable.

The 14th Article of Faith:

Quotations

Nicholas G. Smith: All my life I have looked with the spirit of reverence upon this building. I never dreamed that one day I should be privileged to sit upon these red plush seats. Since living within a stone's throw of Temple Block, my mother was always anxious that we attend the two o'clock afternoon session each Sunday, and as a boy I used to say:

"Mother, it does not do any good for me to go over there, I just go to sleep. I cannot stay awake in the Tabernacle."

"Well, son, that shows there's a good spirit there. . . . There is nothing to be afraid of, and I want you to go" (Conference Report, Oct. 1941, 63).

J. Golden Kimball: I remember a long time ago when the Mutuals launched the Era. I was on a trip with Apostle Francis M. Lyman—we started in at Sevier and went to Panguitch and the surrounding settlements and to Kanab and St. George; and when we got to St. George, Brother David H. Cannon, the President of the Stake, and Brother Edward Snow, superintendent of the Mutuals, with their buggies transferred us to Panacca. The people had not seen an Apostle for twenty years, and it was Sunday, a fast day. Meetings were begun in the morning and they kept them up all day, and we were fasting. I was pretty nearly dead at four o'clock. After four o'clock Brother Lyman said, "Now, Brother Kimball, get up and tell them about the Era." He had done a good deal of talking himself about the Era. . . . So I [got up] and I said: "All you men that will take the Era if we will let you go home, raise your right hand." There was not a single man who did not raise his hand and subscribed and paid $2.00 cash for the Era. . . . Brother Lyman said: "That is the brightest thing you ever did." I do not claim that was inspiration; it was good psychology. Really they paid $2.00 to get out (Conference Report, Apr. 1932, 78).

Brigham Young: If you can make as good a beginning as did an old lady, you will do well. She went to a schoolhouse, and, on her return, called at a neighbor's who inquired where she had been. She replied, "I have been to meeting." "Has there been a meeting?" "Oh, yes, and a glorious one, too." "Dear me, we did not hear of it. Were there many there?" "No, there were not many." "Who was there?" "Why, the Lord was there, and I was there, and had a blessed good meeting." If you cannot get any person to meet with you, be sure and have the Lord meet with you, and you will soon gain confidence in yourselves and have influence with your brethren (Journal of Discourses 8:65).

Stories

At a meeting of General Authorities, President Spencer W. Kimball, his eyesight nearly gone, said, "Brethren, I'm sorry I can't see you, but I assume you're here" (Kimball, "Spencer W. Kimball," BYU Studies [5[4]: 69).

An unknown pioneer told this story: "The Old Tabernacle that formerly occupied the present site of the handsome new Assembly Hall was once the scene of a most inglorious episode in my life, which I am frequently reminded of when I see any of those who, as my youthful companions, were present on the occasion.

"On a sultry summer afternoon a half dozen or more playful boys, myself among the number, occupied one of the seats in that building farthest removed from the speaker. On the seat immediately in front of [us] sat a man on whom the preacher's discourse or the hot weather, or both, seemed to have rather a somnolent effect. With his head leaned backward and his mouth open, he slept, while his breath came and went in fitful snatches and small explosions. He was soon the center of attraction for quite an extended circle of interested, if not admiring, auditors. The nervous ladies in the vicinity doubtless eyed him with a good deal of concern, as the agonized manner of his breathing probably led them to expect that every succeeding hitch in his breath would be a permanent one. The boys found amusement in watching his snoring struggles, while the pious old men, anxious to hear the preaching, looked daggers at him for creating such a disturbance. All at once an idea occurred to a large boy on the end of the seat behind him, who, by the way, was a great practical joker. Drawing from his pocket a long lead pencil, he passed it along the row of boys to where I sat, behind the sleeper, and motioned for me to tickle him with it. The other boys also immediately joined in urging me to do it as an excellent joke, and entering into the spirit of the fun, I assented. Reaching over with the pencil, I tickled him about the ear, causing him to wake up with a snort, and all the boys to laugh.

"In a few moments, however, our drowsy neighbor apparently lapsed into another doze. I say apparently, for I believed afterwards that he was only feigning sleep—throwing out a little chaff to catch the birds who were annoying him, which I was silly enough to mistake for real grain.

"Flattered with my success the first time, and the encouragement I received from the other boys, I tried the tickling process again, when lo! to my surprise and chagrin, he whirled, as I was in the act, and struck me a blow over the head.

"I looked at the boys, and saw that they were nearly convulsed with laughter at my expense, and then I looked at the man, and felt as if I would like to do something desperate. But then it was a place of worship, and besides he was much older and stronger than I was, and discretion forbade my retaliating there. The boys prevented me from hitting him with a cobble stone as he emerged from the door after the service was closed, and by the time I next saw the man my anger had worn off and I had concluded that he served me right.

"I learned a lesson by my experience that day, in fact two or three of them.

"I learned that when a sleepy man is tickled in meeting, no matter who the instigators are, if he has spirit enough to resent it, it is generally the fellow at the other end of the pencil who has to suffer the consequences.

"I learned that when a person indulges in any foolishness for the sake of affording amusement to jovial or thoughtless companions, he can't count with any certainty on their sympathy when his acts lead him into trouble. Laughter is cheap, and they can afford to indulge in it while their heads are in no danger.

"I learned that a house of worship is not exactly the place to play practical jokes in.

"I learned that there are other ways (and more congenial ways at least to one party) of waking a sleeping man in meeting than getting a small boy to tickle him about the ear with a pencil.

"The joker who handed me the pencil is now a prominent and portly bishop in our Church, and I—well, I think I am a little wiser if not better than when I used that pencil" (Juvenile Instructor, 15 Mar. 1880).

Once J. Golden Kimball was assigned to conduct the sustaining of Church officers during a stake conference. "It has been proposed," he began, "that we sustain Brother Heber J. Grant as prophet, seer, and revelator of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. All in favor make it manifest by the raising of the right hand; opposed, if any, by the same sign. . . . It has been proposed that we sustain Brother Anthony W. Ivins as . . ." And so on. After a while, Brother Kimball looked up from his list and noticed that the congregation was nodding off. So in a monotonous tone he continued, "It has been proposed that Mount Nebo be moved from its present site in Juab County and be placed on the Utah-Idaho border. All in favor make it manifest by raising the right hand; opposed, by the same sign." The few who were still awake began to chuckle, reviving the congregation (Fife and Fife, Saints of Sage and Saddle, 305).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
