Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Mistakes

Quotations

Hugh B. Brown: We shall begin these services by the chorus singing a Latter-day hymn medley, with Jay Powells as socialist. . . . I hope Brother Powells will not start an action for slander (Conference Report, Apr. 1966, 91).

Robert L. Simpson: Speaking of getting off to a bad start, I think I hold the record. As I was watching the Rose Bowl game on television the other day, I had a flashback of something that happened to me many years ago on a high school football field, not too far from that Rose Bowl.

It was my first year of high school football. I'd been playing second string all through the practice games, and this was the first big league game. Six thousand cheering people were in the stands. As we were breaking our halftime pep talk, the coach suddenly said, "Simpson, you start the second half."

The old adrenaline came rushing, and I went charging out onto the field. This was my chance! Just about that time the coach suddenly said, "Oh, and by the way, I want you to kick off, Simpson."

I determined right then and there that I was going to kick that ball farther than any football had ever been kicked in history. I really wanted to make a good showing on my first chance on the first string. Well, the referee waved his arm and blew his whistle. I could hear those six thousand people. I looked at the ball and came charging down the field. I felt everything tingling in my body—the excitement was so high!

Well, you have probably already guessed it, I missed the ball. Six thousand people went wild. But that isn't the half of it. This was back in the days when the quarterback held the ball with his finger. I broke the quarterback's finger.

Now, if you think that you're off to a bad start, I just want to set your mind at ease and let you know that it could be worse. I also want you to know that I had a coach that had confidence in me . . . because he left me in. I don't know why, but he did . . . and I played the rest of the game. If I weren't so modest, I might also tell you that I made all-league that year (Speeches of the Year, 1975, 319-20).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
