Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Humor of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Money

Jokes

At one time John was true and faithful in the Church. But he became so consumed with making money that he began to work seven days a week and became inactive.

"John," a friend protested, "you shouldn't think about money all the time. You can't take it with you, you know."

"Is that so?" John answered. "Then I will not go."

Client: Well, now that you've examined my records, how am I doing financially?

Accountant: Well, sir, I can give you the same odds the Lord gave Noah.

Client: What would that be?

Accountant: You've got forty days and forty nights to keep from going under.

Husband: Hi, dear! I've got good news and more good news!

Wife: What is it?

Husband: First—we don't have to move to a more expensive apartment after all! And second—guess why? Our landlord has raised our rent.

They say the auto industry employs more than a million workers. How can so many people make a living from something nobody has paid for?

Joanne: Here it is the middle of February, and we're still cleaning up from Christmas.

Tammy: What? Still cleaning up?

Joanne: Yes. First we cleaned out our checking account. Then we cleaned out our savings account. Now we're going through drawers looking for spare change.

Our family went shopping for a larger family car last week. A salesman came over and said, "Take a look! They're bigger than ever and they last a lifetime." Unfortunately he was talking about the payments, not the cars.

Living within a budget saves money because by the time you've balanced it, it's too late to go anywhere.

I believe in living within my income—even if I have to borrow money to do it.

It's really hard to save money when your neighbors keep buying things you can't afford.

Misers aren't fun to live with, but they sure do make terrific ancestors.

A farmer who had just planted a large field of corn commented to his neighbor, "I sure hope I break even this year. I really need the money."

Two men stood before the casket of a wealthy friend. "How much property did he leave?" asked one.

"All of it," replied the other.

Poems

Joseph Fielding Smith: Asael [Smith, grandfather of Joseph Smith] was gifted with the pen and did considerable writing in his day. He was affable in manner, possessing a quaint and genial humor and a fund of anecdotes. While living in Topsfield he expressed to the selectmen of that town the amount and nature of his taxable property in this manner:—

I have two poles tho' one is poor, I have three cown & want five more, I have not horse, But fifteen sheep; No more than these this year I keep, Stears, that's two years old, one pair, Two calves I have, all over hair, Three heffers two years old, I own One heffer calf that's poorly grone, My land is acres Eighty two Which search the Record youle find true, And this is all I have in store, I'll thank you if youle Tax no more. (Life of Joseph F. Smith, 21).

Quotations

John Taylor: You have had hard times; still you are living and thriving: there are none of you naked or without shoes, hats or bonnets. You seem to be provided with a great many of the good things of this life. You seem to be doing tolerably well. I know very well that you have a hard struggle to make two ends meet; I understand it. But there is one advantage you have—no one will want to steal away your place from you; will they? (Laughter.) I do not think they would want to carry it off. I do not think they would want to drive you away because of your extraneous wealth; consequently, you are free from this trouble (Journal of Discourses 23:16).

N. Eldon Tanner: After our youngest daughter had started school, she came home just before Christmas and said to her mother, "Do you know what they say about Santa Claus in school?"

Her mother said, "No, what do they say?"

She replied, "They say there is no Santa Claus and it's our parents who give us Christmas gifts."

Her mother asked, "And what did you say?"

"I told them, 'You don't know my daddy and mother!'"

Milton R. Hunter: What is there in all the world that you would rather have than anything else? What is the goal for which you would seek? When I had asked my college students those two questions, several of them would immediately raise their hands. Some of the big boys on the back row would snap their fingers and be quite excited, thinking they had the right answer, and so I would call on them. They always answered the same way. They said, "A million dollars" or "A Cadillac."

I spent a few minutes trying to convince them that a million dollars was not the most vital thing in the world. In fact, I even endeavored to convince them that it might even be detrimental to a person to have that much money. At least I convinced myself that I had convinced them to that effect.

You know, I have never read in the scriptures where Jesus said, "For, behold, a million dollars is the greatest gift of God." I observe by your smiles and laughter that you haven't either. Nor have I read wherein the Savior said, "He who hath a million dollars is rich indeed." It does not sound like scripture (Speeches of the Year, 12 May 1964, 2).

J. Golden Kimball: My father [Heber C. Kimball] died in 1868. When his administrators divided up the estate there was not a single silver dollar given to any of his children, to my knowledge, but there was some property. Our father selected land on the side hill, among the rocks—he wanted to get away from the center of the city. He owned what is known as the Capitol Hill. He left his children that real estate. There was one lot that was given to my mother's family, and I owned one third of it. I received twenty-five thousand dollars for my portion, and I have been very sorry twenty-five thousand times that I ever sold it. . . . I am thankful we had sense enough to keep sufficient ground to bury our posterity on. We have paid taxes on it ever since I was fifteen years old, and I still hold it. What about the other property? There is now hardly a Kimball to be found on the Capitol Hill—unless it be those that are dead (Conference Report, Oct. 1909, 111).

J. Golden Kimball: I am in sympathy with the people. I know we have all been foolish. I am foolish. I don't think there is a bigger fool than an old fool. A man who has had experience ought to know better. One of my brethren said to me and he is a man so kind and gentle that I had every reason to believe he would extend to me a little sympathy—I told him of one of my last speculations and he said: "If you are as big a sucker as that you ought to take your medicine." I said: "I am taking it, and it is not sugar-coated either." (Laughter)

I met a banker a few weeks ago—we were very friendly. Thank the Lord, I do not owe that bank anything, but I owe another bank. (Laughter) I said: "How are things going?"

"Well, we are taking everything but their suspenders."

I thought afterwards that I should have said to him: If that bank hasn't got any more elasticity than my suspenders, I will throw them in (Conference Report, Oct. 1931, 57).

Stories

N. Eldon Tanner told the story of an immigrant father who ran his business very simply, keeping his accounts payable in a shoe box, his accounts receivable on a spindle, and his cash in the cash register.

"I don't see how you can run your business this way," said the man's son. "How do you know what your profit is?"

"Son," answered the businessman, "when I got off the boat, I had only the pants I was wearing. Today your sister is an art teacher, your brother is a doctor, and you're an accountant. I have a car, a home, and a good business. Everything is paid for. So you add it all up, subtract the pants, and there's my profit" (Durham, N. Eldon Tanner, 286).

After John C. Bennett became estranged from the Church, he decided he wanted to come back to Nauvoo. Joseph Smith extended a warm welcome, but he held out no material inducements or false hopes—only the possibility of spiritual blessings. He concluded an August 1840 letter to Bennett in this way: "My general invitation is, Let all that will, come, and partake of the poverty of Nauvoo freely" (Regional Studies, Illinois, Skinner—John C. Bennett, 252-53).

Spencer W. Kimball once decided against taking an option on some property on the Las Vegas "Strip." He didn't want ties to gambling, but he also didn't know the full value of the option until later. He said of the incident, "It is good we didn't buy that property. We'd unavoidably have been multimillionaires, and I don't think I could have stood it" (Kimball, "Spencer W. Kimball," BYU Studies [5[4]: 64).

1999 Deseret Book Co.
