This ebook aims to reproduce the 1849 Liverpool edition. Signature Books very kindly gave permission for the Mormon Texts Project to use the text of "Absurdities of Immaterialism" they originally published in "The Essential Orson Pratt" (as made available on their website) as a basis for this work. This text was compared to scans of the pamphlet that Google has helpfully made available. The end of the pamphlet, which was not in the Signature Books text, was produced based off the Google scans, and the rest of the text was carefully compared to the scans and in a few cases edited to conform more closely.

Footnote citations in the original have been converted to parenthetical form to improve readability. Some unmatched quotation marks have been corrected in cases where the correct placement could be established. A few typographical errors (wont for won't, actua for actual) have been corrected.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ABSURDITIES OF IMMATERIALISM ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE
