The following are additional ideas Primary leaders may use with the Sharing Time printed in the October 2008 Liahona. For the lesson, instructions, and activity that correspond with these ideas, see “I Will Be His Servant” on pages F4 and F5 of the children’s section in this issue.

1.  Prior to sharing time, obtain pictures of the current First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Place them on the chalkboard or white board. Make wordstrips of their names, and place them along the side of the chalkboard.

    Begin by asking the children to match the names of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve Apostles with their pictures. Help the children put the pictures in the correct order by calling and seniority.

    From the most recent general conference or from other issues of the Liahona, choose addresses from the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve Apostles that focus on service. Share these messages, and discuss ways the children can apply what they learn to help them as they serve others. Refer to Doctrine and Covenants 4:2 to remind the children that we serve with our heart, might, mind, and strength. Sing a song or hymn about prophets. Bear testimony of the blessing of having prophets, seers, and revelators, who teach us by their words and their examples how to serve one another.

2.  Write the weekly gospel principle across the top of the chalkboard: “Because others serve me, I too want to serve.” Invite the children to sing songs to discover who serves them. Then have them sing songs or hymns about the Savior, prophets, families, friends, and so on. Make a list of those mentioned in the songs or hymns under the phrase Because others serve me.

    Compare Doctrine and Covenants 4:2 and 59:5. Help the children find the words heart, might, mind, and strength in both scriptures. Point out that we should love and serve Heavenly Father and others with our heart, might, mind, and strength. Prepare the necessary materials for the children to complete the mobile on page F4.

    When the mobiles are completed, invite the children to sing songs to discover ways they can serve. Then sing songs or hymns about service. Write the answers they discover in the songs and hymns under the phrase I too want to serve. Bear testimony of the blessings that come from serving others and from others serving you.
