Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

INTRODUCTION

OUR BALANCE SHEET at the CLOSE of the YEAR

I am honored in the privilege to address you and to take a little of your time in discussion of things which I hope have interest for all of us. If I shall be fortunate enough in this or subsequent talks to say anything which, even in small degree, may be helpful to anyone who listens, I shall be grateful indeed.

The end of an epoch-making year is almost here. Its momentous events and the lessons it has taught are perhaps too near to us to permit deliberate appraisal, but we are moving and living so fast that we must evaluate and learn as we go. In the year since our country entered the war, America has suffered many defeats and has seen some victories, both on the battle front and the home front. In the main, perhaps, internal affairs have been the darker side of the picture. Evidences of disunity, confusion, and selfishness have at times been quite discouraging. Signs of hope, however, for better organization and order and more unified effort lately appear. With these signs come also more conscious recognition of the stern reality of war and more deprivations and sacrifices on the part of the people. Anticipation of victory sooner or later has brought rather timorous talk of the peace and what it shall be when it comes. Underneath this over-all picture has been the steady, persistent induction and training of military forces, the constant clangor of production and the swift exaction and expenditure of moneys in prodigious amounts, the like of which the world has never known before.

What are the lessons the year has taught us? How will they help us for the future? Of course they are many. I shall mention only a few. First, we have learned that shock, however violent, cannot be counted on to permanently change deeply ingrained habits, thought, and action. We thought that Pearl Harbor had united the nation. And it did, perhaps, for a time, but it was not long after this dreadful catastrophe before selfishness of groups and individuals began to assert itself in costly disputes and dissension which slowed down most pressing production and created bitterness between factions that almost precipitated battle and bloodshed. Second, we learned too that partisan prejudice and allegiance are all too often more important in the hearts and minds of men than patriotism; that there are altogether too many citizens of America who would sacrifice country for party and political preferment. And thirdly, observations and experience have taught us,—and perhaps it is the most painful lesson of all,—that the youth of America who have been called to the colors,—grateful as we are for their sacrifice and service and much as we love them,—have not lived such lives as to bring to their country in its time of need, in a degree we should all like to have seen, that physical fitness and personal strength which is the rich heritage and native endowment of these sons of America.

Now if this very brief and perhaps much too superficial summation of the debit side of our annual balance sheet is at all accurate, I hope you will indulge me in the presentation of a few suggestions,—not all by any means which might be offered,—which in their application should be helpful to our country and the noble cause it has set itself to sustain.

Unity can be achieved through fraternity, the brotherhood of man. Blood ties are among the strongest cohesive factors known to society. It is possible for men of different groups and races to establish bonds of relationship of substantially the same quality and endurance as within the family itself. These bonds are spiritual bonds. Every man is inherently blessed with the native attributes of brotherhood and friendship. Someone has well said, "God is a Father; man is a brother; life is a mission and not a career." All that is required is conscious cultivation of this precious endowment.

But the concepts which men hold vitally effect the development of this great virtue. If men do not recognize common origin it is difficult to establish kinship, but if they acknowledge the Fatherhood of God, brotherhood then becomes not only an ideal but a reality.

It would seem that the ideal alone has proved not to be sufficient. While much credit is undoubtedly due to fraternal and other organizations which have sought diligently to promote this ideal, the strength of the ties established by them has not been adequate to withstand the impact of other forces. There is ample support in both Christian doctrine and human experience as well for the statement that there is no lasting efficacy in a brotherhood of man without the Fatherhood of God. Jesus said, "The Father and I are one," (D. C. 93:3-4, John 10:30) and He told His disciples, "If ye are not one, ye are not mine." (D. C. 28:37) "Love the Lord, thy God, with all thy heart," and "thy neighbor as thyself" is not only the primary law of the gospel, it is also the only firm foundation for the establishment of human relations,—unity through brotherhood.

In its broadest implications this would be the answer to all our problems, but it would be too much to hope that everyone would make the application to life and conduct. So, it may be profitable to attempt a little further analysis of the other major items I have noted as coming out of the experiences of the past year.

Why do men place party above country? One of the answers is obvious, namely, for selfish personal interest and the emoluments of office. The other answer is not quite so apparent. It is, so it seems to me, a lack of an adequate concept of the place and function of government in human affairs. Now the only remedy I know for the eradication of the misconception is the inculcation of the Savior's doctrine of altruistic service: "For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; and whosoever shall lose his life for my sake shall find it." (Matt. 16:25) This unselfish doctrine is the true foundation for neighborliness and friendliness among men and for the great principles of charity and love. Contraction of the heart is perhaps the most malignant malady afflicting the world. I know of no prescription nearly so effective as that of giving,—giving one's substance and giving one's self. You may well measure the patriotism and real devotion of citizens of this country to its institutions and lofty ideals by the extent to which selfish ends are subordinated to the common good. It is a very definite perversion of the rightful place and concept of party organization and procedure in our government to subordinate the nation's prestige and welfare to partisan preferment and personal aggrandizement. I am pleased to observe that there are indications which point to better conditions in this respect.

I would like now to give you some lofty concepts of government. I read from modern revelation: "Governments were instituted of God for the benefit of man . . . He holds men accountable for their acts in relation to them, both in making laws and administering them for the good and safety of society." (D. C. 134:1) And again from the same source this pertinent admonition: "When the wicked rule, the people mourn. Wherefore, honest men and wise men should be sought for diligently, and good men and wise men ye should observe to uphold; otherwise whatsoever is less than these cometh of evil." (D. C. 98:9-10) If only such wholesome principles might underlie the conceptions of the rights and obligations of citizenship and official position in our beloved country, a very different story might be told of its performance in times of stress such as those through which we are now passing.

We live under a beneficent constitution which commands not only our loyalty, but our reverent veneration as well. In the sight of God America is a "choice land," and its constitution a divinely inspired document, for God has declared, "For this purpose have I established the constitution of this land by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose and redeemed the land by the shedding of blood." (D. C. 101:77-80) Such divine pronouncements not only enhance our love of country, but they invest patriotism with a religious fervor and sanctity that make the preservation of our national institutions and ideals an integral part of the establishment and maintenance of the Kingdom of God on earth. My people believe, and so declare, "that Zion will be built upon this, the American continent," and they merge her destiny into the glorious future forecast by the Savior of the world for the good, the just, and the faithful. What a boon it would be to our government and all our people if such concepts were universal!

And now a word as to the last debit item on the statement. I discuss this item with reluctance, and I would not mention it at all except for the hope I have that drawing attention to it may help some young man. I do not know that reports are available to indicate just what the physical examinations of inductees reveal on the causes and forms of physical unfitness and disability. I do know that I have seen figures in the press which show that almost incredibly large numbers of men have been rejected, and I have also read that among the major contributing causes of disability are those that arise out of failure to lead clean, wholesome, circumspect lives.

When we contemplate the irreparable loss that so comes to the nation and the even more regrettably sad plight of the unfit themselves, it would seem that there is ample justification for trying to say something and do something about it. It is only an infrequent condition, such as the present emergency, which brings these matters forcibly to our attention. In the last war we had a similar shock and we got the Eighteenth Amendment. We did not get a lot of other things we should have had; we did not get public opinion as solidly behind some reforms as it ought to have been, but we did get Prohibition and we know now definitely that it was a salutary thing for the nation and our young people in particular. Since Repeal, an orgy of excesses has set in, of which the youth again are the chief victims. I cannot say, of course,—and perhaps no one can,—what may come out of our present war experience. I am firmly convinced that if the conflict lasts a long time the absolute need of effective manpower in the war effort will of necessity dictate some prohibitory measures.

I hope with all my heart they may come before it is too late, and I take occasion here to voice again the appeal that was made by resolution in the last General Conference of our Church to the Commander-in-Chief of our armed forces that he give early consideration to measures designed to reduce the evils attendant on unchastity and liquor in and around army camps and establishments. Our boys are making a big enough sacrifice to serve our country without being forced into environment which jeopardizes virtue and health. I am sure I speak for the good homes of America when I renew appeal for action in this matter, and I know that I speak for efficiency in the service at the same time. I am aware that the problem is not easy of solution, but there is no doubt if our leaders and officers were disposed to do it, they could find a way.

Now I told you I was reluctant to speak of this matter because I fear that some of the fine boys and men who are serving their country, of which service I am a beneficiary, might feel that I was ungrateful and inappreciative. I assure them and you that that is not so. I am grateful and I am trying to do my part,—not pagerange8 as big a part as theirs,—to sustain them in the great cause. I want only to help them and I can think of nothing that will help them more than to try to throw around them safeguards so that they will come out of the conflict as clean and wholesome and pure as they were when they lived in good homes under the uplifting influences of devoted fathers and mothers, wives and children.

I most earnestly hope, too, that the religious faith of these boys in the service will not be injured during their military experience. Now is the time they most need spiritual comfort and support. Any officer who by word or action knowingly injures the religious faith of a boy in the service should be held accountable. I cannot permit myself to believe that we have any appreciable number of such men in the forces. I am fearful, however, that there are many who thoughtlessly and negligently contribute to religious and spiritual delinquency.

Now, my friends, you have such of my impressions at the close of the year as I have been able to crowd into these few minutes. To brighten the picture, I would like to say in closing that I observe a number of heartening and encouraging things among our people. There is surely evidence of a disposition to bear hardships patiently, much volunteer help is available, drives for funds are prosecuted quickly and successfully, and there is abundant evidence of real patriotism everywhere. I think, however, that which heartens me most is what I believe to be rather a pronounced tendency on the part of scholarly, thoughtful men in their exploration of causes and effects to make, for them, bold assertions to the effect that the need of our country and the world is more certain pagerange9 and unchanging standards of life and thought to which men may cling in times like these. They don't always say it in so many words, but reading between the lines one can at least hope that in the back of their minds is a recognition of the necessity of authoritative religion and the kind of life it inspires. Then, too, how refreshing it is to hear the simple story of faith told by the national hero, Eddie Rickenbacker. There would be tremendous gain for the spiritual power everywhere if only men had the humility and the courage that he had to acknowledge the answer to fervent prayer.

So for one, I do not propose to be discouraged by the depressing aspects of scenes about us. There are innumerable things to be grateful for, foremost of which is the word of God that His work is set up in the earth never again to be destroyed, that righteousness and liberty and justice will triumph, and that ultimately peace and brotherhood and good will will envelop the earth.
