Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

CHAPTER II

NATURE AND POWER OF A TESTIMONY

It is not my purpose to attempt a theological presentation, but rather a practical discussion of this spiritual theme. I feel that any consideration of the place of the Church in our lives and affairs would be wholly inadequate without some understanding of the nature, value, and acquisition of what we of the Church call a testimony.

It is probable that among Christian people there is a rather wide variety of interpretation on this subject. Indeed, in the Scriptures themselves a number of different expressions are used to designate this all-important and vital thing in religious life. But for my purpose it is not material whether it be referred to as "the testimony of our conscience," "the testimony of Jesus," "the Comforter," or "the Holy Spirit." What I wish to talk about is that something which brings abiding conviction and complete assurance of the verity of things divine.

This personal conviction, which we call a testimony, is more than belief, more than rational deduction, even more than faith as ordinarily understood, yet definitely founded in faith. Perhaps the best difinition of the "testimony of God" is that given by Paul when he characterizes it as "the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom, which God ordained before the world unto our glory." (I Cor. 2:7) Undoubtedly there is mystery in this "hidden wisdom which God ordained" for, as Paul further says, "that natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned." (I Cor. 2:14) But these scriptural statements are not so abstruse as they might appear to be. The simple meaning is that a testimony of divine things comes from divine sources and not from human rationalizing. It should be noted that there is no statement nor inference that a divine testimony is not reasonable, but only that it does not arise wholly out of the reasoning faculties.

I think perhaps it is because of this latter aspect of the case that men who are inclined to pride themselves on their reasoning faculties find it so difficult to tolerate a conviction which does not lend itself to the tangible proof of the five senses. They do not acknowledge that there is a very real difference between conclusions of the mind and convictions of the spirit, which differentiation Paul made so clear when he said, "For what man knoweth the things of a man save the spirit of a man which is in him? Even so, the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God." (I Cor. 2:11) I am very much inclined to believe that the failure to make this distinction is in large measure responsible for a great poverty of faith and testimony in the world.

Most people these days are reluctant to place limitations on the discovery of secular knowledge and the achievements of science. You will seldom find anyone who, in forecasting the development and utilization of the forces of nature or some invention to meet a given need, will say positively, "It can't be done." We have come to have that much faith in human resourcefulness. Why is it that intelligent men will admit the probability of the scientific discovery even of the fourth dimension, and yet obstinately set themselves against acceptance of spiritual reality and brand as fanatics those who lay claim to spiritual experiences and conviction? I can give theological reasons for such a state of thinking but I will not do so now because, for the present at least, I would like to have you consider this situation in terms of what seems to me ordinary reason and common sense.

I gratefully acknowledge the contributions which science and scholarly men have made to an understanding of the universe and its physical and astronomical laws and phenomena. What a boon to humanity these contributions have been! But with all his long quest, and the knowledge and control of the great forces of the universe he has attained, does man yet understand the real inner essence of these hidden forces? What about gravitation, heat, light, and electricty,— these physical forces which we all know and around each of which an elaborate science has developed? Intelligent man has discovered how to measure them, many of their properties and attributes and how to utilize them, but has he yet found out just what the basic primal element in each of these forces is? I think the greatest scientists have sufficient humility and frankness to admit that the ultimate has not yet been achieved and that these basic facts are still beyond them, and the search goes on and on.

Now if we admit our inability to fully comprehend and define these material forces about us, which we know so tangibly and definitely by the effects which they produce, why, I ask you, should we be so reluctant to acknowledge the existence and potency of other hidden forces which affect the lives and conduct of men and women but which, like these other manifestations of nature, we cannot fully understand and define with human faculties? It seems to me this is a legitimate question to ask a man of reason and logic. If he should reply, "I have no knowledge of spiritual forces because I have had no experience with them,—therefore, for me, they do not exist," I should have no quarrel with him. That may well be his status. But if he should say that such spiritual forces have no reality for others and that they are mere imaginary concoctions of the mind, then I should brand him as unscientific and illogical,—first, because he presumes to say that a thing may not be because he does not understand it; and secondly, because without experience himself, he denies the validity of the experiences of others. I think that fortunately there are not a great many who take such a pronounced position, but I regret to note that there are many who exhibit such an indifferent and disparaging attitude toward spiritual concepts and those who hold them as to mark them with an intolerance and presumption they would not relish in others.

So, my friends, I submit the conclusion that a testimony of spiritual things is not unreasonable and that it is a great mistake to impugn the intelligence of anyone who has such conviction. We take the position in our Church that there is no higher order of intelligence than that which comprehends and accepts spiritual truth, and that in its final analysis all truth is spiritual. Our scriptures declare that all things were created spiritually before they were created temporally, and that "truth is knowledge of things as they are and as they were and as they are to come, . . . the spirit of truth is of God." (D. C. 93:24, 26)

Now I would like to tell you about the desirability of testimony and its effect on individual and church life. I am not able to explain the inner processes by which it is acquired, but I know that a testimony of divine truth does for a person what nothing else can do for him. It brings comfort, contentment, and purpose into life. It is resistant to evil. I have often wondered if there is not within its essence something akin to the serums which are injected into the blood to procure immunity from disease. Perhaps the comparison is not an apt one, but certain it is that there is an element in it that wards off the microbes of sin and makes the man of testimony more impervious to the repeated attacks of the adversary of truth. Be assured that this protection so afforded is no inconsiderable advantage in the living of a life.

The acquisition of a testimony often completely transforms the person who secures it. When Saul of Tarsus miraculously received into his heart and soul the testimony of Jesus he was a changed man. All his conceptions, his ideals, and the works of his life were, so to speak, set in reverse. The transition came about in a moment,—not gradually, but suddenly, when something of real essence entered him. However we need not go to the long past for illustrations. Many have come within my own observation and experience, and innumerable other transformations of lives have come within the history of the Church of Christ.

I remember being in one of the missions some years ago when a man asked that he might drive me to my next appointment, a distance of sixty or seventy miles. During the course of the journey he told me the story of his life. He was a strong, robust fellow, but he shook with sobs as he confessed his errors and his sins, and then said, "Do you think I can be forgiven? Until the missionaries brought the gospel to me and until I received a testimony of its truth, I never realized the kind of a life I was living. My whole understanding of life has now been changed. I would like to spend the rest of my days making amends for what I have done." That man was a different person than he had been. When I explained to him that the gospel held out forgiveness to all who would truly repent, the light of hope and courage came into his eyes and I am sure that a firm resolution took possession of him to make his life conform to the light that had come.

On another occasion I remember shaking hands with a number of people at the conclusion of a missionary meeting. In the group I met an old woman,—so very old that I took the liberty of asking her age. Of course I would not have done that with a younger lady. I said, "How old are you, sister?" She replied tremulously, "Twelve years old." "Twelve years?" I said, "How do you make that out?" "Twelve years ago," she replied, "the missionaries brought the gospel to me. Only since then have I really lived." That was her tribute to that marvelous something which had come into her life which we call a testimony.

The restored Church of our Lord is built upon testimonies such as these,—the individual testimonies of its members. Indeed no one is asked to come into the Church until he has personal assurance of the divine truths which it teaches. At times it is something of a shock to applicants for admission into the Church to be advised that the evidences of their real conversion are not adequate. Such persons are not infrequently urged to further investigation and more supplication that they may know of a surety that it is the truth which they embrace.

A young lawyer once told me that he would like to join our Church. I knew him to be a fine fellow and I told him we would be glad to have him as a member. I told him also that it was necessary to do something more than merely to indicate his desire for membership. I advised him that he should make careful study of the gospel, that the principles taught by the Church would seem reasonable and desirable to him, but that that was not enough. I then told him that in his studies he would be expected to supplicate the Lord for a divine impression of the truth and divinity of the work, which we call a testimony. He was much surprised and, I think, disappointed. He said that he had assumed that all that was necessary was a willingness to join. He did not know that the true disciples of Christ are they who have no doubt as to His divinity and His Lordship.

A firm testimony of Jesus is the greatest comfort which may come to the human heart. There is great need for that comfort today, and greater need will arise as we endure more of the sacrifices and deprivations that this terrible war is bringing. There will be scarcely a family that has not someone in danger, and the cold hand of death will reach into many a home and take away loved ones whose companionship is more precious than anything else in life. In such cases the kindly ministrations of friends and neighbors will help, but neither they nor anything else can bring the comfort, the lasting consolation, and the hope that come from a sure testimony in the reality of spiritual life and the immortality of the soul of man. Wives who lose husbands and mothers who lose their sons want to know that they are not gone forever and that they will meet them again, and the only place in the wide world they can obtain that blessed assurance is in the testimony of Jesus and His holy gospel.

What a boon it would be to every soldier facing death, either on the vast expanses of the ocean or in the battlefields of the jungle, the desert, the mountain, or the plain, to know deep down in his heart, with a conviction beyond question, that the Savior of the world is his Lord and King, that He gave His own life to make life everlasting, and that whatever happens, a good man will not ultimately lose his life, but will find it!

People having such convictions never think of loved ones as lying in graves on land or sea. They know that death is a transition to life. They envision their loved ones as having gone on just a step ahead to await their coming,—"out there" to continue together the eternal mission and destiny of their lives.

If any man thinks that this comfort and assurance cannot come in these days, I would like to direct him to a people nearly a million strong, and if it were feasible, ask him to consult these men, women, and children to ascertain their views on these matters of life and hereafter. I can assure him that he would find a unanimity of faith and concept that would hearten and sustain him. He would find, too, a people who are proud to bear their testimonies of truth and not ashamed to acknowledge the divinity and Lordship of the Christ and the miracles of His power.

It would be a great gain for the world if all who profess to take upon themselves His name had the courage and the conviction to do this. The humanistic interpreters of the Christian message are making but doubtful contributions to the advancement of the Christian cause. When they rob the doctrines and the history of their supernatural divinity they take from them their true genius and vitality. It is the humble, direct testimonies of humble folk which support the cause of Christ in the earth.

Personally I am grateful to be one of those who enjoys such conviction. Every interpretive faculty which I possess gives me assurance of the divine truths which my people proclaim to the world. These truths provide the purpose and pattern of my life. They are of the very essence of existence. I wish I could impart the confidence and security which I and my colleagues feel to every man, woman, and child. It would be the greatest gift that could be bestowed. But I cannot bestow it. All I can do is to testify of its worth and hope and pray that people everywhere will recognize its value and live for it and pray for it and receive it. God speed the day when the testimony of Jesus shall dispel fear and uncertainly in this stricken world.
