Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

CHAPTER III

THE GOSPEL OF WORK

I am proud to represent a people who have always dignified work and reproved idleness. Our books, our sermons, our leaders, and particularly our present President, have glorified industry. The busy hive of the honeybee, Deseret, has been our emblem. Work with faith is a cardinal point of our theological doctrine, and our future state, our heaven, is envisioned in terms of eternal progression through constant labor.

This fundamental principle of the honor of work is sorely needed in application in our country today. All the fraudulent schemes, the rackets, governmental corruption, and most of the factors which so seriously retard unity and efficacy of effort in our war projects are chiefly attributable to the failure to recognize the integrity and dignity of work and the satisfaction and happiness that flow from honest toil.

What is honest work? I believe it is rightly interpreted only in terms of service, and the value of true service is measured by someone else's gain. Such a concept is not only Christian, but it lies at the foundation of all sound, profitable business. Illustrations of this fact are so innumerable I shall not mention any.

There are at least two factors indispensable to efficient work: first, integrity, which includes loyalty; and second, ability. No one can succeed unless he is dependable. If he works for another, he must make his employer's interest his own. If he works for himself, he must be faithful and true to his enterprise or he will fail. The "watch-the-clock" variety of service, with no interest in the job but to get the per diem, is as much responsible for failure as any other item which I know.

To succeed not only must your workers be loyal but they must also be able. In the highly competitive markets for goods and services, as with our war industries, the skills are usually the deciding features. Ability is generally the product of training and education. The most skillful not only have the best chances themselves, but they contribute most to the success of the enterprise with which they are associated. It is a notable fact that during the years of depression, with some exceptions of course, particularly in industrial centers, the really skilled worker has been little in evidence among the unemployed, and today it is the man of skill only, who in certain specified lines, is exempted from military service because of his work.

On the other hand, our recent history demonstrates that the unskilled laborer has a hard time of it. His service is the first to be dispensed with. He is the least wanted. And, I regret to say it for fear of hurting feelings, he makes the least contribution to economic progress. In saying this, I want you to understand that I do not limit skilled labor to the professions, the artisans, or any white-collar or other group who may consider it beneath them to do any honest work. I class any man as a skilled worker who has cultivated the ability to do his assigned job exceptionally well.

It is my privilege to travel around the country a good deal. I see many farmlands. I often note that on one side of a fence is an area of stunted crop growth, weeds, barren patches, and unproductive desolation, while on the other side of the fence, with nothing but a dimension line between, with the same potential soil, equal water right, the same air, the same sun, the same climate, lies a field beautiful beyond description with the abundant productivity which nature yields to the skilled husbandman. I see fat cattle and lean, good homes and poor ones. I go into stores. Some are attractive,—merchandise is so arranged, service so efficient and courteous that goods sell, while in others, on the same block perhaps, there is evidence of slovenliness, poor buying, lack of the art of proper display, and the proprietor wonders why customers do not come.

Now what is the determining factor in these contrasted results and a world of others comparable to them? Why of course, with relatively few exceptions, it is the personal equation, the skill and the energy of the proprietor, or his employees, or both.

This doctrine of work lies at the very foundation of the capitalistic system, or what we choose to call "the American way." Many people misinterpret capitalism. They think that because the word capital is used to designate the system that its chief purpose is to make wealthy men who are usually called capitalists, and whose wealth it is feared is too often accumulated at the expense of the poorer classes. I admit that there are instances, altogether too many, when this comes about. But this is not the true concept of capitalism. In its inner essence it is little, if anything, more than a man's free right to work, to choose his work, and to enjoy the rewards of his efforts. In my estimation it is a most precious thing, and it is indispensable to the liberty and freedom of which America boasts. It is the only tried and tested system of free enterprise in this world and every other opposing system is built on an abridgment of personal liberty. We are fighting for it, and we are determined we will not lose it.

But we will lose it some day if we do not understand it and recognize its virtues. It is not the capitalistic system itself that makes some men rich and some men poor. The men themselves do that, again with some exceptions. The system merely offers the opportunities. There are, of course, abuses within it, as there must always be when humanity is involved. It does not guarantee that all men will be rich, and it is worthy of note that all systems which do, usually succeed only in making all poor. To eradicate abuses within the system is almost as difficult as to reform humanity. But who would advocate killing humanity because they are slow to reform?

We must be patient with our American system. It will take a long time to eliminate the imperfections in its operation. To be patient it is necessary to be tolerant,—tolerant of other people and their views. Everything we do in America is a composite of many opinions. The unifying element in our national affairs is common purpose and desire. I believe that the war effort, however discouraging some of its aspects may have been, has certainly indicated beyond question a common desire to maintain our fundamental liberties, one of the most important of which is our system of free enterprise. So I hesitate to impugn men's motives, even though I do not agree with their methods.

Our citizens themselves must be educated to understand the economic systems under which they live and work. They must know enough to establish the proper education for themselves and their children and reach conclusions for themselves. I believe that it is neither wise nor safe to leave the determination of our educational system and policies exclusively to the professional educators. I do not discount the valuable services of our teachers. I should always want their expert advice, but I am confident that the patrons of the schools should have a much larger voice than they now have in the establishment of curriculums, school policies, and management.

I am in favor of more concentration in our educational processes on the development of the useful skills. For the time being the war has made this imperative. The student who comes out of a high school or university without ability to serve in useful capacities has failed, whatever his alleged scholarship may be. I am willing that the term "useful" should be applied to every form of human endeavor that contributes to the welfare of humanity, but I demand that it be consciously useful in the mind and heart of the student himself. What better could we do than to teach every boy and girl, and ourselves meanwhile, that the ambition of each life should be a distinct contribution to the economic and spiritual welfare of the whole people?

For the purpose of this discussion I lay emphasis on economic education. I am sure that in the long view of our living that emphasis is not misplaced. It is not misplaced because happiness and culture and progression come to people only who are not hampered by destitution and poverty and who are able to maintain the right kind of manhood and womanhood in reasonable independence and prosperity. Self-reliance, itself, is a necessary concomitant of the principle of free enterprise. There is no sin of proprietorship and every man and woman can be a proprietor if he or she but will. All may not be landed proprietors or the owners of great property, but all may be proprietors of their services, so developed and executed as to make them indispensable units in the progress of the people.

And now to return to the gospel of work,—and it is a gospel, if ever God gave us a message and principle for our salvation. It would seem apparent, without further comment, that the spread of this gospel is absolutely indispensable to the solution of the problems of both our individual and national economy. I think we can lay it down as an almost unfailing rule, because the exceptions are so few, that the loyal, able, skilled, industrious worker is successful. His loyalty is his character. He makes that for himself. But we cannot safely under-estimate the part played by home influence and environment in the formation of that character. The first essential step is implanting the concept of useful service for others. This is the doctrine of altruism and basically it is a religious principle. There can be little doubt that the outstanding workers of America and the greatest contributors to her incomparable progress have been those who, either by direct descent or through the heritage of tradition, have imbibed the conceptions of duty and honest toil from the old fashioned homes of this land wherein life was regarded as "a mission and not a career."

It is a shame to permit children to grow up without such a sense of obligation to both their family and society. Parental indulgences and unwarranted privileges have literally robbed thousands of the opportunity to bless the nation and themselves and realize a happiness and joy that can come from no other source. Not only are opportunities missed, but it is the contra doctrine of "riches without work" which has filled our jails and made law enforcement in all its ramifications perhaps the most costly establishment in state and national life. Lowell pays this tribute to the worker:

"No man is born into the world whose work

Is not born with him. There is always work

And tools to work withal for those who will;

And blessed are the horny hands of toil."

What a pity it is that this basic asset in all progress, this God-given endowment,—work and the right to labor,—should be made the subject of such vicious contention, manipulation, and intrigue. Everyone agrees, without a moment's hesitation, that it is the one and only thing that will save us in our time of peril. There is abundant evidence that all our citizens, with but few exceptions, wish to work for the great causes to which they have given their allegiance and yet, while I am speaking this very night, there are work stoppages which are materially impairing the war effort and from present indications the end of such costly disputations is not in sight. I heard a lecturer a few months ago who had recently returned from a trip of inspection and study in Britain, an economist of experience and prominence, say that if the workers of America would add but eight hours to the work week, Hilter could be whipped before the coming pagerange38 summer has gone. I suspect that he contemplated, also, that a new zeal, proportionate to the increased hours, would be added. Whether this prognostication could be realized, I do not know, but it is certain that our production could be enormously increased and the prospects of early victory correspondingly enhanced by greater opportunity to utilize one of the foremost of the freedoms for which we say we are fighting: the right to work. What a spectacle we must be making of ourselves in the eyes of the people to whom we propose to open the democratic way of life! It is a most reprehensible and regrettable thing that we should permit to develop within our own national family animosities and hatreds as vitriolic as those between enemies at war.

I am sure that I voice the sentiment of the great majority of our citizens when I say that this thing should stop,—and stop now. Our national ideals and principles demand it, and ultimately it will be requisite and indispensable to the preservation of our union.

I do not wish it to be understood from these statements that I am appealing for the triumph of any faction in the great controversy,—in fact, I think that a factional victory only would be disastrous. I am hoping for two things: first, a widespread recognition of the seriousness and grave import of these conditions. I doubt that the questions and problems confronting the country before the Civil War were more pregnant with danger and threat to national unity. And secondly, what I am hoping for most to follow in the wake of a consciousness of the urgent importance of the situation, is a reconciliation of differences in righteous and equitable adjustment.

Labor troubles in this country, or in any other pagerange39 country, can be composed if men meet them in the spirit of brotherhood. Mutual cosideration enjoined upon us by our Savior is the key to the solution. Just so soon as the light of tolerance dispels the blindness of enmity will the way open. I have read a number of "pro" and "con" arguments and plans for solution. Undoubtedly no solution yet presented is perfect, but the most encouraging from a practical standpoint seems to me to come from the composition of violent labor disputes in Sweden many years ago. There the employers and employees suddenly came to recognize the futility of disputation, vindictiveness, and violence and turned from coercion to persuasion. This change of heart avoided revolution and laid the foundation for amicable relations which have endured for more than thirty years. With such examples before us it is surely not hopeless to look for peaceful solutions.

Rather frequently in these dark days we are exhorted to prayer. The President sets aside a day or a week in which prayers are to be offered in the churches and in the homes of the people. It is expected that we will pray for unity, for devotion to the ideals and principles of country, for protection and for success. Has it occurred to us what a solvent prayer could be for contention and animosity in our national life? If this sacred Christian practice which has come down to us through all the annals of our republic could be more than a mere perfunctory thing, and could mean something real in tempering men's hearts and feelings and in stimulating kindly and fraternal relations,—if men could only pray together, they could work together and such work would transform this bleeding world. That day will surely come, my friends. It is so ordained. Be not skeptical or doubtful of it. Work for it with all your mind and strength.
