Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

CHAPTER IV

MEN DIFFERENT

I should like to tell you something about 215,000 men and boys. These men and boys are not unlike many others whom you know, except in one respect. They are laborers, artisans, and tradespeople of all kinds,—doctors, lawyers, bankers, educators,—following all the professions that are legitimate. Some are poor and some are rich, with the usual preponderance in between. Most of these men, young and old, have high ideals and worthy ambitions. They aspire to make a good living and surround themselves and their families with the comforts of life. They have their successes and their failures. They are common men and boys except in one thing, and in that they are not common at all. They are unique and distinctive, for they are invested with a principle and a power that distinguish them from all other men in the world.

This power which has come to them has abolished all class distinction among them and has furnished them new criteria by which to measure life's successes or failures. Not infrequently by such standards of measurement the poorest and lowliest is elevated to the highest position, to whom the richest and most successful willingly and humbly render subservience and allegiance.

What is this feature which has made these men and boys different from their fellows? It is the Priesthood of the Living God which has been bestowed upon all of them. I hope to explain to you briefly what it is, what it does, and where it comes from.

The Priesthood is usually defined as being "the power of God delegated to man to administer the ordinances of the gospel." This is a true definition, but I like to add to it an interpretation in terms of service. The power is not static. The extent of it varies with a man's worthiness and capacity to hold and use it. In this respect it is not incomparable to the waters that flow from our mountains down into the valleys below, as these waters are controlled and regulated by the law of irrigation which prevails in our communities. An early settler might have diverted from its natural channel the whole of a mountain stream and thereby set up a claim of right and ownership to the entire flow. But the law said, "No, you cannot have the whole stream. You may have only so much of it as you can put to beneficial use,—no more." It is so with the great stream of power that flows from the fountainhead of God down to His servants in the earth. No one can claim the right to more of that power than he uses wisely and well for the blessing of his fellowmen.

By revelation we are informed that this power is to be exercised only in righteousness, in humility, and without compulsion. If it is used autocratically or with ulterior purposes, it is lost. The words of the Lord are, "No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the Priesthood, only by persuasion, by long suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned, . . . reproving betimes with sharpness when moved upon by the Holy Ghost and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy. . . . Let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men and to the household of faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly, then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God and the doctrine of the Priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven." (D. C. 121:41-45)

Here is the complete answer to those who have thought that the Priesthood may be used for self-aggrandizement and for unworthy purposes. In these beautiful words of revelation is set forth an interpretation of this divine power wholly consonant with the spirit and personality of the Christ Himself, from whom it emanates.

It is not only a plan for service, but it is itself a perfect service. All worthy service is commendable. The man who builds my house to shelter my family from the storms and the elements merits my gratitude. I am indebted to the farmer who tills the soil for food and sustenance. To the scientists, the inventors, the skilled artisans, the mechanics, and the captains of industry we owe lasting praise and thanksgiving for innumerable comforts and conveniences that make life easy and desirable. The artists of the world have gratified our inner craving for expression through beauty and tender and lofty sentiments of art, music, and literature. We almost worship the modern medical man who, with patiently developed skill and enlarged scientific knowledge, is able to relieve our bodily distresses, mend our broken bones, and set us up in health and vigor.

But who of all who serve so well and so nobly the interests of the human family can do for me a service that in real vitality, in everlasting benefit, is comparable to that performed by a man of the Priesthood who takes me into the waters of baptism and, raising his hand to high heaven, repeats these solemn words: "Having been commissioned of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost"? What service is there that mortal man can give which approaches in importance and eternal beneficence the laying on of the hands of the Priesthood in the utterance of those divine words: "Receive ye the Holy Ghost and be confirmed a member of the Church of Christ"? This is why I call it the perfect service. And this is the nature of this divine essence called the Priesthood.

Now, what does it do for the children of men and how does it affect their lives? Not only is it essential for our induction into the Church and fold of Christ, but it is of constant application. We use it in the blessing of our sick, to relieve suffering,— physical, mental, and spiritual; for the encouragement and direction of our officers and missionaries as they are set apart for their respective duties in the Church; for the blessing and naming of little children; for the administration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, in the partaking of which we frequently renew our covenants with the Savior; in the ordination of men and boys to offices of the Priesthood which are so widely distributed in the Church; and lastly, and perhaps more importantly than in any of the items I have mentioned, in the carrying forward of our temple work which is so unique in the world of religion and is so distinctively a product of latter-day revelation, in which, through the authority of the holy Priesthood, vicarious work is done for our kindred dead; transcendently beautiful ceremonies and ordinances are performed for the living by which eternal bonds of marriage are solemnized for man and wife and holy unions created into which children are born,—all to enable men and women to make preparation to come back into the eternal presence of God, the Father, and His Son, Jesus Christ.

Every man who receives the Priesthood and makes himself worthy to exercise its powers is thereby made a better and stronger man. He is a better father and husband. He has power to better serve his family. He presides over his household in dignity and love. He wins the respect of his wife and children by constant solicitation, not only for their temporal, but for their spiritual welfare also. The very nature of the government of the Priesthood induces respect and devotion. The wife does not begrudge a man of the Priesthood his position as head of the household. She honors him as such and teaches her children to do likewise, for she well understands, not only what the Priesthood means to her husband, but what it means to her too. She knows that if she sustains her husband in his Priesthood calling she has assurance of exaltation with him. She knows, moreover, that if he is true to his Priesthood he will always be kind and faithful and righteous. I feel sure that if we could have more of the authority and influence of the Priesthood in the homes of the land we should have more love, less domestic infelicity, and infinitely less disrespect for law and order in the established institutions of society than we now see about us everywhere.

The man of the Priesthood is a better citizen and a better neighbor than he would be without it. Holding authority himself, he is constrained to respect authority. Being a part of the government of God, he sustains all governments. His life is dedicated to service. He must be a good neighbor, serving the needs of those about him.

The man of the Priesthood loves knowledge and education. He is taught that the "glory of God is intelligence," and that "man cannot be saved in ignorance," and that "knowledge is power." He is enjoined to teach truth and righteousness, and he knows that he cannot teach unless he learns.

While the Priesthood is a principle of force and action, it nevertheless makes a man humble. The realization of the responsibility entailed in this partnership with God in the exercise of His powers, the very nature of the grant itself, tends to subdue natural human egotism. When one blesses the sick, he knows that it would be futile to rely on his own talent, his own influence or fine words in the presence of distress and suffering and the imminence of death. His native powers seem as nothing. He realizes that it is only through faith and with a pure heart and with a power superior to his human faculties that he can pronounce a blessing that will be efficacious.

Those who bear the Priesthood know, too, that their lives must be consistent with the divine commission which has come to them. No man can lie and steal, or malign his neighbor, or polute his body with poison, and defile himself with sin and expect the stream of God's powers to flow through him. Holding of the Priesthood stimulates a man more than anything I know to conform his life to the standards and attributes of the Master whose authorized representative he is.

And it is true that a man who has been properly ordained to the Priesthood in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is an authorized and duly accredited representative of the Lord Jesus Christ. To many, no doubt, this appears as a bold and highly presumptuous statement to make. I sometimes hesitate to make it for fear of giving offense and hurting feelings, but it is a fact substantiated by accreditable evidence, and I would be remiss in my duty to my Church and my listeners if I did not present this truth.

If you will pardon a personal reference, I will use my own case as an example. I am not infrequently asked, particularly by those whom I ordain, as to the derivation or lineage of my Priesthood. I reply by setting forth four steps only: First, I was ordained by President Joseph F. Smith. Second, he, by President Brigham Young. Third, Brigham Young was ordained by three men, one of whom was Oliver Cowdery, and his ordination was confirmed by Joseph Smith. Fourth, both Oliver Cowdery and Joseph Smith were ordained by the angelic ministers, Peter, James and John, Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ, at the beginning of this dispensation. These are facts. So, you see, the authority of the Priesthood which we bear is proximate to the divine source from which it emanates. Living witnesses, or the recorded testimony of those who have recently passed away, attest the validity of each act or event which has brought to us this delegation of divine power.

Not only are we able to establish the legality of our credentials, but in addition thereto the experience of our people with the powers of the Priesthood, extending now for more than a century of time, furnishes irrefutable proof of the genuineness and divine nature of the powers which have been exercised. Spiritual manifestations and temporal blessings derived through the Priesthood have been altogether too numerous to estimate or recount. Under the Priesthood the Church was set up by a young man unlearned in the things of the world. Its marvelous organization, its procedure and practice, its ordinances and ceremonies, and its incomparably beautiful and uplifting interpretation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ are all attributable directly to the powers of the holy Priesthood. Even its temporal successes and those of its members, the migrations of the people and their establishment in different sections of the earth, are due to the inspired direction of the Priesthood of the Church. So that if you ask any man who has had experience with the Church or knows its history what one thing it is that more definitely distinguishes our people from any other group and what one thing is most accountable for all our successes and achievements, he will readily respond, the Priesthood of the Church of Christ.

Now my friends, I hope I have given you some idea of the nature, uses, and origin of the holy Priesthood. I wish I could say that every man who has received it has been true to it. I regret that that cannot be said. And I regret it particularly for the reason that I fear that many not of us have judged the Priesthood by the lives and actions of those who have not had the strength and courage to live to its high standards. This is not alone unfortunate for those who have failed. It is unfortunate too for those who have formed their opinion of a great power and principle on the basis of such weak representation. We men of the Church are constantly striving and praying for strength and wisdom to make manifest to the world the efficacy of this holy power. We want the world to recognize it, not with any ambition in ourselves for dominance or acclaim, but because we know that it is the power by which Christ's kingdom is established and by which He shapes the destinies of men.

With this concept of the Priesthood which I have given you, do you question the wisdom of its wide distribution and bestowal upon all good men? Should not all Christian men who truly love the Christ and wish to do His work desire a portion of His power to aid and sustain them in their labors? Do not men need a power superior to human talent to solve the problems which confront them individually, as well as those which weigh down this stricken world? I think on reflection you will say that they do. Well, such a power is available. It may be had by every man who will prepare himself in faith and strength to receive it.

And now, in conclusion, I offer to all who will seriously contemplate this divine force, 215,000 testimonies of its authenticity and its efficacy. These men, different from other men because of this power, have had experience with it. They ought to know, and they do know. I am but one of that great number and I bear humble witness that the Priesthood of God is real and genuine, that it is a vital essence of force and power. I have felt its influence. I have been consciously aware of its power passing from me as I have laid my hands on the heads of others in the administrations of its kindly offices. I have seen its effects. I know that it is more than a mere name and symbolism. I prize it above all earthly possessions. I look upon it as the key to all the happiness and joy and glory for which I aspire.

I fervently pray for its recognition among all men and for its divine blessing to attend humanity the world over.
