Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

CHAPTER V

BEING ORTHODOX IN RELIGION

I desire to speak to you on the subject: Being Orthodox in Religion. I am led to believe that this subject is timely and of some general importance by many expressions which have reached me, coming from both young and mature people, which seem to indicate that there is something of an aversion to being considered orthodox. Not infrequently does one hear it said, "Yes, I am a Church member. I think it is all right, but I don't pretend to be orthdox."

The manner of making such a statement, or others like it, usually carries the implication that the one who takes this position regards being orthodox as something of a stigma or blot on his intelligence. He seems to think that orthodoxy is opposed to broadmindedness and indicates contraction of view. From the technical definition of the word, of course, this interpretation is erroneous. Orthodoxy means, "correct or sound in doctrine; holding the commonly accepted faith."

I cannot help believing that much of this attitude results from an inadequate conception of Christian doctrine and illogical thinking about it. I feel sure that many who express skepticism are not really as skeptical as their talk would indicate, and that some who think themselves skeptical could easily resolve their doubts by a little clear thinking.

Now what is necessary to be orthodox, or "correct and sound in the doctrine" of Christianity? To what must we subscribe? In answer to this question, I might, with propriety, quote the long list of Christian principles which are considered fundamental in the Christian doctrine. But I am not going to do this. I am going to try to simplify and condense the answer. The answer I propose is this: Accept Christ for what He said He was. If we can really do this, we will be orthodox.

I have never been able to understand how intelligent, educated men could reconcile the acceptance of that portion of the record of the Savior which sets forth His incomparable teachings and philosophy, and at the same time deny the correctness of the same record which proclaims His divine Sonship and Lordship and miraculous powers. What justification is there for credence in a part of the record and not all of it, or for believing some of the things the Master said and not all that He said? I admit that it may be easier, in that it requires less faith to accept some parts, rather than other parts, but from the standpoint of the authenticity and validity of the record itself, which is admittedly the source from which we obtain our knowledge and information of the Christ, how can one part be true without all being true? To that question I have never been able to discover a satisfactory answer.

Then, too, the part of the record which the so-called higher critics and some of our skeptical friends would discredit, while accepting other parts, is the most important and surely the most vital thing connected with the Redeemer's work and message.

Was He what He said He was? I think thoughtful persons must agree that the significance and vitality of His Lordship is infinitely greater than the ethics of His teachings. Of course, it is easier to believe in the Golden Rule than in the virgin birth or the transfiguration. We can understand the one far better than the other. Perhaps on that very account those matters of difficult understanding are of more importance and lasting benefit to us, because they require and develop faith which is the very genius and essence of the Savior's life, work, and mission. No student of Chistianity, I believe, will deny that.

Perhaps it will not be too much of a digression from the theme to ask the question at this point: Why is it so difficult to accept things on faith? I think I can suggest an answer. It is because we are so conceited. Men of "the world" are in "the world" only because they adopt the philosophy of "the world," which is the philosophy of self sufficiency. It is not a humble philosophy—it is highly egotistical. It makes men themselves the arbiters of all things. They look to no higher source than themselves for the solution of all questions.

Such a philosophy is diametrically opposed to the philosophy of Christ, which is that of faith. When men adopt His philosophy they are humble—they acknowledge an intelligence far superior to their own and they seek guidance and wisdom from that source. When they adopt the philosophy of faith, they "come out of the world," for "the world," as a term in theology, is not a place but a condition or state of mind and feeling. It requires courage to "come out of the world" and adopt the philosophy of faith. Sometimes it subjects one to ridicule and the contempt of friends which are harder for most men to endure than physical pain, but because a thing is hard to do or hard to believe is no assurance that it is not right.

I am one, however, who believes that is not so hard for most people to have faith and accept spiritual realities if they will but let their minds and their native inclinations pursue their natural bent. I think that altogether too often we permit thinking complexes and sophisticated reasoning to warp our intuitive judgment and entrammel the spontaneous feelings and emotions of our souls. So, when I prescribe the acceptance of Christ as a condition of orthodoxy, I mean an acceptance without reservation—a whole-souled, intelligent, joyous acceptance of Him that proclaims Him Lord, Savior, Redeemer, and Mediator with the Father and lays claim on His mercy, His grace, and His love for all the finer things we know in life. What hope,—what peace and satisfaction such a full acceptance of Christ brings to the heart of man, only those who have received a testimony of Jesus will ever know.

I have a feeling that most of the class who regard themselves as unorthodox are not entirely happy and contented with their lukewarm, partial allegiance to Christianity and the Church, especially at such times as they may seriously ponder the matter. They realize without being told that their position is inconsistent with any logical deduction they can make. They know that the challenge of the gospel is such that it means everything to one who embraces it, if it means anything at all. If they are parents, they are often very pleased to have their children receive the benefits of religious and Church training. They are concerned for the welfare of their children and they know that these influences are good. Why is it then that they do not or cannot call back into full force their testimonies of the truth, enjoy the companionship of the Holy Spirit, and rejoice in the associations of the Church

I am not sure that I can answer this question for many, but I am sure that each can answer it for himself, if he will but frankly look into his own life, feelings, and conduct. I think I can promise to each that if he will but scrutinize himself as critically as he does the authorities, establishments, and procedure of the Church, he will discover the reasons which underlie his own disaffection. This is not so easy to do and not nearly so interesting as it is to criticise others. One seldom has company when he is analyzing himself, and the conversation he carries on with himself is never very scintillating. The parties to the conversation—he and himself—know all the facts and they have to be so brutally frank that it is sometimes really painful. But when the conversation centers about others, with sympathetic company, it isn't necessary to have more than a mere smattering of the facts to make a colorful, interesting story.

Now I do not contend that the authorities and policies of the Church are beyond criticism. If the criticism were constructive and if it could reach those who could remedy defects when they are shown, it might be very profitable. I know, without being told, that the men who administer the affairs of the Church are men with human frailties, but I know, too that they are humble men and that they diligently and prayerfully seek to give to the service of their fellows the best that is within them. There may be a few exceptions, but they are very rare indeed. With such a disposition manifest in Church leaders and officers, surely it is not going too far to ask for forbearance of judgment and kindly, tolerant consideration, and particularly a full investigation of all the facts before adverse criticism is either entertained or uttered. I believe that if we could once and for all abandon the practice of long-range, ill-considered, intemperate criticism, thousands of people would save themselves and their faith. It is my desire not so much to save the Church from criticism as to save the critics from themselves.

Worship is an essential part of religion. Who can go to a place of worship and enjoy the sanctifying, refreshing influence which comes from prayer, songs of praise, communion with the Saints and the lovely spirit which pervades a reverential assembly, if his mind is filled with critical thoughts? In fact, when he is in such a condition, a man does not enjoy worship and he usually ceases to attend the meetings of the Church. It is surprising how rapidly disintergration of faith sets in. Skepticism and doubt follow, and sometimes complete apostasy, but more often indifference.

I wish I could say something to check those who are on the road to indifference, and I wish I could call those who have already gone far astray back to the faith and the fold of the Church. I recognize that my words can do but little and that each must do the things that are necessary for himself. I do want to hold out encouragement, however. I can give positive assurance that everyone whose spiritual progress is being retarded by critical thoughts, doubt, and skepticism can remove the obstacles if he but has the will to do it. When he reaches the point that he is not ashamed to be considered orthodox, he will have broken down one of the greatest barriers. Anyone who will earnestly make this effort will be amply and richly rewarded all the days of his life.

The church and religion need the services of able men and women who regard themselves as being unorthodox. Some of them are among the brightest and most capable people we have and many are of excellent character. Not a few are in the professional and business world and have permitted their vocations so completely to occupy their time and attention that they have neglected their opportunities and duties in spiritual fields, in consequence of which, they find that their affection for the great cause has waned and their faith has declined.

Today we are pleading all over the land for spiritual revival in our country. Spiritual power is considered essential to our unity of effort and to fortify us in sustaining sacrifices and losses we are called on to bear. Religious concepts are essential to the interpretation of our ideals and objectives and no one can adequately contemplate and project a peace in which Christian doctrines do not play a major part. I have pointed out before that the solution of many of our domestic problems is contingent upon the application of their salutary principles. We cannot estimate the drawback to our spiritual advancement and achievement which comes not only from indifference but from this disinclination to be orthodox in religion. Many of our educators and leaders of pagerange58 thought are either consciously or unconsciously deterring thousands who look up to them for guidance from an enjoyment of a full religious life because of this attitude.

So I say, come back, you lawyers, doctors, professors, and men of affairs! The Church needs you, and you need the Church. Your faith is not dead,—it is but sleeping. You know that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and you know your duties. That knowledge was given to you to bring you joy and faith. It will condemn you and bring you misery if you do not heed it. I plead with you, my own people, and my friends, to come back to those who love you. You will find open arms to receive you. You are not ostracized because you have departed from the straight path of duty. The gospel of Christ is one of mercy, forgiveness, and tolerance. Many of you have entered into everlasting covenants with God under which you may receive blessings and joys that pass understanding. Do not violate your covenants nor forfeit your rights They are much too important to you and your loved ones. You cannot afford to set an unworthy example. Your children will see it. Other men's children will be influenced by it. It will fill you with remorse to know that you have led one soul astray.

I need not remind you of all that you should do. Your hearts will guide you if you will but consult them. If you are not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, criticism and doubt will leave you; faith and love will take their place. You will bless humanity and God will bless you.
