Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

CHAPTER VI

NEW GOSPEL INTERPRETATIONS

I have heretofore told you of a spiritual power that makes men different. Now I wish to tell you of some new concepts of the Christian gospel. This occasion will permit me to give only a few of these new interpretations and that briefly. I present them because I feel sure that they contribute to a larger appreciation of the principles of life taught to us by the Savior of the world.

I set forth as the first item of this new interpretation the doctrine of the dominance of intelligence. I believe I am correct in the assertion that in all Christian literature prior to the advent of the Restored Gospel there were to be found no such concepts of the origin, function, and place of intelligence in the universe as comes from modern scripture. Here are some excerpts:

"Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be.

"All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence." (D. C. 93:29-31.)

"The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth.

"Light and truth forsake that evil one. (D. C. 93:36, 37.)

"Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection.

"And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come. (D. C. 130:18, 19.)

Now since intelligence is co-eternal with God and the very glory of God, it follows logically that it is the chief investiture of man. Indeed, it is man, for it is that part of his constitution that persists, that is eternal. This knowing, conceiving, illuminating principle of existence lies at the base of all our powers and potentialities. Without it there would be no virtue and no sin. It alone gives to man his free agency, the power to choose, to will, and to act, conscious of the effects of his decisions and his deeds. It accounts for the place of good and evil in the world and justifies their existence,—a philosophical problem that has baffled the minds and the thinking of great scholars of all time.

This conception of intelligence justifies the eternal quest for knowledge. It explains the necessity of acquiring knowledge, for it makes knowledge essential to progression, and progression in the last analysis is salvation. It places a terrific penalty on ignorance. It lays down a new and very definite gospel doctrine that "it is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance." (D. C. 131:6.)

The world in general, and the modern world in particular, with its science, scolasticism, and technology has been prone to scorn and slur religion and the Church for an alleged backwardness and retardation in intellectual processes and in the acquisition of knowledge. Whatever justification there may have been in times past for such an imputation. I present now an interpretation of the gospel that is a complete refutation of these disparaging allegations and inferences of the secular world. The gospel of Christ, under such interpretation, offers a stimulus and a reward in the pursuit of knowledge and the development of intelligence that transcend in their appeal and promise anything that the students and philosophers have ever evolved.

But the knowledge and intelligence that it rewards must be true. "Light and truth" are the words of revelation. It places no premium upon the acquisition of falsehood and error. It distinguishes very clearly between sophistication and true intelligence. In differentiating intelligence from education a man once said, rather facetiously, that intelligence is that which enables one to wisely meet the situations of life without education; whereas, education is that which helps one to meet the situations of life without intelligence.

This statement may leave the inference that intelligence is largely inherited. The gospel teaches us that it is—that it came as a native endowment of the race, but that the potency of the endowment has been in many instances largely mitigated by the perversion of the race. It is encouraging and gratifying, however, to be assured that no man has quite lost this vital and all-important attribute. There is enough intelligence with every man to acquire knowledge and truth if he elects so to do. It is a significant fact, demonstrated by most extensive research and investigation, that there is no people in the earth, even the most primitive, which has not sufficient intelligence to grasp and hold to a conception of God as a Supreme Being.

How to exercise the intelligence we possess for the attainment and utilization of knowledge is a vital matter in the interpretation and application of the gospel, but it is one that I must pass over briefly. The gospel places highest value upon that intelligence and knowledge which contribute most to the enduring welfare of man. "Pure knowledge," it is called in the revelation. (D. C. 121:42.) This pure knowledge contemplates an understanding of the divine plan of redemption and the principles and laws that pertain to the Celestial Kingdom of our Father. In all the learning of the world there is nothing of higher import for the mind of man to comprehend than the eternal principles and truths that pertain to exaltation in the presence of God. There is no higher order of intelligence than that which enables man to perceive these glorious truths.

Since intelligence is a divine essence, it may function adequately only when recognized as divine. In that recognition faith is indispensable. Faith and knowledge constitute testimony and bring that conviction which is epitomized in the declaration, "that to know thee is eternal life." So, I ask, where is the philosophy or school of thought that esteems more highly and ascribes nobler attributes to the mind and intelligence of man than does this exalted concept set forth in the new interpretation of the gospel of Christ?

The next major phase of this new interpretation is a unique and distinctive concept of the family of God. God, the Master Intelligence, is the Creator and veritable Father of His children, the lesser but potentially divine intelligences who make up His family and populate His kingdom. As a kindly parent He desires and designs the eternal welfare and happiness of His offspring. In modern revelation His purpose is clarified as never before in recorded scripture. "For behold, this is my work and my glory to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (P. of G. P., Moses 1:39.)

And again, "Men are, that they might have joy." (B. of M. 2 Nephi 2:25.) These are the sublime declarations revealed in latter days, forever banishing all doubt and uncertain speculation as to the place and purpose of man in the universe.

In what does the joy of man consist? There are two major things: first, an eternal progression in intelligence, knowledge, and power that leads to perfection, even as Christ is perfect; and second, companionship with God in His presence and in the presence of His Son.

This pronouncement of the purpose of our being, together with additional revelations, brings a new concept of heaven. By the perfection of our lives we achieve joy and come into the presence of God. Where is He? He is in His own kingdom. Are there other kingdoms? Yes. And in that revealed knowledge we learn the truth about heaven. There are other kingdoms referred to but not fully explained by St. Paul and also indicated in "the many mansions of my Father's house," spoken of by the Savior.

These scriptures have been fully amplified by the new interpretation. Kingdoms of eternity have been defined. Laws that govern the various kingdoms have been set forth and entrance requirements stipulated. There are preferential places and conditions in the hereafter, as there are here. The highest and most desirable is the Celestial Kingdom of our God. In that kingdom, and only there, do intelligences attain their highest state of perfection. Only there do we have assurance of the reunion of families and the perpetuation of family relationship and eternal increase. In that kingdom man may ultimately become divine.

In the mercy of God other lesser kingdoms make provision for just compensation in the lives of men. But the lesser kingdoms are outshone by the celestial as the sun in its brightness and glory transcends the moon and the stars.

Men attain these various kingdoms by election and the work of their lives. We do not know all the conditions precedent to entrance into the lesser kingdoms, but what is necessary to come into celestial glory has been definitely revealed. The principles and ordinances of the gospel of Christ are the laws of that kingdom. Faith, repentance, baptism, the laying on of hands for the bestowal of the Holy Ghost, ordination to the Priesthood,—are all essential requirements. Why? Because God has stipulated them and because also they are consonant with the spirit, the purpose and glory of the kingdom.

Is it necessary for one to be baptized to go to heaven? That depends on the place in heaven to which one aspires. We have no knowledge as to whether it may be necessary for the lesser kingdoms, but we do know by revelation that it is absolutely essential for the heaven of the Celestial Kingdom of God. The scriptures give us to understand that through the general atonement of the Savior all mankind will be resurrected from the grave and come forth in a life hereafter, but we know that the atonement itself is not adequate to place us in the Celestial Kingdom, in which respect we distinguish between the general salvation of the human family brought about by the Redeemer of the world, and the exaltation of the individual accomplished by his own works and faithfulness, through the mediation of Christ.

From this clearly defined, sublime concept of heaven is devolved the mission of the Church, which is: first, to disseminate knowledge of the Celestial Kingdom; and second, to assist in perfecting the lives of men so they may enter that kingdom.

This mission of the Church, through the revealed justice of God, is extended not only to all the living, but to the dead as well. It is not designed that the accident of death shall circumscribe the free agency of man to choose and attain his ultimate destiny. Since, however, it is in the plan that certain ceremonies and ordinances which are requisite for entrance into the Celestial Kingdom shall be performed in mortality, merciful provision has been made whereby the living may vicariously perform these ordinances for the dead. Hence our extensive temple work wherein all conditions essential for entrance into the Celestial Kingdom are complied with for both the living and the dead.

I think of all Christian service, vicarious work for the dead is the most Christ-like. It often entails great sacrifice. The beneficiary is not here, even to give thanks. It is true benevolence.

As another item in this new interprepation of the gospel, I must not pass by the doctrine of the holy Priesthood, of which I have heretofore spoken. Knowledge of God, His family and His kingdom, and reason also, assure us that we cannot do His work and accomplish His purposes without a delegation of His power. The Priesthood is His commission to men. It holds the keys to His kingdom. The gates will not unlock without these keys.

What is the significance of these new interpretations of the gospel? Perhaps I can best tell you by relating the experience of a young man engaged in missionary service. I asked this young man to speak in a meeting of missionaries reporting their labors. It was in Texas, I think.

He said in substance, "While pursuing my labors the other day, I went to a house and knocked on the door. A fine looking, dignified lady came to the door and I told her the purpose of my visit. I explained that I was a missionary of the Church of Christ and I asked if I might have the privilege of explaining to her some of the principles of the gospel which my Church taught. To my surprise, she immediately became angry and indignantly said to me, 'I resent your bringing the gospel to me. I'm as good a Christian as ever you dare be. I've always been a member of a Christian church and supported the Christian cause. You take your gospel to the heathen.'

"I was so confused," the young man said, "by her irritation that I scarcely knew what to say, but it occurred to me to ask some questions. And I said to her, 'Madam, will you permit me to ask a few questions?' She said, 'What is it?' I asked, 'In your study of the gospel, have you ever discovered the way in which work may be done for your kindred dead?' No, she did not know it was necessary. 'Have you ever been told of a power that can bind you and your husband together beyond this life when "death doth you part," and also assure you of the companionship of your children in the family relationship in the life to come?' No, she had never heard of such a power, although she hoped for a reunion hereafter. 'Have the various kingdoms or gradations that exist in heaven ever been explained to you?' 'No, never.' 'What is the difference between salvation and exaltation? What has God stated the purpose of man's life to be? What is the Christian doctrine of eternal progression?' She did not know. Her resentment subsided. She said, 'Young man, I beg your pardon. I see there is much about the gospel I do not know. Won't you please come in and explain?'"

There are hundreds and thousands of good people professing the Christian faith who do not know of this new interpretation and new restoration of the pure gospel of Jesus Christ. When prejudices disappear and hearts and minds are open to receive the "glad tidings of great joy" that have been re-revealed, then will the gospel of Christ find a reception that it has never before known.

In this new revelation lies the hope of the world. When true intelligence shall banish error and superstition and the family of God shall be more than a theological conception; when men shall truly aspire to the highest heaven, and the duly constituted authority of God shall be recognized and esteemed, then,—and not until then,—will the long-desired peace of Christ descend upon the nations. God grant the early coming of that day!
