Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

CHAPTER VII

LESSONS FROM LINCOLN

There are biographers and students of Lincoln who maintain that he was a man of God, divinely prepared and inspired to be the liberator of human beings and the savior of the union of free men. I am sure that there is much to support the argument for this concept of Lincoln, although I do not pretend to have been a sufficiently deep student of his life and philosophies to warrant an independent judgment in the matter. I do know, however, that many of his utterances in public and private stamp him as a true Christian, although he did not ally himself definitely with any of the churches of his day. It is about his religious nature that I wish to weave this discussion in the hope that we, his fellow countrymen of a later generation, living in troubled and anxious times not incomparable, in gravity at least, to those through which he passed, may derive some measure of that support and wisdom so amply bestowed upon this great servant of the people.

These biographers of whom I speak point out that Lincoln's background was all deeply religious, that the Bible was always his first and best book, that it was taught to him by his two mothers, and that its precepts were ever the criteria by which he determined right and wrong.

Linguists say that his simple, pure language was unconsciously fashioned by his familiarity with holy writ and that the sublimity of his thought and vision was definitely a product of the inspiration and influence of the divine prophets.

Those who hold to this thesis assert that he had a forerunner for the mission of his life, even as did the Savior, in the person of Peter Cartwright, the great exhorter and revivalist who helped to mold both Lincoln's spiritual and political life and prepare the soil for the seeds which were to ripen in the heart and soul of the Great Emancipator. It is recorded of this fiery preacher that a dinner party was given in his honor in New York City attended by many of the prominent men and celebrities of the day. To Cartwright's surprise, he heard nothing but criticism of President Lincoln. After standing it as long as he could he asked to be excused, but before leaving the party rebuked the critics and upheld the President in these words:

"Once we were opposing candidates for a seat in Congress. I went down to defeat, but it was defeat by a gentleman and a patriot. I stand here tonight to commend to you the Christian character, sterling integrity, and far-seeing capacity of the President of the United States whose official acts you have, in your blind money-madness, so critically assailed.

"When you go from here to your homes, I want you to bear with you the assurance of his neighbor and once political opponent that the country will be safe in his hands."

One of his biographers says that in his "first political campaign, Lincoln, always mindful of religion, issued a circular announcing his platform of principles in which he declared that all citizens, however poor, should be afforded an opportunity to acquire at least a moderate education to the end that they might be able 'to read the scriptures and other works, both of a moral and religious nature for themselves.' . . . This doctrine contained the germ that flowered into the magnificent public school system."

It is, however, from the words of Lincoln himself and his living that his truly Christian character is substantiated. His law partner went so far as to contend that Lincoln was not a Christian because he said on one occasion "that his religious code was like that of an old man back in Indiana who said: 'When I do good I feel good; when I do bad I feel bad, and that's my religion,'" and also because at times Lincoln berated the clergymen of his day for what he conceived to be their hypocrisy and insincerity in distorting the scriptures to give support to the selfish and ulterior motives of influential parishioners.

But when he was presented with a copy of the agnostic Tom Paine's Age of Reason, he said of the book: "I have looked through it carelessly it is true, but there is nothing to such books. God rules this world and out of seeming contradictions all this kind of reasoners seem unable to understand He will develop and disclose His plan for men's welfare in His inscrutable way. Not all of Paine's nor all the French distempered stuff will make a man better, but worse. They might lay down tons and heaps of their heartless reasonings alongside a few of Christ's sayings and parables to find that He had said more for the benefit of our race in one of them than there is in all they have written. They might read His Sermon on the Mount to learn that there is more of justice, righteousness, kindness, and mercy in it than in the minds and books of all the ignorant doubters from the beginning of human knowledge."

Lincoln saw God in nature. A friend of his young manhood said that one night Lincoln asked him to take a walk. The friend said "that he turned his eyes toward the stars and told me their names and their distance from us and the swiftness of their motion. He said the ancients used to arrange them so as to make monsters, serpents, animals of one kind or another out of them, 'but,' said he, 'I never behold them that I do not feel I am looking in the face of God. I can see how it might be possible for a man to look down upon the earth and be an atheist, but I cannot see how he could look up into the heavens and say there is no God.'"

He once told another friend: "That the Almighty does make use of human agencies and directly intervenes in human affairs is one of the plainest statements in the Bible. I've had so many evidences of His direction, so many instances when I have been controlled by some other power than my own will, that I cannot doubt that this power comes from above . . . All we have to do is to trust the Almighty and keep on obeying His orders and executing His will." Continuing further, he said to others: "I am a full believer that God knows what He wants a man to do,—that which pleases Him. It is never well with the man who heeds it not. I talk to God. My mind receives relief when I do, and a way is suggested. If it is not a supernatural one, it is always one that comes at a time and accords with a commonsense view of the work."

It is well contended that this deep religious faith was largely responsible for Lincoln's impeccable honesty and purity of life. He could make no compromises with wrong and he framed the issues of his time so clearly on the code of righteousness that he straightway won the respect and admiration of honest folk everywhere. He always had the courage of his convictions from which nothing could swerve him. An abstainer from the use of intoxicating liquor and tobacco, it is recorded that when the committee came to Springfield to formally notify him of his nomination for the presidency, he was advised that courtesy would require that suitable drinks should be served. But when the tumblers came in on a large tray with a pitcher, Mr. Lincoln arose, and addressing the company, said: "Gentlemen, we must pledge our mutual health in the most healthful beverage God has given to man. It is the only beverage I have ever used or allowed in my family and I cannot conscientiously depart from it on the present occasion. It is pure Adam's ale, just from the spring."

He was committed to the abolition of liquor as he was to slavery, and he said to one of his friends: "We have cleaned up a colossal job; we have abolished slavery. The next great movement will be the overthrow of the legalized liquor traffic, and you know my heart and my hand, my purse and my life will be given to that great movement. I prophesied twenty-five years ago that the day would come when there would not be a slave or drunkard in the land. I have seen the first part come true." Would that he had lived completely to fulfill his prophecy!

The evidence seems clear that he was not only a believer in prayer but universally practiced it. When the problems of state almost overwhelmed him he said: "I am driven to my knees because there is nowhere else to go." In his farewell address to his friends in Springfield, when he went to assume the presidency, he said in part: "I now leave, not knowing when or whether ever I may return, with a task before me greater than that which rested upon Washington. Without the assistance of that Divine Being who ever attended him, I cannot succeed. With that assistance, I cannot fail. Trusting in Him who can go with me and remain with you and be everywhere for good, let us constantly hope that all will yet be well. To His care commending you, as I hope in your prayers you will commend me, I bid you an affectionate farewell."

On another occasion he said to a friend: "I know there is a God and that He hates injustice and slavery. I see the storm coming and I know that His hand is in it. If He has a place and a work for me, and I think He has, I believe I am ready. I am nothing, but truth is everything. I know I am right because I know that liberty is right, for Christ teaches it and Christ is God."

He said on another occasion: "It makes me stronger and more confident to know that all Christians in the loyal states are working to the same end. Thousands of them are fighting for us. No one will say that an officer or a private is less brave because he is a praying soldier. Tell every father and mother you know to keep on praying and I will keep on fighting, for I know God is on our side."

It is well known how urgently and frequently he called upon the people, especially during the dark days of the rebellion, to suspend secular activities and give themselves to prayer and supplication. Some of these proclamations were in response to resolutions of the Congress, sponsored by men as humble and devout as Lincoln himself.

I have not time to do more than direct your attention to a few distinctive features of these sacred proclamations. The first is that of humility and a recognition of the necessity of repentance and forgiveness. Here is his language: "It is the duty of nations as well as of men to own their dependence upon the overruling power of God, to confess their sins and transgressions in humble sorrow, yet with assured hope that genuine repentance will lead to mercy and pardon, and to recognize the sublime truth, announced in the holy scripture and proven by all history, that 'those nations only are blessed whose God is the Lord.'"

"We have been the recipients of the choicest bounties of Heaven. . . . But we have forgotten God . . . Intoxicated with unbroken success, we have become too self-sufficient to feel the necessity of redeeming and preserving grace, too proud to pray to the God who made us.

"It behooves us, then, to humble ourselves before the offended power, to confess our national sins, and to pray for clemency and forgiveness."

Such reverence had he for divine commandments that he issued the following remarkable order: "The importance for men and beasts of the prescribed weekly rest, the sacred rights of Christian soldiers and sailors, the becoming deference and the best sentiment of a Christian people, and a due regard for the divine will demand that Sunday labor in the Army and Navy be reduced to the measure of strict necessity. The discipline and character of the national forces should not suffer nor the cause they defend be imperiled by the profanation of the day or pagerange76 the name of the Most High." We are told "that he went so far as to admonish a certain general who was addicted to the habit of profanity to abandon the habit himself and to use his authority to discourage it among the soldiers."

So strongly did the spiritual nature of this man of God assert itself that a spiritual awakening took place throughout the nation. Men everywhere found themselves responding to the influence of this reverent, praying disciple of the Christ. One writer tells us that a small group of business men began a series of noon-day prayer meetings in New York. They had no preacher and no leader, but had become strongly convinced that the spiritual life of the church was rapidly becoming extinct and that as a result the nation was losing its virility, its moral vigor, and its power.

I will make but one more quotation, and that from the closing words of his first inaugural address. Speaking to his traducers, he said: "We are not enemies, but friends. We must not be enemies. Though passion may have strained, it must not break the bonds of affection. The mystic chords of memory, stretching from every patriotic grave to every living heart and hearthstone all over this broad land, will yet swell the chorus of the Union when again touched, as surely they will be, by the better angels of our nature."

And so this great American spoke, in all these utterances and volumes of others like them, revealing a greatness of soul and a divine compassion for humanity and a loyalty to God and country that have made him the peer of all men of all time.

Is not this a day of dedication, my countrymen, as pagerange77 was his day? Are the issues less vital, and the future less ominous? I think you will say upon reflection that our times, like his, require the whole-souled devotion of the people and the consecration of life and property and all resources, spiritual and material, for the preservation of the same high concepts of liberty, equity, and justice that he espoused. Can we do better than follow in his steps? Do we need divine direction less than he did? How futile, to have the example of such a life before us and fail to follow it! Oh, that the hearts and minds of all our people, and our officials, and humanity the world over could be touched with the faith, the tolerance, the charity, the integrity, the humility, and the spirit of Abraham Lincoln, friend of God and man!
