Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

CHAPTER VIII

COUNSELS OF WASHINGTON

Tonight we find ourselves at the end of a week set apart for the exposition of Americanism, and this, too, on the eve of the two hundred eleventh anniversary of the birth of George Washington.

It is to be expected that this combination of circumstances would direct our thoughts to our country and the manifold blessings it has brought to us and still holds in store for us, if only our generation shall conserve the lofty principles of liberty and government which have come down to us from the founders of the republic. It seems to me peculiarly fitting that we should review some of these principles and concepts of government at a time when all governments are under scrutiny and when the whole world is at war to determine the issues created by conflicting political ideologies. I think, too, that in such a review there are few, if any, better sources to which we may turn for interpretation and understanding of fundamentals than to the "father of our country."

Now the first principal underlying American freedom and institutions which I gather from the statements of Washington is the acknowledgement of God as the Ruler of the universe, the Author of good, and the Divine Protector of the nation. In his first inaugural address, delivered in New York, April 30, 1789, after he had been recalled from a much needed rest and retirement following his long service for the colonies, his leadership of the Revolutionary cause, and his arduous labors in the Constitutional Convention, he said in part:

"It would be peculiary improper to omit in this first official act my fervent supplication to that Almighty Being who rules over the universe, who presides in the councils of nations, and whose providential aid can supply every human defect, that His benediction may consecrate to the liberties and happiness of the people of the United States a government instituted by themselves for these essential purposes, and may enable every instrument employed in its administration to execute with success the functions allotted to His charge.

"In tendering this homage to the Great Author of every public and private good, I assure myself that it expresses your sentiments not less than my own . . . . No people can be found to acknowledge and adore the Invisible Hand which conducts the affairs of men more than the people of the United States. Every step by which they have advanced to the character of an independent nation seems to have been distinguished by some token of providential agency."

He went on further to say that "in the important Revolution just accomplished" and "in the system of their united government" our country "cannot be compared with the means by which most governments have been established."

The next principle of general application so well stated by him is "that foundations of our national policy. . . . (are) laid in the pure and immutable principles of private morality." On such a basis, alluding to the duty of the executive department to make recommendations to the Congress, he merely referred the legislators to the Constitution which "designates the objects to which your attention is to be given," and then paid tribute "due to the talent, the rectitude, and the patriotism which adorn the characters selected (by the people) to devise and adopt" the laws. And then with the following admonition he left the Congress to its duties. He said:

"There is no truth more thoroughly established than that there exists in the economy and course of nature an indissoluble union between virtue and happiness, between duty and advantage, between the genuine maxim of an honest and magnanimous policy and the solid rewards of public prosperity and felicity, since we ought to be no less persuaded that the propitious smiles of heaven can never be expected on a nation that disregards the eternal rules of order and right which heaven itself has ordained."

Another essential doctrine I gather from his utterances is the support and preservation of the Constitution. In his farewell address of September 17th, 1796, after two terms as President, he expressed himself as follows:

"That the free Constitution which is the work of your hands may be sacredly maintained; that its administration in every department may be stamped with wisdom and virtue; that, in fine, the happiness of the people of these states, under the auspices of liberty, may be made complete by so careful a preservation and so prudent a use of this blessing as will acquire to them the glory of recommending it to the applause, the affection, and the adoption of every nation which is yet a stranger to it."

He declared that "the basis of our political system is the right of the people to make and to alter their constitutions of government, but the constitution which at any time exists till changed by an explicit and authentic act of the whole people is sacredly obligatory upon all." He cautioned "that you resist with care the spirit of innovation upon its principles, however specious the pretext." And then with prophetic vision he observed, "It is important likewise that the habits of thinking in a free country should inspire caution in those entrusted with its administration to confine themselves within their respective constitutional sphere, avoiding in the exercise of the powers of one department to encroach upon another. The spirit of encroachment tends to consolidate the powers of all the departments in one and thus to create, whatever the form of government, a real despotism."

How wisely he called attention to "the love of power" in the human heart and "the necessity of reciprocal checks in the exercise of political power by dividing and distributing it into different depositories and constituting each the guardian of the public weal against invasion by the others."

"If, in the opinion of the people, the distribution or modification of the Constitutional power be in any particular wrong, let it be corrected by an amendment in the way which the Constitution designates." But he solemnly warned, "Let there be no change by usurpation, for though this in one instance may be the instrument of good, it is the customary weapon by which free governments are destroyed."

I present next the emphasis to be placed on general education. This was Washington's admonition: "Promote, then, as an object of primary importance, institutions for the general diffusion of knowledge. In proportion as the structure of a government gives force to public opinion, it is essential that public opinion should be enlightened."

The necessity of preserving public credit was set forth in these words: "As a very important source of strength and security, cherish public credit. One method of preserving it is to use it as sparingly as possible, avoiding occasions of expense by cultivating peace, but remembering also that timely disbursements to prepare for danger frequently prevent much greater disbursements to repel it; avoiding likewise the accumulation of debt, not only by shunning occasions of expense, but by vigorous exertion in time of peace to discharge the debts which unavoidable wars may have occasioned, not ungenerously throwing upon posterity the burden which we ourselves ought to bear."

I next present the principle that international relations should be founded upon good faith, justice, and benevolence. These are Washington's declarations: "Observe good faith and justice towards all nations; cultivate peace and harmony with all. Religion and morality enjoin this conduct; and can it be that good policy does not equally enjoin it? It will be worthy of a free, enlightened, and at no distant period, a great nation, to give to mankind the magnanimous and too novel example of a people always guided by an exalted justice and benevolence. Who can doubt that, in the course of time and things, the fruits of such a plan would richly repay any temporary advantages which might be lost by a steady adherence to it? Can it be that Providence has not connected the permanent felicty of a nation with its virtue? The experiment, at least, is recommended by every sentiment which ennobles human nature. Alas! is it rendered impossible by its vices?"

The essentiality of unity in government and of the people with the subordination of partisan and selfish interests to the common good was the subject of his special consideration. Some of his utterances were as follows:

"The unity of government which constitutes you one people is also now dear to you. It is justly so, for it is a main pillar in the edifice of your real independence, the support of your tranquility at home, your peace abroad; of your safety; of your prosperity; of that very liberty which you so highly prize."

"The name of America, which belongs to you in your national capacity, must always exalt the just pride of patriotism more than any appelation derived from local discriminations. With slight shades of difference, you have the same religion, manners, habits, and political principles. You have in a common cause fought and triumphed together; the independence and liberty you possess are the work of joint counsels, and joint efforts of common dangers, sufferings, and successes."

"All combinations and associations . . . with real design to direct, control, counteract, or awe the regular deliberation and action of the constituted authorities are . . . of fatal tendency. They serve to organize faction, to give it an artificial and extraordinary force; to put in the place of the delegated will of the nation the will of a party,—often a small but artful and enterprising minority of the community; and, according to the alternate triumphs of different parties, to make the public administration the mirror of the ill-concerted and incongruous projects of factions, rather than the organ of consistent and wholesome plans digested by common councils and modified by mutual interests."

And then this portentous warning: "The alternate domination of one faction over another sharpened by the spirit of revenge, natural to party dissension, which in different ages and countries has perpetrated the most horrid enormities, is itself a frightful despotism. But this leads at length to a more formal and permanent despotism, the disorders and miseries which result in gradually inclining the minds of men to seek security and repose in the absolute power of an individual, and sooner or later the chief of some prevailing faction, more able or more fortunate than his competitors, turns this disposition to the purposes of his own elevation on the ruins of public liberties."

I cannot close my references to the words of Washington without reciting this justly famous comment on the place of religion and morality in political life. This is his statement:

"Of all the dispositions and habits which lead to political prosperity, religion and morality are indispensable supports. In vain would that man claim the tribute of patriotism, who should labor to subvert these great pillars of human happiness, these firmest props of the duties of men and citizens. The mere politician, equally with the pious man, ought to respect and to cherish them. A volume could not trace all their connections with private and public felicity. Let it simply be asked: Where is the security for property, for reputation, for life, if the sense of religious obligation desert the oaths which are the instruments of investigation in courts of justice? And pagerange86 let us with caution indulge the supposition that morality can be maintained without religion. Whatever may be conceded to the influence of refined education on minds of peculiar structure, reason and experience both forbid us to expect that national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principle."

I have now given to you, I believe, eight major observations and counsels which came from the experience and wisdom of this great man of the nation so appropriately designated as "first in war, first in peace, and first in the hearts of his countrymen." I have not time, nor perhaps is it necessary, to attempt to point out the application of these principles to present conditions. I think their mere statement many be sufficient to bring to thoughtful citizens everywhere a deep concern for the national welfare. Certainly they epitomize the fundamentals of Americanism as few other expressions could do. It is my purpose on the occasion of my next discussion to further amplify some of these salutary doctrines and give substantiation to them from other creditable sources.

In the meantime, I think I can close with no more appropriate appeal than that offered by President Washington near the close of his farewell address:

"In offering to you, my countrymen, these counsels of an old and affectionate friend, I dare not hope they will make the strong and lasting impression I could wish; that they will control the usual current of the passions, or prevent our nation from running the course which has hitherto marked the destiny of nations. But, if I may even flatter myself that they may be productive of some partial benefit, some occasional good, that may now and then recur to moderate the fury of party spirit, to pagerange87 warn against the mischiefs of foreign intrigue, to guard against the impostures of prentended patriotism, this hope will be a full recompense for the solicitude for your welfare, by which they have been dedicated."
