Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

CHAPTER IX

DIVINE DESTINY OF AMERICA

In the two discussions immediately preceding this one, I have endeavored to present some of the views of Abraham Lincoln and George Washington concerning our country, its government and people by the selection and quotation of public and private utterances of these two great and good men. I think that all who are familiar with the political concepts and expressions of these two most eminent statesmen of America will concede that there is remarkable similarity of concept and expression between them as to the fundamentals underlying and controlling national organization and policy.

I do not mean to infer that it was not to be expected that Lincoln would be inclined to follow Washington's interpretations in his herculean efforts to save the Union which Washington had been so instrumental in creating. We know of his profound admiration for the father of his country. But what I do think is noteworthy, is that although they lived in different centuries and their administrations were more than sixty years apart and the crises which they met and mastered were of vastly different character, yet the chief emphasis of each in national policy and idealism was identical. What was that one thing upon which they agreed so perfectly and deemed so transcendently important?

I believe I am fully warranted from their own words in asserting that it was this: a humble and devout recognition of the providence of God in the creation of the nation and conformity to divine law as indispensable to its preservation.

Some of you may feel that because I speak under religious auspices I unduly accentuate this phase of the political philosophy of these two great Americans.

Let me again quote to you a few sentences from their statements. Washington: "No people can be found to acknowledge and adore the Invisible Hand which conducts the affairs of men more than the people of the United States. Every step by which they have advanced to the character of an independent nation seems to have been distinguished by some token of providential agency." Then, in advocating good faith and justice toward all nations: "Religion and morality enjoin this conduct, and can it be that good policy does not equally enjoin it?" And again: "Of all the dispositions and habits which lead to political prosperity, religion and morality are indispensable supports. . . Reason and experience both forbid us to expect that national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principle."

And from Lincoln: "God rules this world and out of seeming contradiction . . . He will develop and disclose His plan for men's welfare in His inscrutable way." Again, he said: "All we have to do is to trust the Almighty and keep on obeying His orders and executing His will." And, Again: "I am a full believer that God knows what He wants a man to do—that which pleases Him. It is never well with the man who heeds it not." "Without the assistance of that divine Being . . . I cannot succeed. With that assistance I cannot fail." "I know that liberty is right, for Christ teaches it, and Christ is God." And finally: "It is the duty of nations as well as of men to own their dependence upon the overruling power of God, to confess their sins and transgressions in humble sorrow . . . and to recognize the sublime truth that those nations only are blessed whose God is the Lord."

So, I submit, there is justification for the conclusion that both of these, our most revered countrymen, esteemed religion and morality as the foundation and surest safeguard of national welfare.

Now, my friends, I would like to try to show you that the agreement of these great minds in the fundamental principles they advocated was no mere coincidence. Personally I am one of those, —and I think there are many,—who entertain the view that these two great actors in the historic drama of our national existence were selected long before the curtain rose on the play, and that their lines were written and the stage settings prepared ages ago by a Master Producer who conceived the whole drama from the prologue to the final curtain.

In order to give substance to this concept I must take you back many centuries into the earliest history of America of which we have record. I hope you will not be prejudiced against the record of which I speak because it came to men in a very unusual manner. There is within it so much of valuable information for all Americans in both their continents, that it would be a great misfortune to discredit the record without full investigation of its authenticity and content.

This history tells us of a righteous and God-fearing people who crossed the seas and came to this land from the Old World many centuries before the birth of Christ. Before they embarked on their long voyage they were told by the Lord "that they should come forth, even unto the Land of Promise, which was choice above all other lands, which the Lord God had preserved for a righteous people." And they were also told "the decrees of God concerning . . . this . . . Land of Promise," and that "whatsoever nation shall possess it shall serve God or they shall be swept off when the fullness of His wrath shall come upon them." And they were further assured of God "that whatsoever nation shall possess" this choice land "shall be free from bondage and from captivity and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the Land, who is Jesus Christ." (B. of M., Ether 2:7-12).

We also have this statement in the sacred record: "This land shall be a land of liberty unto the Gentiles and there shall be no kings upon the land who shall raise up unto the Gentiles, and I will fortify this land against all other nations and he that fighteth against Zion (that is, America) shall perish . . . for I, the Lord, the King of Heaven, will be their King, and I will be a light unto them forever that hear my words." (B. of M., II Nephi 10:10-14).

The prophecies of inspired men are recorded in this history, and predictions are set forth which were made centuries before the discovery of America that are well interpreted to foretell the discovery of Columbus, the coming of the Pilgrim fathers, the struggle of the colonies for independence, and the assurance that the power of God would be exercised to give them victory over "their mother Gentiles" or the British nation. (B. of M., Nephi, 13.)

Prophets of this early American history predicted again and again that this should be a land of liberty if the inhabitants would but keep the commandments of God, and great statesmen of that early day laid the foundations for democracy. One, in particular, declined the crown and urged the people to establish a republic according to "the voice of the people." "Therefore choose you," said he, "by the voice of this people, judges,—that ye may be judged according to the laws which have been given you by our fathers which are correct and which were given them by the hand of the Lord." And then follows a most pertinent dissertation on the merits of democracy. Listen to this: "Now it is not common that the voice of the people desireth anything contrary to that which is right; but it is common for the lesser part of the people to desire that which is not right, therefore this shall ye observe and make it your law to do your business by the voice of the people. And if the time comes that the voice of the people doth choose iniquity, then is the time that the judgments of God will come upon you . . . And now if ye have judges and they do not judge you according to the law which has been given, ye can cause that they may be judged of a higher judge. If your higher judges do not judge righteous judgment, ye shall cause that a small number of your lower judges shall be gathered together and they shall judge your higher judges, according to the voice of the people."

Here we have expounded not only the sovereignty of the people themselves, but a government of law and a procedure by which justice and law may be enforced and irregularities in government corrected. This wise statesman of American antiquity thus closed his great proclamation of government: "Now I desire that this inequality should be no more in this land, especially among this, my people. But I desire that this land be a land of liberty and every man may enjoy his rights and privileges alike." (B. of M., Mosiah 29.)

This sacred record, portraying the history of the inhabitants of America for centuries of time, sets forth what is perhaps the most significant and portentous fact in the whole volume, which is, that when the people lived the principles of righteous government and the laws of God, they prospered. And when they departed therefrom, they failed and perished.

And now, my friends, believing as I do in the divinely recorded history of America from which I have quoted, does it seem strange to you, or untenable, that I should regard Washington and Lincoln, and their consecration to our beloved country's loftiest spiritual ideals, as part and parcel of the divine destiny of America? I do hope you will agree that America has a divine destiny. I feel sure that Washington envisioned it when he said that our country "cannot be compared with the means by which most governments have been established."

And I feel sure that if all our citizens could only be convinced that the hand of providence is, and always has been, over this nation, we would immediately develop a unity, a patriotism, and a soundness of concept and action which would accelerate our national welfare and progress by leaps and bounds. People who believe, as my people do, that this is the land of Zion, the abode of the pure in heart, and that the Constitution of the United States was, according to divine revelation, "established . . . by the hands of wise men whom (the Lord) raised up unto this very purpose" and that (this land) has "been redeemed by the shedding of blood," cannot divest themselves of the conviction that the first duty of every American citizen is to live a life worthy of the great heritage that has come to him and acceptable to Abraham Lincoln's "God of the land, who is Jesus Christ."

We need the blessings of God on this nation today as we have seldom done before. Our officials need wisdom, more wisdom than is their native endowment; our armed forces need direction and support that transcend the military codes; our citizens and our homes need fortitude and comfort that come from an unfailing source; and our workers in the factories and on the farms need the stimulation and solidarity that only clear vision and faith in the realization of ultimate objectives can give them.

Who is there so optimistic as to think that we can get these essential things without personal goodness? Do you think we are making progress, in the face of Mr. J. Edgar Hoover's report as Director of the F. B. I. revealing that "fifty-five and seven-tenths percent more girls under twenty-one were arrested last year than in 1941," and that "the number of boys under twenty-one arrested last year increased seventeen and one-tenth percent over 1941 despite the removal of large numbers from civilian to military life," and that arrests for some unspeakable offenses "were up one hundred four and seven-tenths per cent; that drunkenness arrests increased thirty-nine and nine-tenths per cent"?

Surely every lover of America must feel deep concern over these things. If our youth should depart from righteousness, what would become of the American way of life, the virtue of which we have proclaimed to the world? Wherewith could we hope to man our government and the great institutions of our country? Who would be the builders of our homes which have been the foundation of our national security and progress? These are solemn questions, my friends. They are questions the people of our beloved country must soon answer if they would preserve the inestimable heritage bequeathed to us by our founders.

No one perhaps is wise enough to give all the answers, and I would not presume to give any if I did not feel fortified by the counsels and lessons which have so clearly come to us from these sages of the past and the revelations of sacred writ. In this confidence I am sure I can propose the foundation of a reformation that would transform this nation and make it truly the light of the world.

It is not too late to yield to Lincoln's appeal "to humble ourselves before the offended power, to confess our national sins, and to pray for clemency and forgiveness." And with the noble Washington, tender "homage to the Great Author of every public and private good."

Remember, my countrymen, that the Lord has promised you that this land "is choice above all other lands" and that "it shall be a land of liberty unto" you, and that He "will fortify this land against all other nations." if only we shall serve Him.

God grant that our love of country and truth may prompt us so to do!
