Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

CHAPTER X

NATIONAL REPENTANCE

In some of our previous discussions we have endeavored to substantiate the doctrine that America is a divinely favored nation with a glorious and sacred destiny to establish and preserve the God-given concept of the majesty and liberty of man in the earth; and that to accomplish this transcendent mission she must ever acknowledge the Lord as the source of her strength and conform her ways to the Light of Truth, who is Christ, our King. On the subject, we have heard from Washington, Lincoln, and the Word of the Lord.

For this present discussion, I take my text from those memorable words of Lincoln: "But we have forgotten God . . . It behooves us then to humble ourselves before the offended power, to confess our national sins, and to pray for clemency and forgiveness."

This is repentance,—national repentance, I have chosen to call it. I think I scarcely need argue for its necessity. If it was necessary in Lincoln's time, there is far greater need for it today. I think it is generally conceded, without offering proof, that religion is a less vital factor in American life in this generation than it was in his, and that a very much smaller portion of the population has been exposed to its influence in our time.

Some may say that the wider extension of education may compensate for this ever-increasing restriction of divine teaching and spirituality. But there are innumerable students and analysts of human welfare who deny that this is so, and who present convincing data to show that with all our vaunted progress in scientific and intellectual achievement, we have made little if any advance in the correction of social ills and certainly no progress whatever in the art of living together in peace and in the elimination of inhuman and barbarous practices as the present condition of the world so cruelly attests. If, therefore, I may assume pretty general agreement among thoughtful citizens that our country needs to repent, I should like to make a few observations and suggestions as to ways by which repentance may be brought about.

First, may we ask, what is repentance? What is the nature of this divine principle? For answer, let us turn first to the word of the Lord. In the Bible repentance is defined as "the acknowledging of the truth." (II Timothy 2:25) And also as "Godly sorrow." (II Corinthians 7:10) "Godly sorrow" is distinguished from "the sorrow of the world," the "sorrow of the world" being merely lamentations for the loss of the things of the world. In all scriptural comments on the subject, however, is to be found the underlying and basic principle in repentance, that is the confessing and forsaking of sin. That alone is efficacious. "The acknowledging of the truth" and "Godly sorrow" for weaknesses and wrongs committed are but effectual steps to the final and conscious act of forsaking sin. It is well epitomized in a statement from modern revelation: "By this ye may know that if a man repent of his sins, he will confess them and forsake them." (D. C.. 58:43)

Now repentance is not a static thing. It is dynamic. We do not merely repent once and for all, for everything amiss in life, but this principle is of constant application. No one is so free from human weakness and frailties that he does not have need of repentance every day of his life,—if not for sins of commission, then for things he has omitted to do.

Repentance contemplates perfection as the goal of life and the acknowledging of shortcomings in the approach to that goal. It was because of the general importance of this salutary principle of human life that the ministry of Christ among men opened with His clarion call, "Repent ye, for the Kingdom of God is at hand."

It is true that these statements apply to individuals, but it is also true that national rectitude is but the composite of individual goodness. All that is necessary is to get individuals to repent to secure the national repentance for which Lincoln pleaded. Since, therefore, this is a personal matter, I wish to make a few personal appeals.

First, I want to appeal to those who have been entrusted with positions of leadership in our national institutions, both civic and military. I appeal to this group particularly, not because they are more important than average citizens, but because their example and influence are more potent in forming public opinion and policies. I most earnestly entreat these men and women in public positions to give serious and solemn consideration to the spiritual and moral welfare of our country and to remember that their constituency, the citizens of America, do not, cannot, and will not disassociate the private lives of their officials from their public utterances and actions however much, they (the officials) may insist on such a separation. The prestige and influence which come to a man with public office should, I am sure, be considered more as a responsibility, than as a personal aggrandizement. One so elevated to prominence should ask himself seriously, not only how he may best administer the duties of his office, but also how the influence of his life and his conduct may best promote the welfare of his fellow citizens. If all would do this, I am sure that they would become convinced that the latter is not less important than the former.

We remember Washington and Lincoln today as much for what they were, as for what they did. The symbol of greatness of "the Father of his Country" has descended not alone from his military genius, and his political acumen, but from crude sketches of the colonial general on his bended knees at Valley Forge and the simple and naive story of the boy who couldn't tell a lie. The concept of Lincoln that lives and is most deeply imbedded in the hearts of the people is not that of the shrewd and skilled debater, and astute politician, but it is the picture of a tall, gaunt, solemn figure with deep, sad, mysterious eyes looking out on a troubled world and a firm and sensitive mouth expressive of sympathy, compassion, and charity for all, whom all the world affectionately and lovingly call "Honest Abe." The recorded words of the Savior of the world can be compressed in a few pages, but what He was and what He has meant to humanity could not be set forth in all the libraries of the world.

I hope, therefore, you will permit me to say to you leaders of the nation and of the state and communities where we live, that you should assume primary resposibility for this spiritual regeneration—this national repentance so essential to the public good. We, the people, plead with you to set your private lives in order and to conform to standards which you know to be right, and this we do, not because your lives are worse than those of the people, but because we know we cannot make goodness popular without your example and your aid. We know we cannot adequately stimulate worship and prayer and trust in God without leaders like Lincoln in official positions to guide us. We know we cannot preserve hosts of boys who have gone into and who are now entering the military service, in virtue of thought and action unless high-principled officers lead the way. We know we cannot pave the way for repentance by stimulating love of God while those in authority profane His holy name.

What a tremendous obligation you bear, you trusted leaders of the nation. I hope, I pray you will ask God to help you discharge it. If you will, and if you will follow the counsels that come from Him, I am sure you can count on the faithful support of your people.

There is another group to whom I now wish to appeal. They have much more learning than I have, but I hope they will not think it presumptuous for me to ask for their help in bringing about repentance. I am sure that many of them recognize this urgent need. I feel that the educators,—those who direct the training of our youth, to whom we have entrusted our most precious possession, have a responsibility which, like that of our other officials, is great indeed. Their influence is equally, if not more potent and far reaching, for they intimately touch the lives of the present and future generations. The private life of the teacher cannot be disassociated from his classroom service. The thinking, attitude and ideals of the teachers characterize every subject which they expound and determine in inestimable measure the character of our citizenry.

While I am thoroughly sympathetic with the separation of church and state, I cannot feel that we shall ever have a Godly nation with Godless education. I know that there are many who think that religious training should be left exclusively to the home and the church. That is undoubtedly the best policy with reference to denominational or sectarian teaching, but it is a very strained interpretation of that policy to assume that the church and the home may not have the sympathetic co-operation of the schools in teaching faith in a Supreme Being.

I note that there has been considerable agitation recently for making courses in American history imperative in school curriculums. I think there is wisdom in this movement and I hope it will succeed. When American history is taught, cannot all the facts be given? Is it not a fact that this nation had its inception, and that its fundamental principles were laid in Christian righteousness and morality? Is it not a fact that its founders were Christian men and that their concepts of liberty, equity and justice were derived from the Christian gospel? Is it not a fact that assemblies of the representatives of the people provided by the Constitution from the beginning until the present time have ever been opened with prayer and supplication to Almighty God to grant protection and wisdom and that all officers, juries, and witnesses make their solemn oaths of allegiance, fidelity and integrity on the basis of fealty and reverence for God? Is it not a fact that divine pronouncements of right and wrong, including the Ten Comandments, have become the basis of and incorporated into our laws and statutes, and have not our outstanding leaders throughout the history of the republic acknowledged the supremacy of the divine will?

Now if these are facts in American history, would it not contribute greatly, not only to a correct understanding of the foundations and ideals of our country, but also to a wholesome, legitimate, and very necessary spiritual awakening in America to have these salient facts of our history taught sympathetically and patriotically to the youth of the land?

Let me ask another question. Why should the offering of prayer in our public school system be restricted, in all grades from grammar school to the university, to graduation exercises? If it has no place in the schools, why have it for commencement and for other special occasions? In my own boyhood days, the district schools, as we then called them, always opened the day with a simple and humble prayer, and the university called all the students together in what were designated as chapel exercises for the purpose of bringing something of the spirit of worship into college work. These religious functions were not sectarian in any way. I never knew of any objection being made to them by either students or patrons, and I believe that the vast majority of the students of older days would concede good as their result.

I must ask one more question concerning our educational system. Do you think it justifiable, even if our schools do not assume any responsibility, for the inculcation of faith and the development of spiritual values, pagerange104 that they should permit any of their facilities,—teachers, text books, and what not to be utilized to tear down or in any wise militate against the faith of students acquired in their homes and churches? Is it not unfair to parents who labor so hard to build the spiritual life of children to be obliged to battle against even the attitude or unspoken influence of an irreverent teacher? On the other hand, how the parents would welcome the sympathetic co-operation of these educated men and women, who so deeply touch the lives of their children in their effort to equip them for good and happy living.

I do not ask these questions on the assumption that this co-operation is not now available. I am sure that to a very great extent it is, and that there are thousands and thousands of excellent people in the teaching profession who are as interested as the parents themselves, and sometimes more so, in developing high qualities of character and spirituality in the student, but if we are to develop national repentance on a large scale, there must be infinitely more conscious effort put into the cause by the educators of our land. If they have the disposition to help, I am sure that they and the parents can be entrusted to formulate an adequate program.

There are other groups to whom I would like to appeal for assistance, who by reason of their positions in industrial, professional, and social circles wield large influence among their fellows. I think every one so situated has a responsibility commensurate with his standing in the community. I know that these important people, by shaking off the indifference toward religion and spiritual matters which many of them display, could be a most potent factor in spiritual regeneration. In these pagerange105 groups are to be found many of the most caustic critics of government and national policies. I am sure that they could realize the reforms for which they contend far more effectively and quickly were they to bend their energies to reach the root of public and private morality, which, as Washington says, has its "firmest prop" in religion. I do hope that they will take time to deliberately analyze both conditions and themselves and then act as their higher natures prompt them to do.

And now, my friends, I must conclude. If I have made a single suggestion that may prove helpful, I shall be very grateful. I know there is safety and happiness in the principle of repentance. I know that every man and woman who incorporates this principle in his or her life will not only be the recipient of great joy and satisfaction, but will make that contribution which is indispensable to the lofty destiny of our country. National repentance, through private goodness, is the need of this hour. God grant that it may come, I pray humbly in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
