Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

CHAPTER XI

THE HOPE OF A PRODIGAL WORLD

A man had two sons. The older was a sober, sedate young man, dutiful, industrious, devoted to his father's interests. The younger son seemed of a different nature. He loved play more than work. He was most happy in the company of convivial friends and he was discontented with his home surroundings. This man loved his sons. They were equally dear to him.

One day the younger son, being unwilling longer to endure the restraints of his home, said to his father, "Father, give me the portion of goods that falleth to me, and I will ask nothing more of thee." When the old man heard this, he was very sad, because he realized that his son was forsaking him and abandoning his home with its standards and traditions, but he yielded to the young man's request and divided his substance with him and his older brother.

When the young son received his portion, he converted everything into cash and rode away to a rich city where he meant to make his home. He secured a fine house and embellished it with costly furnishings. He bought slaves and then invited his friends to partake of his hospitality. He made merry with his guests and he thought he was happy. He violated all the commandments, which his father had given him—his youthful training must have given him some compunction—but he told himself he had what he wanted.

He thought that the money bags he had brought with him were bottomless, that his means would last forever, but he discovered that he was mistaken. No money bags ever are bottomless.

He was soon without funds. He lost his house and his servants, and his friends went with them. He was destitute. To add to his misery a famine came upon the land. There was little food for anyone and none for him who had no money with which to buy. In his desperation, he begged work of a citizen whom he had known in his better days and the man hired him as a swineherd, a keeper of hogs, the most menial and degraded of all positions to which a Jew could come. So reduced was he that he ate the very husks with the hogs he fed and became emaciated, pale, and sick.

Then he began to realize what he had lost and the mistakes he had made. He thought of his home and he said to himself, "How many hired servants of my father's have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger! I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son; make me as one of thy hired servants."

After he had taken this resolution, with great difficulty, in his weakness, he found his way back to his father's home, but when he reached there, he was so ashamed and humilated that he dared not go in, but "stood afar off," wondering and anxious as to how his father might receive him.

But "his father saw him and had compassion and ran, and fell on his neck and kissed him." The son, covered with confusion, said to his father, "I have sinned against heaven and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son." The old man apparently did not even hear him, but called out to his servants, "Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet; and bring hither the fatted calf, and kill it; and let us eat, and be merry; For this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found."

I give to you this somewhat elaborated parable of the prodigal son as an introduction to a few observations which I wish to make on the subject of forgiveness. I have always regarded this parable as one of the most significant and encouraging of all the things left to us by the Savior. It breathes the true spirit of the Christ. I believe that He gave this story to the hard-hearted, rigorous of His day, steeped in the letter of the law, and forgetful of its spirit, to teach them the true genius of the gospel which He had brought. I think that He intended the father in the story to represent the Father of us all and the two sons to stand for the masses of humanity.

He had the wayward son commit the most grievous sins, including the renouncing of his patrimony, and forsaking not only his father's institution, but his way of life as well. Such actions, in the estimate of the law-givers and judges of that day, would have merited complete ostracism and cutting off. But the Savior wished to teach that there is mercy, as well as justice, in the gospel plan, and that the Father forgives those who truly repent.

It would be a mistake to overlook the fact that this wild boy suffered for his transgressions. There is truly a penalty for the infraction of every law. The Savior, in this parable, did not exempt the young man from reaping the consequences of his unrighteous acts. It was made clear that his degradation almost cost him his life; but when he did acknowledge his wrong, and in abject humility did seek his father's pardon, it was not denied.

The elder son seemed to resent his father's kindly treatment of his brother and reproached him: "Lo, these many years do I serve thee, neither transgressed I at any time thy commandment; and yet thou never gavest me a kid, that I might make merry with my friends." He evidently was one of the people who did not understand the meaning of mercy, but his good old father consoled him with the words, "Son thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine. It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad; for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found."

What encouraging and admirable principles are here stated,—that righteousness shall be rewarded; that mercy shall not rob justice, but that through mercy and repentance man may be saved from eternal condemnation for the infraction of law; and that there is great rejoicing when one who has made mistakes turns from his wayward course and in penitence and humility comes again to the fold of Christ.

There are many cases in which the principles of this beautiful parable are applicable today. Thousands of boys and girls and men and women are estranged from fathers and mothers and their homes and still pursue their wayward courses, in part at least, because they despair of reconciliation and the hope of forgiveness. We have had so many good homes in our country, wherein high concepts of truth, duty, and morality have been taught, that I feel sure that a very large proportion of those, who, like the prodigal son, have forsaken the standards, traditions and faith of their fathers, still retain a consciousness of guilt and wrong-doing that must surely bring to them, at times, infinite sorrow and regret. Many of these may not be reduced to degradation and starvation as the other prodigal was, but they must be often painfully aware of a hunger and thirst for the "bread of life" and "living water" to satisfy an inextinguishable yearning within them.

Happiness would be brought to many people, if only all these who have so gone astray, might have the courage and the strength and the humility to acknowledge the futility of their skepticism, their sophistication, and their vain search for pleasure in worldly and wicked ways and come back to the fundamentals and the tried and tested principles and standards of living of their old homes. It is true many of these old homes may be no more, the house may have been destroyed or abandoned, father and mother may be dead, but the spirit and influence of these sacred establishments does not die. It is ever here to claim the loyalty and devotion of the family to the latest generation. That is one of the merits in the pride of ancestry,—that we ever feel a sense of obligation to be true to our progenitors.

And then, too, if the heads of all households could only exhibit that merciful, kindly, generous spirit, exemplified by the father of the prodigal son in the joy he manifested on the reclamation of his wayward boy, there would be an immeasurable gain for happiness and goodness in the world. I know of few things which have brought more acute suffering and misery to human beings than domestic infelicity with the quarrels and bitterness it has fostered. Much, if not all this unhappiness, results from an unforgiving spirit which makes one intolerant and unsympathetic.

So the first place I would apply this salutary doctrine of forgiveness is in family life. I would have, if I could, all boys close companions of their fathers and all girls chums of their mothers. If all children knew that they could go to their parents for sympathetic understanding and consideration of their problems, without fear of rebuff or harshness, there would not only be a great advance in family solidarity, but boys and girls would be safe-guarded from countless temptations to which they yield, either on the counsel of those who have not the interest in them that their parents have, or on no counsel at all.

"Be more than his Dad

Be a chum to the lad;

Be a part of his life

Every hour of the day;

Find time to talk with him,

Take time to walk with him,

Share in his studies and

Share in his play;

Take him to places

To ball games and races

Teach him the things you want him to know;

Don't live apart from him,

Don't keep your heart from him,

Be his best comrade,

He's needing you so.

Never neglect him,

Though young, still respect him,

Hear his opinions with patience and pride;

Show him his error,

Be not a terror,

Grim visaged and fearful,

When he's at your side.

Know what his thoughts are,

Know what his sports are,

Know all his playmates,

It's easy to learn too;

Be such a father that when troubles gather

You'll be the first one for counsel, he'll turn to."

—Edgar A. Guest.

The injunctions of this homely verse, if they are observed, will yield rich dividends.

Then I would turn to the whole family of God to apply the Savior's parable of the prodigal son. Men and nations the world over find themselves in urgent need of repentance and forgiveness, as we have tried heretofore to point out. The calamities that have come, following departure from the father's house and the expenditure of men's patrimony in riotous living, defy recounting. In our own country the primrose path has led to debility, weakness and decay and it is now requiring a herculean effort, which has not yet been demonstrated to be adequate, to rehabilitate the nation with a virility of real manhood and womanhood and a devotion to right and duty that were once the foundation of our national pride, and, perhaps too, it now passes beyond the border of metaphorical expression into the realm of stark realism to declare that the prodigals of the world would now "fain fill their bellies with the husks that the swine did eat."

Surely, the time is here when men and nations may well come to themselves and declare, "I will arise and go to my Father, and will say unto Him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before Thee, and am no more worthy to be called Thy son."

If they would but do this, how the Father would rejoice. Seeing their penitence, He would forgive them. A feast would be prepared from which the hungry of the world would be fed, both literally and figuratively. Man would be taken out of his degraded bondage to the dictators and the state and restored, as was the prodigal of old by the symbol of the ring, to his position of majesty and dignity and dominion in the Father's household. The weary, footsore peoples of the world would have shoes to put on their feet and robes to clothe them and all would be righteously merry as they heard and sensed the glad call of the Father, "For this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found."

Herein lies the hope of a prodigal world. In the mercy of a kind Father, we can be forgiven.
