Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

CHAPTER XII

THE LAW OF TITHING

I propose to discuss one of the oldest subjects in revealed religion. It is a subject which is usually invested with temporal significance, but to my thinking it carries also the highest spiritual implications. I wish to treat briefly both aspects of the subject, which is the law of tithing.

The giving of a tithe, or a tenth of one's income, to the Lord and His work dates back to the very beginning of the sacred records. We are told that Abraham paid tithes to the great high priest, Melchizedek, and mention is made of the law and the practice in many scriptures, both ancient and modern. Taking into consideration the nature of man, it has always seemed reasonable to me that in the very beginning the Lord should have prescribed this test of sincerity in faith and worship. It is such an easy thing to make protestations by word of mouth and sing praises that it is no wonder they were not counted sufficient. The real essence of the Christian gospel is giving. God gave His Son and His Son gave His life, not only to bring salvation to humanity, but also to teach men and women the transcendent message of service and giving.

Now of course there are many things which may be given, but it is apparent that it is the Lord's view that there is nothing more important for a man to give than his money and his property. It is said that Jesus had more to say about man's attitude toward money and property than about any other one thing. In sixteen of thirty-eight parables Jesus made this His theme. It has been well said that the measure of a man's Christianity may be determined by the way he gets and spends his money.

Many years ago I read a little volume entitled, "Dealing Squarely with God." In it was this paragraph:

"After all, is not money myself? Money is the medium for which men exchange their abilities, ingenuity, and labor. When a man gives his money he is giving himself, and the way a man gives his money is the way he gives himself. Money is myself. I am a laboring man, we will say, and can wield a pickaxe and hire myself out for a week at two dollars a day. (That was many years ago.) At the close of the week I get twelve dollars and I put it in my pocket. What is that twelve dollars? It is a week's worth of my muscle put into greenbacks and pocketed. That is, I have got a week's worth of myself in my pocket." So, you see, on this hypothesis, when a man gives the money that he's earned, he's giving literally of himself. Giving is worship. We are commanded "not to appear before the Lord empty-handed." Not that the Lord needs the gift, but that man needs to give.

The first principle of religion is recognition of God—faith. The real test of that recognition is giving. By that test we may judge with accuracy the religious attitude of our country. Years ago statistics revealed the fact that more money was spent for face powders and cosmetics; more for ice cream, soft drinks and chewing gum; more for cigarettes, in each of these items respectively, than the total sum expended to support all churches. May that not be a criterion by which we may safely judge the religious attitude, the deepset religious feeling of the people of the country? Do not the words of the prophet Malachi seem pertinent:

"Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings."

We do not rob God by withholding our gift in the sense that we deprive Him of the substance of earth. He always has that substance, never relinquishing it. But we rob Him of the satisfaction and the joy that He must feel when His children respond to His mandates and open their hearts in giving and in worship. Someone has said, "God never gives a quit-claim deed. He only grants a leasehold estate, and he who receives the lease must ever return the rental."

Christ bought us with a price, so we were told in the scriptures. Is it to be thought that we are to gain salvation without a price, without giving and paying for it? Whenever we speak of paying in this sense we do not mean that pay which is given as if in barter, but we mean the return of substance which is committed to our stewardship and which we hold in trust for the one who has so blessed us.

The Church generally is probably the only society in the world where a man is not suspended from membership for failure to pay his dues. I think that in substantially every other organized body of men for social or material gain if a man fails to pay his stipulated contribution he is dropped. While the Church does not drop from membership those who fail to pay, I feel very certain that those who fail to pay their stipulated portion automatically drop themselves from the real advantages of Church participation and the blessings that inure from activity within it.

I like to think of the Lord as a partner, because the essence of a partnership is a sharing of profits. It is, however, indispensable in a partnership that there shall also be a sharing of the burdens of the enterprise. The honor and the satisfaction that come to one in realization that he lives in partnership with God is to me a lofty and exalting thought. One cannot hope to realize the profits from that venture without bearing his portion of the expense—the giving which is requisite.

"Prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open the windows of heaven," speaking to those whom He had admonished to pay their tithes and offerings. What comes from the windows of heaven? Both temporal and spiritual blessings. Temporal blessings accrue largely from the cultivation of thrift habits. The payment of tithes of necessity compels an orderly arrangement of one's affairs. Accounting is indispensable. Budgeting is necessary. Saving follows. All of which are necessary to financial success.

It was Victor Hugo who said: "Above all, teach the children to save. Economy is the sure foundation for all virtues." I once heard a banker say that if tithing served no other purpose than to secure an orderly adjustment of one's affairs, a budgeting of the income and expenses, it would be invaluable. I feel sure that he who pays his tithes not only has a better conception of economy, but he is indulging in a practice which will bring him into better thrift habits and enable him to go forward toward financial prosperity.

One who is honest with God is apt to be honest with his neighbor and with his employer. The need for honesty is attested everywhere, and I can well advocate the payment of tithing in a straightforward, square, honest way as being a safe foundation on which to build those principles of integrity that shall make honest men and women in the community.

The need of the tithe in the prosecution of God's work must be apparent to everyone. There are so many avenues in which sums may be expended to promote the work that I can scarcely take time to mention them. The building and maintenance of all the churches require large sums of money. While it is the pride of America that every community can boast a church and a school, yet I feel sure that conditions in our country would justify many more such establishments than we now have.

Not long ago I had the privilege of traveling in one of the missions in which there were many rural sections which are not in the van of our progress and civilization. I was happy to note that our Church had caused to be erected a number of inexpensive, but beautiful, small chapels. Many of the people who resided in the neighborhood of these chapels lived in poor and neglected homes. I could well conceive the influence that these church buildings might exert, not only in the furtherance of religious views, but in their effect on the home life, the community life, the habits, and the practices of the people. These little chapels were clean and orderly, and I am sure that they bring an inspiration to many hundreds of home-owners to clean up their establishments, to live in a more orderly and more beautiful way. Why, if our own Church were endowed with the means which would come from the full payment of tithing from all its members, such buildings could be extended throughout many parts of our country, and in other lands, when circumstances may permit, with wonderfully beneficial results.

And, in addition to the building and maintenance of churches, the work of our people contemplates the erection of temples and the carrying forward of work therein at very considerable expense. Our whole missionary cause is in large measure dependent upon the financial support that comes to the Church, although the missionaries themselves contribute their time and personal expense. The facilities which are now available for the spread of the gospel of Christ are expensive, so that there are innumerable ways for the necessary spending of money to further the cause of Christ. What a tremendous gain it would be for humanity everywhere if men would put more of their substance into religious endeavor!

Now I wish to mention another aspect of this subject which is of the utmost importance. It transcends the temporalities of which I have spoken,—vital as they are. My observation and experience have convinced me that there is nothing which brings more spiritual growth and power than the honest observance of the law of tithing and generous giving to the cause of Christ. The prime purpose of religion is to bring that power to man. For it the whole organization of the Church is maintained. So it is fortunate indeed that he who gives his righteous gift helps the cause and helps himself.

To get the full spiritual value out of this law of God, every man who pays his tithing should enjoy it. The gospel of Christ is a gospel of enjoyment. "Men are that they may have joy," is one of the cardinal principles of revealed religion. When one pays his tithing without enjoyment he is robbed of a part of the blessing. He must learn to give cheerfully, willingly, and generously, and his gift will be blessed. In order that he may receive more enjoyment, he needs to pay more frequently. Why deprive one's self of the joy that comes from this voluntary giving until the end of the year, when by payments throughout the year we may increase and enhance not only the joy of our giving but the ease of it?

I have found it to be a very difficult problem in mathematics to pay one-tenth out of one-twelfth. I commend that thought to those who are receiving monthly stipends and who indulge the practice of paying their tithing at the close of the year. I am sure you will find it very difficult indeed to get the tenth out of the twelfth if your tithing remains for payment until the last month. I can heartily recommend to you the payment of your tithes as funds come into your hands, not only because it will be easier, but because greater blessings will inure to you.

In the Church which I have the honor to represent, we consecrate our lives to the advancement of the cause of God. There is no higher evidence of that consecration than this giving which has been enjoined upon us by the Lord. The poet has well said: "Who gives himself with his gift feeds three—himself, his hungering neighbor, and me." So the law of the tithe is the epitome of the gospel. It is genuine worship and true recognition of the sovereignty of God. It is real consecration, the giving of the muscle and energy of life to the cause; and it begets the abundant life of love and service for which the Christ came. It is a measurement of true religion. By the extent of its observance every man may determine for himself the vitality of his own faith and his love of God.

A prophet has said, "The tenth shall be holy unto the Lord." It will be holy unto you, men and women of Israel, if you give it lovingly, joyously, willingly, to the great cause. And it will be holy to all men everywhere who will make generous contributions to the cause of true religion in the earth. We are sorely in need of God's blessings today. It is a mistake to think that they will come without putting ourselves in line to receive them. Supplication in our extremity may not be sufficient. Demonstration of our love and devotion will be more adequate. God help us all to emulate the divine example and grow in the stature of Christian manhood and womanhood by the liberal giving of ourselves and our substance to the great cause, I humbly pray, in His name.
