Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

CHAPTER XIII

CONFERENCE IN WAR TIME

Today in the Tabernacle at Salt Lake City, from which I speak tonight, began the One Hundred Thirteenth Annual Conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. While attendance at the conference has been restricted because of war conditions, there have been invited officials and representatives of the Church in the number of about twelve thousand, and most of these men are here participating in the meetings. They have come from nearly all sections of the United States, from the East coast to the West, from Canada and Mexico, and some other foreign countries. The usual attendance of members of the Church generally, and the women's organizations in particular, has been discouraged because of difficulties in travel.

The conference, however, in spite of the handicaps which prevail, is an imposing occasion. It was an inspiring sight in the sessions today to see this historic building filled with earnest men intent on receiving instructions and giving consideration to matters which should enable them better to lead their organizations and the people in the accomplishment of the high purposes to which their lives have been dedicated. I have thought that you might be somewhat interested in a brief sketch of the Church, which has now passed the first decade in the second century of its existence. To many of you the items I shall mention will not be new, but to some they may be informing. I must ask for the indulgence of those who are already acquainted with the facts.

Mormonism, as people generally call it, had its beginning in the early part of the nineteenth century. In 1820, a young man fourteen years of age, residing in the western part of New York State, became much interested in, and confused by religious discussions and contentions carried on by various sects in the neighborhood of his home. Religion was popular at the time and everyone was expected to ally himself with one church or another. This young man was very serious in his consideration of the choice he was to make. He was careful and he wanted to be right. The investigations he was able to make did not satisfy him. He was not educated. His family was poor and could not afford schooling for him, but he was intelligent and he had some knowledge of the Bible.

In his perplexity he read the passage from James: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God who giveth to all men liberally and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him." He believed that he could rely on this promise and he went into the nearby woods to pray. He wrote a rather minute account of his experience. The substance of it only, can I give you here.

He said that when he knelt down and began to pray, he was suddenly seized by an unexpected and terrific force that threw him violently to the ground and seemed to threaten his life. After struggling with it for what seemed to him a long period, and when he felt he was about to be overcome by it, he suddenly beheld in vision, two glorified personages in the forms of men, standing in the air near to him. He was made aware that one was God, the Father, who introduced the other as His Son. These personages communed with him, and he was told that none of the churches seeking his allegiance was the true church, but that the gospel in its purity was again to be restored, and that he was to be selected to be an instrument in its restoration and in the establishment of the true Church of Christ. He was then told to make preparation for the work he should be required to do and promised that he should be visited thereafter.

Almost completely overcome by this tremendous experience, he made his way, with great difficulty, back to his home and told his parents. During the several years that followed, while he led the life ordinary with a farmer's boy, he had several heavenly visitations, and in 1823 he was directed by an angelic messenger to a hill not far from the place of his residence, known now as the Hill Cumorah, where there was disclosed to him a stone box in which were hidden plates of gold with engravings thereon and an instrument for their translation, all of ancient origin. After a time the contents of this box were placed in his possession and he spent many arduous and eventful months in making a translation of the ancient characters engraven on the plates. He made the translation, as he testified, with the aid of the instruments which were with the plates and with certain spiritual endowments which were given to him. He had assistance in the writing of the translation, and a number of other persons saw the plates and handled them. From the translation which he had made, he caused a book to be printed and published in Palmyra, New York. It was called the Book of Mormon.

In this book were set forth the records of ancient peoples who had inhabited portions of the western world in both North and South America. Political and religious experiences of these people were set forth, as were also accounts of their origin, migration and ultimate fate. Perhaps the most important thing in this book was the record of the visit of Jesus Christ to this hemisphere at a time immediately following His crucifixion, and the establishment of His gospel and His Church in this land under His own personal supervision.

During the time this young man was engaged in the translation of the plates and subsequent to the publication of the Book of Mormon, he was subjected to a great deal of persecution, many indignities, and much public abuse because of the claims and assertions which he made that he had had divine revelation and had received the ministration of angelic beings. He and his family had been of no prominence in the community where they lived, but he was hounded from place to place and obliged to resort to many secret devices in order to complete the work to which he was assigned. He confided in his own family and comparatively few other friends, but the whole countryside was aroused in antagonism against him.

Shortly after the publication of the Book of Mormon, pursuant to direction which he had received from divine sources, he caused to be organized the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on April 6th, 1830, with six charter members, under the laws of the State of New York. He stated that divine messengers had conferred upon him and an associate the authority of the Holy Priesthood which had existed in the primitive church, and that under the Priesthood and a commission of the Lord Jesus Christ, he and his associate had been baptized and confirmed in the true Church of Christ. By this authority others were baptized into the Church, and within a period of a year about fifteen hundred members, believing his story, were brought into the Church.

This young man was but twenty-five years of age when the Church was organized and he lived only until he was thirty-nine. During the brief course of his life he caused the new adherents to the Church to go on missions to many parts of the world, from which new converts came until before he died the Church had a membership of more than twenty thousand people. Through revelation, given to him, he perfected the organization of the Church in substantially the same form as it had existed in the time of the Savior and as it exists today. He received revelations and set them down in volumes of scripture. He prophesied, he blessed the people, he directed their movements, he organized businesses, he established cities, and became an almost incomparable leader of his own people and a person of consequence in the country where he lived. He predicted that his name would be known for good and ill in all the world. His prediction has come true.

Among the people who accepted his teachings he was revered as Prophet and Revelator and Organizer of the Church of Christ. Those in the world who did not understand him have branded him as an impostor and deceiver. Never during his eventful career did he have peace. Seemingly without provication, enemies followed him and persecuted him and his followers. He stood trial on unfounded charges more than forty times during his life, each time being acquitted. He went into a hostile jurisdiction to face a charge under guarantee of adequate protection on the part of the governor of the state. The promised protection failed. He was assassinated in cold blood by a mob, martyr to the cause he had begun. This man was Joseph Smith, the Prophet and founder, under God, of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The story of his life reads like a history of the Savior whose representative his followers claim him to be.

The fast-growing church which Joseph Smith established did not die with him, but the opposition and persecution which he encountered persisted against it. After it had been driven from New York to Ohio, from Ohio to Missouri, and from Missouri to Illinois, it was forced to abandon the beautiful City of Nauvoo, then the largest city in Illinois, and its leaders under Brigham Young conducted it westward to the Rocky Mountains. Joseph Smith had predicted that it would be established there. Its settlement of the deserts of the west is pretty generally known. From its headquarters in the valley of the Great Salt Lake it has sent missionaries to nearly all parts of the civilized world. The Church has grown by hundreds of thousands of members, and today is reported in government statistics to be the fastest growing Church in America according to its population.

In more than one hundred ten years, it has never departed from the organization and principles given to it by the Prophet Joseph Smith. All of its leaders have built upon the foundation which he laid. Its elaborate social system, its extensive holdings of church and commercial property, its important place in the life and development of communities, its unique and characteristic doctrine, the allegiance and fidelity of its members, and its almost unparalleled history of sacrifice and consecration are all attributable primarily to the inspiration, revelation, devotion and spiritual power of a humble, faithful, unschooled young man, Joseph Smith, the Latter-day Prophet.

Perhaps this brief outline of the history of the Church will serve to explain to some of you how and why it is that these thousands of men who are attending this conference find justification for leaving their homes, their vocations, and their businesses, in some instances at great financial loss and expense to themselves, to travel here to the headquarters of the Church and spend time in consideration of matters of religion. Many of these men are engaged in war work and in industries essential to the war effort. Some are in the country's uniform. All are loyal citizens sincerely devoted to the national welfare. They feel warranted in taking a few days' leave from the important industries with which they are associated because they all know and believe the history which I have so briefly related.

They regard themselves as being humble disciples of the living Christ and as bearing definite responsibilities in His restored Church. Not only does their sense of duty impel them to a full discharge of their responsibilities, but they have a deep conviction that their religious labors make an essential and lasting contribution to the welfare of their country and their fellowmen. They believe pagerange130 America is a Christian nation and that her principles of liberty, equity and justice are God-given heritages. They believe that America can achieve her great destiny only in Christian righteousness and that she can win the protection and support of the Almighty only as she adheres to the teachings of the Savior and keeps the eternal commandments.

These men believe in the literal Fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man. They are convinced that no lasting peace can come to the earth, except in recognition of these eternal verities and in the widespread application of the kind and neighborly principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. They are trying, by their example and their teaching, to make a world and a country worth fighting for. That's why they take time off to come to conference.
