Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

CHAPTER XIV

HEALTH AND HAPPINESS

In the early part of the nineteenth century no such science as we have today had been built around human health and diet. Then relatively little was known about the chemistry of foods, and the learning on physiology and anatomy has since been greatly developed. Calories and vitamins, so common in every day conversation now, were not in the vocabularies of those days, and the large volume of statistical data gathered by insurance companies, governmental agencies, and other sources on over-and under-weight, diet, various forms of disease, and their relation to human health was not available and generally circularized as it is today.

Yet, of course, health was a matter of private and public concern then as it is now. People have always recognized its relation to comfort and happiness and it is instinctive within the race to strive for longer life. If in the year 1833, a group of scientists had evolved a set of health rules and principles and had published them to the world with the results of experiments and other scientific data demonstrating the efficacy of these principles, it would undoubtedly have been accounted an inestimable boon to humanity.

Well, there was published in that year a code of health laws so comprehensive as to include not only physical health, but mental and spiritual vitality as well, and so fundamentally sound and effective that all the scientific research and statistical observations conducted in more than a century and a decade have never found a single flaw in the code.

This code was a very unusual document. Examination of it convinces one that the impelling motive within it is to help people. It is apparent in its design that its author had a good knowledge of public relations and well knew the psychology of approach to persuade and win people. The law was not given by "commandment or constraint," but it was "sent" by way of "greeting" and "given for a principle with promise." The promises which are set forth to induce compliance with the laws are among the most desirable and encouraging that can be imagined. I will mention them in detail later. To encourage all to comply with the provisions of the code, it is also set forth that it is adapted "to the capacity of the weak," but a caution is wisely provided that those who seek to keep the law must beware of the temptations, "evils and designs which do and will exist in the hearts of conspiring men." Then, in the introduction to the code, in order to make sure that although the law is sent by way of greeting and not by constraint, it is nevertheless essential and indispensable to health and happiness, it is declared to be "the order and will of God in . . . temporal salvation."

After this appealing and wise introduction, the code enjoins, as inimical to health, the use of three substances which have long been used by man. The first is intoxicating liquors, which are characterized as strong drinks; the second is tobacco; and the third is "hot drinks," which are interpreted to mean all beverages containing habit-forming drugs, such as caffeine in tea and coffee and various forms of colas, etc.

The next part of the code has been characterized as setting forth "positive health factors,"—indicating what foods are good for man and to some extent how and when they should be used. All fruits and herbs are commended with directions that they be eaten "in the season thereof," the flesh of beasts and fowls is permitted with the provision that "they are to be used sparingly," and that they should be used "only in times of winter or of cold or famine." "All grain is ordained for the use of man and of beasts," but wheat is set apart particularly for man.

Then follow the rewards, of which I spoke, which are to come to all who obey the code. The promises are threefold. First, for bodily health; second, for "wisdom and great treasures of knowledge;" and third, for long and abundant life.

Now, perhaps, it would be interesting to discuss briefly a few specific items mentioned in this remarkable code. You will remember that it contained a warning against the "evils and designs" of "conspiring men." This prediction was in 1833, long before the development of modern advertising and the inauguration of such gigantic business concerns as we have today. It is true that liquor and tobacco were known and used in that day, but it is altogether unlikely that the wildest imagination ever envisioned the colossal business which has developed out of the exploitation of these two articles. It is probable, although I do not state it as a fact, because I do not have supporting data, that these two things are more widely advertised than any other product consumed by man. Billions of dollars are invested in their production and distribution, and "conspiring men" have foisted their use on a credulous public, young and old alike.

Such "conspiring men," praying upon human gullibility and weakness, and prompted only by selfish interests, have glutted the country with the most alluring and seductive advertising the civilized world has ever known. In the sales methods employed all the finer sentiments, emotions, and relationships of the human family,—beauty, love, courtship, marriage, fatherhood, motherhood, friendship, and even patriotism have all been perverted to serve the selfish purposes and pad the pockets of the promoters of this nefarious traffic. There is scarcely a newspaper or magazine in the whole country that does not derive a large measure of support from such advertising. Billboards with alluring pictures line the highways from one end of the land to the other and, what is perhaps more regrettable than all, celebrities of stage and screen and the athletic world, the heroes and heroines of youth, are bribed and seduced to lend their names and fame to deceive their admirers and lead them to the adoption of practices inimical to their welfare. Every word of this prophetic utterance of more than a century ago has been literally fulfilled.

Next, the use of intoxicating liquor is enjoined and declared not to be good for man, "neither meet in the sight of" God. I think it is scarcely necessary to tell you that it has long been definitely ascertained that alcohol is not a food, that it has no body-building value. A long list of authorities might be cited to support this statement, but time will not permit. Any bibliography on the subject will be sufficient to satisfy one who cares to investigate. Alcohol is a poison, a racial poison, one author has called it, because its harmful effects are transmitted to the children and the children's children. One of the most unfortunate and regrettable things growing out of governmental control of alcoholic beverages is that in harmony with laws that have long been in operation, requiring ingredients to be properly labeled for the protection of the public, it has been, up to date, impossible to require that the label of "poison" be placed on alcohol. That measure itself might have been of tremendous help to countless persons.

The figures on the production and consumption of alcoholic beverages, like those of our war expenditures, defy the conception of the human mind. I shall not attempt to present any of them, because they do not particularly serve my purpose at this time. Most unfortunately they show that drinking and drunkenness are increasing and the ills and crimes attendant upon them also. The only item that shows a decline is in automobile accidents due to drunkenness, and we all know that rubber, and not drink, is responsible for this decrease.

I do not need to point out the waste in human life, energy, and happiness due to alcohol, and the loss to the nation in the inefficiency, crime and disease which it causes. What about the generations to come if its use is not curtailed? I sat in a train a few weeks ago riding a couple of seats behind two soldiers. The one, much older than the other, was attempting to get the young boy to take a drink out of a flask. I only heard a part of the conversation, but enough to assure me that the boy had first protested and that the older fellow persisted, made fun of the young man, and finally got him to imbibe. It may have been his first drink. Of course I had no way of knowing, but during the course of the rather long journey the young man was persuaded to take several more drinks 'till finally he was drunk with the older man, joking over him and poking fun at him. I had great difficulty restraining myself from some kind of interference. How much of this thing goes on I do not know, but I do know that it is a great pity that many thousands of our young men who have left good homes and good environments to fight the battles for freedom and country should be exposed to such conditions.

What I just said about alcohol applies very largely to tobacco. The learning of the last several decades has proved beyond question that it too is a poison without food value. Again, in spite of its ill effects on the human system, its use has grown tremendously. The youth are now, perhaps, its chief victims, boys and girls alike. The figures that represent consumption of this noxious weed, like the others I mentioned, are incomprehensible.

Pretty much the same is likewise true of the products containing caffeine,—tea, coffee, and the colas. The injurious effects of caffeine have not only been demonstrated, scientifically, but they are even acknowledged in the trade itself by the advertising of the merits of non-caffeine coffee and other substitute beverages. So I submit that the evidence available, although I have not had time to analyze it for you, is sufficient to fully substantiate the correctness and soundness of the injunction against the use of the products I have mentioned given more than a century ago.

Briefly, I wish to call your attention to the positive health factors in this code of health and the substantiation for its doctrines which has developed over the years. The comparatively recent enlargement of the knowledge of vitamins and their essentiality in human health, and the now better established laws of nutrition, furnish much corroboration for the counsels given—that herbs and fruits should be eaten in the season thereof, that meat should be used sparingly, that grain is the staff of life, and that wheat is designed especially for man. Our present highly developed dietary principles could all be evolved out of the statements and their connotations set forth in this early code of health. In fact one of my colleagues, a scientific man, has already done just that thing. Here, then, written a hundred thirteen years ago, is the foundation of the health laws of today and of some that may be developed in the future.

Now, where did this code of health come from? Who was its author? Many of you will have rightly guessed before now that my references have been to a document emanating from Joseph Smith, published, as I have said, in the year 1833. Joseph Smith was not a scientist. It is doubtful that he was even acquainted with the literature that might have been available to a student of his day bearing upon the subject of health. In all probability he did not understand the scientific reasons which lay behind this excellent statement of health principles, but he did have an unusual understanding of the nature and constitution of man. He knew that the living part of man is his spirit. It had been made clear to him that the spirit in man is the literal child of God, and he knew from the Bible, as from other sources, that the body is the tabernacle wherein the spirit dwells. He knew that no man could take poison into his body and thus defile the tabernacle of the spirit without impairing the physical organism and without offering affront to God, the Father of the spirit. He knew, therefore, that this Word of Wisdom which he had received was not only a temporal law, but a spiritual one as well. Indeed, that was manifest in the document itself. For the great blessing promised for observance of the law was a spiritual blessing—"wisdom and great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures."

This, then, was perhaps the most important deduction that Joseph made from the revelation of the Word of Wisdom, for it was a revelation from God to His prophet that the laws of health have spiritual, as well as temporal significance. Many people have been acquainted with the restraints of the Word of Wisdom,—they have been pretty well advertised—but comparatively few understood the true genius and philosophy of this great document.

I remember many years ago sitting down to a meal with a friend in one of the hotels in Washington. I observed that he did not use tea nor coffee, nor tobacco. He likewise noticed that I abstained from these things and we commented upon it. He said, "I have long been convinced that the items prescribed by your Word of Wisdom are not good for me. I am sure my health is better without them and I think all men would be better without them. I can well understand the physiological reasons for your Word of Wisdom, but I have never been able to understand why you attach any religious significance to it." I then told him what I am now trying to tell you. That in our estimation the spiritual aspects of this code are more important than the temporal ones. We have long observed that there is a very definite relation between a man's spiritual power and the purity of his life. We have noticed that when a boy begins to smoke, he usually ceases to pray. When he does that, he often absents himself from the Church and its institutions and forsakes the company of good people whose influence upon his life would be helpful. The Church does not ostracize boys and men for this practice, but they often ostracize themselves, very much to the regret of their associates who love them and would do all in their power to help them. I realize that this may not be true to the same extent with those who do not entertain the same concepts as do we with reference to personal whole-someness.

So, my friends, I do not hesitate to commend to all the principles, the restraints, the cautions, and the promises of this great code of health, the Word of Wisdom. I know of nothing wiser and more calculated to bring freedom from pain and distress and ultimate contentment and happiness. The fact that it was given as a law of God adds to its force and vitality with everyone who reverences the great Lawgiver. The money that could be saved by the observance of this law would be the difference between success and failure for many men and their families. The conversion of all the industries which supply and distribute these harmful products would divert untold millions into infinitely more profitable channels. Compliance with these health rules would tend to insure sound bodies and alert minds to the populations of the world. Such bodily strength and mental vigor would guarantee a power in men and women adequate to meet the necessities of this day, and always.

And transcending all these the acceptance of the divine concept of the body as the tabernacle of the spirit, and the obligations to the divine Creator which go with it, would do more to elevate man to his rightful place as a son of God, "a little lower than the angels," and attain the high spiritual powers with which he is by providence endowed, than any other one thing we can contemplate.
