Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

CHAPTER XV

FREEDOM FROM BONDAGE OF DEBT

It seems appropriate at this time to repeat some counsel which has come from the leadership of the Church since its earliest days. This is the counsel to get and keep out of debt. I think I have never known of conditions and circumstances where this advice is more applicable than to those of the present day. We have never known a period of higher wages and incomes for the people generally, nor one of more universal employment. Every one who health,—old and young, men and women,— can secure work if he or she has the will so to do. When will ever come a better time to pay personal obligations?

One of the present urgent needs is to curb inflation and the ever-increasing competition by private citizens against their government and among themselves for the purchase of goods and services. Of course rationing and price ceilings do something toward that end, but what is most needed at the moment is a voluntary reduction of purchasing power, and it would be far better to be voluntary than involuntary. If everyone would only pay his debts and do his part in the war effort, much would be accomplished to relieve the pressure on the limited supplies of the country and thereby enable the government to secure its necessities at a lower cost which, in the end, the citizens themselves have to pay. This would also reduce the cost of their own living. Recent depressions in our own and other countries, following inflation, ought to be so vivid in the memories of the people as to constitute a warning that would induce immediate action. Fellow citizens, take no chances with inflation; it is much too dangerous.

I am well aware that for many people the high wages of today offer opportunities to satisfy many cravings and longings they have had for a long time. Women who have never had a fur coat, now for the first time in their lives have the money to buy one. There are many other items of dress which the more unfortunate have never been able to enjoy; there are conveniences and embellishments for the home which they have long wanted and perhaps envied in the possession of the more successful. Now they have the money to buy these desirable things, that is, to the extent they are available, and I, for one, wish that they could have them.

I saw an electric dishwasher in a home a while ago. All that was necessary in its operation was to put the dishes in the racks, turn on a faucet and a control button, and in a few moments they were all washed, dried, and ready for another meal. I thought of the tremendous job which many women have, to wash dishes three times a day for fifty years, and I wished that every woman in every home could have an electric dishwasher to help conserve her strength and energy, to relieve monotony, and to provide time and opportunity for other pursuits which I know she might like to follow, but, howevermuch I might wish for my sisters to enjoy this luxury, I would not advise them to buy it unless they could pay for it, or at least have the clear and definite prospect of discharging the obligation entailed. Now we can't buy electric dishwashers today, but there are still some other tempting things available for our purchase. I am sure we will do well not to buy those which are non-essential unless we are fully out of debt and have some surplus to meet the needs of "a rainy day." This policy will tend to curb inflation, provide the sinews of war, and bring about financial independence and personal stability.

Debt is a taskmaster to be feared almost as much as the dictators themselves. It has enslaved thousands in its meshes. It has wrecked happy homes. It has bred defalcation, embezzlement, and other crimes. It has driven thousands to drink, and the worry and anxiety it has created have literally taken the lives of many of our ablest men. It has prostrated individuals, enterprises, and nations.

And then there is something more which is also regrettable. Perhaps it is the chief reason why the Church has always deplored it. Debt robs a man of much of the energy and support which he is otherwise able to give to the Church and to other good causes. Even though he may be disposed to give time and means to such activities, his bondage to creditors often prevents him from doing it. I have known men in high Church positions being compelled to relinquish their offices by such circumstances. Debt, with many people who place before everything else their obligations and opportunity to develop and spread the gospel of Christ, has all too frequently retarded, and sometimes completely inhibited their missionary labors. There are numerous examples of great financial sacrifice to respond to Church calls in carrying forward the work of the Master which might have been greatly mitigated by freedom from debt. Therefore, the Church from its very beginning has always exhorted its members to keep free of financial bondage and to that end it has ever urged the cultivation of habits of thrift and saving and industry, which, had they been universally adopted, would have made its people among the most self-reliant and prosperous of all groups of comparable size to be found anywhere in the world. Even with partial compliance they have achieved over the years remarkable success in this respect.

Too much cannot be said of the obligations which men have to prepare themselves for something beyond making money. It is safe to say that the world would not be in its present condition if many more of its people had seriously and steadfastly devoted themselves to non-materialistic endeavor. And it is also a pretty safe prediction that we shall never recover from our present maladies and lay a stable foundation for peace and enduring happiness until men give not only money, but time and conscientious effort, more generously to the cause of religion and related projects calculated to subserve human welfare.

When I see a man so engrossed in his business that he does not take time even to understand his children or go to church or ponder the things of religious and ethical value, I feel that he is inevitably doomed to a measure of disappointment and failure. No matter how much money may be accumulated, there comes a time in the life of each of us when we appraise ourselves, even though others may not, in terms of eternal value. In such hours of self-judgment the contributions that we have made, both in means and service, to the higher things of life, will be the sources of our greatest comfort and happiness.

Throughout the past, and right now, the cause of true religion continues to furnish our greatest opportunity and highest reward. Christian principles are the background of our concepts, our thinking, and our appraisement, whether we acknowledge them so to be or not. These Christian ideologies have come down to us as a heritage from those who fought for and sustained them in a day when a soul meant more than a dollar. So strong was the dominance and the influence of our great Christian forbears that all the neglect, the perversion of principle, and the indifference of the Godless mechanistic age which followed them has not been able to completely dethrone this benign force in our lives. But it will not always be so, my friends. That force must be rekindled to survive and be potent. It will only attain a living strength which is adequate to meet the needs of this world if many more men and women,—millions more,—devote themselves positively and aggressively to carrying forward the work and word of God.

So today I repeat this counsel with the same intent in which it has always been given, and I give it not only to the members of the Church, but to all my fellow citizens. There will never be a better time than now to discharge obligations. Creditors may not now be pressing their demands, but we can rest assured that there will come a day when they will want their money and debtors will not have it to pay. Everyone who experienced or observed the failures, bankruptcies, and tragedies that followed the last war will want to do everything in his power to avoid a repetition of such regrettable occurances. I know of nothing more effective to this end than to get and keep out of debt and establish a reserve. I don't think any of you have ever known a man to "go broke" who was not in debt.

I hope this time-tested counsel will not be nullified by quibbling over what are "legitimate debts" to retain and what are the ones that ought to be paid. I think we can safely say that at this time, where resources permit, all debts should be paid. Long-time mortgages and other kindred obligations should be "whittled down" as fast as possible to prepare for the exigencies to follow, and unsecured obligations particularly should be wiped out without delay where income will permit. Of course, it is recognized that the capital requirements of most businesses and many individuals at times warrant borrowing, but sound business practice has pretty well defined such circumstances and all will do well to keep within the limitations experience has proved to be prudent. It is one thing to incur an obligation to provide a home for a family to be met out of the reasonable expectations of the borrower's income. It is quite another thing to mortgage one's future for years to come in the purchase of non-essential, even though desirable, commodities. It is fortunate that the government has put a check on this practice of installment buying which has brought ruin to so many people. It is a pretty safe rule for individuals, as well as businesses, to expand out of profits.

Then, too, private debt is an important contributing factor to the adoption of many economic policies that debase the individual. We can scarcely hope for sound economic policies in national life unless we apply them in private life. Whenever a man surrenders economic self-reliance, he drains his system of a lot of the "red blood" of American manhood. Let it never be forgotten that sound credit is one of the surest supports for individual and national prosperity and happiness.

So take this old advice from the Church, pay your debts while you can, prepare to meet the future, preserve your integrity, avoid bondage, and be free to prosecute those lofty enterprises of life so essential today in a stricken world.
