Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

CHAPTER XVI

EASTER THOUGHTS

Easter Sunday for all who hear my voice is now in its closing hours. During the day we have listened to soul-stirring music and eloquent addresses which have served to focus our attention on the greatest event in all history,—the resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ. Some of us, too, may have seen the children in their play with their beribboned bunnies, their fancy baskets and multicolored eggs. Others of us may have watched the procession of new hats and gay apparel, which this springtime season always brings out. To many the day may have been a holiday; to some a holy day; and to most perhaps a little of both. I find myself wondering at the close of the day what are the impressions and lessons it has left.

In the first place, I believe that this day has served to recall to our minds the actuality of the resurrection. This is so, at least, with those who accept the divinity of the Savior. We have again been reminded of this central fact in the life and ministry of our Lord. The record of the event has been recited for us again,—how, following His crucifixion and the mutilation of His body, Jesus was taken from the cross and laid in the sepulchre of a friend, there wrapped in burial clothes and His body anointed with embalming spices; how, after such laying away, a stone was placed to close the entrance to the sepulchre and Roman guards stationed to guard it; how, in the early morn of the third day following His cruel death, the stone was rolled away by an angel who so frightened the guards that they ran away in great fear and consternation; how His intimate friends came shortly thereafter to perform further kindly offices for Him and in astonishment discovered He was gone; how He first appeared and brought comfort and reassurance to the woman who loved Him; and how thereafter He established to the satisfaction of other friends, and strangers too, some doubting, the reality of His life after death and the literal fulfillment of His remarkable prophecy then so vaguely comprehended that He should be killed, but "He shall rise the third day." (Mark 9:31).

This profoundly impressive story we have heard retold this Easter Day. There is within it more significance for the life and happiness of man than in any other circumstance of which we have record, unless it be in the account of man's creation as the son of God. It is out of this transcedent event in the life of Jesus that we derive the supreme blessing of humankind, the immortality of the soul, and eternal life with God.

I believe, my friends, that the resurrection is as well attested by credible witnesses and records as any other event in history of equal antiquity. It has often been challenged, but never disproved. Millions and millions of people have had and do now have an inner conviction of the truth of this record, and it has brought to them and continues to bring to them more comfort and more enduring hope than comes from any other source in the whole wide world. The story persists through the centuries of time because it is true. Christ lived a mortal life, died, and rose from the grave that you and I and all mankind might have life everlasting.

The inestimable blessing of the resurrection inures to all. Every man, woman and child who has lived or who will live is the beneficiary, "for as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (I Corinthians 15:22). It is interesting to note that in the record called to our attention this day, no mention is made of any requirement on the part of man to qualify himself to receive the blessing of resurrection. It will come to all men through the atonement of Christ irrespective of the things they do in life. Everyone will come forth hereafter to receive judgment for the works of his life. It is universal. Mention is made of an order in the resurrection of people,—some will come forth before others, but in the end every spirit will be reunited with an immortal body to constitute an eternal living soul.

In this connection, while you ponder the resurrection, you might be interested in a concept of life hereafter which has come to us from a divine revelation which is not universally known. You will remember that the Savior said to His disciples, "In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you . . . that where I am, there ye may be also." (John 14:2, 3).

You will remember also that Paul said, "There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: for one star differeth from another star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the dead." (I Corinthians 15:41, 42).

This revelation, of which I speak, was given in the year 1832 to clarify the scriptural statements which I have just read to you and some others like them. In this revelation, it was made plain that there are preferential places and stations in the life to come, as there are in this life. The kingdoms or glories into which men may go after the resurrection are therein specified as are also the conditions which must be fulfilled to enter the various kingdoms or stations. In this and other modern revelations it is made clear that obedience to all the principles of the gospel of Christ is essential, not as a condition for the resurrection, which comes to all, but as a prerequisite to entrance into the Celestial or highest kingdom of the hereafter. It is pointed out that there are gradations of glory or reward for all according to the lives they lead, but the highest attainment is eternal life in the kingdom where God and Christ dwell. The ordinances and laws of the gospel are essential for entrance into that kingdom, and it is the function of the established Church of Christ to perform the required ordinances.

The import of this and other latter-day revelations is not that all must belong to the re-established Church of Christ and receive the ordinances in it administered to come forth in the new life of the resurrection and attain what is sometimes called general salvation through the grace and the atonement of the Savior, but that acceptance of the restored gospel and obedience thereto are indispensable to the attainment of the highest glory in the hereafter available to man. On the assumption that it is natural for every man to want the best, he can achieve that ambition only by complying with the rules by which it is attainable. So today we give thanks to Almighty God, not only for the immeasurable gift of immortality through the resurrection, but also for the incomparably beautiful and desirable prospect of exaltation in the Celestial Kingdom through the gospel of His Son.

I will now leave the sacred record which has been revivified for us this Easter Day and present for your consideration a few items which, I believe, this time of commemoration suggests and which we may well and profitably preserve in our thinking.

We are engaged in a great and cruel war. So universal are its demands that there is scarcely a family which has not someone in the country's service, and we are only just beginning to fight. Every day new lists of casualties come,—more boys are killed, wounded, and maimed and more hearts are broken. As the days go on these sorrows will increase. Every week, for how long a time nobody knows, will bring more widows, more orphans, more bereaved mothers and fathers, and sad sweethearts. This is the awful penalty of war. It always has been and it always will be.

If a great grief comes to your home, you will need help. Nothing is more precious than one's own flesh and blood, and the loss of a manly son, a devoted husband, or father, or a life mate-to-be is not easily requited. Kinspeople, good friends and neighbors may come to bring you sympathy, love and kindness. This will help, but it will not be enough. You will tell yourself that he died in a great cause,—in the service of his country. You will convince yourself that it was a noble sacrifice. You will be proud of him, but your heart will still ache and you will have an irrepressible longing once more to see his face, to hear his voice, and have his arms around you and feel again the warmth and tenderness of his loving embrace. Surely you will need help.

I know of one source only from which that help may be secured. It is from this selfsame Jesus who gave His life for others and on the third day took it up again. Even with His help you will still weep, but you will not weep in vain. If you will let Him, He will take away all bitterness from your loss. He will touch your broken heart and it will mend, not all at once, perhaps, but gradually and surely. If you will listen to the voice of His Spirit and His holy Word, He will convince you that your loved one is not lost, but only separated from you for a time, and that you may confidently look forward to a happy companionship in the not too distant future where there will be no more war, no more cruelty, and no more sad partings from those we love.

It is true that it is necessary that you make preparation for such a glad reunion, but you will know if you listen to Him, what you are to do and you will have the joyful assurance that His promises do not fail. This is the comfort and the hope, my friends, that you and I and all of us so sorely need in the days of trial ahead. This is the comfort which the one who knew sorrow better than any other left with His disciples to heal their grieving hearts and the broken hearts of all who should come after them.

Thank the Lord that comfort is free,—free to everyone who will seek it. Rich or poor, the powerful or humble of the earth,—all need it when sorrow comes and all may receive it, if they will open their hearts to the divine Spirit that emanates from Him who was the first fruit of the resurrection.

May I give you one more thought from Easter. A peace will be made some day. It will be negotiated by men. All the world is hoping that it will be just and permanent. The last great war and its aftermath are so recent and so vivid in our memories that we are convinced that something which did not characterize the last arrangement must come into a newly established peace or it will be as futile as before. Some say that the thing most requisite is to render our enemies impotent. Let us not forget that that was done before, for a time at least. Various proposals are made for the establishment of a new world order. What form they will ultimately take no one knows, but this I know, and every follower of the Master knows it, that the peace of Christ will never descend upon the nations unless His Spirit is infused into the hearts and deliberations of the men who write the peace and into their constituents as well.

That peace is the peace of brotherhood and good will. It is the peace that grows out of charity, tolerance, kindness, and mutual consideration. It is not founded on force, nor a balance of power among nations, nor hatred, nor vengeance. Love is the keystone in the arch of its structure, righteousness and justice are its foundations. It seems to me that the overshadowing message of this Easter Day is for every follower of the risen Christ to pray for that peace to come to this stricken world, to so live that his prayers may be heard, and to strive with all his strength and power to bring it to pass. God grant that it may come quickly.
