Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

CHAPTER XVII

FAMILY TIES

The fact that this is Mother's Day and also the end of National Family Week pretty well dictates the subject of my discussion. The theme is one I have always thought important and upon which I have often spoken, but I confess that I despair of bringing to you anything new about it. So that if I prove to be guilty of repetition, either of my own or others' ideas on the subject, I must ask your pardon.

In the discussion of children you might be interested in a theological concept which I believe has relevancy in its bearing upon the whole subject of family relationship. This is the doctrine of antemortal existence referred to in the Bible, (John 6:62, John 16:28, John 17:5, John 8:58, etc.—and also Numbers 16:22, 27:16 and Jeremiah 1:5) but made plainer by some passages which have come to us in modern revelation. Here is one:

"Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was, and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones. And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born." (P. of G. P., Abraham 3:22, 23.)

If, as this doctrine affirms, the existence of our souls is eternal and mortality is but a phase of never-ending existence curtained off, as someone has suggested, between the veil of forgetfulness which shuts out all recollection of what went on before and the veil of futurity through which we must pass at death, surely such a concept invests our present life with more far-reaching and important consequences than it would otherwise hold. Who can say what foreordained potentialities are wrapped up in the little package which comes into your home so like a stranger? What was the spirit life of that child? Is he or she one of those "noble ones" with a rich background of prenatal experience selected to come forth in this age of opportunity to do a great work for God and man? Was your home chosen to give entry and nurture to a great soul because it was hoped that in the process of its development you would provide the things essential to its environment?

Please do not confuse this concept of spiritual pre-existence and foreordination with the doctrine of predestination. The selection of our spiritual selves to take tabernacles in the flesh at any given time in the world's history does not contemplate interference with or any abrogation of the universal law of free agency. All are at liberty to choose the life they lead and upon the choice they make depends success or failure in fulfilling the high missions to which they may have been preappointed. On the other hand predestination assumes a fatalism beyond mortal control and is repugnant to free agency.

It seems to me that when the life of a child is so considered, it takes on added significance and those who care for and guide that life must thereby assume graver responsibilities for its safety and direction. It would be a matter of infinite regret to a parent who in a day to come might be confronted by the Father of all the children of men with a statement like this:

"I sent to your home a noble spirit to take on mortality with a great mission to be performed among men. I expected you to cherish and love this child which is Mine and yours. If you had done your duty you would have been rewarded a thousand fold for all the sacrifices your devotion entailed, but you have failed. You yielded to the love of pleasure and wealth. You thought they would bring you more happiness than your child. You have disappointed him and yourself, and you have disappointed Me."

I don't know that many of you, my fellow parents, would envision such a judgment as among the possibilities. I readily concede that it may take no such crude form as that in which I have put it, but I deem it profitable to myself, and it may be for you, to measure parental responsibilities by some such conception of their eternal importance.

Coming now to what may be regarded as more practical aspects of family problems, may we consider for a moment situations which confront us today. Figures are available which indicate a pronounced increase in juvenile delinquency. The F. B. I. some time ago issued a statement revealing a very substantial increase in the number of arrests of both boys and girls. The reports of our own law enforcement officers confirm this tendency. While the figures themselves are probably beyond disputation, there are sociologists who contend that such delinquencies have not perceptibly increased but that violations have been more diligently sought out and have been given much wider publicity than heretofore. I am not in a position to decide as between these views, but I am certain that whether there is a decrease or an increase there is altogether too much letting down of good moral standards and too many tragic cases bringing sadness to many homes.

When misfortunes from moral lapses come to a family it is not much comfort to say, "I told you so," and in making some suggestions on this subject I do not wish to be put in an unsympathetic position. I am sure the families that have suffered from disgrace are often to be pitied more than those who have suffered losses by death, and I have only the deepest sympathy for them, especially when they would seem to be the victims of an environment so difficult to control. However much we may sympathize, still we cannot withhold the repetition of counsel and principles, the observance of which would have saved thousands from disaster and will still go far to protect from dangers that are imminent.

Here is some divine counsel for parents. I shall not repeat passages from the Bible, which are many and generally pretty well known. I give you the following from latter-day revelations:

"Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart and shalt cleave unto her and none else." (D. C. 42:22.) "Inasmuch as parents have children in Zion . . . that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ, the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents.

"For this shall be a law unto the inhabitants of Zion. . . .

"And they shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord." (D. C. 68:25, 26, 28.)

Now I grant that the word of God so put may sound strange in the ears of many of this generation. It is not the language of moderns and the sophisticated, but the meaning is plain so that every one who will may understand. There are three significant things in this scripture. First, the admonition to parents to teach and train their children in the principles of the gospel. Second, to prepare them for membership in the Fold of Christ when they are eight years old, and, third, that for failure to do these things "the sin be upon the heads of the parents."

Now, as to the first, may I ask: Where is a code or set of principles to be found which, in the test of time, has been demonstrated to be so stimulating and effective for the maintenance of high standards of moral and ethical conduct in chastity, integrity, and purity of life as are these Christian doctrines? Has there been discovered a satisfactory substitute for faith in God, prayer, and walking "uprightly before the Lord?" Has any of you personally ever known a man, a woman, or a child whose life was guided by these principles who was not a credit to society and who did not make some contribution, however modest, to the sum total of human happiness?

I am well aware that these principles of conduct are old and that lacking novelty they may be considered passe and outmoded, but if no other reasons existed, would it not seem prudent and wise to stay with the old until something better has been found to take its place? We do know that in times past these Christian standards have served as anchors and safeguards to countless people, old and young alike. If we knew the facts of each case, it would not surprise me to discover that the delinquency of almost every young man and young woman who falls could be traced to the lack of definite and fixed concepts of right living and authoritative sources for such concepts. Many young people have confessed to a woeful lack of discernment between good and evil, and many have also deplored the tragic fact that in their education and training the standards and ideals of their youth have been so disturbed and distorted that they find themselves wholly without stability of concept in life's purpose and design. It is true that these things are not always consciously in the minds of youth and many do not know what ails them, but most have a deep-seated feeling that something vital is lacking.

Now, parents, do we have any greater obligation, not only to our own flesh and blood, but to the generation in which we live, than to supply these vital needs? The consistent, sympathetic teaching of gospel truths will do it.

I think I need not argue much for the second point,—to teach children while they are young. Nearly every one concedes that the early years are the most impressionable age in the life of a child. You will observe from the revelation which I read to you that the age of eight is regarded as the age of accountability in the Church. I know that to many this seems very young to expect any substantial conception of faith in God and duty to keep His commandments. I was much comforted in this respect when I read from an educational psychologist some time ago that in his estimation, and perhaps in the estimation of some of his colleagues in the profession, a person learns one-half of all he ever learns in life by the time he reaches the age of eight years. In this first one-half he included what are regarded as the instinctive things such as walking, talking, and other items that come to be more or less fixed habits, but these and other acquisitions were totaled up to equal one-half of all acquired knowledge. This seemed to me a rather significant coincidence because I assume the author of the book had no knowledge of the revelation which I have quoted to you. I have not time to point out the possibilities for effective teaching of gospel principles in child life. I do wish to take time, however, to say that in my estimation nothing is more effective in that teaching than parental example in the good life.

With reference to the third item that the sin is "upon the heads of the parents" for their failure to train their children in the principles of truth, I can make this observation only at this time. The penalty is imposed for an infraction of the obligation to teach. This doctrine does not make the parents insurers of their child's good conduct. All of us know that unfortunately there are black sheep in the best of families.

If the parents have conscientiously done all they could do, they are exculpated from blame. The point is to do all we can. I ask only that parents examine themselves to determine the measure of their fulfillment of this divine obligation.

So, today, my fellow parents, in the emergency which confronts us I know of nothing which holds a brighter prospect for solution of our family problems and the preservation of our youth in virtue and truth than compliance with this word of God which I have so briefly and so inadequately presented to you.

We are at the close of Mother's Day. Even if time permitted it would be almost hopeless for me to attempt to add anything to the tributes which have been paid to our mothers. I am happy to endorse the eloquent and touching expressions of love and devotion which have this day been accorded to her who gave us mortal life.

It has always seemed to me, however, that but one tribute only is adequate and that is the tribute of a good life,—a life such as a worthy mother would wish for a son or daughter. There is no praise, no show of affection, nor expression of gratitude comparable to this. To be what a good mother wants you to be is not only the highest devotion to her, it is also the supreme achievement of her life and mission.

I invoke this night upon the mothers of the land the benediction of the Almighty and I entreat our Father in Heaven to look in mercy on those good and noble women whose sons have been taken from them,—some never to return in this life. O God, comfort their aching hearts, heal the wounds of separation with faith that is more than hope and knowledge that transcends belief.
