Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

CHAPTER XVIII

THE SUPREME CHARITY

I wish to base these remarks on two recorded words of the Savior: "Judge not." Someone has said that the supreme charity of the world consists in obedience to this simple injunction. Certain it is that thousands suffer from its infraction,—not only those who are its victims, but also those who are guilty of circulating inconsiderate judgment and good causes as well.

There is a proneness to intemperate judgment manifest everywhere. It is seen in the readiness with which people make up their minds on all kinds of questions. Relatively few investigate fully before they decide. The difficulty of securing impartial juries to try cases before the courts is an outstanding example of this tendency. It is reported that in a famous case tried in New York many years ago, more than one thousand veniremen, (that is men summoned to appear for jury service,) were examined before twelve only could be secured to give assurance that they had not made up their minds on this notorious case and that they were not so influenced by accounts in the public press that they could impartially hear the evidence and without prejudice decide the issues on their merits. Such a startling condition is but indicative of this altogether too general tendency to prejudge persons and circumstances.

Now this unfortunate practice is productive of many serious results. In the first place, it brings untold unhappiness to those about whom stories and rumors are circulated to the discredit of reputation. Every red-blooded man prizes his standing in the community and among his fellowmen. Shakespeare put it thus:

"Who steals my purse steals trash; 'tis something, nothing;

'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to thousands:

But he that filches from me my good name,

Robs me of that which not enriches him,

And makes me poor indeed."

At best it is a struggle to build and maintain an unblemished reputation. It is a mean and cowardly thing to stick the knife of slander into the back of one who is earnestly making the effort. Usually one so attacked has no means of defending and protecting himself. Rumors are often accepted at face value and the victim may wait for years and may never get the opportunity to vindicate himself.

Why is a bit of gossip defamatory of another's character such a delicious morsel to be mouthed about and chewed and rechewed with such relish? I am sure I cannot account for this all too general abuse of human relationships, especially when it is evident that in most cases the gossiper has nothing whatever to gain from the circulation of the tale of defamation. It is true that in many cases the practice is indulged without malicious intent, but this does not greatly mitigate the damage done. The person who "goes off and leaves his tongue wagging" is scarcely less censurable than the one who commits the offense with malice aforethought.

I need not say more with reference to the bad effects of this regrettable practice. Perhaps I have already said too much. I don't want you to think that everyone is guilty. I know there are exceptions, many of them. I wish there were more.

I think the remedy for this situation is pretty clear. All that is required is a different attitude, a different feeling about our fellows, whether they happen to be our associates or not. If everyone could be impressed with the fact that he has a duty to others, which after all is the essence of the Christian doctrine of altruism, that sense of obligation would forbid his saying or repeating those things that might be hurtful to another's good name. Then, if in addition to this sense of duty, each could feel a personal regard which, in the broad sense, we designate as brotherhood and love of humanity, he would never have the inclination to indulge this unfortunate practice. About the best psychology I know of is set forth in one of our hymns for children.

"Nay, speak no ill, a kindly word can never leave a sting behind;

And oh, to breathe each tale we've heard, is far beneath a noble mind.

Full oft a better seed is sown by choosing thus the kinder plan,

For, if but little good is known, still let us speak the best we can.

"Give me the heart that fain would hide—would fain another's faults efface;

How can it please the human pride to prove humanity but base?

No, let us reach a higher mood—a nobler estimate of man,

Be earnest in the search for good, and speak of all the best we can.

"Then speak no ill, but lenient be to other's failings as your own;

If you're the first a fault to see, be not the first to make it known.

For life is but a passing day, no lip may tell how brief its span;

Then, O the little time we stay, let's speak of all the best we can."

Now the next phase of this subject which gives cause for concern is the tendency to indulge in what I call "long-range" criticism of public officials, especially as regards their private life and character. I include within the group not only political officers, but all others who, by reason of their elevation to positions of leadership, assume a responsibility for the direction of movements and causes. I recognize, of course, that the policies of a man in public place and the wisdom of his actions and statements are legitimate subjects for public debate and that proper criticism of such matters is not only allowable, but is to be encouraged in the interests of good government and civic procedure. But is it necessary in such an analysis of issues to bring imputations against a man's character, his intentions, and his honor? I think it is not, and I believe that inestimable and unnecessary damage is done to personal reputations, sensitive feelings, and legitimate family pride by the misconceived and cruel strategy that the way to win an ideological victory is to assassinate the character of an opponent. It is true there may be some cases where the official's character itself is the issue, but the relatively few instances of this kind do not warrant an assailment of character generally by opposing factions.

I think that those who occupy positions of public trust and responsibility in state, church, or businesses are entitled to a measure of sympathy in the discharge of their obligations. It certainly is not easy to please everybody, and the enforcement of the best and soundest policies invariably affects someone adversely. Because a person is affected adversely is no justification for an attack on the personal character of the enforcing or policymaking officer.

So until we can stop calling men "crooks" just because they disagree with us, we have much to repent of. When we decide that we are the guardians of the good names of our fellows, as we expect them to guard our own reputations, then, and then only will we truly learn the real meaning of the Christian doctrine of the good neighbor.

Now there is another and concluding item in this subject, which I wish to submit to you. Throughout the land, in the church, and with all organizations there is a persistent cry for unity,—unity of allegiance, unity of purpose, and the fullest cooperation in endeavor. It is not necessary to argue for either the desirability or the necessity of such unity. In the war effort it is essential to victory, and in other lines of endeavor it is requisite to success. The Church, and other kindred causes sustained by the good will and devotion of members, can make no adequate progress without this element of unity and solidarity.

How are we going to get it in the measure in which it is needed? I don't know that I can give a satisfactory answer to that question, but I feel that I can point out one thing that will help, and help greatly. That is to yield obedience to this divine injunction of the Savior, to refrain from intemperate judgment, to impute good rather than evil to the intentions of men, and to investigate and know the facts before deciding. We are much too prone to judge men by the mistakes they make, forgetting that we ourselves are constantly making mistakes. We seldom know or consider their intentions and that they themselves suffer most for their mistakes, in both disappointment and consequence. Most people need our sympathy, rather than our censure, in their failures.

I believe that one of the truest tests of friendship is what one will say or permit said about another behind his back. What a good friend is he, who, when he hears something that casts reflection on the good name of another, has the courage to stand up and say, "I doubt that that is true. I have confidence in my friend and I will require proof to support any statement against him." It is a real friend who will take that position, and if all would do it, there would be far fewer heartaches, and fewer pillows wet with sobs of those who suffer from misjudgment, and much more happiness in the world than there is today.

I do not see how a brotherhood founded on good will can come to men, unless they are kind in their estimates of each other. We might give and give and give to relieve suffering and human misery, but unless we have sympathetic understanding of our fellows, and the charity not to judge them harshly, we have little hope of a real fraternity among men. The Lord has said that He "would forgive whom He would forgive, but of you it is required that ye forgive all men." An unforgiving person who harbors resentment and ill feeling against another often suffers more than the victim of his enmity, so that in divine providence there is a self-imposed penalty for uncharitable judgment.

The Savior, on one occasion, said to His disciples, "Except ye are one, ye are not mine." This was perhaps the supreme rebuke to faultfinding and dissension and at the same time the supreme reward for unity and cohesion. To be "one" in Christ is the highest attainment of the exalted Christian purpose. If all the world were truly "one" in Him perfection would be reached. Indeed that unity in understanding, action and love is the very epitome of His Kingdom. Of course, it can come only if we do His will and keep His commandments, not the least among which is this holy pronouncement carrying a message of true charity, love and happiness to all men,—"Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete it shall be measured to you again." (Matthew 7:1, 2.)
