Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

CHAPTER XIX

IS HATRED NECESSARY?

I am aware that the subject which I have chosen for these remarks is one upon which there are strong differences of opinion. I feel, however, that we cannot permit to go unchallenged not only some of the statements, but also some of the propaganda which originate from sources within the country which tend to make vengeance and hatred dominating factors in the motivation of our people and our armed forces. The setting of a day or a period to avenge certain infamies or outrages against us, and the loud and persistent cries for retaliation for atrocities of the enemy, and the propagation of the doctrine that it is necessary to be tough to win, and the venting of personal spleen on alien but innocent people are all indicative and consequences of this studied and, I think, regrettable tendency to stir men's hearts to enmity and vengeance.

Too often, when one takes exception to this course of things, he is immediately accused of being unrealistic and "chicken livered," so that many who honestly doubt the wisdom of such policies and in their hearts oppose their teaching are often cowed into silence and submission by the more demonstrative methods of the avengers and retaliators. In fact, I am often led to wonder, without any adequate means of ascertaining the fact, whether or not those who hammer so vigorously and loudly for vengeance do not represent but a relatively small minority of our citizens in the real expression of their deep-seated sentiments.

When this tendency gives rise to such a statement as I heard recently coming from a student of the social sciences, namely, that some of the training and psychology through which some of our boys are passing would unfit them for participation in any decent society of the future, I think the matter becomes one of public concern.

Now we all have some conception of what war is and we know that its notorious definition is well merited. Lawless enemies, in violation of every standard of right and decency, have thrown themselves at our throats in a desperate effort to throttle us and rob us of the things we hold most dear. Of course, we have no alternative but to repel them and render them impotent for the repetition of any such further assault upon us.

Not only must we do this for ourselves, but we have altruistic obligations to protect others,—innocent victims of these enemies. Unfortunately we cannot meet these brutal assaults with mere persuasion. We are obliged to use force,—all the force at our command,—to crush the enemies of our dearly-bought liberty, our freedom of religion, our homes, and our way of life. We are forced to use the methods of war and to become expert in them. It is the only way open to us at the present time. Our forces have to be hardened for the hard job. Their muscles should be firm and tough. Their nerves must be like steel. Their courage must be unflinching and their resolution unbeatable.

All this I grant, but what about the hearts of these men? Is it essential to victory that they abandon all the finer sentiments and permit only the brutish impulses to dominate their lives and actions? In the first place, I doubt that that can be accomplished on anything like a universal scale in the space of a few years. Most of our fighting men have come from good homes,—many with high Christian ideals. They have not been educated to kill and murder as it is alleged the youth in some of the countries have been for the last decade. Hatred and vengeance have had little or no place in their lives. While the environment of war may have a pronounced effect upon them, yet they cannot be completely robbed of those finer feelings in which they have been so tenderly nurtured.

In the next place, I believe that while many might succumb to an education for vengeance, such an education will not ultimately help the war effort and contribute to the victory we aim to win. It may be that to get a man mad helps to get him to fight, but I think we have long ago learned that a mad man is a poor fighter. The old saying, "Whom the gods would destroy they first make angry," is not without application today. The modern strategy of war demands clear, calm minds and precise action in its execution.

A brain intoxicated by a flood of blinding madness, as one numbed by the effects of alcoholic drink, does not lend itself readily to the accomplishment of such a methodical pursuit as war now is.

And then, too, will it not be sad enough for the homes and communities to which these fighting boys will sometime return, that is those of them who do return, maimed in body, many with wounds from which they will never recover and with shocks to the mind which may forever rob them of a normal life, without inflicting also upon these homes and communities, when the boys come back, an atmosphere charged with vindictiveness, hatred and enmity, antagonistic to every sentiment and concept which has been fostered in the past? We are informed that the creation of this ideology of hate and revenge has been essential for the growth of dictatorship and the militaristic spirit in the enemy countries. Surely we who oppose such autocracy and aggression can ill afford to encourage the cultivation of the inimical and hateful atmosphere out of which grew the things we fight.

If I have rightly interpreted the influence of this campaign for vengeance on our war effort and our chance for victory, how much more pernicious is it in its bearing on our ultimate objective, the establishment of a just and lasting peace among nations. A moment's contemplation will reveal to any thinking person how it will add to the difficulty of composing all the problems of the world if a studied effort shall have been made to inflame hatreds against each other. When the time comes for making the peace, it will probably be deemed prudent to make adequate provision to forestall another general uprising against the peace and dignity of the world, but there will be grave doubts about the lasting efficacy of such provisions, whatever form they may take, unless peoples begin to feel well toward each other and repose confidence in each other.

Looking toward this end, there is one encouraging thing, which I believe we have all observed. It is the disposition to differentiate between the war lords and their militaristic parties and willing collaborators on the one hand and the decently disposed but helpless citizenry, who have been made the victims of their premeditated scheming and deception, on the other. For one, I hope that however fierce the struggle between nations be, this distinction will never be lost sight of. For I believe that in it lies about the only reasonable prospect for considerate treatment and general good will among peoples following the war.

It is natural to resent the perpetration of crime and offenses against society and human relations and it is lawful to bring offenders to justice. In a Christian civilization, this should be accomplished without the destruction of the very foundations of Christian society which are mutual good will and altruistic service. Vengeance and hatred are antagonistic to the fundamentals. The two cannot be propagated together. One will run the other out.

There is still another reason why we cannot afford the cultivation of personal enmity even as a war time emergency measure. It is basically wrong. It contravenes the law of God. Here are some of the scriptures: "Avenge not yourselves, . . . for it is written, vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord," (Romans 12:19) "Let not the sun go down upon your wrath." (Ephesians 4:26) "He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city." (Proverbs 16:32) Whatever you may believe about the authority of these laws, I think that most of you will admit that they have been a pretty safe and wise guide for human conduct during many centuries past, and I think, too, that most of us concede that it is a rather precarious thing to build up vengeance and hatred as the motivating force in a person's life because we are never quite sure that the objects of this hatred may not change. While today animosities may be directed against what seems to be justifiable objections, yet tomorrow enmities so engendered may vent themselves in the accomplishment of far less deserving ends.

I am convinced that we cannot afford a campaign of vengeance and hatred in this country of tolerance, good will and Christian kindness, no matter what its proponents may claim for it in point of expediency and war time necessity.

And now, my friends, with your indulgence I would like to give expression to some ideas, which, I think, are constructive in the effort we may put forth to provide our soldier boys real incentive to give their best to the country's cause. It is my opinion, and I have spoken of it in many places, that one of the things our fighting men need most, and many civilians also, is a clear interpretation of the issues at stake in this war. It is not enough for them to do battle merely to resist aggression and suppress a vicious enemy, important as that is. That is an obligation which duty imposes upon us,—a necessity we cannot ignore,—but to give zeal and enthusiasm for the cause we support we must understand it and love it.

One of the speakers addressing the closing session of Stanford University's recently held Conference on the Humanities said: "All current plans for a post war world would assume too easily that the major changes needed are in the realm of political and economic organization alone and that we can produce a new world without producing a new man to govern it."

He further said: "We are sending our soldiers to war with little better understanding of humanity's essential inheritance than the fascists have and with no better picture of the future than a fatuitous air-conditioned utopia in which human life is run by a series of push buttons." He expressed his conviction "that soldiers with a knowledge of the philosophy which underlies democracy and individual freedom can fight better than those without it."

Just what is this philosophy underlying democracy and freedom? There are many men who would give a long and scholarly definition of that philosophy, but I set it forth in the simple manner in which I perceive it. There are in this philosophy two things which are essential:

First, the recognition of the majesty of man as the son of God and, second, the divine right of free agency with which man is by nature invested.

An adequate concept of these verities is all that is necessary to clarify the issues and justify all the sacrifices and inspire all the zeal and resoluteness essential to their preservation in the earth. Our greatest need, in all the research and investigation which men of today are so industriously and patiently making, is for man, as one author has put it, "to discover himself." When he does discover himself, he will find out just what he was told ages ago, that he was created in the image of God, that he is the Father's son, and that the way of life planned for him in the beginning by an all-wise eternal Parent is still the way to complete happiness and satisfaction.

With the firm establishment of these truths in the hearts of men will naturally follow the relationships that will make for mutual understanding and peace. Men of a common father must be brothers, with the natural obligations and affections which that fraternity begets. It is true they become unnatural brothers when they permit the passions of greed and selfishness to overwhelm them, but when they do, there is nothing more potent than a realization of their noble lineage to draw them together again. There are some who say, and that too with discernible disparagement, that this conception makes a "holy war" out of our present effort. Well, in one sense no war is holy. War is not a holy business, but does it diminish the zeal of the soldiers who fight it or the civilians who sustain them to regard their endeavor as a contribution to sustain holy principles? Does this concept bring less of comfort to those who lose their lives and to others who make unspeakable sacrifices in its prosecution? Did not the Revolutionary founders of our country regard their cause as a holy cause? Were not union and liberty sacred and divinely precious to Abraham Lincoln? All I plead for is a recognition of the fact that this great calamity has come upon the world because of the perversion of divine principles and that our only hope lies in men who consciously fight and strive in both war and peace for the restitution of these principles in the hearts and lives of humanity.

The Savior gave to us an exalted principle which men find it very difficult to live by. He said: "Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you and persecute you." (Matthew 5:44) I grant that this seems well nigh impossible in times of war. It requires a large measure of the divine nature, which characterized Him who suffered more than any other man at the hands of His enemies, to so control one's native passions and feelings. When, however, they can be brought under control men's minds are enlightened, and they are able to distinguish between just punishment and revenge, between the sin and the sinner, and they do not permit themselves to be poisoned with the most deadly virus in all the world,—hate and enmity. Let us never forget that love is ordained as the saving grace for all mankind.
