Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

CHAPTER XXI

TEMPLES OF GOD

This historic Tabernacle from which I speak is located in an area in Salt Lake City, designated as "Temple Block." There is near the Tabernacle a stately edifice, constructed of granite rock hewn from quarries in the nearby mountains, with six graceful spires reaching high into heaven, which is the commanding feature of the block and hence gives to it its name. This building is called the Temple by the people who erected it, and the hundreds of thousands of tourists who annually visit "Temple Square" are curious to know why it is never open to the public and why they are not invited to inspect it as they are all other buildings and points of interest on the block. It has occurred to me that some of you may have a similar curiosity and that it might be of some interest for me to tell you a little about the temples of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which I have the honor to represent.

The Church, during its history of one hundred thirteen years, has built ten temples and has dedicated the sites for two additional ones which were never completed. One of these sites was in Jackson County, Missouri, dedicated August 3, 1831, and one was in Far West, Missouri, the site being dedicated July 4, 1838, and the corner stone laid April 26, 1839. In both of these places people of the Church were prevented by force from completing the projects they had begun. All of the other ten temples still stand, with the exception of the one erected at Nauvoo, Illinois.

The temples were completed and dedicated in the following order: The one at Kirtland, Ohio, March 27, 1836 (this building has passed out of control of the Church); the Nauvoo Temple, May 1, 1846; the one at St. George, Utah, April 6, 1877; the one at Logan, Utah, May 17, 1884; the one at Manti, Utah, May 21, 1888; the Salt Lake Temple, April 6, 1893; the Hawaiian Temple at Laie, on the Island of Oahu, November 27, 1919; the one at Cardston, Alberta, Canada, August 26, 1923; the one at Mesa, Arizona, October 23, 1927. The latest one to be erected is at Idaho Falls, Idaho, now nearing completion and will probably be dedicated shortly.

In architecture and external appearance, there is wide variation in these temples, except for some similarity among those at Salt Lake, Logan, and Manti. On the inside of the temples since the days of Nauvoo, while interior finish and embellishments have varied greatly, the arrangement of rooms and facilities has been comparable in all the buildings. This similarity of arrangement has been occasioned by the uniform requirements of the work carried forward in these buildings. The master plan provides for a series of four major rooms of assembly, each being spacious enough to accommodate congregations of from one hundred to four hundred people, the rooms being constructed on ascending floor levels. These principal rooms are underlaid and surrounded with other smaller rooms and facilities in considerable number. In addition thereto, in some of the temples there have been provided on the upper floors large assembly rooms of sufficient capacity, as in the case of the Salt Lake Temple, to seat several thousand people.

The materials used in construction have varied with locality and availability, although in all instances stability and endurance have been sought for and achieved. The foundations of the Salt Lake Temple, begun ninety years ago, are sixteen feet thick and extend sixteen feet below the surface of the ground. After they were first begun, they were torn out and relaid at great expense and sacrifice to the people because they were not deemed adequate to support the structure for the duration of time envisioned for its use.

Interior finish likewise has been largely adapted to the time and place of construction. The best the people could secure has never been thought too good, although the utility of the buildings for the high purposes which have dictated their construction has always been considered paramount to their embellishment. Careful and artistic workmanship has always been procured, and pains-taking labor has ever been a conspicuous characteristic. The spending of forty years in the construction of the Salt Lake Temple is not alone evidence of the meticulous care used in its building, but also of the enormous sacrifices made by the people to achieve their lofty aspirations which at times seemed well nigh unattainable.

There is one feature of interior decoration worthy of special mention. In each of the temples now in use artists have been engaged to provide beautiful paintings within the major rooms which I have mentioned to give proper atmosphere to the sacred work there carried forward. In some instances these paintings cover the entire walls of the rooms and have taken long periods of time in their execution. In other cases they are in the form of panels. The effects achieved are beautiful and inspiring. Statuary and other works of art adorn the interiors, all contributing to a peaceful, sacred influence so essential to the prosecution of a holy work.

Now having given you this brief and altogether inadequate description of the physical aspects of the temples, I wish to devote a few moments to the concepts which prompted their erection and the purposes for which they are maintained. Of all Christian peoples, I believe the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the only one which carries forward what is called "temple work," and the only one to erect and maintain buildings specifically designated as temples for the administration of gospel ordinances as distinguished from other edifices designed chiefly for assembly purposes and the carrying on of church services and ceremonies incident thereto. The founders of our Church all came from Christian homes and the Christian denominations of their day. When the church was established in 1830, they had no idea of temple work. They had probably read the passage from First Corinthians (15:29) in the Bible, "Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead?" And they may have wondered as to the meaning of these interrogations and the implications arising therefrom, that baptism for the dead was a practice of the Christian people in Paul's time, but however much they may have wondered, they knew nothing about such an ordinance. They had read of temples, of course, in ancient Israel, but it was not until their founder, Joseph Smith, had received a revelation that they understood that it was an important part of their work to erect temples, or "Houses of the Lord," as they were sometimes called.

This direction first came to them in the second year after the organization of the Church, and several years passed before they came to a full understanding of the divine purpose in temple work. In 1836 information came to them, to use the words of the revelation, that "the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi—testifying that he (Elijah) should be sent before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse." (D. C. 110:14-15) Then they understood for the first time the meaning of Paul's reference to baptism for the dead, and that it was a part of the mission of the Church to begin that great work in which the living could perform essential ordinances for their dead ancestry, who had died without knowledge of or opportunity to receive these ordinances in their lifetime. They knew then that the work for the dead was necessary to and indicative of the universal justice of the Father of men toward all His children and that none should be left without opportunity, either in this life or the life to come, to accept the principles and ordinances of the everlasting gospel and receive the blessings derived therefrom. It was made clear to them, also, that these sacred ordinances were to be performed in houses specifically prepared and dedicated for such work.

Later further light came to them and they were informed that there were other ordinances and ceremonies to be performed in the temple for the living, as well as the dead, and that the highest blessings attainable by men in this life would come to them in these sacred places. These were some of the things which they interpreted to be within the fulness of the gospel of Christ which they were commanded to practice and proclaim to all the world. They deemed this aspect of their work so important and they were so convinced of its rightness and essentiality that henceforth it claimed a very considerable part of their thought, energy, and endeavor.

Just as soon as the members of the Church were definitely established in the beautiful city of Nauvoo on the banks of the Mississippi River they began the erection of a million dollar temple. Stones for the walls were secured in the vicinity; the timbers had to be procured from long distances with great effort. Great groups of men took time from their much needed vocations to make a living for their families, to devote their skill to temple construction. They prosecuted the work as fast as their circumstances would permit, being ever spurred on by the incentive to prepare a place to receive what they regarded as the supreme blessings of the Almighty.

One of the most heroic episodes in the history of these people is associated with this temple. Troubles came upon them before it was completed. Their prophet and his brother were murdered at Carthage and uncontrolled mobs besieged their city and committed all manner of atrocities against them. At the request of the governor and upon his assurance that they would receive protection, they consented to give up their arms which they had held in a military establishment authorized by the State Legislature. They were defenseless. Hostilities and feeling reached such a point that they decided that it would be necessary for them to abandon their homes and move away from their enemies. In the face of this decision, reached but not published by the leaders of the Church, they proceeded with the work necessary to complete the temple. They hoped almost against hope that some of them at least would be able to secure the blessings which were to come to them in this sacred edifice. God had commanded its erection and they were resolved to fulfill His command. They did. It was dedicated and used for a short period. Then they were expelled from their city in the dead of winter. From the opposite bank of the Mississippi River they saw their beautiful temple desecrated by a band of lawless marauders. It was subsequently destroyed by fire. There is no language to express their feelings.

I don't know that I can make clear to you how much the devoted members of the Church prize their temples and temple work. I have had the privilege of attending the dedicatory services for all the temples completed in the last fifty years. These services are regarded by the people as among the most inspiring of any held in the Church. They usually occupy the major portion of a week, and sometimes, as in the case of the Salt Lake Temple, more than that. The beauty of the building itself incites the wonder and admiration of the people. Sacred music, which is most carefully prepared, and the addresses given are inspiring, and the prayer of dedication by the President of the Church is a most solemn and arresting experience. And more than all these, there comes from these buildings an influence and a spirit which never fails to touch the hearts of those invited to be present.

I once had one experience which convinced me of what I had already known but failed to adequately appreciate,—that the dedicatory services of a temple, impressive as they are, are but incidental to other considerations. It was at the beautiful temple at Mesa, Arizona. Near the conclusion of the dedication, as I passed out of the temple after one of the meetings, I observed a little family on the front steps. There was a father, mother, and four or five small children. Their clothing and appearance indicated that they were poor, but they looked happy. I stopped to speak with them and I said, "I suppose you greatly enjoyed the dedicatory services."

The father replied, "Yes, we have, but we are waiting until they are over. We are waiting for the temple to open for regular temple work. We've been poor; we've never been able to afford to go to Salt Lake City or some other place where there is a temple, and we're so happy now that my wife and I can go into this holy house and be married in the way we've always wanted to be married.

"Of course," said he, "we were married under the laws of the land for time, until death parts us, but that is not the kind of a marriage we want. We want to be married for all eternity, and we want these children of ours to be sealed to us in the holy bond of matrimony so that they will always be ours, so that our home will be preserved to us forever."

This man spoke from his heart. I didn't see the house he lived in, but I saw the home he envisioned. As I beheld his vision, I forgot his poverty and I thought him rich indeed.

His was but a reflection of the concept and spirit which down through the years has dominated this temple-building people. Millions of dead kindred have been officiated for in these sacred establishments, and many hundreds of thousands of the living have been made supremely happy in the realization of the most exalted blessings the gospel brings to humanity.

I hope, my friends, that this example of genuine, steadfast devotion to an exalted spiritual ideal will be stimulating in a weary world where faith to believe God's word and do His will is so much needed.
