Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

CHAPTER XXII

WHERE IS HIS KINGDOM?

In the early days of moving pictures, before the talking feature was introduced, a great film was prepared and released. It was called the "King of Kings." Some of you will remember it. It depicted many events in the life and ministry of the Lord Jesus Christ. Most of the scenes were very effective. The whole atmosphere and spirit of the portrayal were such as to induce a reverential regard and a deep sympathy for the Savior of the world and His atoning sacrifice.

I recall distinctly my own enjoyment of this picture. I saw it several times and was touched and deeply stirred by many of the episodes so vividly reconstructed by the marvelous facilities of the screen. At the very end of the picture, however, I suffered something of a disappointment. My interpretation of the last message flashed upon the screen may not have been fully warranted, but I could not concur in the implication arising from the final statement which was, "The Kingdom of God is in your heart."

Now I did not feel to disagree with the aspect of this declaration, which places emphasis on personal faith in the Master and love and regard for His life and work and incomparable teaching, nor the assumption that a personal conviction of the reality of His life and mission is essential to the acceptance of His kingdom. My disappointment arose from the inference in the statement that the kingdom of God has no existence and actuality outside a person's heart.

It is to this latter view that I cannot subscribe, and I am persuaded that an acceptance of this interpretation, which I fear has become very extensive, has not contributed as much to the advancement of the true Christian cause as many of its proponents would like it to do. It is my opinion that this virtual denial of the independent existence of the kingdom of our Father, and the making of His kingdom substantially nothing more than a personal attribute of our thinking and feeling, must result finally in robbing both the kingdom and its King of that authority and potency essential to make them effective in the lives of men and nations. While the essence and force of God's kingdom are in the realm of the spiritual, the kingdom itself is more than a mere personal, spiritual concept.

Since we rely upon the scriptures for our knowledge in these matters, may we turn to them in our discussion. In Daniel (7:27, also 18) we are told that "the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven shall be given to the people of the saints of the Most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him." And from Revelation (11:15): "The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever." And from Psalms (22:28): "For the kingdom is the Lord's; and he is the governor among the nations."

Surely no mythical or insubstantial kingdom is here contemplated. Many other scriptures, both ancient and modern, might be cited to show that the kingdom of God is an actual establishment and that the Lord reigns in a very real and tangible sense. His government is one of law and order. While there is no police force set up and maintained to enforce the will of God, yet there are penalties for the infraction of His laws, immutable and more inescapable than those attached to the contravention of any of the laws and regulations of the governments of men.

The constitution of the kingdom is in the written word of God. Its authority is vested in His sovereign will. Citizenship in the kingdom is free and open to every soul under heaven who will subscribe to the just and beneficent regulations prescribed for induction and participation in its affairs. Records are kept by a recorder who makes no mistakes nor misjudgments, and rewards are determined by an invariable, accurate accounting which balances assets against liabilities in terms of both intention and performance.

The government of this kingdom is far more perfect than that which prevails in the institutions of men. The only policies and principles enforced are those which have long been tried and never found wanting. Eternal justice is tempered with mercy. A man must pay for his mistakes, but he can correct them and be forgiven. When he has been forgiven, he can start anew without the handicap of one coming out of an earthly prison. His fellow citizens of the kingdom are there to greet him with a helping hand and a cordial reception, to look for the best and not the worst in mortal beings. The only force utilized is that of persuasion and the only constraint that of conscience. Power is achieved through self-mastery and ambitions realized in self-effacement. The highest dignity is in the best service and the richest emoluments in the satisfactions which flow from good accomplished.

Some may say that all these attributes, and others which belong to the kingdom, are in the hearts of men. This may be true, but it does not obliterate or preclude the independent existence of the kingdom itself. In one sense God Himself is in our hearts. But those who know and understand Him do not deny Him His personality and omnipotence. He is the Author of all principles of righteousness, but He Himself is more than a principle. His kingdom is more than the attributes which flow from Him.

I feel sure that a universal recognition of the verity of the kingdom of God in the earth, with Christ the risen Lord at the head as master executive, final arbitrator of all controversies, and constant friend to mankind, would do more than all else combined to advance the Christian cause.

Affiliation with the kingdom begets a stability of purpose and a contentment that may be had from no other source. Membership in it provides a home for the wanderer and a refuge for the storm-tossed and weary.

But the kingdom is no place for the idler. Work and progression are essential in its operation. Knowledge and truth are indispensable to those who serve.

If it be conceded that the King presides over the kingdom, those who assist Him in its holy government must of necessity have a delegation of His power. To be sure that it is His power, the source from which it is derived must be firmly established and the virtue of the power must be manifest in those who hold it. "By their fruits, ye shall know them." Permit me to give you a few verses of modern scripture which define the character and nature of the delegated power which comes from the head of the kingdom to His servants who carry forward its work under His direction.

"No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long suffering, by gentleness and meekness and by love unfeigned;

"By kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile.

"Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost, and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy;

"That he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death.

"Let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household of faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God, and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven." (D. and C. 121:41-45)

Here, then, in the kingdom is a revealed government of power manifest in terms of pure and unselfish love.

Assuming then that there is substantiation for the existence of the kingdom of God in the earth as an entity distinct from all other establishments, what, one may ask, is its relationship to the governments set up by man? Is it coordinate with them or does it supersede them? May a person render allegiance to both types of government? Are the exactions they make of their subjects irreconcilable one with the other? I think the answers to these questions are not difficult for they are all set forth in the scriptures. Ultimately the kingdom of God will supersede all other kingdoms and governments. (Daniel 2:44, 45) For it is in the divine plan that the Lord Jesus Christ will assume the headship of the kingdom in person, and when that time comes He will be universally recognized as the governor of the earth. So while the kingdom of God is not coordinate with any other government, it is nevertheless possible during the maintenance of earthly governments that a member of God's kingdom may render loyal allegiance to the national government of which he is a part. The Savior gave the controlling principle in this respect when He was asked whether or not it was lawful to render tribute unto Caesar. You will remember that He replied, "Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's." (Mark 12:14-17) The relationship is further clarified by a revelation of the latter days: "All men are bound to sustain and uphold the respective governments in which they reside, while protected in their inherent and inalienable rights by the laws of such governments . . . " (D. C. 134:5) And one of the direct declarations of our faith asserts that "we believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers, and magistrates, in obeying, honoring, and sustaining the law." (Article of Faith 12)

So it is in no wise incompatible to maintain citizenship in the kingdom and in the nation. It would, however, be far easier to subscribe in feelings as well as conduct to the laws of country if these laws were always framed on the foundation of Christian righteousness.

And why should they not be? Is there a safer and sounder criterion by which to determine the fairness, equity and justice of law than the principles the Christian gospel afford? Do we not secure our concepts of ultimate right and wrong from divine pronouncement? I believe upon reflection Christian men will say that we do. If we do would it not be well for the leaders and lawmakers of nations to seek divine counsel and guidance in their labors, not only through fervent prayer for personal inspiration, but through solicitation of counsel from those who rule in the kingdom and are acquainted with the word of God? It would not be a weak statesman who would seek to know God's will on every question confronting him. He would demonstrate a very superior type of moral courage if he were frank enough to confess that he had sought counsel from an authorized spiritual advisor. Much of the world's distress today is attributable directly to a Godless administration of its affairs. It will be a great pity if we do not learn a lesson from the past and seek diligently to frame the ground work of a future world in the design of spiritual truth.

So, my friends, I appeal for the recognition of the kingdom of God in this world. If any of you is not disposed to accept the word of sacred scripture, I do not know how I can convince you of the verity of this divine kingdom. All I can do is to give my personal assurance, merely as the testimony of one man, that I know that our Father's kingdom has been set up in the earth pursuant to a commission from Jesus Christ, His Son, and that the Holy Gospel is the constitution and law of the Kingdom, and that all who take the steps necessary for naturalization therein will secure a citizenship with rights, privileges and opportunities transcending those of any earthly government.

I have assurance also that the King will come at His appointed time to take the reins of government into His own hand, as has long been foretold, and that the happiest and wisest of the human race are those who prepare to receive Him and serve and honor Him as the Supreme Sovereign of the world. When the world so acclaims Him, its trouble will be over.
