Stephen L Richards, Church in War and Peace ( 1943)

CHAPTER XXIII

PERSONAL PHILOSOPHY

At the conclusion of this series of radio talks I thought I might take the liberty, with your indulgence, to make a few observations consonant with the views I have expressed during the last few months which, for want of a better title, I characterize as "Personal Philosophy." After all, religion and spiritual concepts are essentially personal. While every man is influenced by what others think and the spiritual atmosphere which surrounds him, yet the deep-seated religion of his life is what he thinks, feels, and does. So, perhaps, apologies for personal convictions in the field are superfluous.

I interpret religion in terms of living. I have never been able to see that an abstract theology which did not have direct bearing on life and conduct was of very great profit. I believe that we really acquire moral and spiritual truth only so fast as we incorporate it into our lives. No one secures an adequate concept of worship unless he worships, of prayer without praying, of integrity without honesty, and of love without loving and being loved. There is no emotion nor emotional experience within the realm of our feeling which is susceptible of definition to one who has never enjoyed the feeling or experience. A persuasive description may lead one to experiment, but description itself is inadequate to convey the vital realism of spirituality.

It seems to me this is important to bear in mind in matters of religion. It is probably the basic reason for guarantees of freedom in religious worship and it is also the surest way to a real tolerance in the consideration of religious views. When people reach the point where they can say, "I do not understand that man's views; they do not appeal to me, but I have no reason to doubt his sincerity and he may be right," then, and then only, may we hope for the dissipation of dogmatic bigotry which so often precludes open-minded investigation.

It is this kind of investigation of which I speak and which I deem so essential in the world of science in which we live. I have no words to express my tribute to the men of science who, by their untiring, painstaking, intelligent research and investigation, have made our world such a comfortable and interesting place to live in. We are indebted to these men for so many things which have contributed to the happiness of our lives that it would take volumes to detail them. Many of us are old enough to remember when epidemics of diphtheria, typhoid and scarlet fever took scores from our small communities, sometimes whole families of children as in the case of some of my own relations. We have seen many die of maladies now quickly diagnosed and operated with almost negligible fatalities. We have watched the advance in sanitation, the isolation of the bacteria of disease, and the administration of serums whose immunity in prevention and cure is almost miraculeous. In our own lifetimes we have seen transportation, communication, and production revolutionized. To the men of science and to the skilled workers of the world we owe it all.

Do we owe it all to them alone? From whom did the concept of free enterprise in a free world come? Who originated the idea of altruistic service in the cause of which these splendid contributions have been made? What is it that has fired men with their lofty aspirations and benevolent designs? I think on reflection you will say that there has been an inner moving force in all this. I hold to the view that even men of science are responsive to the progressive enlightening spirit that emanates from the Eternal God of Heaven and earth and that in His providence they and their facilities are utilized, unconsciously perhaps, for the unfoldment of the laws and forces of the universe for the benefit of mankind.

It seems to me more than mere coincidence that the civilizing and cultural forces of the world have emanated in such large degree from those who have had knowledge of the Bible, and the Father and His Son whom it reveals. I am aware that history records the ascendency of pagan nations in the past, but their conquests were limited and effectuated through the force of might. Certainly nothing has been comparable in the world's history to the intellectual dominance of the Christian faith and the doctrine of liberty, equality, and justice which it espouses. In the last analysis our present global conflict is fought over the issue of Christian freedom throughout the earth. This does not mean the war effort is to enforce the Christian religion on people, but it does mean that we are fighting to maintain concepts of liberty and human relations which are derived from the word of God.

I interpret the Christian philosophy to be one of humility, as contradistinguished to the philosophy which the Savior spoke of as "the world," which is that of self-sufficiency. Religious faith can be built only upon humility. There must be confidence and trust in beneficence and power beyond ourselves. The self-sufficient do not feel that confidence and the need for guidance. Arrogance develops within them and they naturally become inconsiderate of other persons and their desires. The dictators who seek to impose their will on the world are not humble. They do not have this philosophy of faith which postulates humility.

I believe the world will never be saved except in the hands of humble people who recognize counsel and wisdom superior to themselves. Abraham Lincoln and George Washington believed that, as I pointed out to you from their own statements on the occasion of their birthdays.

The truest expression of genuine humility is in prayer. I believe in prayer,—not prayer offered just for effect, but a prayer which is the true expression of one's innermost thoughts and desires. I believe in gratitude, and I know of no more appropriate place for its expression than in a prayer of thanksgiving to the Giver of all good. I am sure that prayer brings into a life a composure that helps to meet all vicissitudes and an atmosphere of hope and good will and charity into which people are glad to come.

I believe in the efficacy of prayer. I am aware that there are those who say, when a prayer seems to have been answered in a great blessing, that it would have happened anyway, but I have witnessed too many unusual manifestations of God's power to be content with that explanation. I grant that spiritual power is always difficult of proof to an unbeliever and I am content to leave the issue with anyone who, with pure intent to know, will in humility try the experiment.

I believe in home and family. I am sure that the home is a divinely appointed institution, and I view with the utmost alarm the forces within and without it which seem to be making for its disintegration. If it is robbed of its sanctity I doubt that anything can hold it together. It seems evident that the state alone cannot do it. When the contracting parties consider themselves free to make the marital status nothing but a matter of personal and social convenience and the state lends its assistance to meet their convenience,—home, family and national life are doomed. This terrible perversion of the only sure foundation in social and national progress, and the lack of adequate parental care for children, offer a greater threat to our future security and happiness than any other problem which confronts us. The instinct for self-preservation will help us win the war, but if traditional family life vanishes, nothing can take its place. It is unthinkable that the destiny of America shall be committed to generations without legitimate homes, and yet that prospect may well lie ahead if our people are not aroused to the obligations they owe themselves and their posterity and their country.

I know of no concept of home so salutary as that accorded to it by true religion. When a man and a woman consider their life partnership is formed not only by the inclusion of themselves, but of God and the state as well, then stability and purpose come to their compact. They know then that they are engaged in a great enterprise,—the greatest in all the world, — homebuilding. They realize that the contributions which their home makes to the manhood and womanhood of the world will determine its future progress, and when they have the concept of home as an eternal institution existing not only for this life but for all time to come, then the enterprise they begin with wedding vows becomes great indeed. It furnishes the foundation not only for their greatest happiness here, but for their fondest hopes and aspirations in the world to come. They do not permit irritations and annoyances incident to the mortal weaknesses to sever that sacred relationship. They cannot tolerate divorce, except as an escape from an unbearable wrong committed by one against the other, nor can they tolerate the thought of losing one of their children from the eternal family circle through sin, if it is possible for their care and training to avert such a catastrophe.

How we need such a concept of home all over the world today to safeguard the children and protect them from the evil influences these times throw about them. I think if more of our homes today had such a spiritual setting there would be far fewer mothers letting their children run the streets day and night and far fewer juvenile tragedies reported in the press. I question very seriously the wisdom of taking the mothers of children who have not reached the years of discretion out of the home to make munitions of war when they ought to be making good citizens for the republic. I know we need both, but no one but a mother can satisfactorily operate a home, and I believe we can contrive other ways of manning our munition plants. Home is the cornerstone of the nation and the nursery of all virtues. I am happy and proud to subscribe to a faith which projects this sacred institution beyond mortal life as a foundation of our supreme blessings in the heaven to come.

I believe in revealed religion. There are things in the scriptures which I do not understand and for which I can offer no explanation. I have confidence, however, that some day explanations will be available and when they are that I will understand and believe. I do not permit myself therefore to be troubled, beyond a natural inquisitiveness to know their meaning, by scriptural passages which are obscure to me, and I have no disposition to discard that which does seem plain because there are parts which I cannot analyze. I agree with the views expressed by Walter Lippmann in a book written by him several years ago, that there is no tenable middle ground between authoritative religion and humanism; between the objective reality of the kingdom of God, "as definite and as real, in spite of its invisibility, as the British Empire," and the humanistic view which makes belief in this kingdom "necessarily seem a grandiose fiction projected by human needs and desires." I accept the kingdom as real, and I find it far easier to account for what I know of the universe and man on the basis of an intelligent creator whose government is one of law and order, than upon any other hypothesis I have ever heard projected. I may be wrong, but I think that wherever there is a disposition to harmonize findings of science with gospel truth it can be done, especially when the differentiation between the field of science and the province pagerange216 of religion is clearly recognized. I challenge the conclusion unfortunately reached by many that it is necessary to abandon faith to achieve mental integrity in scientific scholarship.

I prize the comfort of religion and the happiness that flows from it. It furnishes a constant standard for appraisal and choice. It relieves every decision of the uncertainties that must be present where criteria of rightness and fitness are lacking. It is a stimulant for the noblest ambition and the highest type of service, and at the same time it provides the rewards that are satisfactory and lasting.

No life is free from disappointments, sorrow, and bereavement. True religion provides the healing balm more potent than all else to bring hope out of despair, comfort to sorrow,—indeed it is the only thing that brings life out of death. It invests everything with meaning. It puts purpose into every phase of life. It makes brothers out of men and exalts humanity from the materialism of earth to the idealism of the spirit. It characterizes every deed with eternal import and enriches life beyond computation.

This, my friends, is a sketch of my personal philosophy of life. I would not impose it upon you if I were not convinced that it is helpful, comforting, and uplifting to everyone who adopts it. I know that these spiritual concepts have not come to all people and I express my deep gratitude that they have come to me. Every interpretative faculty which I possess tells me that God lives, that Jesus Christ is His divine Son, the Author of the gospel which bears His name, and that the Savior has caused His kingdom, His truth, and an authentic delegation pagerange217 of His power to be restored to the earth in these latter days for the blessing of mankind. I know that there is within that restoration the true interpretation of the divine plan revealed to a humble, yet mighty prophet chosen of God.

More than anything else I wish for my friends and the whole world an open-hearted acceptance of these beautiful principles and their divine Author. I know that their application in the lives of men and nations will bring peace and goodness to the world. I pledge myself with the limited powers at my command to the propagation of these salutary principles, and I invite all of you, not only to enjoy the rich blessings that accrue from a testimony of the truth, but to lend your aid, and the influence and power of your example to the greatest of all causes, the cause and kingdom of Jesus Christ, our Lord. Goodbye and God bless you always, I humbly pray in Jesus name. Amen.
