The circumstances attending the death of our beloved and much esteemed Apostle, Parley Parker Pratt, rendered it impossible for him to complete and prepare for publication the work in which he had for many years been engaged, which is now presented to the public.

The general history and incidents were recorded in various forms of manuscript, some in book form, some in loose leaves, whilst others were extracts from the "Millennial Star" and other publications, yet they needed collating and revising preparatory to their publication.

The deceased, as appears above, had laid upon his eldest son, P. P. Pratt, the responsibility of publishing his history in case anything should happen to prevent himself from doing it.

At the solicitation of Brother Pratt I undertook the task of assisting to collate and revise the work preparatory to publication. I found, as I expected it to be, quite an undertaking. But, as Bro. Parley brought the gospel to and baptized me, and as I have always entertained for him the most profound regard, I esteemed it a duty, due alike to gratitude and respect, to assist in having him properly presented before the community.

In the revision the changes are very few and unimportant, the meaning being rigidly adhered to, and the original, so far as possible, preserved intact. His doctrines and general views are left unchanged, as he was always considered sound in doctrinal points.

The multitudinous reminiscences manifested in his eventful life exhibit a true and living faith in God and his religion—an honesty of purpose, an inflexible will, and an unflagging, indefatigable industry and perseverance. He possessed a comprehensive mind, coupled with a sound judgment. He manifested an indomitable fortitude under the most trying circumstances, and in adversity and trials, as well as in prosperity, exhibited an example worthy of praise and emulation. He was indeed a true Latter-Day Saint, an honorable Apostle, a good and kind husband, an affectionate father, a true friend, and an honest man.

From various premonitions which he had during his last visit with me in New York, I was satisfied that, when I took my last sad leave of him in that city, I should never see his face again in the flesh. These presentiments were but too speedily and sadly fulfilled. He has gone—but has left a name and a fame that will live throughout time and burst forth in eternity; and in the morning of the first resurrection, when the opening heavens shall reveal the Son of God, and he shall proclaim, "I am the resurrection and the life," when Death shall deliver up the dead, I expect to meet Bro. Parley in the resurrection of just.

John Taylor.
