During April 2021 General Conference, our beloved prophet, Russell M. Nelson, taught us to always have faith in Jesus Christ; and that through faith in Jesus Christ we can move the mountains of our lives.

This message touched me, and I remembered the discussion we had with some of the church leaders at the Yaoundé District Conference earlier this year. During the discussion, each leader shared his or her testimony. As a result of my wife and I sharing our testimony, we understood that it was through faith that we had overcome many challenges.

One of the mountains we had to climb was when we were making all the arrangements with my wife’s family for our marriage. Her family, who is Catholic, made it a condition that if I wanted to marry their daughter, we had to get married religiously in the Catholic Church. We were completely at a loss as to what to do.

My wife and I said to each other that temple marriage is a commandment of God. We have faith in Him and in His son Jesus Christ; we shall pray and fast, and then whatever our Heavenly Father will reveal to us we shall do it, even if it is to get married in a Catholic Church. We decided to meet with my wife’s family to ask them if we could all pray together. If our Heavenly Father reveals to us that we should get married in the Catholic Church, then we shall do it. But if God reveals to us that we should get married in the temple, then we would invite my wife’s family to accept that answer. The goal: to accept the will of God.

After we prayed and fasted, our Heavenly Father revealed to us that we should get married in the temple. To our great surprise, my in-laws did not challenge us anymore.

We are married now for three years, and we plan to go to the temple next month.

A few months ago, my mother-in-law told my wife that she felt that we had “bewitched” them during the prayer. They did not understand what had happened! My wife tenderly explained that it was the Spirit of God that touched her heart.

When we trust in God, we are not disappointed. As the prophet, Russell M. Nelson said, “The Lord does not require perfect faith for us to access His perfect power. But He does ask us to believe”.
