## 37068-The Title Page of the Book of Mormon

The Title Page of the Book of Mormon

Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 5

The Title Page of the Book of Mormon

In his History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, commonly called by us the Documentary History of the Church, the Prophet Joseph Smith makes this interesting comment concerning the title page of the Book of Mormon:

I wish to mention here that the title-page of the Book of Mormon is a literal translation, taken from the very last leaf, on the left hand side of the collection or book of plates, which contained the record which has been translated, the language of the whole running the same as all Hebrew writing in general; [i.e., from right to left] and that said title page is not by any means a modern composition, either of mine or of any other man who has lived or does live in this generation. Therefore, in order to correct an error, which generally exists concerning it, I give below that part of the title-page of the English version of the Book of Mormon, which is a genuine and literal translation of the title-page of the original Book of Mormon as recorded on the plates:

The Book of Mormon An account written by the hand of Mormon, upon Plates, taken from the Plates of Nephi.

Then follow the two main paragraphs of the title page, edited and printed in most respects as we now find them in our present editions of the Book of Mormon, after which Joseph Smith explains: The remainder of the title-page is, of course, modern. 1

In the first (1830) edition the modern remainder consisted of the following:

BY JOSEPH SMITH, JUNIOR, AUTHOR AND PROPRIETOR ________ Palmyra: PRINTED BY E. B. GRANDIN FOR THE AUTHOR 1830.

The AUTHOR AND PROPRIETOR part of the remainder in the first edition has been the butt of much ridicule on the part of critics of the Nephite record because it seems to imply that its text was indeed man-made, that Joseph Smith was truly the Author and Proprietor. This problem we shall deal with later.

In the second (1837) edition, the modern part reads as follows:

TRANSLATED BY JOSEPH SMITH, JR. ________________ KIRTLAND, OHIO: PRINTED BY O. COWDERY & CO. FOR P. P. PRATT AND J. GOODSON 1837

In our modern editions, the statement that Joseph Smith was the translater has been retained, and the fact that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the publisher has been added, together with the appropriate date of each edition.

The title page of the first edition of the Book of Mormon was, unfortunately, poorly edited and punctuated, and the transition between the two main paragraphs was badly done, as may be noticed in the following lines:

the interpretation thereof by the gift of God; an abridgment taken from the Book of Ether.

Also, which is a Record of the People of Jared, which were scattered at the time the Lord confounded the language of the people....

In the second edition, these lines were edited (apparently by Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery) in the following manner:

the interpretation thereof by the gift of God:

An abridgment taken from the book of Ether also, which is a record of the people of Jared; who were scattered at the time the Lord confounded the language of the people....

This arrangement is essentially that adopted by the Church in our modern editions, but in the edition of the Book of Mormon printed by our friends in the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the opening lines of the second paragraph are punctuated in this manner, so as to give a slight change in meaning:

An abridgment taken from the Book of Ether; also, which is a record of the people of Jared; who were scattered at the time the Lord confounded the language. . . .

The words at the top of the title page of the Nephite record immediately above the two main paragraphs state that the Book of Mormon is an account written by the hand of Mormon upon plates taken from the plates of Nephi. (See account of the Prophet above.) One reading these words for the first time might get the impression that Mormon wrote the title page, but this impression would be quickly dispelled on reading the first paragraph, where it is explained that the record was sealed by the hand of Moroni, and hid up into the Lord. In other words, Moroni, son of Mormon, was the author of the title page and the last Nephite to possess the plates before they were hidden.

The reader's attention should be called to two other matters in connection with the words at the top of the title page: First, Moroni says (to repeat) that The Book of Mormon was an account written by the hand of Mormon. This explanation of Moroni's is true as far as it goes, but only partly true, because Moroni himself produced the latter part of the record, from Mormon 8:1 to Moroni 10:34. Why does he not say, "An account written by the hand of Mormon and by the hand of Moroni?" The answer to this question is, I believe, given in Chapter 2 of this book, where it is explained that Moroni did not write anything upon the plates until A.D. 400 (Mormon 8:6), sixteen years after the last great battle of the Nephites and Lamanites. Moreover, he seems to have written at that time, only through what is now Mormon 8:13, after which be wrote the title page through paragraph one and hid the plates in the hill. Since he had written but thirteen verses himself (Mormon 8:1-13) and had not at that time given an account of the Jaredites and some other matters, he did not feel justified in adding his own name as co-author with his father, Mormon. After about twenty years had passed by (Moroni 10:1-2), Moroni seems to have dug up the plates, finished the record of Mormon (Mormon 8:14-9:37), abridged the Book of Ether, and added the miscellaneous in the last book, which was called Moroni. Then he logically added the matter which appears as the last paragraph of the title page in our present editions of the Book of Mormon, matter which deals in part with the Book of Ether. Having done that, he hid the plates once more in the Hill Cumorah.

The second point we should observe in connection with the words at the top of the title page is that Moroni tell us Mormon wrote his account upon plates taken from the plates of Nephi. Now, what does he mean by this? The student of the Book of Mormon knows that there were two sets of plates known as The Plates of Nephi. These were (a) The Large Plates of Nephi and (b) The Small Plates of Nephi. The Large Plates were at first reserved more particularly for the secular history of the peoples concerned, but after the Small Plates, which had been reserved for sacred purposes in connection with the ministry, were filled (Omni 30), the Large Plates were used for both purposes. Moroni of course knew that his father Mormon had not abridged or compiled the Small Plates of Nephi but had preserved them for a wise purpose as a unit among the plates he placed in charge of his son. (See Words of Mormon 1, 6, 7; Mormon 6:6.) Consequently, what Moroni meant by his words at the top of the title page is in effect this: The Book of Mormon is an account written by the hand of Mormon upon plates [The Plates of Mormon] the subject matter of which is taken or abridged from the Large Plates of Nephi.

Now let us examine the two main paragraphs of the title page in some detail. First of all, it should be observed that when Joseph Smith translated the title page, it is doubtful that he found the subject matter paragraphed as in our modern editions. Very often in ancient times, words were run together without the niceties and elegance of word division, punctuation, and paragraphing that we find in modern books. The paragraphing now found on the title page is a modern contrivance; and, as we have already seen, whoever did the paragraphing in the first edition of the Nephite record did a poor job. Perhaps we should forgive him because he seems not to have been well-acquainted with the subject matter and mechanics of the book.

Coming to the first paragraph, we notice that Mormon's account is described by Moroni as an abridgment of the record of the Nephites and Lamanites. And, indeed, with the exceptions of some direct quotations and The Words of Mormon, almost all of Mormon's writing (Mosiah 1:1--Mormon 7:10) consists of abridgments of larger and fuller accounts found on books of the same names as those in our present Book of Mormon. These larger and fuller accounts, books if you please, were written upon the Large Plates of Nephi. Even Mormon's history of events as he found them in his own lifetime (Mormon 1-7) is doubtless an abridgment of a larger and more detailed account of his times which he wrote upon the Large plates. (See Mormon 5:9.) Mormon also made an abridgment of another book not named 2in our present editions of the Book of Mormon, but it is called the Book of Lehi by Joseph Smith in his preface to the first edition. It will be remembered that it was from this book that the Prophet translated 116 pages which were wrongfully obtained by Martin Harris and subsequently lost. Mormon was doubtless referring to the Book of Lehi when he wrote these words:

And now, I speak somewhat concerning that which I have written; for after I had made an abridgment from the plates of Nephi, down to the reign of this King Benjamin, of whom Amaleki spake, [Omni 23] I searched among the records.... (Words of Mormon 3)

The first paragraph next tells us of the peoples to whom Mormon was directing his writing, namely the Lamanites (cf. Jarom 2; Moroni 10:1), an Israelite remnant, and also the Jews and Gentiles. Notice that not only remnants of the house of Israel, but also those peoples not having the blood of Israel flowing in their veins are favored. Moroni then proceeds to emphasize the spiritual nature of the record; it was written by divine command, and by the spirit of prophecy and of revelation. It was written and sealed up unto the Lord, in order not to be destroyed; and it was destined to come forth and be interpreted by the gift and power of God. Moroni also reveals that he is the one who seals and hides up the record unto the Lord, and that it is to come forth in due time by way of the Gentile. That the Book of Mormon was to come forth by way of the Gentile may evoke surprise among Latter-day Saints. Our people claim to be of Israel (see D&C 103:16-17; D&C 133:32-34), and they are the ones who have brought forth the Book of Mormon. Joseph Smith the Prophet was assuredly of Israel, and he translated the Nephite record and originally sent it forth. Why, then, does Moroni say that it is to come forth by way of the Gentile? The answer is probably this: Moroni, and of course the Savior (3 Nephi 21:5-6), knew that when the Book of Mormon was to come forth in the latter days, it would come by way of the great Gentile nation (United States) spoken of by Nephi the prophet hundreds of years before (1 Nephi 22:7-8). The Latter-day Saints who bring forth the Book of Mormon, thus assisting the Lord to do his marvelous work among the Gentiles, are Gentiles in the political sense. We are citizens (as was Joseph Smith) of this great Gentile republic, the United States. So Moroni, the Savior, and some others speak of us as Gentiles in the political sense, and this fact must be kept in mind by readers of the Nephite record. (See, e.g., 1 Nephi 13:39; 1 Nephi 15:13; Mormon 5:15; 3 Nephi 16:4, 6, 7; 3 Nephi 21:5.) 3

Now we come to a consideration of the second paragraph of the title page. First of all, Moroni speaks of an abridgment from the Book of Ether, a record of the people of Jared. These people were scattered at the time the Lord confounded the language of the people, when they were building a tower (of Babel, the city mentioned in Genesis 11:9) to get to heaven. Ether, the last great prophet of the Jaredites, was a direct descendant of Jared, who lived when the tower of Babel was being built (Ether 1:6-32). It will be noticed that Moroni accepts as true history the tower of Babel episode (Ether 1:3-4; cf. Genesis 11:1-9). The account of the tower of Babel in the Book of Genesis is generally looked upon by scholars as a myth or legend invented by the Hebrews in the childhood of their race to explain how the many languages of mankind came into being. But Latter-day Saints accept the biblical account as essentially correct; if it were not, the authenticity of the Book of Ether would be in question and, along with it, the divine origin of the entire Book of Mormon.

Moroni now proceeds to explain to us the reasons why he abridged the Book of Ether. First, it is to show unto the remnant of the house of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers. Such is the statement given in the second and succeeding editions, instead of how great things, etc., in the first edition. The reading, how great things, seems very odd to us at the present day, but it should be remembered that the adverb how has also the meaning of what, as may be ascertained in a good dictionary. Since the Book of Ether deals with peoples whose beginnings antedated the house of Israel and who lived apart from Israel, one wonders what Moroni meant when he said that it was intended to show Israel's remnant what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers. Apparently by their fathers he means the fathers or ancestors of the latter-day, remnant of Israel (see next clause); but one wonders in what way the Book of Ether, which deals with Jaredite history, can show what great things the Lord hath done for their [Israelite] fathers. Doubtless what Moroni had in mind was that even the abridged record of the Book of Ether gives wonderful testimony of Christ and his revelations to the Jaredites, which in turn were made known in their fulness to the Nephites at the time of our Lord's appearance among them. (See Ether 4:1-4.) Not only that, but a number of Jaredite prophets could have known of the house of Israel, if the words of Ether are a criterion (Ether 13:4-13). From this last reference it is quite understandable why Moroni could add that the house of Israel may know the covenants of the Lord, that they are not cast off forever.

Moroni also tells us that the abridgment of the Book of Ether is to the convincing of the Jew and the Gentile that JESUS is the CHRIST, the ETERNAL GOD, manifesting himself unto all nations. In other words, the Jaredites, through the testimony of their records, are another witness to the nations that Jesus is the Christ, even as the Jews and Nephites are witnesses through their sacred books.

The great Nephite prophet concludes his last paragraph by warning us not to condemn the things of God if we find in the volume certain faults-after all, they are the mistakes of men:

And now, if there are faults they are the mistakes of men; wherefore, condemn not the things of God, that ye may be found spotless at the judgment-seat of Christ.

Now, let us turn to the AUTHOR AND PROPRIETOR problem of the title page as printed in the first edition. As we have already explained, critics have assailed Joseph Smith's story about the divine origin of the Book of Mormon by pointing out that the Mormon Prophet himself unwittingly betrayed that he was the true autor when he had AUTHOR AND PROPRIETOR printed after his own name in the first edition of the Nephite record. Not only that, but the testimony of the Eight Witnesses in the last part of the record is also pointed to as confirming the point. Only in later editions, say the critics, did Joseph Smith cover up by claiming that he was the translator.

In answering the critics, let it first of all be made clear that in Joseph Smith's day copyrights were secured to authors and proprietors by act of Congress. And where would the Prophet pick up the wording he uses in the first edition of the Book of Mormon but by adapting the words of the act itself? In a communication to the writer under date of June 14, 1963, the Copyright Office of the Library of Congress said: In 1830 copyright claims were governed by the Act of 1790 as supplemented by the Act of 1802, which required that the person claiming copyright state 'in the title page or in the page immediately following' of the work that he was the author or proprietor of that work.

And in the second place, let it be noticed that in Joseph Smith's preface to the reader in the first edition of the Book of Mormon, he makes it crystal clear that he had been translating from the Book of Lehi. The word translate (or variations of it) occurs six times: and if the Prophet claims that he translated from the Book of Lehi, why should his word be doubted when, in later editions of the Book of Mormon, he claims that he was the translator of it? After all, a little logic and common sense should guide us in the matter.

We believe that sufficient evidence has been presented to show that Joseph Smith's real claim was to be AUTHOR AND PROPRIETOR not of the Book of Mormon but of the translation which he had made of that record.
