## 37070-The Three Outstanding Messages

The Three Outstanding Messages

Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 7

The Three Outstanding Messages

It becomes obvious as one reads the Book of Mormon that it is expecially directed to the Lamanites (American Indians) of our day, although Jew and Gentile are also included in its scope. 1 The writers of the volume have a very definite warning message to convey to the Lamanite "remnant" of this generation as well as to the other peoples-so much so that a clear philosophy of history is woven about it. The warning given by the Book of Mormon prophets, in its essence, is this: Their own peoples, together with all others that shall in the future inhabit this land, (America), must serve God or be destroyed; to violate this divine decree is fatal; it is imperative that the warning be heeded. Whatever else the Nephite scripture is, it must be looked upon as a voice of warning to our age. Let us briefly proceed to trace the genesis and later rise of this warning message.

The essence of the warning seems first to have been given by the Lord to Nephi, the son of Lehi. When the Lord visited Nephi, then a very young man, he said, among other things, these words:

And inasmuch as ye shall keep my commandments, ye shall prosper, and shall be led to a land of promise; yea, even a land which I have prepared for you; yea, a land which is choice above all other lands. And inasmuch as thy brethren shall rebel against thee, they shall be cut off from the presence of the Lord. (1 Nephi 2:20-21

At a later time it was expressed more concisely by Lehi, who quoted the Lord as saying:

Inasmuch as ye shall keep my commandments ye shall prosper in the land; but inasmuch as ye will not keep my commandments ye shall be cut off from my presence. (2 Nephi 1:20)

When Lehi subsequently blessed the sons and daughters of Laman and Lemuel, he repeated this injunction to them (2 Nephi 4:4). Jarom and Amaron were aware of it, but did not write it out in full (Jarom 9; Omni 6). King Benjamin emphasized its importance in his last formal address to his people (Mosiah 2:31). The younger Alma warned the wicked inhabitants of Ammonihah of the Lord's words to Lehi (Alma 9:13, 18). When Alma gave commandments to his three sons, Helaman, Shiblon, and Corianton, he was careful to remind them of the divine warning (Alma 36:1, 30; Alma 37:13; Alma 38:1). It should be observed that the Lamanites were cut off from the Lord's presence through wickedness but were not destroyed; like mercies were not extended to the Nephites as a people, because they were blessed with unusual gifts from God (Alma 9:14, 18-23). Notice this express statement to the effect that the Nephites were to be held more strictly accountable than their brethren:

For behold, the promises of the Lord are extended to the Lamanites, but they are not unto you if ye transgress for has not the Lord expressly promised and firmly decreed, that if ye will rebel against him that ye shall utterly be destroyed from off the face of the earth? (Alma 9:24)

Thus it may be seen that to be "cut off from the presence of the Lord" was equivalent-at least for the Nephites as a nation-to destruction. Moreover, the Nephite nation was destroyed as Alma had warned. The destruction of the Nephite people thus comes to us at this day as a potent warning from the past-a "voice from the dust," so to speak.

Moroni, the last great Nephite prophet, brings to us another voice of warning from the past. When he abridged the records of the great Jaredite nation, a nation which preceded that of his own people upon this continent, his object was not only to give us the highlights of their history, but also to point out to us that they were destroyed for the same reason that his own people (the Nephites) were. When the Jaredites kept the commandments of God, they prospered; when they trangressed, they were cut off from his presence and eventually fell as a nation. Moroni makes it crystal clear that God had manifested to a great Jaredite prophet that this is a land of promise only to those who serve Him. Notice this key passage:

And he [God] had sworn in his wrath unto the brother of Jared, that whoso should possess this land of promise, from that time henceforth and forever should serve him, the true and only God, or they should be swept off when the fullness of his wrath should come upon them. And now, we can behold the decrees of God concerning this land, that it is a land of promise: and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall serve God,. or they shall be swept off when the fullness of his wrath shall come upon them. And the fullness of his wrath cometh upon them when they are ripened in iniquity. For behold, this is a land which is choice above all other lands; wherefore he that doth possess it shall serve God or shall be swept off; for it is the everlasting decree of God. And it is not until the fullness of iniquity among the children of the land, that they are swept off. And this cometh unto you, O ye Gentiles, that ye may know the decrees of God-that ye may repent, and not continue in your iniquities until the fullness come, that ye may not bring down the fulness of the wrath of God upon you as the inhabitants of the land have hitherto done. Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ, who hath been manifested by the things which we have written. (Ether 2:8-12 )

Mark the fact that Moroni addresses himself to this generation of Gentiles and warns them not to continue in their iniquities and bring down upon their heads the wrath of God as the former inhabitants of this continent had done. In warning this generation, the prophet is obviously adhering to the same philosophy of history that was held by most of his predecessors. A little later in his writings Moroni emphasizes the secret oaths and combinations that caused the destruction not only of the Jaredites but also of his own people:

And now I, Moroni, do not write the manner of their oaths and combinations, for it hath been made known unto me that they are had among all people, and they are had among the Lamanites. And they have caused the destruction of this people of whom I am now speaking, and also the destruction of the people of Nephi. And whatsoever nation shall uphold such secret combinations, to get power and gain, until they shall spread over the nation, behold, they shall be destroyed; for the lord will not suffer that the blood of his saints, which shall be shed by them, shall always cry unto him from the ground for vengeance upon them and yet he avenge them not. (Ether 8:20-22)

The writer then addresses himself again to the Gentiles of our day and warns of similar secret combinations that may overthrow us as they did the nations upon this land before us:

Wherefore, O ye Gentiles, it is wisdom in God that these things should be shown unto you, that thereby ye may repent of your sins, and suffer not that these murderous combinations shall get above you, which are built up to get power and gain-and the work, yea, even the work of destruction come upon you, yea, even the sword of the justice of the Eternal God shall fall upon you, to your overthrow and destruction if ye shall suffer these things to be. Wherefore, the Lord commandeth you, when ye shall see these things come among you that ye shall awake to a sense of your awful situation, because of this secret combination which shall be among you; or we be unto it, because of the blood of them who have been slain; for they cry from the dust for vengeance upon it, and also upon those who built it up. For it cometh to pass that whoso buildeth it up seeketh to overthrow the freedom of all lands, nations, and countries; and it bringeth to pass the destruction of all people, for it is built up by the devil, who is the father of all lies; even that same liar who beguiled our first parents, yea, even that same liar who hath caused man to commit murder from the beginning; who hath hardened the hearts of men that they have murdered the prophets, and stoned them, and cast them out from the beginning, (Ether 8:23-25)

We may, then, reasonably conclude that one of the most important considerations guiding the Book of Mormon prophets in their writing was that of warning our generation (and their own, of course) that destruction awaits those nations on this land that do wickedly and fail to acknowledge the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ. Even as the Doctrine and Covenants is a modern voice of warning to this generation (see Sec. 1), so the Book of Mormon is a warning to us from the nations of the past that lived upon this continent.

The second of the three outstanding messages of the Nephite scripture to our time is that it is the witness of two great nations of the past (Nephites and Jaredites) on this continent that Jesus is the Christ. In the second paragraph of the title page of the Book of Mormon, Moroni tells of the abridgment of the Book of Ether (a record of the Jaredites) and informs us that one of its purposes was "to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations." It is clear to the student of the Nephite record that this purpose is one of the major concerns of the whole volume.

Early in the history of the Nephite people, the great Nephi rejoiced that he had seen in vision the Lord's day, and his heart rejoiced in his holy name (2 Nephi 25:13). He spoke of the scattering of the Jews and of the time that should come when they would be persuaded to believe in Christ and in the power of his atonement (2 Nephi 25:16). Notice also these words of interest to all of us:

And as the Lord God liveth, there is none other name given under heaven save it be this Jesus Christ, of which I have spoken, whereby man can be saved. Wherefore for this cause hath the Lord God promised unto me that these things which I write shall be kept and preserved, and handed down unto my seed, from generation to generation, that the promise may be fulfilled unto Joseph, that his seed should never perish as long as the earth shall stand. Wherefore, these things shall go from generation to generation as long as the earth shall stand; and they shall go according to the will and pleasure of God; and the nations who shall possess them shall be judged of them according to the words which are written. For we labor diligently to write, to persuade our children, and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God; for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do. And, notwithstanding we believe in Christ, we keep the law of Moses, and look forward with steadfastness unto Christ, until the law shall be fulfilled. (2 Nephi 25:20-24 )

The importance of these words to this generation can scarcely be emphasized enough. Moreover, some of Nephi's farewell words to us should be a sufficient testimony of the significance he attached to the work and mission of Christ:

I have charity for the Jew-I say Jew, because I mean them from whence I came. I also have charity for the Gentiles. But behold, for none of these can I hope except they shall be reconciled unto Christ, and enter into the narrow gate, and walk in the straight path which leads to life, and continue in the path until the end of the day of probation. And now, my beloved brethren, and also Jew, and all ye ends of the earth, hearken unto these words and believe in Christ and if ye believe not in these words believe in Christ. And if ye shall believe in Christ ye will believe in these words, for they are the words of Christ, and he hath given them unto me; and they teach all men that they should do good. And if they are not the words of Christ judge ye-for Christ will show unto you, with power and great glory, that they are his words, at the last day; and you and I shall stand face to face before his bar; and ye shall know that I have been commanded of him to write these things, notwithstanding my weakness. (2 Nephi 33:8-11)

Nephi's words concerning the Christ are part of the general warning of the Book of Mormon to our time. That "you and I shall stand face to face before his bar" is warning enough.

When Mormon, the great historian, abridged the Nephite accounts of the personal appearance of the resurrected, glorified Christ to the ancient inhabitants of this land, he was careful to accent for our benefit the fact that they (the Nephites) were individual witnesses of the risen Lord. On the first day of the Savior's ministry, it is recorded that he extended this invitation to the twenty-five hundred men, women, and children (3 Nephi 17:25) who were present:

Arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world. (3 Nephi 11:14)

Then Mormon writes these words of what ensued:

And it came to pass that the multitude went forth, and thrust their hands into his side, and did feel the prints of the nails in his hands and in his feet; and this they did do, going forth one by one until they had all gone forth, and did see with their eyes and did feel with their hands, and did know of a surety and did bear record, that it was he, of whom it was written by the prophets, that should come. And when they had all gone forth and witnessed for themselves, they did cry out with one accord.... (3 Nephi 11:15-16; italics ours.)

Notice the words in italics. Mormon's purpose in writing the account is quite evident. The emphasis which he attaches to the Nephites as witnesses of the Christ and of the powers of heaven is strikingly brought out in another passage. In a touching scene, Jesus blesses the Nephite children, after which the heavens open and angels encircle the little ones about as with fire (3 Nephi 17:21-24). Then follows this testimony:

And the multitude did see and hear and bear record; and they know that their record is true for they all of them did see and hear, every man for himself, and they were in number about two thousand and five hundred souls; and they did consist of men, women, and children. (3 Nephi 17:25; italics ours.)

Such a witness must impress every honest heart-at least Mormon meant it to.

Although the Nephite witness of Christ to our time is or should be a voice of gladness, we must not forget that this revelation of our Lord from the past brings with it additional responsibility to this generation. Mormon, like Nephi in this respect, adds to the note of warning which is sounded by the Book of Mormon. The world of our day is addressed by him and cautioned not to deny the Christ or spurn his works:

And when ye shall see these savings coming forth among you, then ye need not any longer spurn at the doings of the Lord, for the sword of his justice is in his right hand; and behold, at that day, if ye shall spurn at his doings he will cause that it shall soon overtake you. Wo unto him that spurneth at the doings of the Lord; yea, wo unto him that shall deny the Christ and his works! Yea, wo unto him that shall deny the revelations of the Lord, and that shall say the Lord no longer worketh by revelation, or by prophecy, or by gifts, or by tongues, or by hearings, or by the power of the Holy Ghost! (3 Nephi 29:4-6)

Moroni, the great son of Mormon, also bears witness to our day that Jesus is the Christ, and adds a note of warning in his farewell to the Gentiles:

And now, I, Moroni, bid farewell unto the Gentiles, yea, and also unto my brethren whom I love, until we shall meet before the judgement-seat of Christ, where all men shall know that my garments are not spotted with your blood. And then shall ye know that I have seen Jesus, and that he hath talked with me face to face, and that he told me in plain humility, even as a man telleth another in mine own language, concerning these things; and only a few have I written, because of my weakness in writing. And now, I would commend you to seek this Jesus of whom the prophets and apostles have written, that the grace of God the Father, and also the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of them, may be and abide in you forever. Amen. (Ether 12:38-41 )

Nor should we forget that in his farewell note to the Lamanites of our time he urges them also to come unto the Christ and be perfected in him:

Yea, come unto Christ, and be perfected in him, and deny yourselves of all ungodliness; and if ye shall deny yourselves of all ungodliness, and love God with all your might, mind and strength, then is his grace sufficient for you, that by his grace ye may be perfect in Christ; and if by the grace of God ye are perfect in Christ, ye can in nowise deny the power of God. And again, if ye by the grace of God are perfect in Christ, and deny not his power, then are ye sanctified in Christ by the grace of God, through the shedding of the blood of Christ, which is in the covenant of the Father unto the remission of your sins, that ye become holy, without spot. And now I bid unto all, farewell. I soon go to rest in the paradise of God, until my spirit and body again reunite, and I am brought forth triumphant through the air, to meet you before the pleasing bar of the great Jehovah, the Eternal Judge of both quick and dead. Amen. (Moroni 10:32-34)

The third outstanding message of the Book of Mormon to the world concerns the Lord's intentions toward the remnant of the house of Israel. On the title page of the Nephite record occurs this statement concerning one of the objectives for which the book was written:

Which is to show unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers; and that they may know the covenants of the Lord, that they are not cast off forever.

In the light of these words, it is easy to understand the special interest displayed by Book of Mormon writers in the Lamanite remnant of our time. In fact, they demonstrate remarkable interest in the eventual redemption of all branches of scattered Israel. It should be explained that the prophets of the Nephite and Jaredite peoples thoroughly understood the part that the house of Israel should play in the salvation of the human race-something, incidentally, which few or none of the sectarian churches of our day comprehend rightly. What the sectarian world doesn't understand is that when the Lord made his famous covenant with Abraham, he promised the Father of the Faithful that through him and his descendants should all the families of the earth be blessed with the gospel. Therefore, the right to carry the gospel to the human family and bless it with the message of salvation remains one of the heritages of Israel. Unfortunately the text of Genesis doesn't carry all of the original promise made by God to Abraham. While Abraham was yet in Haran, so our modern scripture, the Book of Abraham, records, the Lord made him this promise:

My name is Jehovah, and I know the end from the beginning; therefore my hand shall be over thee. And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations; and I will bless their through the name; for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after the name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father; and I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee; and in thee (that is, in thy Priesthood) and in thy seed (that is, thy Priesthood), for I give unto thee a promise that this right shall continue in thee, and in thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings (if salvation, even of life eternal.) (Abraham 2:8-11)

The implications of this promise are obviously of tremendous spiritual interest. In plain words, it must be recognized that the Church of Jesus Christ in any age after Abraham's time was to be organized and directed by divine authority in the hands of his descendants, the Church being the means by which God carries the message of salvation to mankind. Our Lord himself, the author of our salvation, was an Israelite; his apostles were Israelites; the Church in this age was restored by divine authority to men who had in their veins blood of the tribe of Ephraim, the senior tribe of Israel.

The great Nephi predicted that Israel would eventually be scattered among all nations because of iniquity. He said:

For it appears that the house of Israel, sooner or later, will be scattered upon all the face of the earth, and also among all nations. And behold, there are many who are already lost from the knowledge of those who are at Jerusalem. Yea, the more part of all the tribes have been led away; and they are scattered to and fro upon the isles of the sea; and whither they are none of us knoweth, save that we know that they have been led away. And since they have been led away, these things have been prophesied concerning them, and also concerning all those who shall hereafter be scattered and be confounded, because of the Holy One of Israel; for against him will they harden their hearts; wherefore, they shall be scattered among all nations and shall be hated of all men. (1 Nephi 22:3-5)

Following these words, he explains that in the latter days the Israelites will be assisted by the Gentiles; that a mighty nation (the United States) will be raised up among the Gentiles who, together with Israel, shall have the benefit of a great and marvelous work that will make known God's covenants to Abraham. The Lord will make bare his arm among the nations, in making known his covenants and gospel to gathered Israel.

Nevertheless, after they [the Israelites] shall be nursed by the Gentiles, and the Lord has lifted up his hand upon the Gentiles and set them up for a standard, and their children have been carried in their arms, and their daughters have been carried upon their shoulders, behold, these things of which are spoken are temporal; for thus are the covenants of the Lord with our fathers; and it meaneth us in the days to come, and also all our brethren who are of the house of Israel. And it meaneth that the time cometh that after all the house of Israel have been scattered and confounded, that the Lord God will raise up a mighty nation among the Gentiles, yea, even upon the face of this land; and by them shall our seed be scattered. And after our seed is scattered the Lord God will proceed to do a marvelous work among the Gentiles, which shall be of great worth unto our seed; wherefore, it is likened unto their being nourished by the Gentiles and being carried in their arms and upon their shoulders. And it shall also be of worth note the Gentiles; and not only unto the Gentiles but unto all the house of Israel, unto the making known of the covenants of the Father of heaven unto Abraham, saying: In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. And I would, my brethren, that ye should know that all the kindreds of the earth cannot be blessed unless he shall make bare his arm in the eyes of the nations. Wherefore, the Lord God will proceed to make bare his arm in the eyes of all the nations, in bringing about his covenants and his gospel unto those who are of the house of Israel. Wherefore, he will bring them again out of captivity, and they shall be brought out of obscurity and out of darkness;-and they shall know the Lord is their Savior and their Redeemer, the Mighty One of Israel. (1 Nephi 22:6-12)

Finally, Nephi points out that every nation that turns against Israel shall fall:

And every nation which shall war against thee, O house of Israel, shall be turned one against another, and they shall fall into the pit which they digged to ensnare the people of the Lord. And all that fight against Zion shall be destroyed, and that great whore, who hath perverted the right ways of the Lord, yea, that great and abominable church, shall tumble to the dust and great shall be the fall of it. (1 Nephi 22:14)

Lehi, the father of Nephi, in his words to Joseph, his youngest son, reminded him of the covenants made by God to his ancestor, the great Joseph who was sold into Egypt. This unusual seer, Joseph of Egypt, received from the Lord the promise that from the fruit of his loins should a righteous branch be raised up (on this continent) and also the promise that the Messiah should be manifested to their descendants in the latter days (2 Nephi 3:5). To the remnants of Joseph would the Lord raise up a choice seer who would be like unto Moses:

For Joseph truly testified, saying: A seer shall the Lord my God raise up, who shall be a choice seer unto the fruit of my loins. Yea, Joseph truly said: Thus saith the Lord unto me: A choice seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and he shall be esteemed highly among the fruit of thy loins. And unto him will I give commandment that he shall do a work for the fruit of thy loins, his brethren, which shall be of great worth unto them, even to the bringing of them to the knowledge of the covenants which I have made with thy fathers. And I will give unto him a commandments that he shall do none other work, save the work which I shall command him. And I will make him be great in mine eyes; for he shall do my work. And he shall be great like unto Moses, whom I have said I would raise up unto you, to deliver my people, O house of Israel. (2 Nephi 3:6-9)

This seer would be given power to bring forth 88 God's word to Joseph's seed. That "word" (the Book of Mormon), together with that from the loins of Judah (the Bible), should confound false doctrines, allay contentions, and bring peace and the knowledge of God's covenants to the remnant of Joseph (2 Nephi 3:11-13). Joseph the seer in Egypt was even shown the name of the choice seer who would be raised up in the last days:

And his name shall be called after me; and it shall be after the name of his father. And he shall be like unto me; for the thing, which the Lord shall bring forth by his hand, by the power of the Lord shall bring my people unto salvation. (2 Nephi 3:15)

Joseph Smith, the latter-day Seer, fulfilled this remarkable prophecy. To him were committed all of the keys and authority to restore the gospel in our day and age. Through him and his successors will all of the promises to scattered Israel be fulfilled. We are now living in that day of fulfillment, although the world scarcely realizes it.

It may be well to call attention to some other words of Nephi concerning the writing and gathering-in-one of God's word in the latter days. Not only shall the Jews, Nephites, and the lost tribes of Israel write the scriptures, but after they have been gathered, they shall each read the word of the Lord given to the others:

For I command all men, both in the east and in the west, and in the north, and in the south, and in the islands of the sea, that they shall write the words which I speak unto them; for out of the books which shall be written I will judge the world, every man according to their works, according to that which is written. For behold, I shall speak unto the Jews and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the Nephites and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the other tribes of the house of Israel, which I have led away, and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto all nations of the earth and they shall write it. And it shall come to pass that the Jews shall have the words of the Nephites, and the Nephites shall have the words of the Jews; and the Nephites and the Jews shall have the words of the lost tribes of Israel; and the lost tribes of Israel shall have the words of the Nephites and the Jews. And it shall come to pass that my people, which are of the house of Israel, shall be gathered home unto the lands of their possessions; and my word also shall be gathered in one. And I will show unto them that fight against my word and against my people, who are of the house of Israel, that I am God, and that I covenanted with Abraham that I would remember his seed forever. (2 Nephi 29:11-14 )

Surely these words indicate the kindness which God will display in dealing with the remnants of scattered Israel in the latter days.

When the resurrected Christ visited the Nephite people on this continent, he told them much about the blessings that would be bestowed upon the scattered tribes when they should be gathered. They were to come to a knowledge of the Lord, inherit this land, and, should the Gentiles not repent, be among them as a lion among sheep:

Behold now I finish the commandment which the Father hath commanded me concerning this people, who are a remnant of the house of Israel. Ye remember that I spake unto you, and said that when the words of Isaiah should be fulfilled-behold they are written, ye have them before you, therefore search them-and verily, verily, I say unto you that when they shall be fulfilled then is the fulfilling of the covenant which the Father hath made unto his people, O house of Israel. And then shall the remnants, which shall be scattered abroad upon the face of the earth, be gathered in from the east and from the west, and from the south and from the north; and they shall be brought to the knowledge of the Lord their God, who hath redeemed them. And the Father hath commanded me that I should give unto you this land, for your inheritance. And I say unto you, that if the Gentiles do not repent after the blessing which they shall receive, after they have scattered my people-then shall ye, who are a remnant of the house of Jacob, go forth among them; and ye shall be in the midst of them who shall be many; and ye shall be among them as a lion among the beasts of the forest, and as a young lion among the flocks of sheep, who, if he goeth through both treadeth down and teareth in pieces and none can deliver. Thy hand shall be lifted up upon thine adversaries, and all thine enemies shall be cut off, and I will gather my people together as a man gathereth his sheaves into the floor. (3 Nephi 20:10-18)

Then he spoke of a New Jerusalem on this land and of the powers of heaven that should be among his people:

And behold, this people will I establish in this land, unto the fulfilling of the covenant which I made with your father Jacob; and it shall be a New Jerusalem. And the powers of heaven shall be in the midst of this people; yea, even I will be in the midst of you. . . . Verily I say unto you, yea, and all the prophets from Samuel and those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have testified of me. And behold, ye are the children of the prophets; and ye are of the house of Israel; and ye are of the covenant which the Father made with your fathers, saying unto Abraham: And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed, (3 Nephi 20:22,24,25)

The Savior also mentioned to the Nephites that others of the covenant people would receive their inheritance in Palestine or in the "land of Jerusalem" as promised. These would have the gospel preached to them and eventually believe in him:

And I will remember the covenant which I have made with my people; and I have covenanted with them that I would gather them together in mine own due nine, that I would give unto them again the land of their fathers for their inheritance, which is the land of Jerusalem, which is the promised land unto them forever, saith the Father. And it shall come to pass that the time cometh, when the fulness of my gospel shall be preached unto them; and they shall believe in me, that I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and shall pray unto the Father in my name. (3 Nephi 20:29-31)

At the present time the Jews are rapidly returning to Palestine. They now have their own state. The Lord's words are indeed coming to pass. In due time the gospel will be taken to the Jews as predicted; many of the other tribes will also return and receive their inheritance in that land, as specifically predicted by the prophet Ezekiel (Ezekiel 48:1-29).

It has already been mentioned that the Jaredite prophets knew of Israel's status in bringing the message of salvation to mankind. That they knew of this-at least some of them-would seem to be indicated by the fact that Ether, the last Jaredite prophet, uttered great and marvelous prophecies concerning Israel and their gathering from the four quarters of the earth. He spoke of the New Jerusalem that should be built upon this land as well as of the restoration of the old Jerusalem to the house of Israel. The remnants of Joseph (who was sold into Egypt), according to Ether, shall inherit this continent and shall no more be confounded. Thus all of gathered Israel shall be blessed and be partakers of the covenant God made with Abraham (Ether 13:4-13).

The importance of the message of the Book of Mormon in reaffirming and extending the Bible message that the scattered remnants of Israel shall, through God's kindness, be gathered and redeemed can scarcely be gainsaid. Israel is not cast off, and her gathering is more nearly complete than the world realizes.
