## 37074-The Second Book of Nephi

The Second Book of Nephi

Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 10

The Second Book of Nephi

The Second Book of Nephi is the second book of the six in the Small Plates of Nephi. Its author is the Nephi who also wrote the first book in these plates. This book contains thirty-three chapters; its total text is, however, only about ten printed pages greater than that of the First Book of Nephi. The superscription in italics at the head of the book is much shorter than that in the First Book of Nephi and summarizes very inadequately its contents. Here it is:

An account of the death of Lehi. Nephi's brethren rebel against him. The Lord warns Nephi to depart into the wilderness. His journeying in the wilderness, c.

In the original edition of the Book of Mormon, another et cetera is found after "wilderness" but was removed in the Second Edition. The superscription is doubtless part of the original text of the book, but the et cetera which it contains, as likewise the one in the superscription of the Book of Nephi, arouses interest. 1

From a literary point of view, we may look upon Second Nephi as the second and last installment of Nephi's "Memoirs." The book falls quite logically into this scheme of analysis:

I. Teachings, exhortations, blessings and death of Lehi. Nephi and his followers flee into the wilderness. (Chs. 1-5)

A. Lehi speaks of his sons' rebellions, of the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the land of promise. He exhorts his rebellious sons to be righteous. His final blessings on his sons and grandchildren. The Psalm of Nephi. (Chs. 1-4)

B. Nephi leads faithful away from older brethren. He teaches arts of peace and war. Temple completed. Nephi appointed king. Lamanites cursed with dark skin. Priest and teachers consecrated. Records of Nephi. Ch. 5)

II. Nephi cities part of this brother Jacob's teachings. (Chs. 6-10)

A. Jacob quotes and explains certain prophecies of Isaiah. (Ch. 6)

B. Isaiah 50, 51 quoted. (Chs. 7, 8)

C. Jews to be restored to true church. Infinite atonement and sufferings of Savior foreseen. Resurrection and judgment. Where no law is given there is no punishment. Way for man is narrow. Coming of Christ. Scattering and gathering of Israel. Land of promise to have no kings. Those who fight against Zion shall Perish. (Chs. 9,10)

III. Nephi quotes Isaiah 2-14; commentaries and teachings based thereon. Some other teaching. His farewell (Chs. 11-33)

A. Nephi delights in words of Isaiah. He loves to prove coming of Christ and delights in eternal plan of deliverance from death. Jacob a witness of Redeemer. (Ch. 11)

B. Isaiah 2-14 quoted. (Chs. 12-24)

C. Nephi's comments on Isaiah. Iniquity of Jews foreseen; to crucify savior. Jews to be restored from lost and fallen state. Nephi's records to be preserved. Law of Moses. Messiah to appear among Nephites. Destruction of Nephites. Pride and wickedness of Gentiles. The Lord's commands. Quotation from Isaiah 29 concerning coming forth of Book of Mormon. Latter-day churches. Misleading precepts of men. Gentiles and the Bible. Gathering of God's word in one. Converted Gentiles to be numbered with God's people. Lamanites and Jews to believe Gospel. Wicked be destroyed. (Chs. 25-30)

D. Why Savior was baptized. The straight and narrow way. Teachings concerning angles and Holy Ghost. Nephi's final testimony to all men (Chs. 31-33)

The reader will observe from this outline that Second Nephi is considerably broken up by quotations which Nephi makes from the teachings of his brother Jacob and from the text of the prophet Isaiah. The difficult literary problem which is raised by the quotations from Isaiah will be treated later. It is probable that Nephi felt that some of his brother Jacob's teachings should be included with his own, because he also was a witness of the Redeemer (11:3). Of the Thirty-three chapters in the book, five are devoted to Jacob's teachings and his quotations from the Book of Isaiah.

Nephi's purpose in writing his Second Book was probably very similar to that expressed for the First Book of Nephi. In 2 Nephi 5:32 we observe the following commentary:

And I engraved that which is pleasing unto God. And if my people are pleased with the things of God they will be pleased with mine engravings which are upon these plates.

Our understanding of Nephi's purpose in writing this book is somewhat broadened by the following words:

As the Lord God liveth, there is none other name given under heaven save it be this Jesus Christ, of which I have spoken, whereby man can be saved. Wherefore, for this cause hath the Lord God promised unto me that these things which I write shall be kept and preserved, and handed down unto my seed, from generation to generation, that the promise may be fulfilled unto Joseph [who was sold into Egypt] that his seed should never perish as long as the earth should stand. Wherefore, these things shall go from generation to generation as long as the earth shall stand; and they shall go according to the will and pleasure of God; . . (25:20-22)

Observe also these words of Nephi in his concluding chapter:

And now, my beloved brethren, and also Jew, and all ye ends of the earth, hearken unto these words and believe in Christ; and if ye believe not in these words believe in Christ. And if ye shall believe in Christ ye will believe in these words, for they are the words of Christ, and he hath given them unto me; and they teach all men that they should do good. (33:10)

In most of the opening chapter of 2 Nephi, Nephi presents additional instructions and exhortations of his father, Lehi, to his wayward sons. Lehi reminded them of the great things which the Lord had done for them since their leaving Jerusalem (1:1). They had been mercifully preserved despite their rebellions when sailing to this continent; moreover, they had escaped death in Jerusalem and had been led to this land of promise, which would be a a land of inheritance for Lehi's seed forever (1:2-5) While in the Spirit, Lehi predicted that no people should come to this land except by the hand of the Lord. Those who should come would be blessed and have their liberty as long as they served Him. Lehi obtained a promise from the Lord that no other nations would be permitted to obtain a knowledge of this land or to possess it as long as those whom he had brought out of Jerusalem kept his commandments. But if they should dwindle in unbelief and reject their Redeemer, other nations would be brought in to dispossess them and scatter them. As if perfectly aware of the judgment of future events, Lehi began to exhort his rebellions offspring with great fervor and vigor. He urged them to throw off the sleep of hell and to shake off the awful chains by which they: were bound (1:13). With all the pressure that an aged parent could muster, he pleaded with his sons to avoid the cursing and destruction that must inevitably come upon them as a people if they incurred the displeasure of a just God (1:14-22). Again he exhorted them to awake (spiritually) and urged them to rebel no more against their brother, Nephi:

Awake, my sons; put on the armor of righteousness. Shake off the chains with which ye are bound, and come forth out of obscurity, and arise from the dust. Rebel no more against your brother, whose views have been glorious, and who hath kept the commandments from the time that we left Jerusalem; and who hath been an instrument in the hands of God, in bringing us forth into the lands of promise; for were it not for him, we must have perished with hunger in the wilderness; nevertheless, ye sought to take away his life; yea, and he hath suffered much sorrow because of you. And I exceedingly fear tremble because of you, lest he shall suffer again; for behold, ye have accused him that he sought power and authority over you; but I know that he hath not sought for power nor authority over you, but he hath sought the glory of God, and your own eternal welfare. And ye have murmured because he hath been plain unto you. Ye say that he hath used sharpness; ye say that he hath been angry with you; but behold, his sharpness was the sharpness of the power to the word of God, which was in him; and that which ye call anger was the truth, according to that which is in God, which he could not restrain, manifesting boldly concerning your iniquities. And it must needs be that the power of God must be with him, even unto his commanding you that ye must obey. But behold, it was not be, but it was the Spirit of the Lord which was in him, which opened his mouth to utterance that he could not shut it. (1:23-27)

Chapters 1:28-4:11 of 2 Nephi contain the patriarchal blessing literature of the Book of Mormon. This type of literature corresponds roughly to that found in Genesis 48:13-22; Genesis 49:1-27, where are found account of Jacob's blessing upon his sons (including Ephraim and Manasseh, his adopted sons; see Genesis 48:5) before his death. These blessings have a prophetic element in them, and we believe them to be inspired. A patriarchal blessing is one bestowed upon a person by an inspired man holding the patriarchal office, its purpose being to give comfort, direction incentive, counsel, and guidance in the life of the recipient. Occasionally the patriarch, under the influence of the Holy Ghost, may for a special purpose indicate future events or give special warnings to an individual. The lineage of a person of the house of Israel may also be indicated.

Lehi knew that because of his advanced age he would soon pass away. Like Jacob of old he wished to leave a blessing for his children. And like Isaac, the son of Abraham, he would have desired to leave his first blessing upon his eldest son (in this case, sons; see Genesis 27:1-41). But his eldest sons, Laman and Lemuel, had been a sore trial to him. Therefore, in blessing these two and their next oldest brother, Sam, he said:

And now my son, Laman, and also Lemuel and Sam, and also my sons who are the sons of Ishmael, behold, if ye will hearken unto the voice of Nephi ye shall not perish. And if ye will hearken unto him I leave unto you a blessing, yea, even my first blessing. But if ye will not hearken unto him I take away my first blessing, yea, even my blessing, and it shall rest upon him. (1:28,29)

It will be observed that because of Nephi's faithfulness his father stood ready to give the first blessing to him. Sam later received a special blessing like Nephi's (4:11).

Zoram, the servant of Laban, was next to be blessed:

And now, Zoram, I speak unto you; behold, thou art the servant of Laban, nevertheless, thou hast been brought out of the land of Jerusalem, and I know that thou art a true friend unto my son, Nephi, forever. Wherefore, because thou hast been faithful thy seed shall be blessed with his seed, that they dwell in prosperity long upon the face of this land; and nothing, save it shall be iniquity among them, shall harm or disturb their prosperity upon the face of this land forever. Wherefore, if ye shall keep the commandments of the Lord, the Lord hath consecrated this land the security of thy seed with the seed of my son. (1:30-32)

The blessing pronounced upon Jacob, Lehi's firstborn in the wilderness, is unusual in certain respects. In the first three verses of Chapter 2, Lehi promises him that God will consecrate his afflictions to his gain, and that he will dwell safely in the service of God with his brother, Nephi. In the fourth verse, Lehi indicates that Jacob had beheld the Redeemer in his youth (cf. 11:3). Then the patriarch launches into an extended doctrinal discussion that seems directed not only to Jacob but also to all his (Lehi's) sons (cf. 2:11, 14, 28, 30). He points out that men know good from evil, but that by the law (of Moses) no flesh is justified, for redemption comes in and through the Holy Messiah (2:5, 6). No flesh may dwell in God's presence save it be through the merits, mercy, and grace of the Messiah, who should lay down his life and bring to pass the resurrection, being the first that should rise from the dead. Wherefore, because he is the first-fruits of the resurrection, he will make intercession for all men; and those who believe in him and come with a broken heart and a contrite spirit shall be saved. Through his intercession all men come unto God to be judged in truth and holiness. Whatever punishment or happiness comes from the judgment answers the ends of the atonement made by the Messiah (2:10). Lehi then explains that there is need for an opposition in all things. His reason, in part, is this:

If not so, my first-born in the wilderness, righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither wickedness, neither holiness nor misery, neither good nor bad. Wherefore, all things must needs be a compound in one; wherefore, if it should be one body it must needs remain dead, having no life neither death, nor corruption nor corruption, nor incorruption happiness nor misery, neither sense nor insensibility. Wherefore, it must needs have been created for a thing of naught; wherefore there would have been no purpose in the end of its creation. Wherefore, this thing must needs destroy the wisdom of God and his eternal purposes, and also the power, and the mercy, and the justice of God. And if ye shall say there is no law, ye shall also say there is no sin. If ye shall say there is no sin, ye shall also say there is no righteousness. And if there be no righteousness there be no happiness. And if there be no righteousness nor happiness there be no punishment nor misery. And if these things are not there is no God. And if there is no God we are not, neither the earth; for there could have been no creation of things, neither to act nor to be acted upon; wherefore, all things must have vanished away. (2:11-13)

The patriarch further explains that when man and beast were created, an opposition was set up-the forbidden fruit in opposition to the tree of life, the one being sweet and the other bitter. Man was thus left as a free agent to act for himself by choosing one or the other (2:15, 16). Lehi briefly described the struggle in the pre-existence in which the devil (once an angel of God) was cast down to this earth, where he seeks to bring misery to all mankind. He it was who tempted Adam and Eve. When they had partaken of the forbidden fruit, they were driven out of the Garden of Eden to till the earth. Under these circumstances they brought forth children; indeed, they are the progenitors of all mankind (2:20). Men were not left to themselves; God prolonged their days in order that they might repent and not be lost because of the transgression of their first parents. Their state became one of probation, in which they would be tested according to God's command. Had Adam not transgressed, he would not have fallen and would have remained forever in the Garden of Eden in the same state as when he was first placed there (2:22). He and Eve would have had no children; they would have remained in a state of innocence, without joy, for they had no experience with misery; they could do no good because they were not acquainted with sin. Lehi then expressed this classic: "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy." (2:25) The patriarch proceeded to explain to his sons the function of the Messiah as a Redeemer. The coming redemption-looking at it from Lehi's time-would free men from Adam's fall; they would become free forever, knowing good from evil; as free agents they could act as they desired, restrained only by their knowledge of God's judgment for sin. They would be free to choose liberty and eternal life, through the irradiation which the Messiah brings to all men, or they might choose captivity and death, the devil's way; for he desires all men to be miserable like himself (2:26,27). Lehi ended his blessing and discussion in this way:

And now, my sons, I would that ye should look to the great Mediator, and hearken into his great commandments and be faithful into his words, and choose eternal life, according to the will of his Holy Spirit; and not choose eternal death, according to the will of the flesh and the evil which is therein, which giveth the spirit of the devil power to captivate, to bring you down to hell, that he may reign over you in his own kingdom. I have spoken these few words unto you all, my sons, in the last days of my probation; and I have chosen the good part, according, to the words of the prophet. And I have none other object save it be the everlasting welfare of your souls. Amen. (2:28-30)

Father Lehi's blessing on Jacob and the manner in which he discusses the doctrines which follow probably make Chapter 2 of 2 Nephi the most philosophical one in the Book of Mormon. It is worth careful study.

The next Blessing was pronounced upon the head of Joseph, Lehi's last born in the wilderness. This land was consecrated to Joseph and his posterity forever on condition that they obey the commandments of the Holy One of Israel. Lehi asked that the Lord bless Joseph to the end that his seed might not utterly be destroyed. Joseph's name doubtless inspired Lehi to remind him that Joseph who was sold into Egypt was their great ancestor, one with whom the Lord had made great covenants. Joseph of old predicted the coming of Moses to deliver his people out of Egypt, and the Lord had promised him that his seed would be preserved in this land and that the covenants of the Lord would be made manifest to them with power in the latter days. Joseph also predicted the coming, in the latter days, of a choice seer of the fruit of his loins, who should be great like Moses (3:1-9). This seer's name should be called Joseph, and he would have the same name as his father (3:15). Latter-day Saints believe, of course, that Joseph's prediction was fulfilled in the coming of Joseph Smith as the seer of this dispensation. Joseph of old declared that the Lord had said unto him that even as Moses should have a spokesman, so should the great seer of modern times have one likewise (3:18). (Sidney Rigdon was the modern spokesman raised up, and he was made mighty in expounding the revelations and writings brought forth by Joseph Smith (D&C 100:9-11). Moreover, the modern seer's writings were to go forth to the descendants of Joseph of old upon this land. Lehi impressed upon his son, Joseph, the importance of his great ancestor's prophecies. He also predicted the coming among his son's descendants, in the latter days, of a man (Joseph Smith) mighty in words, deeds and wonders, who should bring to pass "much restoration" unto the house of Israel (3:24). He ended his blessing upon his son Joseph's head by advising him to hearken to the words of his brother, Nephi. Father Lehi next blessed the sons and daughters of Laman and Lemuel, after giving them a warning to keep the Lord's commandments (4:3-9). Because of Lehi's blessing, the Lord would not allow Laman and Lemuel's descendants to be utterly destroyed. After blessing the household of Ishmael, Lehi again spoke to his son, Sam, and promised him and his seed an inheritance like that of Nephi (4:10,11).

Shortly after Lehi had pronounced blessings upon his household and that of Ishmael, he died and was buried (4:12). We are told neither how old Lehi was at the time of his death nor how many years had elapsed from the time the party had left Jerusalem before he passed away. This we do know--that less there thirty years had passed away after the Nephites left Jerusalem before his death (5:28). We shall probably not be much in error if we set 575 B.C. as an estimate of the date.

Lehi had scarcely been laid away when Nephi was again the object of the wrath of his elder brothers and the sons of Ishmael (4:13). This was because of the admonitions of the Lord which he had cited to them. Many of his sayings to them, as well as those of his father, were written upon the Large Plates. Nephi says that he wrote the things of his soul upon "these," meaning the Small Plates of Nephi (4:15). One of the intimate glimpses we get of Nephi's soul is found in 4:16-35, which passage we may call "The Psalm of Nephi." It is the only psalm in the Book of Mormon. Because of considerations of space, I shall not quote all of it here. Captions are placed over the parts chosen for the purposes of illustration.

Rejoice, O My Heart

Awake, my soul! No longer droop in sin.

Rejoice, O my heart, and give place no more for the enemy of my soul.

Do not anger again because of mine enemies.

Do not slacken my strength because of mine afflictions.

Rejoice, O my heart, and cry unto the Lord, and say:

O Lord, I will praise thee forever; Yea, my soul will rejoice in thee, My God, and the rock of my salvation. (4:28-30)

O Lord, Redeem My Soul

O Lord, wilt thou redeem my soul?

Wilt thou deliver me out of the hands of mine enemies?

Wilt thou make me that I may shake at the appearance of sin?

May the gates of hell be shut continually before me, because that my heart is broken and my spirit is contrite!

O Lord, wilt thou not shut the gates of thy righteousness before me, that I may walk in the path of the low valley, that I may be strict in the plain road!

O Lord, wilt thou encircle me around in the robe of thy righteousness!

O Lord, wilt thou make a way for mine escape before mine enemies!

Wilt thou make my path straight before me!

Wilt thou not place a stumbling block in my way--but that thou wouldst clear in way before me, and hedge not up my way, but the ways of mine enemy.

O Lord, I have trusted in thee, and I will trust in thee forever.

I will not put my trust in the arm of flesh; for I know that cursed is he that putteth his trust in the arm of flesh.

Yea, cursed is he that putteth his trust in man or maketh flesh his arm.

Yea, I know that God will give liberally to him that asketh [cf. James 1:5].

Yea, my God will give me, if I ask not amiss;

Therefore I will lift up my voice unto thee;

Yea, I will cry unto thee, my God, the rock of my righteousness

Behold, my voice shall forever ascend up unto thee,

My rock and mine everlasting God. Amen. (4:31-35)

This is a true psalm in both form and ideas. Its rhythm is comparable to the notable cadence of David's poems. It not only praises God but lays bare to us the very depths of Nephi's soul. A study of this psalm reveals how the scriptures delighted Nephi. The influence upon him of the Books of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Lamentations, and the Psalms is very apparent to the student of scripture.

We may call Chapter 5 "The Great Separation." The reference is to the final separation of Nephi's followers from those of his older brethren. Up to this point, we have observed the continued rebellions of Laman, Lemuel, and their followers against Nephi, but the cleavages between the two groups were now so pronounced and serious that a final division was bound to come. The anger of Nephi's brethren was so intense that they would not accept his inspired leadership, and even sought to take his life (5:1-4). The Lord took notice of it and warned Nephi to flee into the wilderness, with all who would accompany him. Here is Nephi's account of those who went with him:

Wherefore, it came to pass that I, Nephi, did take my family, and also Zoram and his family, and Sam, mine elder brother and his family, and Jacob and Joseph, my younger brethren, and also my sisters, and all those who would go with me. And all those who would go with me were those who believed in the warnings and revelations of God; wherefore, they did hearken unto my words. (5:6 )

The party probably traveled north from where they were and finally settled in a land which they called Nephi. Here they worshiped, farmed, raised flocks, and prospered under the direction of Nephi, who had brought with him the sacred records and relics of his people (5:7-13). The mechanical training which Nephi had received under the Lord's hand when he built the ship upon which his people sailed for this land now proved of great benefit to them. Nephi taught them how to make swords for their defense, and how to build and work with their hands. The record states that he caused his people "to be industrious." (5:17) This was an important lesson, one which needs to be learned afresh by the younger generation of our own day. Nephi and his people built a temple not so luxurious as Solomon's, but after its pattern, the plans of which were doubtless found upon the Brass Plates (5:16). The members of the colony also persuaded Nephi to be their king.

The Lord now laid his heavy hand upon the Lamanites, because in rejecting Nephi as their ruler and teacher they had rejected him and had cut themselves off from his presence. A curse in the form of a "skin of blackness" was brought upon them in order that they might not be enticing to the Lord's people (5:21; cf. Jacob 3:9, "darkness of their skins"). The lord also provided that the curse should come upon those who mixed with the seed of the Lamanites (5:23; cf. 3 Nephi 2:14-16, where, for good reasons, an exception was made). The Lamanites subsequently became an idle people, full of mischief and subtlety, and served as a scourge to the Nephites to keep them in remembrance of the Lord (5:24, 25).

Nephi observes at this point that he consecrated his brothers, Jacob and Joseph, to be priests and teachers over the land of his people, and that thirty years had passed away since they left Jerusalem (5:26, 28; 571 B.C.). In the remainder of the chapters Nephi says more about his records and about the wars his people had with their brethren.

Chapters 6-10 constitute the next logical division of the text of 2 Nephi. These chapters are a selection of the teachings and exhortations of Nephi's brother, Jacob, which were delivered to the people of Nephi over a period of two days (6:1; 9:54; 11:1). We may properly ask why Nephi quoted the teachings of Jacob. There are at least two good reasons why he did. The first is that Jacob, like himself, was a personal witness of the Redeemer, and a valuable witness to the truthfulness of his (Nephi's) writings (2:3, 4; 11:2,3). The second is that Jacob quoted extensively from the prophecies of Isaiah which Nephi delighted in, and expounded the great doctrines involving the Savior's coming, sufferings, and infinite atonement.

At the beginning of his remarks Jacob explained that he was called of God, haying been "ordained after the manner of his holy order." (6:2 ) He was therefore called by proper authority to teach an expound to his people. He said he was anxious concerning the welfare of his people's souls, and proceeded diligently to teach them the words of Isaiah at Nephi's request, since they concerned matters "which are, and which are to come." (6:4 ) These words of Isaiah, so he explained, concerned all of the house of Israel, including the Nephites. Here are some of the words he quoted from Isaiah 49:22, 23 (cf. 1 Nephi 21:22,23):

Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles [nations], And set up my standard [signal, admonition?] to the people, And they shall bring thy sons in their arms [bosom]. And thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders. And kings shall be thy nursing [foster] fathers, And their queens thy nursing mothers; They shall bow down to thee with their faces towards the earth, And lick up the dust of thy feet; And thou shalt know that I am the Lord; For they shall not be ashamed that wait for me [i.e., their confidence in God will be justified].

According to Jacob, this quotation from Isaiah has reference to the gathering of Israel. He pointed out that his own people in Jerusalem had been either slain or carried away captive. Nevertheless, the Lord had shown him that the captives would return to Palestine again. He was also shown that Jesus Christ should manifest himself to them in the flesh, but that they would scourge him and crucify him. Then the judgments of God should come upon them, and they should be smitten and afflicted. After their punishment in being dispersed, the Lord would be merciful unto them so that they might come to the knowledge of their Redeemer and be gathered again into the lands of their inheritance. Jacob then pronounced a blessing upon the Gentiles, a prophecy which has to do with our own and future times. If they repent and do not fight against Zion or unite with the "great and abominable church," they shall be save. They that fight against Zion and God's covenant people, however, shall lick up the dust of their feet, and the Lord's people shall not be ashamed. According to the word of Isaiah (11:11, 12), the Messiah will gather the remnant of Israel the second time and manifest himself unto them in power and great glory.

Jacob points out that those who will not believe in the Messiah shall be destroyed in various ways: by fire, tempest, earthquakes, bloodshed, pestilence, and famine. In proof of this, he quotes Isaiah 49:24-26 (6:16-18; cf. notes on 1 Nephi 21:24-26).

The prophet now quotes in their, entirety Chapters 50 and 51, as well as Chapters 52:1, 2 of Isaiah. 2These scriptures constitute 2 Nephi 7, 8. Let us, at this point, quote and expound these prophecies of Isaiah as we did those in 1 Nephi 20, 21.

2 Nephi 7 (Cf. Isaiah 50.)

The text from the Brass Plates is a little fuller and more understandable than the one in the familiar version. In verses 1-3 the Lord argues vigorously with Israel's exiles to the effect that he has never cast his people away. True, because of unfaithfulness the Lord has punished Israel and has cast her aside, but the rejection was never permanent or intended to be such. Israel fell into the hands of her enemies and was in this sense divorced, but under the Mosaic law (Deuteronomy 24:1-4), a marriage could not be legally dissolved unless the wife received from her husband a "bill of divorcement." Therefore, the Lord argues, he can take his people back because Israel was never legally separated from him; no bill of sale was ever made out. Moreover, the Lord never had any creditors; consequently, his rights over his children have not been jeopardized. In ancient times children might be sold its slavery in order to provide means for the payment of a debt; the allusion to creditors is made because of this custom.

When the Lord made attempts in various ways to bring about a reconciliation with Israel, there was no one ("man") to receive him; when he called through the prophets, there were none who took the trouble to answer him. By means of references to his great powers in nature and in the heavens (vss. 2,3), the Lord tries to convince a skeptical house of Israel that he can redeem and deliver them.

Verses 4-11 make up what is known as the third "Servant Song" in Isaiah, and in it the Savior is represented as soliloquizing concerning himself and his labors. God gives him the power of the learned (cultivated and fluent) in order to sustain, encourage, or comfort his weary fellow Israelites. His humility is manifested in that God opened his ear to let him know what he should tell his people and he did not rebel or turn away backward. He has delivered the message as ordered to the misguided people (7:4,5), who treat him despicably, even going so far as to pluck off the hair of his beard, a terrible form of degradation in ancient times (7:6; cf. Isaiah 7:20; 2 Samuel 10:4). But God will aid him; therefore he shall not be confounded by the perplexities and doubts raised by the undeserved insults and torments to which he has been subjected. Sustained by God, he is determined to feel no shame (7:7). Since God is near and justifies him, who can successfully content with him? Let a potential adversary draw near and try to justify his enmity! The Lord will smite him with the strength (power) of his mouth. Because of God's help, all men who condemn or attempt to convict him shall come to an ignominious end (7:9). The Lord now exhorts his people to trust in God; for who among them that fears and obeys divine counsel walks in darkness, having no light? (7:10.) On the other hand, those who kindle fires and gird themselves with firebrands--that is, those who conspire evil and plan the destruction of the faithful or who walk by their own lights--shall be trapped by their own snares. They shall come to a sorrowful end (7:11; cf. D&C 133:64-74).

2 Nephi 8 (Cf. Isaiah 51; Isaiah 52:1,2.)

The Lord now resumes the address which was begun in Chapter 7 (cf. Isaiah 50), but which was interrupted by the "Servant Song" in 7:4-11. First of all (8:1-8), the righteous remnant among his people is given an encouraging message. They are told to recall their illustrious ancestors, Abraham and Sarah, "the rock from whence ye are hewn, and . . . the hole of the pit from whence ye are digged." (8:1) These two worthies are compared to a quarry from whence came the stones, the house of Israel. Abraham is represented as the "rock" and Sarah as the "pit". The Lord called Abraham alone, as one, and blessed him that he should have a numerous posterity, not to mention other great blessings (cf. Abraham 2:6, 8-11). At first, Abraham and Sarah were childless, but God remembered them; similarly, he will remember the promises made to their descendants, the house of Israel. In the latter days the Lord will comfort Zion, the remnant of his people, he will transform the waste places to which they come into an Eden, and there will be joy and gladness among them. Here the Lord is speaking of Israel's final gathering and not of the Babylonian exiles, as many commentators suppose. The revelation of God, his law, shall go forth to the nations, and his justice shall be established as a light to the people (8:4). Looking down the centuries--as Isaiah sees it--the Lord's righteousness or vindication is near, his salvation has gone forth, his arm or power shall judge the people, and they will trust in that power. Though the heavens vanish and the earth wax old like a garment, the Lord's plan of deliverance will endure. The Lord's people, in whose heart he has written his law, are not to be discouraged or afraid of the reproaches and reviling of men, for the oppressors shall perish as though eaten by moths and worms. But the Lord's righteousness or favor, on the other hand, shall persist for ever, and his salvation from generation to generation (8:8).

Isaiah now represents Israel as calling upon the Lord to intervene and exercise his power as he did in his battle Rahab, the primeval chaos or ocean, and the dragon, not to mention his delivery of Israel from the bondage in Egypt (8:9,10). Some authorities think that by "Rahab" Egypt is meant (see Isaiah 30:7) and that the dragon represents Pharoah. The Lord is reminded that he dried up the waters of the great deep so the ransomed could pass over. Therefore, in response to God's power his people shall return in the latter days to Zion with singing and everlasting joy (8:11; cf. Isaiah 35:10; D&C 45:71; D&C 101:18,19). Israel's God assures her that it is he who comforts her; why should she be afraid of mortal men, who are like unto grass? The fury of the oppressor is nothing before God's power. Israel is the Lord's envoy, and it is his desire to establish her and restore Zion (8:12-16).

Isaiah now calls upon Jerusalem or Zion, as if she were in a drunken stupor because of punishments received, and with none to guide her among her children, to awake and stand (8:17,18).

The Lord now tells her of some events that will come to pass in her restoration and also that he will see to it that she will no longer have to drink of the cup of his fury (8:19-22; cf. Isaiah 51:19-22). Verses 19 and 20 deserve special comment. In the common version, verse 19 begins with "These two things are come unto thee; who shall be sorry for [bemoan] thee?" The Book of Mormon version shows that the text should read: "These two sons are come unto thee, who shall be sorry for thee--..." This reading then makes sense in the light of verse 20, which refers to "thy sons." We shall quote the verses at this point and then comment upon them at greater length.

Who are the "two sons" mentioned in this passage? Isaiah doubtless has reference to the two great prophets who will be raised up to save the Jews from some as yet unknown enemy that will infest Jerusalem. John the Revelator saw their work in his great vision of the future and writes of it as follows:

And there was given me a reed like unto a rod: and the angel stood, saying Rise, and measure the Temple of God, and the altar, and them that worship therein. But the court which is without the temple leave out, and measure it not; for it is given unto the Gentiles: and the holy city shall they tread under foot forty and two months. And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a thousand and two hundred and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth. These are the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks standing before the God of the earth. And if any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies; and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed. These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy; and have power over waters to turn them to blood, and to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will. And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them. And their bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified. And they of the people and kindreds and tongues and nations shall see their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves. And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another because these two prophets tormented them that dwelt in the earth. And after three days and a half the Spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet; and great fear fell upon them which saw them. And they heard a great voice from heaven saying unto them, Come up hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud; and their enemies beheld them. And the same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the city fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand: and the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven. (Revelation 11:1-13)

When Isaiah has finished telling about the episode involving the "two sons", he continues to address Jerusalem as "thou afflicted, and drunken, and not with wine," that is to say, as one in a stupor because of punishment and not because of strong drink. He tells her that God will plead her cause and that she will not have to drink the cup of fury any more. Quite to the contrary, as in Jeremiah's vision (Jeremiah 25:15ff.), the cup of God's wrath will pass from Jerusalem to the nations, her oppressors. Those nations that previously said, "Bow down, that we may go over,"--an allusion to the ancient custom of forming a footpath of prostate prisoners of war over whose bodies the conquerors walked (cf. Joshua 10:24)--will now feel the weight of God's power.

Verses 24 and 25 of 2 Nephi 8 correspond to Isaiah 52:1,2. They contain a remarkable appeal to Zion to put on festive garments and to loose herself from the bands of her neck; no more will her unclean oppressors enter into her sacred precincts. Inasmuch as the Prophet Joseph Smith gave an explanation of these verses, we shall quote them and then present his exposition of them.

The Prophet Joseph Smith's interpretation of these two verses is as follows:

Questions by Elias Higbee: What is meant by the command in Isaiah, 52nd chapter, 1st verse, which saith: Put on thy strength, O Zion--and what people had Isaiah reference to? He had reference to those whom God should call in the last days, who should hold the power of priesthood to bring again Zion, and the redemption of Israel; and to put on her strength is to put on the authority of the priesthood, which she, Zion, has a right to by lineage, also to return to that power which she had lost. What are we to understand by Zion loosing herself from the bands of her neck; 2nd verse? We are to understand that the scattered remnants are exhorted to return to the Lord from whence they have fallen; which if they do, the promise of the Lord is that he will speak to them, or give them revelation. See 6th, 7th, and 8th verses. The bands of her neck are the curses of God upon her, or the remnants of Israel in their scattered condition among the Gentiles. (D&C 113:7-10)

Moroni, the last great Nephite prophet, seems also to have understood Isaac's message and in his farewell words makes an allusion to it:

And awake, and arise from the dust, O Jerusalem; yea, and put on thy beautiful garments, O daughter of Zion; and strengthen thy stakes and enlarge thy borders forever, that thou mayest no more be confounded, that the covenants of the Eternal Father which he hath made unto thee, O house of Israel, may be fulfilled. (Moroni 10:31)

He indeed looked forward to our day, when God's work should be no more confounded or overthrown.

Having quoted Isaiah 50-52:2 to his brethren, Jacob informs them that he wanted them to know the covenants of the Lord which he made with all the house of Israel; that he has or will have spoken with the Jews by the prophets from times until the latter days, when they will have been gathered to the lands of their inheritance and restored to the true church and fold of God (9:1-2). They can rejoice because of the blessings the Lord God shall bestow upon their descendants. Jacob teaches his audience that though our flesh waste away and die, nevertheless, "in our [resurrected] bodies we shall see God." (9:4) Then he points out that the Savior, "the great Creator," would show himself in the body to those at Jerusalem in order to subject himself unto man in the flesh, and die for all men, that all men might become subject to him. In the next ten verses (9:6-15), Jacob gives one of the most important discussions on the necessity of the resurrection and the power of the atonement to be found in all scripture. Indeed, he gives some information not found in other scripture. Inasmuch as death, he explains, has passed upon all men by reason of the Fall, it becomes necessary to have a power of resurrection, because men are all cut off from the presence of the Lord by transgression (9:6). The first judgment upon men -- being cast out from God's presence -- would abide forever, save there should be an infinite atonement which would bring about in corruption (resurrection). Without God's grace, mercy, and wisdom, the flesh should rise no more, and our spirits would become subject to--and even like unto-the great Adversary, who fell from the presence of God, and who beguiled our fist parents and stirred up mankind to commit murder and do all manner of secret works of darkness (9:8,9). Because of the deliverance made possible by our Lord, the Holy One of Israel , death and hell (the death of the body and spirit) shall be frustrated; the grave will deliver up its captive bodies, and the bodies and the spirits of men will be restored one to another by the power of the resurrection. The united spirits and bodies of men become incorruptible and immortal, having a perfect knowledge like unto us in the flesh, except that their knowledge shall be perfect. They will have a perfect knowledge of their foibles and guilt in the flesh; and the righteous will have a perfect knowledge of their enjoyment, and their righteousness, being clothed with purity, even with the robe of righteousness. Men, having become immortal, must now appear before the judgment-seat of the Holy One of Israel to be judged according to the holy judgment of God. Those who are righteous shall be righteous still, but those who are filthy--the devil and his angels--shall go away into the torment prepared for them, which shall be likened unto a "lake of fire and brimstone." (9:15,16; cf. Alma 34:35; Alma 40:13,14; D&C 76:36-38.)

Jacob extols the greatness, justice, holiness and mercy of God in suffering the pains of all the descendants of Adam and in having the power of the resurrection invoked in their behalf. The righteous who despise the shame of the world shall have a fulness of joy forever (9:17-22). All men must repent and be baptized in our Lord's name in perfect faith, or they cannot be saved in his kingdom. Those who do not repent and be baptized will be condemned.

The Lord has given a law in this respect; but where there is no law given--that is, where men do not know of it--there can, of course, be no punishment of condemnation. Where there is no condemnation, the mercies of God have a claim, because of the atonement. The atonement satisfies the demands of God's justice upon all those who do not have the law given them; consequently, they are spared and delivered from death and hell, and are restored to that God who gave them breath (9:24-26).

On the other hand, the prophet deeply condemns those who have been given the law, and who transgress and waste the days of their probation. He associates such actions with the cunning plan of the evil one:

O that cunning plan of the evil one! O the vainness, and the frailties, and the foolishness of men! When they are learned they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not. And they shall perish. (9:28)

He then gives this very wise epigram: "But to be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God," (9:29).

It should be observed that Jacob does not attack learning as such. Learning is much to be desired, if with it men are humble and contrite in spirit. True learning should make men humble because their own deficiencies are revealed therein.

In a series of ten "woes" (9:27-38), Jacob denounces the wickedness of the "rich as to the things of the world," of the "deaf that will not hear," of the "blind that will not see," of the "uncircumcised of heart," of the "liar," of the "murderer," of "them who commit whoredoms," and the like. He goes on to observe that to be carnally minded is death, and to be spiritually minded is life eternal (9:39). The course of righteousness is narrow, and the keeper of the gate is the Holy One of Israel. Whoso knocks upon the gate will find it open to him if he comes to Christ with a repentant and humble spirit. The Lord despises those who are puffed up with their learning and their wisdom and their riches. His audience is exhorted to turn away from their sins and prepare their souls for the glorious day when justice shall be administered to the righteous. They are to awake to the awful reality of the results of sin. He informs them that his very soul abhors sin, and his heart delights in righteousness (9:45-49). Then he makes an allusion to the words of Isaiah who points out that the Lord's spiritual feast is free:

Come, my brethren. every one that thirsteth, Come ye to the waters. And he that hath no money Come, buy, and eat; Yea, come, buy wine and milk Without money and without price. (9:50; cf. Isaiah 55:1.)

Apparently Jacob could not praise enough the covenants of God and his condescension unto the children of men. He was particularly grateful that the Lord had promised them (the Nephites) that their seed should not be utterly destroyed, but should be preserved and in future generations become a righteous branch of the house of Israel (9:51-53).

The teachings of Jacob which we have discussed thus far are the highlights of his sermon as delivered on the first day. What we have of his teachings of the second day are found in Chapter 10. In the main, the chapter deals with a discussion of the righteous branch of his (Jacob's) people and the promises of God to them. The Christ who should eventually come and be crucified among the wicked Jews will, in time still to come, restore Israel from its long dispersion, and the Gentiles will be great in the Lord's eyes in carrying his people to the lands of then inheritance. This land will be shared by the Gentiles, and it will be a land of liberty to them. No kings will be raised up upon it (10:1-11). The reader will remember that the kings who have been "raised up" on this land have not lasted very long. This continent has been singularly free from kings as government heads. Jacob continues his sermon by citing the Lord's words that he would fortify the land against all nations and destroy all works of darkness and abomination. Moreover, those who fight against Zion shall perish. Jacob's seed are to be afflicted by the Gentiles, but the Lord will soften their hearts so that they will bless the remnant of Israel on this land. For this reason the Gentiles shall themselves be blessed and numbered among the house of Israel. This land will, in fact, be consecrated to the remnant of Israel and those who join themselves to it (10:19). Another point of interest taught by Jacob is this: the Lord from time to time has led away members of the house of Israel to various parts of the earth according to his will and pleasure (10:21,22). Finally, Jacob once more urges his brethren to remember the Lord, lay aside their sins, cheer up their hearts, and reconcile themselves to the will of God, not to that of the devil.

One who reads Chapters 6, 9, and 10 cannot help but be pleased with the genuine piety, humility, and worthiness of Jacob. His soul had been so touched that he could not refrain from extending his praise and adoration to the Christ, the Holy One of Israel.
