## 37075-The Second Book of Nephi (Continued)

The Second Book of Nephi (Continued)

Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 11

The Second Book of Nephi (Continued)

With Chapter 11 we begin the consideration of the last division of the Book of 2 Nephi (11-33). In this chapter Nephi makes the comment that his brother Jacob had spoken many other things to his people, other that those contained in Chapters 6-10, but what he (Nephi) had written of them was adequate for his purpose (11:1). Jacob's tendency to quote the prophecies of Isaiah and expound them seems to have pleased Nephi, because he says, "And now I, Nephi, write more of the words of Isaiah, for my soul delighteth in his words." (11:2)

He then explains that Isaiah had seen the Redeemer, even as he (Nephi) and his brother Jacob had seen him. For that reason he desires to send forth Isaiah's and Jacob's words to his children in order to prove to them the truth of his own teachings and establish other witnesses for God. Nephi continues by saying that he delights to prove to his people the truth of Christ's coming. To this end the law of Moses was given; all things given by God from the beginning of the world unto man, typify him. Nephi says that his soul delights in the covenants which the Lord had made with their fathers; his grace, justice, power, and mercy in providing the great and eternal plan of deliverance from death profoundly moved him. He delights in proving to his people that except Christ should come, all men must perish:

For if there be no Christ there be no God; and if there be no God we are not, for there could have been no creation. But there is a God, and he is Christ, and he cometh in the fulness of his own time. (11:7)

Nephi now announces his intentions of writing more of the words of Isaiah:

And now I write some of the words of Isaiah, that whoso of my people shall see these words may lift up their hearts and rejoice for all men. Now these are the words, and ye may liken [apply, compare] them unto all men (11:8)

Chapter 11 thus emphasizes the worth of the Book of Isaiah to us all. Unfortunately, however, our people have made no thorough going study of the teachings of Isaiah in the light which the gospel now affords us. The reader is referred to 3 Nephi 23:1-3 for the Savior's estimate of the value of Isaiah.

In Chapters 12-24 of 2 Nephi, thirteen chapters in all, Nephi quotes the writings of Isaiah 2-14. This is the longest single quotation of scripture in the entire Book of Mormon. The quotations from Isaiah must have been taken directly from the Brass Plates which were brought by the Nephites from Jerusalem. The observant reader may wonder why Chapter one of Isaiah was omitted. This may well have been because it is a great arraignment of the sins of the Jews of an earlier time, and also because Nephi wanted to emphasize other matters of more particular interest to himself.

For the most part, the quotations of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon are in the language of the King James Version. Where the text of this version did not agree with that on the Small Plates of Nephi, the Prophet Joseph Smith unhesitatingly translated so as to agree with the ancient text before him. There are, therefore, many divergencies in text that are of considerable interest to the scholar. We shall not deal at this point with the great literary problem of the text of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon; the reader is referred to Chapter 27 in this book, where it is discussed at considerable length.

Now let us consider under appropriate headings the main teachings of these chapters quoted by Nephi from Isaiah.

2 Nephi 12 (Cf. Isaiah 2.)

In the superscription (vs. 1) of this chapter, Isaiah says:

The word that Isaiah, the son of Amoz, saw [beheld prophetically] concerning Judah and Jerusalem.

Despite the fact that Isaiah speaks only of Judah and Jerusalem, his words may be "likened" or applied to all the tribes of Israel indeed, as Nephi says, "unto all men." (2 Nephi 11:8)

Isaiah saw clearly the wickedness and moral degeneration of his people (cf. Isaiah 1), but as a seer he gazed into the future and saw that in the latter days a remnant of the house of Israel would be gathered and would play a glorious role in the world. In verses 2 to 3 of this chapter, the prophet gives an exalted and idealized vision of Israel's future. He sees the "mountain of the Lord's house," the dwelling place or temple of God, a place where He may feel at home with his people, established or towering at the head of the mountains, and exalted above the hills. People of all nations will stream to the house of the God of Jacob to be taught and instructed in his ways. Two great capitals, Zion and Jerusalem, are to be set up from whence the world will receive instruction, politically and spiritually. Zion will be established upon this the (American) continent, which is to be the inheritance of the remnants of the house of Joseph (cf. Ether 13:8). The present members of our Church are mostly of that lineage. The other tribes will eventually receive the gospel and return to Palestine to receive their inheritance, as the Lord decreed to Abraham (Genesis 17:8). To this blessed land of America many shall come to be taught the gospel principles in their fullness. This, we believe, has in part already taken place. The great empire in the West already established by the Mormon people attests to that fact. These people have come out of many nations, and their influence is spreading throughout America. Jerusalem, the capital of Palestine, will in time also have great power and influence under the gospel plan. At this writing, 2,600,000 Jews have returned to Palestine, They may not realize it, but the Lord has great plans for them:

And let them who be of Judah flee unto Jerusalem, unto the mountain of the Lord's House. (D&C 133; D&C 13; italics mine.)

This quotation may indicate that latter-day Saints are too prone to restrict the application of the phrase, "mountains of the Lord's house," to one locality. Jerusalem must also be considered in connection with it.

In verse 4 Isaiah gives an intensely idealistic and beautiful word picture of a word picture of a world in which there is no war. In it the Lord is sovereign, and his rule extends to all nations; he judges disputes among them and arbitrates difficulties among the peoples of the world in accordance with the principles of his justice and righteousness. Obviously Isaiah is describing a condition in the world that shall come at or after the Second Advent of the Lord. It has been nearly 2700 years, at the time of this writing, since he, wrote the vision, and we sometimes marvel at how little social progress man has made in that time. Wars are bred because men and nations seem never to learn how to get along with each other. Selfishness and greed for power are still rampant in the world. In the midst of it all, we are apt to conclude that Isaiah was an impractical dreamer. But was he? In the physical world we do not progress without much planning and toil. But in physical matters we are making progress. In the realm of the moral and spiritual, can we likewise expect to progress without effort and without setting up goals and ideals? Isaiah knew, as all men should know, that war is a crime against humanity. He knew, as few men have know before since, the weakness and failings of mankind. But in spite of that knowledge he boldly writes that some day war shall cease. He doesn't argue the point. He writes that some day war shall cease. He doesn't argue the point. He writes as if it were certain of accomplishment. His faith is magnificent.

Having described the wonderful and glorious state of Israel in the distant future, Isaiah now contemplates drab reality--the wicked state of his people-and exhorts them to change their ways:

In verses 6 to 9, Isaiah addresses the Lord and recites the reasons why the Almighty has forsaken his people. They are superstitious; they trust in their material resources, covenant with aliens, worship pagan gods, and fail to humble themselves before the Lord:

Isaiah's disgust and sorrow over the wickedness of his own people cause him to launch into a discussion (vss. 10-22) of God's judgments upon the wicked in the latter days, the era in which we live. The judgments of which the prophet speaks will doubtless take place just before and at the time of our Lord's Second Advent. Attention is called to the identical refrains in verses 11 and 17, "and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day." The Lord's exaltation can take place only when he has returned to the earth and has established his kingdom, politically and spiritually. Attention is also called to other world-shaking events that will take place when God visits his judgments upon the wicked (notice vss. 12, 14, 19, 21):

2 Nephi 13 (Cf. Isaiah 3.)

Isaiah now addresses himself to the punishments and judgments the Lord will bring upon his people. The people of Judah will have taken from them every means of support upon which they rely. Their most competent leaders of society and state will be deported, and they will be ruled by incompetents without experience or ability. Military, civil, and religious leaders, not to mention skillful artificers and mechanics, will be removed from Judean society. The people will be reduced to such straits that they will lack necessary subsistence, bread and water (13:1-4):

Isaiah sees that social chaos will take place among his people. Violence and oppression will take the place of law, the young will treat the aged with insolence, there will be abject misery, and none will be found among them willing to take up or assume the responsibility of government (13:5-7):

Isaiah now speaks of the coming disaster to the nation as already accomplished. The disaster will come as a direct consequence of the sinful words and deeds of the people. Their rebellions are in direct defiance of God's majesty and glory. The very sight of their countenances gives them away and witnesses to the gravity of their sins, which are like those of Sodom. Nor can they hide it. (Verse 9 is difficult.) Isaiah expresses woe to their souls, because their crimes shall recoil upon their own heads. He makes clear the basic law of retribution, that the righteous have a blessed reward and the wicked a merited punishment (13:8-11):

In verses 12 to 15 the Lord castigates the people and rulers of Judah. The leaders of the people act like children in maltreating those who come under their rule, and the corrupting influence of their prominent women is also felt. In other words, the leaders of the people are misleaders; they bring about apostasy with their false teachings and exploit the helpless poor. For these reasons the Lord will judge the ancients (elders), the primary administrators of justice, and the princes (royal appointees) thereof:

Just as the prophet Amos had shown the sad state of Israel by describing its women (Amos 4:1-4)-he called them "cows"-so Isaiah now portrays or symbolizes the unfortunate state of the nation by describing the unseemly conduct of "the daughters of Zion" in their gaudy and extravagant articles of apparel (13:16-23). We do not know the exact nature of all these articles of apparel, but that fact need not disturb us; we still see the point that Isaiah is trying to make. The Prophet Joseph Smith probably did not change the renderings of these articles of women's clothing, as given in the King James Version, for that very reason.

The "daughters of Zion," representing Israel, strut proudly in their fine clothes and jewels, but the Lord will smile them with disease and exhibit their shame (vss. 16, 17). "in that day," the day of the Lord's judgment, they will be stripped of all their finery and be left bareheaded and scantily clad (vss. 18-23):

Because of Israel's delinquencies and frequent apostasies from God through the centuries, as represented by the "daughters of Zion," she shall lament and mourn, [I say "through the centuries," because in 14:4 (cf. Isaiah 4:4) the Lord will have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, which act will take place in this dispensation, the latter days.] Zion (so means Isaiah) will now adopt the garb of mourning, sackcloth. She will receive branding, the mark of slavery, instead of beauty. Her men will be lost in battle, and mourning and desolation shall take over (13:24-26). And such has been Israel's history as prophesied by Isaiah.

2 Nephi 14 (Cf. Isaiah 4.)

In this chapter Isaiah deals almost exclusively with events of the latter days, events even yet future. It concerns the restoration of Zion. To be sure, the effects of God's judgments, as we have seen in the previous chapter, will still be felt. "In that day," (14:1) when the judgments will have removed so many men that there is a great scarcity of them, "seven women" (meaning simply a lot of women) will request a man's hand in marriage. Economic problems will be such that these women will be willing to provide their own food and clothing, contrary to the usual marriage customs. According to the Hebrew scriptures (Exodus 21:10), a man was required to provide a wife with food and clothing; but in this case Isaiah observes that the women are willing to waive that right. Having a good knowledge of the importance of marriage, they request a man to take away their reproach. In Isaiah's day and, indeed, in many parts of the Near East today, it was and is a disgrace to remain unmarried.

In 14:2 Isaiah portrays the fact that in the restoration of Zion the vegetation and fruit of the earth will be the pride and glory of the escaped remnants of Israel. And these remnants of Israel, having been purified by suffering, and having been approved by God ("written among the living"), shall be called holy (14:3). This will take place when the Lord will have purged the moral degradation (filth and blood) of the "daughters of Zion" (cf. 13:16-23) by his blasts of judgment and extermination (14:4). And the whole site of Zion and her assembly places will be glorious to behold, for the Lord will manifest his presence and protecting care over her with a cloud and smoke by day and the shining of a flaming fire by night (cf. Exodus 13:21-22; Exodus 40:34-38). Moreover, over all the glory of Zion the Lord will provide a canopy (14:5). Just as a king's throne is covered with a canopy, so will it be becoming for our Lord the King to have a canopy over his Zion. For a more revealing description of the glorified Zion, one may be advised to read Isaiah, Chapter 60.

Isaiah ends the chapter (14:6) by giving a description of simple comforts and protection the Lord will provide for his people in Zion. There will be provided a pavilion for shade by day from the heat, and for a refuge and a shelter from storm. Some authorities think that "heat" and "storm" symbolize enemy attacks, but I think such a view is highly unlikely when applied to a glorified, redeemed Zion.

2 Nephi 15 (Cf. Isaiah 5.)

In verses 1 to 7 of this chapter, Isaiah gives its his famous "Song of the Vineyard," variously described as a parable or an allegory. By means of it the prophet effectively portrays to his people the love, energy, and kindness which God has extended to them, but which they have repaid with base ingratitude and rebellions conduct. Because of this, they are threatened with dire retribution. In this parable, Isaiah takes the role of a singer whose theme deals with the relations between his "friend" or "beloved" (the Lord of Hosts) and His vineyard (the house of Israel). As one reads the poem, it will be observed that in verse 3 the singer gives way to the "friend," who expresses his disappointment at the meager return he receives for the care bestowed on the vineyard. The vineyard had fertile soil in a choice location. Upon it the owner bestowed his labor and skill to make it productive, but all to no avail. The people are now asked (15:3-5) if the owner is not justified, considering the care he has given it, in pronouncing the doom and ruin of the vineyard. So the Lord pronounces sentence upon it. It is to be left uncultivated and uncared for, becoming a jungle of briars and thorns. Thus the vineyard, representing Israel and Judah, is rejected by the Lord because of injustice and oppression:

In a series of six "woes" (15:8-25), Isaiah indicts the rulers of his people for land-grabbing at the expense of the poor, for drunkenness, for challenging God to hasten his work, for calling evil good and good evil, for their arrogance, for taking bribes, and for taking away the righteousness of the righteous. At intervals the prophet follows his indictments of the oppressors with descriptions of the inevitable punishment that is to follow their conduct. First of all, Isaiah denounces the rapacity of the rich who expand their estates at the expense of the poor. Most of the land becomes the property of a few:

Because of their covetousness in taking away the hereditary possessions of their less fortunate brethren, Isaiah spells out the retribution that shall overtake the rich oppressors. Their houses and cities shall be deserted and their lands shall give poor returns in produce:

9 In mine [Isaiah's] ears, said the Lord of Hosts, Of a truth many houses shall be desolate, And great and fair cities without inhabitant

The prophet next announces a woe because of the selfish indulgence of the rules and lords of the people who carouse and feast day and night, thinking only of their own pleasures (Cf. Amos 6:4-6.)

As punishment for their iniquities, Isaiah sees as an accomplished fact exile, hunger, thirst, and death, for both the people and their greedy rulers. Want of knowledge, knowledge of God and his ways, brings about their downfall. In verse 14 Isaiah represents hell or Sheol, the world of departed spirits, as an insatiable monster which devours these victims of Jehovah's judgment, together with their luxury, din, and remaining dignity:

Over against the injustice and unrighteousness of His people, Isaiah describes the exalted state of God:

Verse 17 seems to give little sense in its present position; indeed, most authorities think that verses 15 to 17 are out of their proper position. Some critics would place them after verse 10. I have made fair sense of verses 15 and 16, but verse 17 is difficult:

Isaiah now pronounces another woe upon Israel's hardened sinners, who are described as being yoked to sin as we see a horse yoked to a wagon. Moreover, they mock the prophet's warnings of the Lord's day of judgment, "in that day," (cf. 13:18) by saying, in effect, "Let the Lord speed up his work; we are indifferent to it, we are skeptics."

The next woe pronounced by the prophet shows that his people either willfully pervert standards of right and wrong-like the communists of our day-or have reached such depths of depravity that the, can no longer make moral distinctions:

The fifth woe is directed against the arrogant and conceited, those who think themselves shrewd and discerning:

In his sixth and last woe, Isaiah uses military terms, "mighty" and "valiant," to describe Israel's leaders; but they are mighty only in their ability to drink wine and valiant only in mixing, strong drink. Not only that, but they enrich themselves by resorting to corrupt practices in the law-courts:

Because Israel has rejected God's law and has despised His word, Isaiah describes how the Almighty will vent his anger upon his people. Stubble and chaff, which are quickly consumed in a fire, symbolize the suddenness with which disaster will strike the nation. Root and branch, it will meet its doom.

I have omitted the last lines of verse 25 at this point for a good reasons. Although Isaiah has pronounced a sentence of doom upon Israel for her iniquities, it now appears that it is not one of complete doom-there is a note of hope in the last lines:

For all this His anger is not turned away, But His hand is streched out still.

Isaiah sees the hand of God still extended to his erring children and, indeed, perceives a future glorious age of Israel's final restoration. Most commentators look upon verses 26 to 30 as a description of the coming of the Assyrians to complete the punishment of Israel for her sins. On the contrary, they describe in poetic hyperbole events of the latter days, when the Lord will lift the gospel ensign to the nations and will "hiss" his word from the end of the earth. When Israel responds to the Lord's call, she will come with power, and her enemies (the prey) will not be able to deliver themselves. Note the words of the Lord, who is speaking of these very events and makes an allusion to the verses in question:

But behold, there shall be many--at that day when I shall proceed to do a marvelous work among them, that I may remember my covenants which I have made unto the children of men, that I may set my hand again the second time to recover my people, which are of the house of Israel; and also, that I may remember the promises which I have made unto thee, Nephi, and also auto thy father, that I would remember your seed; and that the words of your seed should proceed out of my month unto your seed; and my words shall hiss forth unto the ends of the earth, for a standard [ensign, signal] unto my people, which are of the house of Israel; and because my words shall hiss forth--many of the Gentiles shall say: A Bible! A Bible! We have got a Bible, and there cannot be any more Bible. (2 Nephi 29:1-3; italics mine; see also 3 Nephi 20:16; 3 Nephi 21:12.)

2 Nephi 16 (Cf. Isaiah 6.)

This chapter describes Isaiah's call to the ministry, a call to the wicked and rebellious people of Israel. And why did Nephi include the chapter among his quotations from Isaiah? The answer in all probability is that he wanted his people to know about Isaiah's personal testimony that he had seen and talked to the preexistent Christ:

For he [Isaiah] verily saw my Redeemer, even as I have seen him. And my brother, Jacob, also has seen him; wherefore I will send their words forth unto my children to prove unto them that my words are true. (2 Nephi 11:2, 3)

Apparently Isaiah's vision and call to the ministry took place about the year 742 B.C. in the year that King Uzziah died." (16:1)

In verses 1 to 4 Isaiah describes the majesty and splendor of his vision of the Lord in the temple. Apparently the Lord was attended by two seraphim, strange heavenly creatures with wings, face, voice, hands and feet (cf. Revelation 4:6-8; D&C 77:3-4), who stood above (about?) him.

Awed by the vision, Isaiah is humbled by the terrible consciousness of his own sins and those of his people. Indeed, he feels as if he were a lost soul in a just and holy God's presence. Nevertheless, his iniquities and sins are forgiven him. Then he hears the Lord consulting counselors of His court concerning the choice of a messenger to visit the people of Israel. Isaiah volunteers for the mission.

The Lord commissions Isaiah to preach to His people, and is told in substance what to say to them. In somewhat disdainful, ironic language the Almighty describes the moral indifference and spiritual insensibility of the people; so lacking is their perception that he prophesies (vs. 10) the failure of Isaiah's mission. Verses 9 and 10 should be read in connection with the savior's words in Matthew 13:13-17; Mark 4:9-13; Mark 8:18; Luke 8:9-10; John 12:39-41.

Sorrowfully, the prophet asks the Lord how long this hard-heartedness, obduracy and insensibility of Israel will continue. The Almighty answers that the ultimate result of Israel's rebellions conduct will be desolation, destruction and exile; nevertheless, a remnant of Israel (vs. 13) will survive at the last, but even this remnant will undergo further suffering:

2 Nephi 17 (Cf. Isaiah 7.)

The Syro-Ephraimite War of 734 B.C. was one of the great crises in Isaiah's early ministry. (For historical background see 2 Kings 16:1-20.) It appears that Pekah, king of Northern Israel, and Rezin of Damascus, king of Aram (Syria), desired Ahaz, king of Judah, to ally himself with them in order to resist the encroachments of Assyria. The story of what happened is told in 17:1-9. Ahaz saw only the politics of the situation and preferred to maintain the friendship of Assyria rather than to enter into an alliance with Rezin and Pekah. The text of Isaiah paints a vivid picture of the dismay caused in Jerusalem by the attempt to force Ahaz into the defensive alliance. He determined to resist, and the two confederates planned to overthrow him and to place a certain Syrian, the son of Tabeel, on his throne (17:6). Apparently Jerusalem was to be invested, and the water supply of the city seems to have caused Ahaz some concern. When the attack threatened, the king determined to ask the help of Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria (2 Kings 16:7). At this juncture the Lord bade Isaiah to take his son Shear-jashub to meet Ahab at the "conduit of the upper pool," where the young ruler seems to have been inspecting his water supply (17:3). There the prophet apparently counseled him against calling in Assyria's help, and assured him that the two insignificant kingdoms of Syria and Northern Israel could not prevail. The great prophet, now also assuming his place as a practical statesman, urges him to have faith in God's word or he will not succeed (17:9):

It appears that Isaiah found Ahaz had little faith in God's power to save. So the prophet, at the Lord's behest, offered Ahaz a sign calculated to build up his faith. He could ask for a sign from the depths of Sheol, the realm of departed spirits, or from the heights above, and the Lord would give it to him. The miracle would establish the divine authority of Isaiah, whether he spoke as directed by God or spoke his own thoughts. But Ahaz rejected Isaac's offer, doubtless because he did not want to be bound in his actions and because he dreaded the truth:

Isaiah, now out of patience with Ahaz, decides to leave him to his fate. So the prophet addresses Ahaz as the representative of the whole royal court. He asks whether it is too little for them to weary or exhaust men's patience must they also exhaust that of his God?

Isaiah now tells Ahaz that the Lord will give him a sign, a sign to be given in spite of his obduracy. The sign as mentioned in verse 14, together with the comment that follows in verses 15 and 16, has evoked a great debate through the years and has called forth a great literature. Let us set forth these verses containing the so-called Immanuel Prophecy and then discuss the problem of interpretation:

What is the true meaning of this prophecy or sign? If we had only verse 14 to deal with, the answer might seem easy. We could adopt the view of the of the Gospel of Matthew (1:23) that it clearly refers to Mary and the birth of Jesus:

Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying: "Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel" (Which being interpreted is, God with us.)

This is an attractive interpretation to most of us, but unfortunately it seems not to take into account the implications of verses 15 and 16. The difficulties which these two verses introduce have caused many critics to omit them. But this we cannot conscientiously do if we concede, with the Book of Mormon, that Isaiah wrote them. What do verses 15 and 16 mean? Offhand, they seem to demand an interpretation of the sign which looks to the near future for its fulfillment rather than to the time of Christ. The obvious meaning of the verses seems to be this: When the boy Immanuel reaches an age when he can discriminate between good and evil, he shall only be able to eat butter and wild honey, the land having been so devastated that other foods will not be available. But even before the lad reaches the age of discrimination, the land of which Ahaz is terribly afraid (Syria and Israel) will lose both of her kings (Pekah and Rezin). In this respect the king is reassured. The American Revised Version translates verse 16 as follows: "For before the child knows how to refuse the evil and choose the good, the land before whose two kings you are in dread will be deserted." And we know that within about two years both Pekah and Rezin were dethroned and their lands ravaged (2 Kings 15:29-30; 2 Kings 16:9). Now if Immanuel of verse 14 is the Messiah, the Savior, what is his connection with the "child" of verses 15 and 16? Many Jewish commentators, not to mention some non-Jewish ones, think that the "virgin" or "young woman" of verse 14 may be a woman of the royal family, or any other young woman of Judah, and that her son, a boy whom she called Immanuel, does not refer to the Christ. Personally, I am inclined to accept Immanuel as a reference to the Savior, and especially in the light of 18:8 (cf. Isaiah 8:8), where Judah is referred to as Immanuel's land. The allusion to Immanuel suggests that the land of Judah (about which Ahaz was concerned) had a great destiny to fulfill, and hence that it was not about to be destroyed by Syria and Ephraim. Verses 15 and 16 of Chapter 17 (cf. Isaiah 7:15,16) simply make our Lord's infancy a symbolical representation of the short-lived nature of the threat to Judah.

Whatever the Complete answer to our problem may be, we can be sure that the sign given to Ahaz, which relieves or saves him from immediate difficulties with Syria and Israel (vss. 15,16), is in reality a foreboding of worse troubles for him and his people. For Isaiah proceeds to make clear that the Lord (Immanuel?), the great judge, will bring, down his judgments upon the dynasty of David and upon his recreant people. In verses 17 and 19, the prophet describes the disaster that Ahaz brings about as comparable only to that brought about in Jeroboam's day when the Ten Tribes revolted from the United Kigdom (cf. 1 Kings 12). The king of Assyria will come (17:17) Indeed, the present text (17:18), in metaphors involving the fly and the bee, indicates that both Egypt and bees the Assyrians and Egyptians will settle down wherever the unfortunate people try to escape from the invaders.

Changing his metapor, Isaiah now compares Assyria to a hired razor (see 2 Kings 16:7-9) by which the land is shaved bare, pillaged, decimated, and degraded. Cutting of the beard would be a sign of degradation to the Hebrews. (cf. 2 Samuel 10:4-5).

With the land heavily depopulated, Isaiah sees primitive conditions return; agriculture practically ceases, and the few people who are left eke out a precarious existence with a few animals and the wild honey they manage to find:

The prophet now describes the desolate state of the land itself. Neglected vineyards and untilled land turning to wilderness will be the order of things. Where there used to be a large vineyard containing a thousand valuable vines, there will emerge a brier and thorn patch infested with wild beasts which men will hunt with bows and arrows. Hills that were once cultivated shall be so covered with briers and thorns that men will hesitate to come there. They will only be fit for the pasturage of oxen and sheep. Verse 25 has a textual problem.

2 Nephi 18 (Cf. Isaiah 8.)

We have seen, in Chapter 17, Isaiah's failure to influence King Ahaz of Judah. Now the prophet turns to the people, and in prophecies that parallel those in Chapter 17 he assures them that their present enemies, Israel and Syria, will fall before Assyria. But since they refuse to believe, like their king in this respect, he prophesies disaster, the coming of Assyrian forces to overrun their land like a flood. In Chapter 17:3 Isaiah mentions his son Shear-jashud (a remnant shall return), but in 18:1-4 he uses the name of a newborn son Maher-shalal-hash-baz (the spoil speedeth, the prey hasteth) to symbolize the fall of Damascus and Samaria (see 2 Kings 15:29), the capitals of Syria and Israel respectively. An interesting parallelism should be noticed between 17:16 and 18:4. In 17:16 the point is made figuratively that Syria and Israel will lose their kings before the child Immanuel is old enough to discriminate between good and evil, whereas in 18:4 the point is made that the capitals of those lands will fall before Maher-shalal-hash-baz is old enough to say "my father" and "my mother." Here is the first prophecy:

The next prophecy, verses 5 to 15, parallels Chapter 17:10-25. In verses 6 and 7 Isaiah uses two interesting metaphors, the waters of Shiloah (a gentle stream, southwest of the Temple Mount) to represent the silent, unobtrusive power of God, and "the waters of the River [Euphrates]" to represent the strong forces of the king of Assyria that will sweep the land like a flood. Since the people reject the Lord, he will bring disaster upon them, using Assyria as the instrument of his power. Note the possible change of metaphor in verse 8 to that of a bird:

Despite Assyria's success in overrunning Judah, Isaiah makes clear that God will not permit the entire destruction of His people. On the contrary, the peoples (the reference is to Assyria) will be overthrown and a remnant of Israel will survive, "for God is with us," a play on the name Immanuel. The Lord's plan, not Assyria's will prevail;

The Lord firmly impresses Isaiah to stand up for principle; he and his followers are not to approve the policy adopted by Ahaz and the people of allying themselves with Assyria, and in fearing Syria and Israel. They are not to call a conspiracy all that the people call conspiracy (i.e., between Syria and Israel), nor are they to fear what the people fear. The Lord is their true ally, and he alone is to be their fear. He will be a sanctuary to those who believe in and obey him, but to the unbelievers and disobedient he will be a stumbling stone:

The threatened disaster predicted by Isaiah (the invasion of Syria and Israel) having taken place, and other prophecies having been partly fulfilled, the prophet finds himself vindicated by events. The meaning of these events, like a document legally drawn up and signed, is to be bound and signed in the hearts of his disciples. Although the Lord has vented his anger against Israel, the prophet will await patiently for him to unfold his purposes with respect to his people, despite present displeasure. Isaiah is confident that his prophecies of consolation, promises of survival and restoration, will be fulfilled. His hope and trust is in God. Indeed, his own name (Jehovah will save) and that of his two sons Shear-Jashub (a remnant shall return) and Maher-shalal-hash-baz (the spoil speedeth, the prey hasteth) are constant signs and portents of the Lord's threats of disaster and of his promises of future restoration:

Looking into the future, Isaiah sees troubles and hard times for his people, so much so that many of them will seek for light on future events by resorting to occult media instead of consulting sources authorized by God, such as scripture and the prophets. If men, says the prophet in effect, do not speak and give instruction from authorized sources, it is because they have not the light of the Spirit in them; they are to be avoided. Isaiah also sees his people so hard pressed by privation and hunger that they will be enraged and curse their king and their God. Whether they look upward or downward they shall behold distress and gloom. Many commentators think that verses 21 and 22 are out of their original place. The Hebrew text has the singular throughout the two verses, having reference to the people in privation:

2 Nephi 19 (Cf. Isaiah 9.)

Isaiah, as we have seen, has just forecast a period of distress, gloom, and privation for his people. And to appreciate and understand verses 1 and 2 of 2 Nephi 19, we should keep in mind that "at first," that is, in 734 B.C., the Assyrian king, Tiglath-pileser III, deprived Israel of Ephraim, Zebulun, and Naphtali (2 Kings 15:29). Verse 1 is, in reality, a transitional one between present gloom and a future day ("and afterwards") of glorious tidings, having to do (vss. 2-7) with the coming of the Messiah in the flesh. The King James Version rendering of verse 1 in the Book of Mormon is rather cumbersome and difficult to make clear. As a matter of fact, the verse is obscure:

These two verses were looked upon by the Apostle Matthew as finding their prophetic fulfillment in the ministry of Jesus:

And leaving Nazareth he went and settled at Capernaum on the Sea of Galilee, in the district of Zebulun and Naphtali. This was in fulfillment of the passage in the prophet Isaiah which tells of 'the land of Zebulun, the land of Naphtali; the road by the sea, the land beyond Jordan, heathen Galilee', and says:

'The people that lived in darkness saw a great light; Light dawned on the dwellers in the land of death's dark shadow.' (Matthew 4:13-16; New English Bible translation)

Accepting Matthew's interpretation of verses 1 and 2 as referring to Christ, and with verses 6 and 7 assuredly referring to his birth, power and character, we can proceed with some assurance to interpret verses 3 to 5. In the coming of the Savior to earth, Isaiah sees his nation made great ("multiplied"), and the joy of his coming among good men like the "joy in harvest," the harvest festival which was an occasion of national rejoicing. Not only that, but the joy will be like soldiers "when they divide the spoil," i.e., when they are victorious. Isaiah also sees again a future day when the Messiah will reign and war will be no more (vss. 4,5; cf. Isaiah 2:4). The "yoke of his burden," the oppressive rule of the conqueror, will be lifted; and the bars and rods representing unjust and cruel exercise of power and authority will be broken. The material and equipment needed for war will be destroyed; "this shall be with burning and fuel of fire."

All of these things will take place and be possible, says Isaiah in effect, because a certain child will come into the world-God himself:

Having spoken of the coming of Christ, Isaiah now speaks (vss. 8-21) of judgments past and of judgments yet to come upon Israel and Judah. In all fairness it should be pointed out that it is difficult to tell whether these verses are completely a prediction of future events or a review of past events. Some authorities think they refer only to Israel (the Northern Kingdom). Personally, I shall take a middle course among the various views that have been presented over the years. The main thing for us to remember is that the prophet is giving a warning of disaster to all Israel whether it be illustrated by past events or whether by the prediction of future events. Attention is called to the three refrains in verses 12, 17, and 21 (cf. 20:4) in which the prophet says, "For all this [past events?] his [God's] anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still [i.e., to extend mercy after their repentance]."

The first logical division of the prophecy comprises verses 8 to 12. The Lord has sent his decree ("word") of ruin to the whole nation, comprising Judah and Israel. The Northern Kingdom, Ephraim-Samaria, is singled out. The arrogant, boastful people of this kingdom, whose past chastisements have not humbled them, express in proverbial terms (bricks, hewn stones, sycamores, cedars) that they will better themselves, but the Lord makes clear that he raises adversaries and stirs up enemies against them. Despite ravages of Syrian and Philistine invaders, the Lord's anger is "not turned away"; more trouble is yet to come. Nevertheless, if the people repent, the Lord's "hand is stretched out still" to them:

The next logical division of the prophecy comprises verses 13 to 17. In it Isaiah makes clear that, despite his warnings and despite the calamities brought upon them, the people continue in their apostasy, refusing to turn to the Lord (cf. Amos 4:6-11). Therefore, the Lord will bring or has already brought (question of tense) a sudden catastrophe ("in one day") on Israel in which people of all classes, leaders ("palm branch") and followers ("rush"), are or will be cut off from Israel. That the "head" and "tail" of verse 14 refer to rulers and subjects is clearly brought out in Dent. 28:13,44. The "ancient" or elder of verse 15 is defined as the head or of the ruling class, whereas the false prophet is a follower, saying only what men of the upper class wish him to say. Isaiah points out that the leaders of Judah ("this people") lead their people astray and bring about their confusion and possible destruction. indeed, "when the wicked rule the people mourn." (D&C 98:9; cf. Proverbs 29:2.) As a result of the apostasy of all classes of people, all are alienated from God, they shall all suffer, including widows and orphans. Yet the hand of God is "stretched out still" if they repent and turn to him.

In the last logical division of this chapter (verses 18 to 21) Isaiah gives a vivid picture of the destruction wrought by sin. Moral decay consumes a nation like a forest fire. The common people, the first to suffer in the demoralization of a nation, are consumed like briers and thorns, nor do the wicked elders and leaders escape. They are disposed of like the thickets of the forest. When righteous political and religious leaders are removed from a nation, the natural influence restraining from wickedness disappears, and social chaos results. Israel is shown in the throes of dejection, confusion, anarchy, fratricidal conflict, grim famine, and civil strife.
