## 37076-The Second Book of Nephi (Continued)

The Second Book of Nephi (Continued)

Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 12

The Second Book of Nephi (Continued)

2 Nephi 20 (Cf. Isaiah 10.)

The first four verses of this chapter comprise the fourth and last strophe of the prophetic poem which began with verse 8 of the previous chapter. If the three previous strophes (19:8-21) deal mostly with past events involving Ephraim's sins and punishments, as many authorities believe, it would seem certain that the fourth strophe (20:1-4) marks a transition dealing with present sins and threatened doom of Judah ("my people" vs. 2). Isaiah gives the rulers of Judah ample warning of coming disaster because they have made iniquitous laws that deny justice to the needy and rob the poor of their rights. Even widows and orphans become the spoil and prey of these oppressors. The prophet asks them what they will do when the day of retribution comes. Their ill-gotten gains cannot purchase immunity from coming captivity and death. Although the Lord's anger is not abated, still his hand is stretched out to his people.

Before we leave this prophetic poem(19:8-20:4) it should be pointed out that the last clause of the four refrains (19:12, 17, 21; 20:4), "but his hand is stretched out still," is usually interpreted to mean that God's wrath against his people is unappeasable, that Isaiah has no word of hope for his people, still unrepentant. Some commentators express the meaning of the clause in this manner: "But his hand is stretched out still to strike." I may be wrong, but I feel that Isaiah was by no means completely a prophet of doom, that he still held out to his people a note of encouragement intended to bring about their repentance (cf. Isaiah 1:16-20). Let me express it this way: "But his hand is stretched out still if only you but change your ways."

Much of the remaining part of the chapter (20:5-34) is devoted by Isaiah to the role of Assyria as the Lord's agent in the chastisement of Israel. In this section we have a fine illustration of the prophet's teaching concerning God's control and direction of history according to his plan. Assyria is indeed chosen as the agent of the Almighty (Assyria is unconscious of this role), but is rejected by him because of her arrogant pride and selfishness in thinking only of destruction and conquest. Someone has said: "The whole passage ought to be read as a commentary on the modern world situation. Here is an exposé of what has been called 'the atheism of force.' (The Interpreter's Bible.)

Coming now to the text proper, we notice in verses 5 to 7 that God has chosen Assyria as his agent to spoil, plunder, and trample down the godless nation of Israel. But Assyria, unfortunately, does not intend to assume the subordinate role assigned by the Lord in humbling his people; it wants to conquer on a grand scale. The Lord's purpose is the purification, not the total destruction, of Israel.

Assyria now boasts that even the commanders in its army are vassal kings. The conquered cities of Calno, Carchemish, Hamath, Samaria, and Damascus all give substance to the boast. And inasmuch as the idols ("nonentities," "no-gods") of these cities could afford no protection to their inhabitants, how can the inferior god or idols of Jerusalem save her? Though Samaria and Jerusalem have a distinctive deity, Assyria boasts that Samaria was not saved by him. Isaiah here quotes Assyria in irony; he knows that the God of Israel is the only true God, and that in spite of their present idolatry, the people of Israel are his people.

At this point Isaiah indignantly interrupts the blasphemous utterances of Assyria which compare Israel's God with the heathen idols of its conquered territories. The Lord's "whole work" consists in the punishment of Judah and in the purifying of the nation. When this has been accomplished, the Lord will punish what comes out of the Assyrian king's boastful heart and arrogant insolence.

page 215 12. Wherefore it shall come to pass that when the Lord hath performed [finished] his whole work upon Mount Zion and upon Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the stout heart [i.e., the proud boast] of the king of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks [i.e., his arrogant insolence, haughty pride].

The Assyrian now resumes his boasting and self-glorification. Isaiah knows that the Assyrian is really achieving the Lord's purpose, but the king claims that he is acting on his own initiative. He boasts in his own strength, wisdom, and discernment as the true source of his widespread victories. He has moved the borders of the conquered peoples, that is, has incorporated their lands into the Assyrian empire, and has displaced whole populations so as to prevent uprisings. Like a despot he has put down the inhabitants and robbed them of their treasures. Not only that, but he boasts of the ease with which he has gathered the wealth of the peoples and has claimed the whole earth as his dominion. In their fear none of the inhabitants gave any resistance, not even a "chirp."

Knowing that the Lord, not the Assyrian, is responsible for the great conquests of which boasts have been made, Isaiah resorts to metaphors to drive home the point that Assyria cannot swerve God from his purpose. That purpose is as much under his control as the axe or saw is subject to the desires of the workman who wields it. The metaphors of rod and staff further illustrate or symbolize Assyria's impotence without the help of the Almighty. Jehovah is no mere lifeless piece of wood to be used as Assyria desires; "He is the living active agent and Assyria is the lifeless 'rod.' " (Kissane, I:129.)

In fulfillment of the Lord's plan, not to be thwarted by Assyria, Isaiah gives us an interesting picture of the enemy's future destruction by fire and disease. Assyria is spoken of as "fat," that is, prosperous. Likened to a well, prosperous man at the first, he shall be smitten with a wasting sickness ("leanness") and die. The internal organs of his body ("his glory") shall be fevered and burn like a fire.

Having represented the Lord as sending a fire, or rather as sending a burning which is like a fire, to destroy Assyria, Isaiah now represents the fire as the Lord himself. In verses bristling with technical difficulties, the prophet seems to compare Assyria and its armies to a forest with its briers and thorns which is to be burned over and almost completely destroyed. So few trees will be left that even a child could count them. The briers and thorns may represent Assyria's rank and file (cf. 19:18), whereas the "glory ... and fruitful field" may be alluding to the upper echelons of her government and armies.

Isaiah now expounds his familiar doctrine, namely, that of Israel a remnant will return," which is the meaning of his son Shear-jashub's name. Looking down through the centuries to the dispensation in which we live ("in that day"), Isaiah perceives a righteous remnant of Israel and "such as are escaped of the house of Jacob" in God's service (cf. 2 Nephi 14:2; 3 Nephi 21:22-29; Ether 13:4-12). Despite Israel's rebellious ways and its iniquities that have brought down God's disfavor and punishments through the years, the prophet joyfully views her survivors returning to the Almighty and placing their trust in him. No longer will Israel lean upon or make alliances with nations such as Assyria that turn and strike her; on the contrary, her stay and trust will be in the Lord. Nevertheless, there is a note of sadness, for though Israel's people be as the sand of the sea (cf. Genesis 22:17; Genesis 32:12), only a remnant of them will return. The Lord has decreed destruction, a judgment overflowing with righteousness, for the punishment of Israel's wicked and corrupt people was well deserved.

Pleased that in the latter days a remnant of Israel will return to God, Isaiah proceeds to transmit to that surviving remnant a message of hope and comfort (cf. Isaiah 40:1-2). The message is that "in that day" (vs. 27) Israel's burdens will be lifted, the yoke of her enemies will be destroyed, and her vigor and prosperity ("fatness") will, with God's help, relieve enemy oppression. The prophet uses Assyria and Egypt as symbols of the enemies of Israel's remnant (vss. 24-26); and he has just predicted (vss. 15-19) and continues to predict Assyria's destruction. The Lord's anger will bring the destruction of Israel's foes even as his lifted rod wrought havoc with the Egyptians.

As he so often does, Isaiah suddenly changes the emphasis in his prophecy. Having given a message of hope and comfort to Israel's "remnant," he now gives us a prophetic but graphic description of the Assyrian invasion through towns or near towns on the northern approaches to Jerusalem. We do not know the exact location of all the towns mentioned, but suffice it to say that most of them were in the vicinity of Jerusalem. Aiath (Ai?; Joshua 7:2) is supposed to have been about nine miles to the north and east of Jerusalem and about two miles northwest of Michmash, which in turn was a little over seven miles from the capital city of Judah. Migron was probably situated between Ai and Michmash, but has not been identified. Ramath was located just a short distance north of Jerusalem, and Anathoth, the birthplace of Jeremiah, is about three miles northeast of the capital. Nob (city of priests; 1 Samuel 22:19) was obviously near Jerusalem (vs. 32), near enough that an enemy leader could be seen waving his hand or shaking his fist at her. Many scholars think that it may have been situated on Mt. Scopus, a hill to the north of Jerusalem.

Isaiah describes the rapid advance of the enemy and pictures the fear and panic that grip the inhabitants of the towns and villages that lie in the immediate path of the Assyrians. In verse 32 we have the climax-the foe will halt at Nob and shake his fist at Jerusalem. Many authorities take the view that Tiglath-pileser III (745-727 B.C.) led the Assyrian forces during the reign of Ahaz (735-715 B.C.); still others believe that the invaders were led by Sennacherib (705-681 B.C.) during Hezekiah's reign (715-687 B.C.; note the siege of Jerusalem in 701 B.C.). Some other views might be mentioned, but for our purposes there is no need to pursue more technical problems of history at this point.

Isaiah knows that the power of Israel's enemies is but temporary; he doubtless keeps constantly in mind the eventual redemption of a remnant of Israel free from enemy oppression. And so he ends this particular prophecy with a prediction of the sudden destruction of Assyria by the Lord. He uses the metaphor of a forest being cut down by the forester's cutting instrument. The Lord is the divine forester who cuts down and humbles the pride of the forest (Assyria). The boughs of the trees may represent the young men who are slain in battle. The tall trees of the forest would then represent the haughty ruling classes, and the thickets the common people (cf. 19:18; 12:12,13). The Lord does his work with terrifying power. Some authorities think that these verses (33,34) refer to the destruction of Judah, but the general context of the chapter convinces many others besides myself that the destruction of Assyria is the theme.

2 Nephi 21 (Cf. Isaiah 11.)

In the preceding chapter (vss. 20-23) Isaiah told us about the remnant of Israel that should return to the Lord in the latter days. Now the prophet tells us of certain other great events that were to take place at that time, early in the dispensation of the fulness of times; these were to involve the "remnant of Israel." We believe that the Lord revealed to him the great events associated with the rise and development of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Isaiah saw these events with such clarity and understanding that when the Angel Moroni appeared to Joseph Smith on the evening of September 21, 1823, he quoted Chapter 11 of the book of Isaiah in its entirety to the young Prophet. In the Documentary History of the Church (1:12,13), Joseph Smith tells us that Moroni quoted many passages of scripture and offered many explanations. "In addition to these, he quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah, saying that it was about to be fulfilled." It seems but reasonable to believe that Moroni would not quote the entire chapter unless it had some immediate connection with Joseph Smith and his mission. So what is Isaiah's message in this chapter that is of such great importance to the Church?

The chapter divides into three logical parts: (1) vss. 1-5, (2) vss. 6-9, (3) vss. 10-16. Let us examine these in turn and try to determine their meaning and significance. The first verse is of capital importance, and we shall quote it first and discuss it:

We have synonymous parallelism in these lines, so that "rod" corresponds to "branch" and "stem" corresponds to "roots." And "Jesse" makes us think of the Davidic dynasty and then of Christ. Now what does the verse mean? Commentators give various explanations, but one gets the impression that they are groping in the dark. Many non-Jewish writers, however, do believe that it has Messianic connotations. The Prophet Joseph Smith gives a straight-from-the-shoulder explanation of most of it and some hints for us to determine the meaning of the remaining part. Here it is as found in the Doctrine and Covenants 113:1-6:

By "stem of Jesse" Isaiah has reference to Christ, and by "rod" he has reference to a servant of Christ. But just who is the servant? A careful reading of verses 4 to 6 in the explanation convinces me that Joseph Smith is meant, for who fulfills the conditions of these verses, especially verse 6, better than he? Surely he had the lineage to which rightly belongs the priesthood (cf. D&C 86:8-11); he received the keys of the kingdom (D&C 65:2) for an ensign (standard; D&C 45:9) and for the gathering of the Lord's people in the last days (D&C 110:11). Moreover, the situation under which Moroni quoted the chapter from Isaiah favors Joseph Smith as being the rod." He would logically be the "servant in the hands of Christ" who was to receive the instruction from Moroni and be prepared to understand the ancient prophecies concerning his mission in the latter days.

The qualities attributed to the Stem of Jesse by Isaiah in verses 2 to 5 of his prophecy make it easy to believe that it is Christ. Moreover, the judgments he is to pour out upon the wicked make that belief all the more certain, not to mention his righteousness.

The Book of Mormon gives an interesting sidelight on the interpretation of verses 4 and 5 above that we should not miss. Nephi refers to them in these words:

For the time speedily cometh that the Lord God shall cause a great division among the people, and the wicked will he destroy; and he will spare his people, yea, even if it so be that he must destroy the wicked by fire. And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins. (2 Nephi 30:10-11)

In view of our present world situation, Nephi's words merit our closest attention.

In the next logical division of his prophecy Isaiah gives us a beautiful picture in poetic metaphor of the coming of the millennium, when universal peace and harmony among men will also extend to the animal world. In verse 9 the Lord himself makes clear that men and animals alike shall not hurt or destroy "in all my holy mountain," for the whole earth will be a place in which the Lord may feel at home with his people. Moreover, the knowledge of the Lord, his revelations and manifestations of truth, will cover the earth as a flood. Isaiah's metaphors should not be carried to the extreme in interpreting conditions during the millennium. We all know that the Lord has placed a balance in nature. And to contend that man cannot eat meat or use the fowls of the air or fish in the streams and oceans for needed sustenance during the millennium is beyond what Isaiah meant to convey, in my opinion.

And whoso forbiddeth to abstain from meats, that man should not eat the same, is not ordained of God; for behold, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which cometh of the earth, is ordained for the use of man for food and for raiment, and that he might have in abundance. (D&C 49:18, 19)

But surely Isaiah would condemn the senseless and needless destruction that goes on in the world today among both men and animals.

When Moroni quoted Isaiah 11 to the Prophet Joseph Smith he must have emphasized that the organization of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints would help to prepare men for the great millennial era when the Lord would come and "dwell with men on earth a thousand years, and the wicked shall not stand." (D&C 29:11 ) And some years later the Lord himself revealed to Joseph the following interesting facts concerning the millennium:

And in that day the enmity of man, and the enmity of beasts, yea, the enmity of all flesh, shall cease from before my face. And in that day whatsoever any man shall ask, it shall be given unto him. And in that day Satan shall not have power to tempt any man. [Cf. 1 Nephi 22:26.] And there shall be no sorrow because there is no death. In that day an infant shall not die until he is old; and his life shall be as the age of a tree; and when he dies he shall not sleep, that is to say in the earth, but shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and shall be caught up, and his rest shall be glorious. Yea, verily I say unto you, in that day when the Lord shall come, he shall reveal all things-things which have passed, and hidden things which no man knew, things of the earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereof-things most precious, things that are above, and things that are beneath, things that are in the earth, and upon the earth, and in heaven. (D&C 101:26-34; cf. Isaiah 65:17-25.)

It is clear that the Lord, through our modern prophets, elaborates on and explains some millennial conditions in greater detail than does Isaiah. Now let us quote the ancient prophet's description of the coming day of peace, yet future:

Having prophesied concerning the millennial peace that shall come to the earth, Isaiah now speaks of a subject that chronologically should have preceded it, namely, the Lord's setting his hand to recover the remnant of Israel in the latter days. The remainder of Isaiah 11 deals completely with that subject. Offhand, verse 10 may seem to be detached from the remaining verses, but logically it belongs with them, as we shall see. As was shown earlier in my discussion of this chapter of Isaiah, I equate the "rod" of verse 1 and the "root of Jesse" of verse 10 as referring to the same individual, that is to say, Joseph Smith the Prophet. Many authorities do give the same meaning to "rod" and the "root of Jesse," but some others, following, as they suppose, the lead of the Apostle Paul in Romans 15:12, believe that the "root of Jesse" refers to Christ. But for Latter-day Saints to believe that it is Christ, the same individual as the "stern of Jesse" (Isaiah 11:1), would be inconsistent and contrary to the information given to us in the Doctrine and Covenants (D&C 113:1-6). If the Apostle Paul, when he quoted Isaiah 11:10, really believed that the "root of Jesse" was Christ, he was in error, an error quite easily explained. Examination of Romans 15:12 demonstrates that Paul was closely following the Septuagint (LXX, Greek translation) text of Isaiah 11:10 rather than the Hebrew. As a matter of fact, the LXX version is only a paraphrase of the original Hebrew. We notice that the Greek version of Isaiah 11:1 translates the Hebrew text, "stem of Jesse," as the "root of Jesse" and uses the same phrase in Isaiah 11:10. Of interest is the fact that the Greek word riza (root) is used in both verses to translate different Hebrew words. Paul would be quick to discern that the "root of Jesse" of the LXX text of Isaiah 11:1-5 was the Christ. And when he observed that the phrase "root of Jesse" was used again in verse 10, he would naturally assume that it, too, had reference to the Christ. Hence the reason for his quotation in Romans 15:12.

Isaiah now sees that the "root of Jesse," whom we have identified as the Prophet Joseph Smith, will stand for an ensign to the peoples of the world, that is, as one around whom the peoples will rally. Unto him will the nations resort or appeal for consultation and guidance.

Isaiah perceived that when the great latter-day Prophet arose, the Lord would set his hand the second time to recover the remnant of his people Israel. The first time was the exodus of Israel from Egypt under the direction of Moses. As Latter-day Saints we know that the glorified, resurrected Moses, holder of the keys of gathering, came into the Kirtland Temple April 3, 1836, and conferred upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery the "keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north. " (D&C 110:11) Isaiah (vs. 11) describes the gathering of the "remnant" from seven countries known to his people, not to mention the "islands of the sea." Why does the prophet name Assyria, Egypt, Pathros, Cush, Elam, Shinar, and Hamath when we know that few, very few, if any of Israel's remnant have been gathered from those countries (i.e., up to the present time, at least)? The answer seems to be that his people wouldn't recognize the names of modern nations from whence parts of scattered Israel have been gathered to the West. The countries Isaiah named meant the world of his day, and Israel was to be gathered from the world. And we cannot doubt that scattered Judah is being gathered to her predicted home. But the people of the world seem not to recognize the gradual fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy, even though it is taking place under their very eyes.

Isaiah also sees (vs. 12) an "ensign," a gospel standard or signal, raised up for the nations, a subject mentioned earlier by him in 2 Nephi 15:26 (cf. Isaiah 5:26). The "outcasts of Israel" will respond to the gospel and assemble where they can be better taught. The gathered remnants of Israel will not harass and vex each other as they did in ancient times after they were divided politically. Ephraim, representing the Northern tribes, and Judah, representing those to the South will, under the gospel banner, get along amicably, each with the other (vs. 13). In verse 14, Isaiah states that the Gentiles (under the appellation "Philistines") will help his people in gathering ("fly upon their shoulders"), and Israel's enemies (symbolized by their ancient names of Edom, Moab and Ammon) shall no longer have any power over them. Rather the shoe will be on the other foot: Israel will have power over them.

In the last two verses (15, 16) of this prophecy, Isaiah desires to let us know that when the remnant of Israel returns, it shall be aided by God's power, even as he showed forth his power at the exodus from Egypt tinder Moses. Notice that Isaiah singles out Egypt and Assyria, two countries that held Israelites in bondage, in connection with his symbolic description of God's power that shall provide a highway or means for the return of His people in the latter days. He symbolizes the vise of the power of the Almighty by telling us that He will cut off or separate the tongue of the Egyptian sea, shake his hand over the Euphrates, smite it into many streams and cause men to go over it dryshod. Perhaps "Egyptian sea" and "River" (vs. 15) are metonyms for places of exile and bondage. Such shall be overthrown when the time of redemption comes. In connection with this verse, see D&C 133:26-34.

In connection with the study of verses 11 to 16, one will find it profitable to read (in a modern translation) Zechariah 10:6-12.

2 Nephi 22 (Cf. Isaiah 12.)

Having seen a glorious consummation to the predicted gathering of Israel's remnant (2 Nephi 21), Isaiah records a beautiful hymn of thanksgiving by the redeemed Zion. In the first two verses, Zion is personified as a single person who praises the Lord and reminds him that his anger is appeased, and that he now comforts her (lit., 'me'). The renewed friendship causes Zion to exclaim that God is her salvation, that is to say, her helper and deliverer as opposed to man. In him she will trust and not be afraid. The Lord is her strength and very song.

In the remaining verses, especially verses 4 to 6, Zion calls upon the redeemed to praise the Lord and proclaim his doings and greatness among the nations. The Lord has delivered his people and now dwells again in their midst. Verse 3, one of the loveliest in the Old Testament, is quoted with verses 4 to 6 because Zion now speaks to all the redeemed and not just of herself:

2 Nephi 23 (Cf. Isaiah 13.)

Many commentators deny the prophecy in this chapter to Isaiah, because it assumes the destruction of Babylon, an event which took place long after the prophet's lifetime. These men reason that a Hebrew prophet couldn't see beyond the historical horizon of his own time, an assumption which Latter-day Saints deny. The Book of Mormon attributes the authorship of the chapter to Isaiah, and I gladly follow its lead.

The superscription (vs. 1) of the chapter deserves a little comment. Let us present the verse first:

The word "burden" is a translation of the Hebrew word massa, which signifies "that which is lifted up," a burden, which probably has reference to the lifting up of the voice in prophecy. Often the word is equivalent to an oath, curse, or pronouncement of doom, a meaning which it has here as applied to Babylon. The verb ("did see") has reference to Isaiah's spiritual insights as one of God's servants, that is, his ability to see in vision the things of which he speaks.

Though most authorities hold that the whole chapter is directed against ancient Babylon, I cannot escape the conviction that in verses 1 to 13 Isaiah is still dealing-as he was in Chapters 21 and 22 (Isaiah 11, 12)--with events of the latter days. As I view it, these verses are directed against the spiritual Babylon prevalent in the world of the day when the remnant of Israel is being gathered and redeemed. It is the Babylon referred to in the Lord's preface to the Doctrine and Covenants:

They [the people of the world] seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own God, whose image is in the likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol, which waxeth old and shall perish in Babylon, even Babylon the great which shall fall. (D&C 1:16)

On another occasion when the Lord was commanding his people to gather to Zion, he said:

Go ye out from Babylon. Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord. (D&C 133:5)

That is the Babylon of which Isaiah speaks. He predicts the doom of the wicked world of the latter days before describing the end of the worldly Babylon of ancient times.

In verses 2 to 5 the prophet describes in figurative language how the Lord musters his hosts and signals them to the battle against spiritual Babylon. The Lord first addresses his commanders to signal or summon their warriors to the Gates of the Nobles (vs. 2). Warriors who have been consecrated or set apart for the battle or campaign (in ancient times this was often done) are commanded to appear, together with other mighty men. All of these are select men, men who rejoice in the Lord's majesty and have not been subject to his anger (vs. 3). Isaiah then graphically portrays the tumult and bustle incident to the Lord's gathering his hosts, "the weapons of his indignation," from the "end of heaven" to destroy, not just the "whole land," but the "whole earth." In Hebrew the word for "land" can also be translated "earth," and here the context demands "earth."

The very impressive language used in verses 2 to 5, including the statement concerning the intended destruction of the "whole earth," (cf. Malachi 4:15) must go far toward convincing one that Isaiah is describing the destruction of powers greater than Babylon as it existed in the ancient world. Moreover, Isaiah's description of the "day of the Lord," with its accompanying death, gloom, and desolation in verses 6 to 10, is very powerful and sobering. By "day of the Lord," as applied to this dispensation, Isaiah has in mind the destructive and cleansing forces the Almighty will apply to the earth just before and at the time of our Lord's Second Advent. (See D&C 29:9-21; D&C 45:39-59.) Cheyne, the great English Hebraist of the past generation describes this day as

... that crisis in the history of the world when Jehovah will interpose to rectify the evils of the present bringing joy and glory to the humble believer, and misery and shame to the proud and disobedient. (The Prophecies of Isaiah 1:80.)

In the next three verses the Lord speaks and gives his reasons for sending his hosts against the world. It is to be punished because of its iniquity, pride, insolence, and haughtiness. So great will be the destructive forces that the survivors will be relatively few-indeed so few that they are spoken of as being more rare than the fine gold of Ophir. Ophir was probably located in South Arabia; anciently, it was famed for its gold. (Cf. 1 Kings 10:11; Psalms 45:9.) In his description, the Lord says that his fierce anger will be such that he will make the heavens tremble and will shake the earth out of its place:

Isaiah now turns to deal with an event nearer his own times, the end of the wicked Babylonian Empire. The remainder of Chapter 23 (cf. Isaiah 13) is devoted to that theme. The Babylonians, not to mention visitors to their land, will, in the days of retribution and destruction, be like hunted gazelles or like untended sheep. Everyone not at home will attempt to return to his own community or country. The insolent and wicked among the inhabitants will fall by the sword.

Isaiah perceives that the cruel Medes are the agents of the terrible judgments and destruction to be wrought upon Babylon. The destruction is vividly described-the death of babes and youths, the ravishment of women; the Babylonians meet a terrible end at the hands of their enemy. Nor are the Medes to be turned from their savage purposes by the blandishments of gold or silver.

In his vision Isaiah perceives that Babylon is to become as Sodom and Gomorrah, ruined and without inhabitants; not even the lonely Arab will pitch his tent there, nor will the shepherds cause their herds to lie down there.

Finally, the prophet sees the land inhabited by assorted wild beasts, birds, ghostly creatures, and other denizens of the wilderness. Isaiah also adds (in some words not in our usual Bible texts) that the time of Babylon's destruction will not be prolonged; she will be speedily destroyed. The Lord will be merciful to his people (Israel), but the wicked shall perish.

2 Nephi 24 (Cf. Isaiah 14.)

Having just predicted the destruction of Babylon, Isaiah now looks again to the latter days when Israel will be chosen by the Lord, and when she will rest from her fear, sorrow, travail, and hard service. Israel will be restored (with the help of other people) to her own land of promise and have power over her enemies.

As a symbol of her triumph over her enemies and of the fall of the wicked world of the latter days, Isaiah has the redeemed Israel utter a taunt-song ("proverb" in Authorized Version) over fallen Babylon, personified as a king. This, one of the finest examples of Hebrew poetry in the Bible, is contained in verses 4b to 21. Dr. Israel Slotki describes the passage as an ode (Isaiah, pp. 66, 67. Soncino Bible Series), and Dr. Julius Bewer speaks of its "great brilliance and dramatic power" (The Book of Isaiah, 1:42). The beauty of this satirical song cannot be questioned. It is followed by an epilogue in verses 22 and 23, which reminds one somewhat of what was said about Babylon in 23:20-22 (cf. Isaiah 13:20-22).

Verses 4b to 8 portray the general satisfaction and joy experienced over Babylon's downfall. Even the juniper and cedar trees rejoice. Why? Because many of them were cut down by the enemy. It is a well-known fact that the trees of Lebanon were cut down by the kings of Assyria (cf. Habakkuk 2:17), and inscriptions found in the district of Lebanon seem to confirm the Babylonian guilt in this respect.

In verses 9 to 11 the scene changes. The Babylonian king comes down to the nether-world, Sheol or the abode of departed spirits, where the inhabitants point out that he is as weak as they are. His former pomp and glory avail him nothing. The man who, in life, thought of himself as an immortal god now finds himself, in death, sought by maggots and worms, like other ordinary humans.

Again the figure is changed in verses 12 to 15. Here the king of Babylon is personified as Lucifer ("light-bearer"), the son of the morning. The figure will be recognized in its full significance by Latter-day Saints. Our theology teaches that in man's pre-mortal existence Lucifer was an angel of authority in the presence of God, who rebelled against the Almighty's plan of redemption for mortal men, and was thrust down with his followers from the presence of God and the Son. The account of the rebellion is best told in the Pearl of Great Price:

And I, the Lord God, spake unto Moses, saying: That Satan, whom thou hast commanded in the name of mine Only Begotten, is the same which was from the beginning, and he came before me, saying-Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor. But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me-Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever. Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down; and he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice. (Moses 4:1-4)

In the light of this explanation, the verses of Isaiah are clearly understood. Notice that Lucifer aspires to be God's equal. It should also be noticed that Helal son of Shahar (vs. 12) is found in the Ras Shamra texts. Dr. William F. Albright thinks we have here a quotation from Canaanite poetry. "In Moab, 'Ashtar was identified with the national god, Chemosh, and in the Bible (Isaiah 14:12) we have a quotation from Canaanite poetry in which the God appears as Helel, 'son of Dawn.' 1

In verses 16 to 19 we see the scene shifting from the world of Sheol, or the abode of the spirits of the dead, to the battlefield, where the unburied (or disinterred) corpse of the king is exposed to the elements. In ancient times it was considered a curse not to have a decent burial. (Cf. Amos 2:1.)

Now the king is told that the desolation of his land and the slaying of his own people are the causes of the indignities heaped upon him. And the decimation of children comes because of the crimes of their fathers. The Lord will frustrate the ambition of the children to possess the earth.

In the epilogue (vss. 22, 23) the Lord confirms his judgment upon Babylon, pledging the extermination of its people and the desolating of the land:

Isaiah now turns his attention to hated Assyria again. He quotes the Lord as firmly resolving to bring the forces of Assyria into Judah ("My land") and tread them (the Assyrians) under foot. The yoke of the Assyrian will be removed from the inhabitants, and the burden imposed by the enemy will be lifted from their shoulders.

Having quoted the Lord's words concerning Assyria's future destruction, Isaiah now comments (vss. 26, 27) upon them, applying the lesson derived therefrom to the whole earth. Just as the Almighty has firmly decreed Assyria's future downfall, so in time yet future (probably the latter days) will He bring his judgments upon the world of nations, the wicked world. Even as the peoples of Judah will find freedom from the yoke of the oppressor, so will the people of the whole earth find freedom. And when the Almighty resolves to do a thing, who has the power to annul the action?

Beginning with verse 28, Isaiah gives us another prophecy, "burden," or pronouncement of doom, this time against "Palestina," meaning Philistia, Judas's enemy. We are told that the revelation came in the year that Ahaz died, which, according to latest research, would be in or about the year 715 B.C. Although the prophecy is more especially directed against Philistia, Judah is also involved. Unfortunately, a number of thorny, unresolved historical problems prevent the giving of a reasonably exact interpretation of some parts of the prophecy. But Isaiah seems to be telling Philistia not to rejoice over his predictions of the ruin and downfall of Judah, her traditional enemy. For whereas the kingdom of Judah will fall, there will come a glorious day when the people of Israel will rise above their troubles, secure from the attacks of their enemies. Indeed (vs. 30), "the first-born of the poor shall feed, and the needy shall lie down in safety." (Cf. Ezekiel 34:4-6, 23-24.) On the other hand, Philistia is to be ruined and to fall without having any prospects of recovery (vss. 30, 31). She may rejoice because the rod (her enemy, vs. 29) is to be broken, but such rejoicing is premature, for from the serpent's root there is to come forth a viper whose fruit is a flying serpent, all symbolic of evil to come upon her. Among the enemies to come against her are the well disciplined ranks of the Assyrian armies, "smoke out of the north." (Vs. 31)

Of interest to us is the way in which Isaiah ends the chapter.

The answer is that God will not tolerate the existence of a nation when, like Philistia, it becomes morally bankrupt. "He raiseth up, a righteous nation, and destroyeth the nations of the wicked." (1 Nephi 17:37 ) So again Isaiah, in prophetic vision, foresees the latter days when the Almighty will have established Zion, a place of peace and righteousness, a place where the remnant of Israel can take refuge-in short, a place where God takes care of his own.

Following Nephi's quotations from Isaiah, he makes a number of interesting comments concerning that prophet. He says that many things which the prophet spoke were hard for numbers of his people to comprehend, because they did not understand the manner of prophesying among the Jews (25:1). Nephi explains that he did not teach his people many things concerning the Jews, because of their (the Jews) wickedness and abominations. He testified of the worth of Isaiah's prophecies to men in the last days, when many of them will be fulfilled, including his predictions of God's judgments upon all nations. Many of his prophecies concerning God's judgments upon the Jews have, so Nephi explains, been already fulfilled. He says that Isaiah's prophecies will be of great worth unto his own people in the latter days, for at that time they will understand them (25:2-8).

Nephi then speaks of the destruction of his people in Jerusalem, save those carried away into Babylon, who would in time be returned to their own lands. He speaks of the coming of the Savior, of his crucifixion and resurrection, and of his appearance unto those at Jerusalem who should believe on his name. He predicts the fact that Jerusalem should be destroyed again after the Messiah's appearance. The Jews would then be scattered among all nations and scourged for many generations until they begin to be persuaded to believe in Christ, the Son of God, and his infinite atonement. When they no longer look for another Messiah, the Lord will set his hand again the second time to restore his people from their lost and fallen state (25:9-17). The Lord's words will be brought to the Jews for the purpose of convincing them of the true Messiah, who was rejected by them. No other Messiah should appear, unless it should be a false Messiah who would deceive the people (25:18). The Messiah would come, Nephi explains, in six hundred years from the time that his father left Jerusalem, and there is no name under heaven save this Jesus Christ, whereby man can be saved. Because of the things Nephi had written concerning the Messiah, the Lord gave him the promise that his writings should be kept and preserved, and be handed down to his seed (of Joseph's lineage), who should never perish as long as the earth stands. The nations that possess these writings shall be judged by them (25:19-22). The chapter ends with Nephi explaining how diligently his people taught concerning Christ and the relationship that the law of Moses bore to him (25:23-30). The Nephites kept the law but were aware of its "deadness." (Vss. 25, 27 )

The prophecies of Nephi in Chapter 26 concern the appearance of the Messiah among the Nephites, the eventual destruction of the Nephite nation, and the days of the Gentiles. Nephi explains the giving of signs concerning Christ's birth, but more especially he tells about the terrible destructions and signs to be given his descendants at the time of the Savior's death (26:1-7; cf. 3 Nephi 8-10). Then the Lord would appear to his people after his resurrection. Three generations and a part of a fourth were to pass away in righteousness; then a speedy destruction would come upon the nation because of wickedness (26:8-11). We can only imagine the anguish that must have filled Nephi's soul when he saw in vision the destruction of his own descendants. It is a strange fact, but a fact nevertheless, that the shadow of coming Nephite destruction is seen through most of the Book of Mormon.

Nephi writes that even as the Jews should be convinced concerning the Christ, so also it must needs be that the Gentiles should be convinced that he is the Eternal God and manifests himself in divers ways unto those who believe in him, by the power of the Holy Ghost (26:12-13). He prophesies of the last days among the Gentiles, when the Book of Mormon shall have come forth to the children of men. After the remnants of Nephi's seed and the seed of his brethren have been smitten by the Gentiles (here he alludes to Isaiah 29:3-5), after the Lord has laid siege to the American aborigines "with a mount," the words of the faithful will whisper out of the dust (26:14-18). The Gentiles will stumble because of their pride; they will build many churches, make light of the power and miracles of God, preach their own wisdom and learning, and grind down the poor; altogether, their churches and secret combinations will lead people into darkness and into the power of the devil (26:20-22). But, explains Nephi, the Lord does not work in darkness. Everything he does is for the benefit of the world. Some very fine religious doctrine is emphasized at this point by the prophet. He declares that all men are free to partake of salvation:

Behold, hath the Lord commanded any that they should not partake of his goodness? Behold I say unto you, Nay; but all men are privileged the one like unto the other, and none are forbidden. (26:28; italics mine. See also verses 24-27.)

Nephi proclaims against priestcrafts and emphasizes the necessity of all men having charity or love. Moreover, they are to labor for the cause of Zion; if they labor only for money they shall perish. Not only that, they are commanded of God, following the lead of the Ten Commandments, not to murder, lie, steal, take the name of God in vain, envy, have malice or commit whoredoms (26:29-32). Then, in speaking of God's goodness, he makes this great statement:

He [God] doeth nothing save it be plain unto the children of men; and he inviteth them all to come unto him and partake of his goodness; and he denieth none that come unto him, black and white, bond and free, male and female; and he remembereth the heathen; and all are alike unto God, both Jew and Gentile. (26:33; italics mine.)

This passage is one of the greatest treasures in the Book of Mormon, because it expresses forcefully the universality of God's love for all his children.

In the opening verse of Chapter 27, Nephi predicts that in the last days the Gentiles and Jews, both in this land and other lands, will be drunk with all manner of iniquity and abominations. In doing this he makes an allusion to Isaiah 29:9. He continues the discussion by indicating that the Jews and Gentiles will be visited by the Lord with thunder, earthquake, great noise, storm, tempest, and the flame of devouring fire (27:2; cf. Isaiah 29:6). These allusions by Nephi to some of the opening verses of Isaiah 29 help us to understand that the great Isaiah was referring to our day and generation. The third verse of 2 Nephi 27 begins with three clauses containing many of the same words as Isaiah 29:7. The King James Version of this reads:

And the multitude of all the nations that fight against Ariel, even all that fight against her and her munition, and that distress her, shall be as a dream of a night vision.

The reader should observe that in the Nephite text "Zion" is substituted for "Ariel." The substitution is significant.

Commencing with the fourth clause of 2 Nephi 27:3, Nephi quotes verbatim Isaiah 29, beginning with verse 8. When I say 11 verbatim" I mean the true and ancient text of Isaiah 29 as found upon the Brass Plates. This inspired text breaks down quite logically into the following topics as found in 27:3d-35:

I. Judgments against Gentiles and Jews of latter days who fight against Ariel (here, meaning the latter-day Zion). (27:3d-5 )

II. Prophetic predictions concerning the circumstances surrounding the coming forth of scriptures including the Book of Mormon. (27:6-29)

A. The Lord God to bring forth a book containing the words of them which have slumbered; part of the book to be sealed and not revealed until the Lord commands. (27:6-11 )

B. The Lord to provide three witnesses to bear testimony concerning the book. (27:12-14)

C. The Martin Harris-Professor Anthon episode foretold; Joseph Smith to be commanded of the Lord to deliver words of book to another (Martin Harris), who in turn is to deliver them to the learned (Prof. Anthon). (27:15-20) Not enough attention has been paid to the fact that the Lord would command Joseph Smith to tell Martin Harris that he should consult the learned. Notice also that the learned (Anthon) would seek for "glory" and "gain." (27:15-16)

III. Further command not to touch sealed portion; Lord a God of miracles and able to do own work; Lord to make known to one (Joseph Smith) that he will do marvelous work and a wonder; testimony of book to deaf and blind. (27:21-29 )

IV. The meek and poor to rejoice and see the wicked brought to naught; house of Jacob no longer to be ashamed, to fear the God of Israel. (27:30-25 ).

This outline of Isaiah's message in 2 Nephi 27 is perhaps sufficient for those who know the history of our Church well. Those who need a more detailed account may find it in my The Voice Of Israel's Prophets, pages 54-61.

Chapter 28 is a continuation of Nephi's predictions concerning the latter days. He tells of the worth of the Book of Mormon ("the book") unto all men, but especially unto the remnants of his seed (28:1-2). The latter-day churches with their contending views, false doctrines, and false teachers, who persecute the meek and rob the poor and who deny the power of God and the Holy Ghost, are caustically dealt with. Their pride, wickedness, abominations, whoredoms, and perversion of the way of the Lord will bring about their destruction. The great and abominable church must tumble to the earth, and great shall be the fall thereof (28:3-18). The kingdom of the devil will be shaken, but Nephi stresses the terrible power and evil that the devil will exercise prior to that time. That the devil is a personal being is made clear (27:19-23). Nephi pronounces woe upon those who are at ease in Zion, who deny the power of God, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, who are angry because of God's truth and who say they need no more of the word of the Lord (28:24-29). The Lord's word is cited to the effect that he will take away what they already have from those who say they have enough. Cursed is he who puts his trust in man, or who hearkens unto the precepts of men, except where given by the power of the Holy Ghost. The Lord pronounces a woe upon the Gentiles who will deny him; nevertheless, he will be merciful unto them who repent and come unto him (28:30-32).

In Chapter 29 Nephi deals with the scriptures that shall be sent forth in the latter days in response to the Lord's promises to him and to his father. When the Book of Mormon shall have appeared among the Gentiles, many of them will declare that they have a Bible and that there can be no more Bible (29:3). The Gentiles are reminded that they do not appreciate or thank the Jews who produced the Bible. The Lord, who created all men, remembers one nation like unto another; consequently, he brings forth more than one scripture, and they shall run together as a testimony to all (29:4-9). The word of God, wherever written in the world, whether by the Jews, the Nephites, or by the other tribes of Israel, will be gathered in one unto the lands of their possessions. Each of the branches of Israel will read the scriptures of one another; the Lord will show unto those who fight against his word and his people, that he covenanted with Abraham and will remember his seed forever (29:10-14).

Nephi predicts that unless his people repent they shall perish; in fact, they need not suppose that they are more righteous than the Gentiles will be. Moreover, the Gentiles who repent will become God's covenant people, but the unrepentant Jews will be cast off (30:1-2). The prophet tells of the teachings of the Book of Mormon which will be carried to the remnant of his seed. This remnant shall know of their fathers; as a result of the gospel to be declared among them, the scales of darkness will fall from their eyes, and in a few generations they will become a white and delightsome people (30:3-6). The scattered Jews will begin to be gathered home, and as many as believe in Christ will also become a delightsome people. The Lord will at that time commence his work among all nations and bring about the restoration of his people. The Lord will cause a great division among the people, and the wicked he will destroy; the Lord will spare his people even if it is necessary to destroy the wicked as by fire (30:7-10). At this point Nephi quotes Isaiah 11:5-9, which refers to the coming of the great millennial era of peace and righteousness (30:11-15). Then he says that all things, whether secret or otherwise, will be made known to the children of men, and that Satan will have no more power over the hearts of the children of men for a long period of time (30:16-18).

Nephi loved to speak of Christ and his work. He stated that his soul delighted in plainness:

For my soul delighteth in plainness; for after this manner doth the Lord God work among the children of men. For the Lord God giveth light unto the understanding; for he speaketh unto men according to their language, unto their understanding. (31:3; cf. D&C 1:24)

Light and understanding is the object of the Lord in giving the gospel unto men.

The great prophet taught that Christ, though holy and without sin, was to be baptized by John to fulfil all righteousness; he would witness to the Father that he would be obedient note him in keeping his commandments (31:4-7). Nephi emphasized (as if present) that after baptism the Holy Ghost would descend-upon the Christ in the form (sign) of a dove. The Savior's example in fulfilling his Father's commandments would show unto men the straight and narrow way leading to eternal life. Repentance and baptism lead men to the blessing of the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost; then they may speak with the tongue of angels. But after receiving these blessings it would be better for man never to have known God than to deny him (31:8-14). When they have received a remission of sins by fire and by the Holy Ghost, men are in the straight and narrow path which leads to eternal life. Nephi voices their continuing responsibility in these lovely words:

Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life. (31:20)

There is no other way or name under heaven by which men may be saved in the kingdom of God (31:21).

Nephi now discourses upon the fact that angels speak by the power of the Holy Ghost; for that reason they speak the words of Christ. The words of Christ will tell one what he should do. If one enters in by the "way," and receives the Holy Ghost, it will show unto him all things that he should do. Nephi indicates that he mourns because of the unbelief, wickedness, ignorance, and stiff-neckedness of men. They will not search for knowledge, nor understand it when it is given to them in plainness (32:2-7).

In his parting testimony, the prophet confesses that he is not mighty in writing, like unto speaking, "for when a man speaketh by the power of the Holy Ghost the power of the Holy Ghost carrieth it unto the hearts of the children of men." (33:1 ) Many there are, he continues, who harden their hearts against the Holy Spirit, that it has no place in them. Such individuals are prone to cast away things that have been written which are of great value and esteem them as naught (33:2). Nephi esteems his writings of great worth to his people and knows that God will consecrate his prayers to their gain. The intensity of his feelings and the character of the man are beautifully revealed in this quotation from his last words:

I glory in plainness; I glory in truth; I glory in my Jesus, for he hath redeemed my soul from hell. I have charity for my people, and great faith in Christ that I shall meet many souls spotless at his judgment-seat. I have charity for the Jew--I say Jew, because I mean them from whence I came. I also have charity for the Gentiles. But behold, for none of these can I hope except they shall be reconciled unto Christ, and enter into the narrow gate, and walk in the straight path which leads to life, and continue in the path until the end of the day of probation. And now, my beloved brethren, and also Jew, and all ye ends of the earth, hearken unto these words and believe in Christ; and if ye believe not in these words believe in Christ. And if ye shall believe in Christ ye will believe in these words, for they are the words of Christ, and he hath given them unto me; and they teach all men that they should do good. And if they are not the words of Christ, judge ye--for Christ will show unto you, with power and great glory, that they are his words, at the last day; and you and I shall stand face to face before his bar; and ye shall know that I have been commanded of him to write these things, notwithstanding my weakness. (33:6-11)

Nephi appeals to all Israel and to all the ends of the earth that his writings are as the voice of one crying from the dust. He bids all farewell until "that day shall come," an obvious allusion to the day of judgment (33:13). In a moving passage directed at those who refuse to partake of God's goodness, or who refuse to respect the words of scripture (Bible), he says:

I bid you an everlasting farewell, for these words shall condemn you at the last day. For what I seal on earth, shall be brought against you at the judgment bar; for thus hath the Lord commanded me, and I must obey. Amen. (33:14-15)

Nephi was an extraordinary man. He was firm and unflinching as a rock in standing up for the right. He was full of faith, and uncomplaining in the face of adversity, and yet was as humble and tender as a child. The Holy Spirit seems constantly to have attended him and instructed him. He is one of the very greatest spiritual characters in the Book of Mormon.
