## 37084-The Book of Alma (Continued)

The Book of Alma (Continued)

Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 18

The Book of Alma (Continued)

When Alma heard that the apostate Zoramites were influencing others to bow down to dumb idols, he felt sorrowful but apprehensive, as did other Nephites, that these dissenters might enter into correspondence with the Lamanites and cause trouble (31:1-4). The sacred record says these significant words relative to a possible remedy Alma had in mind:

And now, as the preaching of the word had a great tendency to lead the people to do that which was just-yea, it had had more powerful effect upon the minds of the people than the sword, or anything else, which had happened unto them-therefore Alma thought it was expedient that they should try the virtue of the word of God. (31:5)

The spirit of this verse is of great value in our own times. How much more valuable to the world have been the efforts of humble missionaries than those of men with swords!

Alma therefore gathered together a group of great missionaries-at least most of them were great-and headed for Zoramite territory in Antionum, which was east of the land of Zarahemla. In addition to Alma and two of his sons, Shiblon and Corianton, the party consisted of Ammon, Aaron, Omner, Amulek, and Zeezrom. Once among the Zoramite dissenters, the missionaries were astonished at the religious rites they found them observing. One day a week, called the day of the Lord, any worshipper who so desired would enter a synagogue, mount a high stand, or a Rameumptom, in the center of the edifice, and cry out this set prayer:

Holy, holy God; we believe that thou art God, and we believe that thou art holy, and that thou wast a spirit, and that thou art a spirit, and that thou wilt be a spirit forever. Holy God, we believe that thou hast separated us from our brethren; and we do not believe in the tradition of our brethren, which was handed down to them by the childishness of their fathers; but we believe that thou hast elected us to be thy holy children; and also thou hast made it known unto us there shall be no Christ. But thou art the same yesterday, today, and forever; and thou hast elected its that we shall be saved, whilst all around us are elected to be cast by thy wrath down to hell; for the which holiness, O God, we thank thee; and we also thank thee that their hast elected us, that we may not be led away after the foolish traditions of our brethren, which doth bind them down to a belief of Christ, which doth lead their hearts to wander far from thee, our God. And again we thank thee, O God, that we are a chosen and a holy people. Amen. (31:15-18)

After each worshipper had said these words, they would all return to their homes and never speak of their God again until the next week, when the same rite would be enacted (31:23).

When the missionaries had observed the customs of the Zoramites, Alma offered a prayer unto the Lord in which he asked for success both for himself and for his brethren in the ministry (31:26-35). In this prayer, Alma included these words about the Zoramites:

Behold, O Lord, their souls are precious, and many of them are our brethren; therefore, give unto us, O Lord, power and wisdom that we may bring these, our brethren, again unto thee. (31:35 )

These impressive words bring home to us a great religious lesson: even apostates from the Church have souls that are precious to God. It is our responsibility, if possible, to reclaim our erring brethren.

Alma placed his hands upon his brethren, and they were filled with the Holy Spirit, after which they separated to preach and labor among the Zoramites (31:36-38).

The missionaries entered into the synagogues and homes of the Zoramites and even preached to them on the streets, but they found their greatest success among the poorer classes. The wealthier class of Zoramites esteemed their poorer brethren as dross and even refused them permission to enter the very synagogues they had helped to build (32:1-3, 5). As Alma preached upon the hill Onidah, a great multitude of these poor Zoramites came to him and poured out their troubles into his sympathetic ears through one of their representatives. The prophet told them that they would be blessed if they were truly lowly in heart, and assured them it was well that they had been cast out of their synagogues, if in the process they had been made humble and had learned wisdom. He taught them that those who were compelled to be humble were blessed, particularly if they repented of their sins and endured to the end, but that those who were humble in spite of their poverty were even more blessed (31:5-15). Then he said:

Blessed is he that believeth in the word of God, and is baptized without stubbornness of heart, yea, without being brought to know the word, or even compelled to know, before they will believe. (32:16)

Alma then dwelt upon the principle of faith. His discourse on the principle is a real contribution to the understanding of this important doctrine. He distinguished, first of all between faith and knowledge. If a man knows a thing, the prophet concluded, he has no cause to believe, for he knows.(32:18). A man who knows the will of God and does it not is much worse off than one who only believes, or only has cause to believe, but who falls into transgression (32:19). Alma their defined the nature of faith in these words;

And now as I said concerning faith-faith is not to have a perfect knowledge of things; therefore if ye have faith ye hope for things which are not seen, which are fine. (42:21 )

This statement is sound. Unfortunately, many people make no distinction between faith and credulity. A person who is credulous may believe in something which has no rational basis, but one who has the power of faith has a hope for things unseen which are based on truth. Truth is the foundation stone of faith. Alma also said that if the people would awake and arouse their faculties, even to experiment upon his words, and exercise a particle of faith-indeed, if they could only desire to believe, they should let this desire work in them until they could find a place for a portion of his words (31:22-27). A comparison which he made is significant and psychologically sound. He said:

Now, we will compare the word unto a seed. Now, if ye give place, that a seed may be planted in you heart, behold. if it be a true seed, or a good seed, if ye do not cast it out by your unbelief, that ye will resist the Spirit of fire Lord, behold, it will begin to swell within your breasts; and when you feel these swelling motions, ye will begin to say within yourselves. It must needs be that this is a good seed, or that the word is good, for it beginneth to enlarge my soul; yea, it beginneth to enlighten my understanding, yea, it beginneth to be delicious to me. (32:28)

It should be noticed that what he says in verse 27 respecting experimentation in the realm of spiritual matters is also a sound principle. We experiment very commonly in the realm of the physical world. Why shouldn't we experiment with the promises of God and find out for ourselves whether or not they are true? In at least two places, Alma used the word "experiment" in his discourse on faith (32:27, 36).

He continued his sermon to the Zoramites by telling them that if they would nourish the tree produced by faith in God's words as it began to grow and get root, it would become a tree springing up into everlasting life. On the other hand, if they neglected it and took no thought of its nourishment, it would not get any root; when the heat of the sun came and scorched it, the tree would wither away because it lacked a root. Then the plant would be thrown away. The original seed was good, but the ground in which it was sown would be considered barren. Diligence, faith, and patience in nourishing the root within themselves would, by and by, produce fruit, which is most precious, sweet above all that is sweet, white above all that is white, and pure above all that is pure. Under these conditions they would reap high rewards for their faith, diligence, patience, and long-suffering, in waiting for the tree to bring forth fruit (32:37-43).

After Alma had thus discoursed, the people had questions as to whether or not they should believe in one God; how they should plant the seed, or word, of which he had spoken; or in what manner they should begin to exercise their faith (33:1). Apparently some of the Zoramites had complained to Alma that they could not worship God because they had been cast out of their synagogues. In this they greatly erred, he pointed out, because the scriptures did not so teach. Alma taught them the words of Zenos, an ancient Hebrew prophet, concerning prayer and worship. Zenos testified that God had heard his prayers whether in the wilderness, in the field, in his house, or in the congregation. Man may worship God and come close to him without a formal place of worship. Zenos also testified that God had turned his judgments away from him, because of his Son. Alma asked the Zoramites how they could disbelieve the Son of God if they had read the scriptures (33:2-14). The prophet then quoted Zenock, another Hebrew man of God, who had spoken of these matters. He also cited Moses and made allusions to his teachings concerning the Son of God who was to come and redeem His people by suffering and dying for them, and who would also bring to pass the resurrection, that judgment might be pronounced upon men according to their works (33:15-22). Alma concluded his words at that point in this manner:

And now, my brethren, I desire that ye shall plant this word in your hearts, and as it beginneth to swell even so nourish it by your faith. And behold, it will become a tree, springing up in you unto everlasting life. And then may God grant unto you that your burdens may be light, through the joy of his Son. And even all this can ye do if ye will. Amen. (33:23)

When Alma had sat down upon the ground, his companion Amulek arose and began to teach the Zoramites. Amulek made some allusions to what Alma had taught them but proceeded to explain the coming of Christ and the atonement which he would make. It was necessary that Christ come and make an atonement, or else all mankind would unavoidably perish; all would be fallen and lost. The sacrifice could not be one of man, beast, or fowl; of necessity it had to be an infinite and eternal sacrifice (34:1-14). Here are some of his words of explanation concerning the nature of the sacrifice:

Now there is not any man than can sacrifice his own blood which will atone for the sins of another. Now, if a man murdereth, behold will our law, which is just, take the life of his brother? I say unto you, Nay. Cut the law requireth the life of him who hath murdered; therefore there can be nothing which is short of an infinite atonement which will suffice for the sins of the world. Therefore, it is expedient that there should be a great and last sacrifice; and then shall there be, or it is expedient there should be, a stop made to the shedding of blood; then shall the law of Moses be fulfilled; yea, it shall be all fulfilled, very jot and tittle, and none shall have passed away. And behold, this is the whole meaning of the law, every whit pointing to that great and last sacrifice; and that great and last sacrifice will be the Son of God, yea, infinite and eternal. And thus he shall bring salvation to all those who shall believe on his name; this being the intent of this last sacrifice, to bring about the bowels of mercy, which overpowereth justice, and bringeth about means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance. (34:11-15)

In this way, Amulek explained, mercy can satisfy the demands of justice; the individual who exercises no faith unto repentance is exposed to the whole law of the demands of justice. The eternal plan of redemption becomes effective only when man exercises faith which leads to repentance. Amulek therefore expressed the hope that God would grant the Zoramites faith which would lead to repentance. To this end, he advocated that they call upon his holy name and obtain his mercy. They were advised to cry unto him under all circumstances of life, whether in their fields, their houses, their secret closets, or the wilderness. They were to ask God's blessings in all of their righteous endeavors (34:16-27). Nor was this all: they were to succor the needy, the sick, and the afflicted, and be charitable to their fellow men. Otherwise their prayers to God would avail them nothing, and they would be viewed as hypocrites who deny the faith. Amulek urged his audience no longer to harden their hearts; now was the time and day of their salvation. This life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; the day of this life is the time for men to perform their labors (34:28-32). Men were not to procrastinate the day of their repentance. Notice these important words of Amulek:

And now, as I said unto you before, as ye have had so many witnesses, therefore, I beseech of you that ye do not procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end; for after this day of life, which is given us to prepare for eternity, behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life, then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed. Ye cannot say, when ye are brought to that awful crisis, that I will repent, that I will return to my God. Nay, ye cannot say this; for that same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the time that ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have power to possess your body in that eternal world. For behold, if ye have procrastinated the day of your repentance even until death, behold, ye have become subjected to the spirit of the devil, and he doth seal you his; therefore, the Spirit of the Lord hath withdrawn from you, and hath no place in you, and the devil hath all power over you; and this is the final state of the wicked. (34:33-35)

The people were further told not to contend against the Holy Ghost, but to take upon themselves the name of Christ, humble themselves, and worship God in spirit and in truth. They were to be watchful in prayer, and were not to be led away by the temptations of the devil. Amulek ended his important doctrinal discourse by exhorting his audience to have patience, to bear with all manner of afflictions, and not to revile those who had cast them out because of their poverty, lest they also become sinners. They were to bear their afflictions in patience, with a firm hope that one day they would rest from all of them (34:36-41).

When they had finished their work among the Zoramites, all of the Nephite missionaries came over into the land of Jershon, where the converted Lamanites lived (35:1-2). The leaders of the Zoramites, on the other hand, took pains to inquire among the people as to who had believed in the words of Alma and his brethren. When they had determined who they were, they cast them out of the land. The believing Zoramites, who were many, went over into the land of Jershon, where their Lamanite brethren received them kindly. There Alma and his brethren ministered among these people. The unbelieving Zoramites threatened the Ammonites (converted Lamanites) in the land of Jershon because they had received their repentant fellows. They attempted to stir up the unbelieving Lamanites to make war with the Nephites. The Nephite armies, however, prepared themselves for war with the Zoramite and Lamanite armies.

The result of the mission to the Zoramites was, on the whole, very satisfying. The missionaries had been instruments in the hands of God in bringing many of the Zoramites to repentance (35:1-14).

Alma was grieved, however, because of the iniquity he found among his people in Zarahemla. He was much concerned about the wars and bloodshed and the contentions among them. Perceiving that hearts of his people had become hard, he caused that his sons should be gathered, in order to give each one of them a father's charge concerning things pertaining to righteousness.

Chapters 36-42 form a literary unit containing Alma's charges to his three sons, Helaman, Shiblon, and Corianton. Chapters 36 and 37 deal with the prophet's words to Helaman, the oldest of the three. First of all, he exhorted Helaman to keep the commandments of God and remember what he had done for their forefathers. He also besought his son to learn to trust in God as a result of a recital of his (Alma's) own experiences. He told about his own remarkable conversion, how an angel appeared to him and made known that he would be destroyed if he continued to persecute the Church of God. He explained to Helaman the nature of the pain and torment he suffered during the three days and nights that he was unable to use his limbs. He had led many of the Nephites away into destruction, and the thought of coming back into the presence of God under such conditions racked his soul with inexpressible horror (36:1-16). While harrowed up by the memory of his sins, he remembered the prophecy of his father concerning the coming of Christ to atone for the sins of the world. The joy of knowing this fact helped him to receive his strength again and manifest to the people that he had been born of God. Since that great spiritual manifestation had been given, he had labored without ceasing to bring souls unto repentance. The Lord had given him great joy in his labors, because he had brought many to taste the satisfaction he himself had received in the ministry. The Almighty had supported him in all of his trials, troubles, and afflictions. He also knew that at the last day God would raise him up, to dwell with him in glory. After a reference to God's goodness to their Israelite forefathers, Alma reminded Helaman to keep the commandments of God; if he did, the Lord would prosper him in the land; otherwise he would be cut off from his presence (36:17-30). After having given this advice, he gave Helaman a command to take charge of the Nephite records and write upon the Large Plates of Nephi a history of his people, as he himself had done (37:1-2). Alma spent considerable time in telling Helaman about the Brass Plates and the other records that had been handed down from generation to generation, in order that they might come unto every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. Their worth, in the spiritual sense, had been incalculable. Without these scriptures, Ammon and his brethren could not have convinced so many thousands of the Lamanites of the unsound traditions of their fathers. Moreover, he pointed out that no one knew but what they would be the means of bringing other thousands to the knowledge of their Redeemer (37:3-10).

Alma reminded his son that the scriptures now put in his charge had been preserved for a wise purpose known unto God. If Helaman elected to trangress the commandments of the Almighty, these sacred records would be taken away from him. On the other hand, if he kept the Lord's commandments, no power of earth or hell would be able to take them away from him. Therefore Alma charged him to be diligent in observing the Lord's desires (37:11-20). Helaman was given special advice concerning the twenty-four gold plates of Ether containing the record of the Jaredites. The history of Jaredite abominations was to be made known to the Nephites in order to teach them that destruction awaits the people of this land that do not repent (37:21-27). Let us look at some of Alma's words:

For behold, there is a curse upon all this land, that destruction shall come upon all those workers of darkness, according to the power of God, when they are fully ripe; therefore I desire that this people might not be destroyed. Therefore ye shall keep these secret plans of their oaths and their covenants from this people, and only their wickedness and their murders and their abominations shall ye make known unto them; and ye shall teach them to abhor such wickedness and abominations and murders; and ye shall also teach them that these people were destroyed on account of their wickedness and abominations and their murders. For behold, they murdered all the prophets of the Lord who came among them to declare unto them concerning their iniquities; and the blood of those whom they murdered did cry unto the Lord their God for vengeance upon those who were their murderers; and thus the judgments of God did come upon these workers of darkness and secret combinations. Yea, and cursed be the land forever and ever unto those workers of darkness and secret combinations, even unto destruction, except they repent before they are fully ripe. (37:28-31)

These words of advice are well worth our sober consideration. Alma again reminded Helaman not to trust the secret plans of the Jaredites to the Nephites, but rather to teach them an everlasting hatred of sin and iniquity. Helaman was to learn wisdom in his youth, cry unto God, and counsel with him in all his doings (37:32-37).

Alma then called the attention of Helaman to the ancient director or compass-their fathers called it Liahona-which guided the Nephites on their travels and worked according to their faith in God. As this compass guided their fathers, so would the word of Christ point to Helaman a straight course to eternal bliss. Even as the Liahona brought their fathers to the promised land, so the Savior's words, if followed, would carry men beyond this vale of sorrow into a better land of promise (37: 38-45).

Notice these sincere last words of exhortation given by Alma to Helaman:

O my son, do not let us be slothful because of the easiness of the way; for so was it with our fathers; for so was it prepared for them, that if they would look they might live; even so it is with us. The way is prepared, and if we will look we may live forever. And now, my son, see that ye take care of these sacred things, yea, see that ye look to God and live. Go unto this people and declare the word, and be sober. My son, farewell. (37:46-47)

Alma gave less advice to Shiblon than to either of his two other sons. He doubtless counseled his eldest son Helaman at greater length than he did Shiblon because of the fact that he had entrusted to Helaman the sacred Nephite relics and records. Corianton, the youngest, was counseled at even length because he had gone seriously astray. (See 39:2-4)

Alma first counseled Shiblon to obey God's commandments or be cast off from his presence. This was, as we have previously noticed, the counsel Nephite prophets all gave from the beginning. (See 2 Nephi 1:20.) Alma then proceeded to compliment young Shiblon for his steadiness and faithfulness to God. He commended his diligence, patience and long-suffering during the mission to the Zoramites, at which time he had been stoned for his testimony. Shiblon was told that even he trusted in God, so would he be delivered from trials, troubles, and afflictions; finally, at the last day, he would be lifted up (38:1-5). Alma said that he did not know these things of himself, but through the Spirit of God. He also recalled his conversion by means of an angel, and told of the bitter pain and anguish he suffered for three days and nights. Shiblon was advised that only through Christ can man be saved; he is the word of truth and righteousness (38:6-9). Alma also exhorted Shiblon to teach as he had begun, to be diligent and temperate in all things, not to be lifted up into pride, and not to boast of his own wisdom or strength. He was to use boldness, but not be overbearing; he was also to bridle his passions and be filled with love. His father told him to refrain from idleness, and not to pray as the Zoramites did but rather ask the Lord to forgive his unworthiness. Alma concluded by invoking the blessing of the Lord upon Shiblon, and trusted that he would receive him at the last day in his kingdom, to sit down in peace (38:10-15).

When Alma focused his attention upon his youngest son, Corianton, he told him that his brother had set him a good example, but that in the Zoramite mission he (Corianton) had not given as much heed to his words as had Shiblon. Not only had he boasted in his strength and wisdom, but when his brethren were preaching to the Zoramites, he had stolen away to the borders of the Lamanites after a harlot by the name of Isabel. Alma upbraided him severely for his wickedness and pointed out that unchastity was abominable above all sins save it be the shedding of innocent blood or denying the Holy Ghost. Corianton was told that he could not hide his crimes from God, and unless he repented they would stand as a testimony against him at the last day (39:1-8). His scandalous conduct had had a great effect upon the Zoramites, for when they had seen it, they would not believe the words of his father. In fact, Alma said:

Behold, O my son, how great iniquity ye brought upon the Zoramites; for when they saw your conduct they would not believe in my words. (39:11)

In response to the warning of the Spirit, Alma commanded Corianton to refrain from his iniquities and seek no more to lead away the hearts of others. Not only that, but he was advised not to seek after the riches or vain things of the world, because he could not carry them with him (39:12-14). Alma then told him about the coming of Christ to take away the sins of the world and to declare glad tidings of salvation to his people. Corianton had marveled that Christ's coming should be known so long beforehand. His father pointed out that a soul living before Christ's coming was as precious as one at the time of his coming. It was as necessary that the plan of redemption be made known to the Nephites then living as to their children. Moreover, it was as easy for the Lord to send his angel now (speaking from Alma's day and time) and declare the glad tidings, as after the time of Christ's coming (39:15-19).

Alma instructed his son concerning the resurrection of the dead, because Corianton seems to have been worried about it. He said that there would be no resurrection of the body until after the coming of Christ whether there should be one time, a second time, or a third time that men would come forth from the dead mattered not-it sufficed Alma to know that there is a time appointed that all men shall rise from the dead. There is a space of time appointed between death and the resurrection (40:1-6). The prophet explained what became of the souls of men between death and the resurrection. An angel had made known to him the fact that when the spirits of men are departed from their mortal bodies, they are taken home to their God, who gave them life. The spirits of the righteous received into a state of happiness called paradise, which is a place of peace and rest where they rest from all troubles, cares, and sorrow. But the spirits of the wicked, that is to say those who have no part or portion of the Spirit of the Lord, who have given themselves in a terrible state. They shall be cast into outer darkness, where there shall be weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth because of their own iniquities, they being led captive by the will of the devil. This state between death and the resurrection is for the wicked a kind of hell, an "awful, fearful looking for the fiery indignation of the wrath of God upon them; . . ." (40:14) They remain in this condition, as the righteous remain in paradise, until the time of the resurrection (40:7-14).

Alma discussed a first resurrection, indicating that it meant the reuniting of the souls and the bodies of those from the day of Adam down to the resurrection of Christ. He made it clear, however, that it did not necessarily mean that the wicked, as well as the righteous, were all resurrected at once. It was made plain that all men would come forth; apparently Alma seems to have thought that the world of mankind who lived before the time of Christ are resurrected before those who die after the resurrection of Christ (40:19). He indicated that the resurrection of all who lived before Christ's time would not take place at the resurrection of our Lord, but he gave it as his opinion that the righteous would be resurrected at that time. But whether the resurrection was then or after, he went on, there is, nevertheless, a space between death and resurrection in which the soul of man is in a state of either happiness or misery until the time is appointed of God for the dead to come forth. When the restoration takes place, every limb and joint shall be restored to its body; not a hair of the head shall be lost; all things shall be restored to their proper and perfect frame (40:15-24). But upon the wicked, in contrast to the righteous, an awful death was to come; they would die as to things pertaining to righteousness; for they would be found unclean, and no unclean thing can inherit the kingdom of God. Their evil works would follow them, and they were to drink the dregs of a bitter cup (40:25-26).

In Chapter 41, Alma continues his discussion of the restoration of which he had spoken. Men's souls were not only to be restored to their bodies, but in the justice of God, if the works and desires of men were good, they would at the last day be restored to that which is good. On the other hand, if their works were evil, they would have evil restored to them. All things would have a proper restoration, either to endless happiness in God's kingdom or to endless misery, depending upon the works and desires of man. The decrees of God are unalterable; men will not be restored from sin to happiness, for wickedness never was happiness. Wicked men, men in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity, are in a state contrary to the nature of happiness. They can never have restored that which they never lived for. "Restoration" means to bring back evil for evil, carnal for carnal, or devilish for devilish-good for that which is good; righteous for that which is righteous, just for that which is just; merciful for that which is merciful (41:1-13).

After this remarkable explanation of what is meant by restoration, Alma applied the lesson to Corianton with these great words:

Therefore, my son, see that you are merciful unto your brethren; deal justly, judge righteously, and do good continually; and if ye do all these things then ye shall receive your reward; yea, ye shall have mercy restored unto you again; ye shall have justice restored to you again; ye shall have a righteous judgment restored unto you again; and ye shall have good rewarded unto you again. For that which ye do send out shall return unto you again, and be restored; therefore, the word restoration more fully condemneth the sinner, and justifieth him not at all. (41:14-15)

Apparently Corianton could not fully understand the justice of God in the punishment of the sinner; he seemed to suppose that it was an injustice for a sinner to be consigned to a state of misery (42:1). It therefore became necessary for Alma to explain the consequences of the fall of man in the garden of Eden. By reason of the Fall men were cut off spiritually and temporally from the presence of God and were reduced to following after their own will. In God's plan of happiness, it became expedient to reclaim man from his spiritual death, but not his temporal death. This plan could not be put into action unless an atonement should be made by God himself for the sins of the world. Moreover, the atonement would reclaim man from spiritual death only on conditions of his repentance while in the mortal or probationary state. And repentance could not come unto man unless there was a punishment affixed opposite the plan of happiness (42:2-16). Alma continued his important explanation in these words:

Now, how could a man repent except he should sin? How could he sin if there was no law? How could there be a law save there was a punishment? Now, there was a punishment affixed, and a just law given, which brought remorse of conscience unto man. Now, if there was no law given-if a man murdered he should die-would he be afraid he would die if he should murder? And also, if there was no law given against sin men would not be afraid to sin. And if there was no law given, if men sinned what could justice do, or mercy either, for they would have no claim upon the creature? But there is a law given, and a punishment affixed, and a repentance granted; which repentance mercy claimeth; otherwise, justice claimeth the creature and executeth the law, and the law inflicteth the punishment; if not so, the works of justice would be destroyed, and God would cease to be God. But God ceaseth not to be God, and mercy claimeth the penitent, and mercy cometh because of the atonement; and the atonement bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead; and the resurrection of the dead bringeth back men into the presence of God; and thus they are restored into his presence to be judged according to their works, according to the law and justice. For behold, justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved. What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God. And thus God bringeth about his great and eternal purposes, which were prepared from the foundation of the world. And thus cometh about the salvation and the redemption of men, and also their destruction and misery. (42:17-26)

When he had given this explanation, the prophet told his son that anyone who desires may come and partake freely of the waters of life; no one is compelled to come, but at the last day it shall be restored to him according to his deeds. Alma told Corianton not to let these matters trouble him anymore; neither was he to excuse himself because of his sins or to deny God's justice. He was to let God's justice, mercy, and long-suffering have full sway in his heart in order to bring him down to the dust in humility. Alma concluded his words to his son by reminding him of his original call to preach to his people. He was exhorted to go his way and declare the "word" with truth and soberness, that he might bring souls unto repentance (42:27-31).

There is a great lesson to be learned from these words. Corianton had committed serious sins, but there was hope for him if only he would repent and carry the plan of salvation to others. This advice he took to heart. (See 63:2, 10-11.)

Mormon now turns to an account of a severe war between the Nephites and Lamanites in the eighteenth year of the rule of judges. This account is contained in the last two chapters (43-44) assigned to Alma's record.

The Lamanite invasion was under the general leadership of Zerahemnah, but most of his chief captains were Amalekites and Zoramites who were more fanatical and murderous than the Lamanites themselves. The reader should be apprised that the Zoramite dissenters had become Lamanites. Even the descendants of the wicked priests of Noah were among the Lamanites forces. The commander of the Nephite forces was Moroni, a young man only twenty-five years old. Moroni equipped his armies with breastplates, armshields, and the like, which the Lamanite armies did not have. Therefore, the Lamanites withdrew at first, in order to attack the Nephites in the land of Manti, where they were weakly defended. But Alma, through the help of the Lord, was able to inform Moroni of the Lamanite intentions. The armies of Moroni and one of his generals, Lehi, were able, with the Lord's help, to surround those of the Lamanites, but only after there had been severe losses on both sides, more especially among the Lamanites. When Moroni perceived the terror of the Lamanites after they were encircled, he commanded his men to stop shedding their blood (43:3-54). He then conferred with Zerahemnah, the Lamanite leader, pointed to the fact that the Nephite cause had been upheld by God, and promised to spare the Lamanites if they would give up their arms and come no more to battle against his people. Zerahemnah said that his people would give up their weapons of war, but would take no oath to refrain from future war. Moroni then declared that the conflict would go on unless they made the required oath. Zerahemnah in his anger rushed forward to kill Moroni, but one of the Nephite soldiers struck down his sword and cut off his scalp. The Lamanite chieftain withdrew to his soldiers, but many of them threw down their weapons of war, entered into a covenant of peace, and were allowed to depart into the wilderness (44:1-15). The wounded Zerahemnah then incited the remainder of his men to battle, but they were mowed down by the well-armed Nephites. When Zerahemnah saw that they were all about to be slain, he vigorously besought Moroni to spare them, promising never to war against the Nephites anymore. The Nephites then took their arms, made them take the required oath, and permitted them to depart. The number slain on both sides was tremendous; the revelation of God to Alma doubtless saved the Nephites from ever greater loss of life (44:16-24).

In these battles, it should be remembered that the Nephites were fighting for their homes and their liberties, their wives and their children, and their right to worship as they so desired. The sacred text makes this important explanation:

And they were doing that which they felt was the duty which they owed to their God; for the Lord had said unto them, and also unto their fathers that: Inasmuch as ye are not guilty of the first offense, neither the second, ye shall not suffer yourselves to be slain by the hands of your enemies. And again, the Lord has said that: Ye shall defend your families even unto bloodshed. Therefore for this cause were the Nephites contending with the Lamanites, to defend themselves, and their families, and their lands, their country, and their rights, and their religion. (43:46-47; cf. D&C 98:23-48.)

With Chapter 45 we begin the study of Mormon's abridgment of the record made by Alma's son, Helaman. It tells about the last days of the younger Alma among the Nephites. It would appear from the sacred record that he was cognizant of his imminent disappearance from the midst of his people. Therefore, he came to his son, Helaman, and questioned him concerning his belief in Christ. Having received a satisfactory answer from his son, he blessed him and told him that the Lord would prosper him in the land (45:2-8). He told how the spirit of revelation had revealed to him that within four hundred years from the time when Jesus Christ should manifest himself unto the Nephite nation, the people should dwindle in unbelief. As a result, the final wars, famine, bloodshed, and pestilences should cause the people of Nephi to become extinct. All of the disciples of the Lord, he said, should be pursued by the Lamanites until they were destroyed. Having said these things to Helaman, Alma blessed his other sons, and also the Church (45:9-17). When he had done this, he departed out of the land of Zarahemla and was never heard of more. The sacred record states (45:18) that as to his death or burial "we know not of." Mormon then adds this significant comment:

Behold, this we know, that he was a righteous man; and the saying went abroad in the church that he was taken up by the Spirit, or buried by the hand of the Lord, even as Moses. But behold, the scriptures saith the Lord took Moses unto himself; and we suppose that he has also received Alma in the spirit unto himself; therefore, for this cause we know nothing concerning his death and burial. (45:19)

This quotation is an exceedingly interesting one. It is possible that the writer was attempting to imply that Alma had been translated, even as Moses was translated by the Lord. It will be remembered that on the Mount of Transfiguration Moses appeared with Elias (Elijah); according to the Prophet Joseph Smith, they conferred keys that were necessary for Peter, James and John to have in their future work. (Matthew 17; see Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 158.) It may be reasonably inferred, therefore, that Moses appeared as a translated being, not as a spirit.

Following the disappearance of Alma, his son, Helaman, and associates tried to establish the Church throughout the land and attempted to put down many little dissensions and disturbances which had come among the people. Notwithstanding the work of Helaman and his brethren, there arose considerable dissension among the various branches of the Church, and many people refused to give heed to these men. As a matter of fact, this dissension led to an even greater rebellion among the Nephite people (45:20-24).

Practically all of chapters 46-62 deal with wars and contentions involving the Nephites and Lamanites. Those who like war narratives should read these chapters, because they contain the best of the kind in the Book of Mormon. Chapters 46-49 have mainly to do with dissensions and rebellions engineered by one Amalickiah, whereas Chapter 50 tells of the rebellion of Morianton. The rebellion of Amalickiah was much serious and costly to the Nephites than that of Morianton. It seems that Amalickiah was an imperious and ambitious man, who wanted very much to be king. He led away people by his flattery, and his words created a great deal of difficulty for the Church. When Moroni, the chief general of the Nephites, heard of these dissensions, he became extremely angry with Amalickiah. He rent his coat in pieces and wrote upon one portion these words:

-In memory of our God, our religion, and freedom, and our peace, our wives, and our children-(46:12)

Having buckled on his armor, he fastened this piece of his coat upon the end of a pole; he then bowed himself to the earth and prayed mightily unto God for the blessings of liberty to rest upon his brethren so long as a band of Christians (notice the term) should remain to possess the land. Having prayed mightily for his people, Moroni went forth among them, waving the rent part of his garment in the air that all might see the writings which he had placed upon it. He cried unto the people:

Behold, whosoever will maintain this title upon the land, let them come forth in the strength of the Lord, and enter into a covenant that they will maintain their rights, and their religion, that the Lord God may bless them. (46:20)

Many of the people gathered around Moroni and upheld him in his desire. When Amalickiah saw that there were more people on the side of Moroni than on his own, he took his forces and departed into the land of Nephi (46:1-19).

The armies of Moroni cut off those of Amalickiah, but this renegade escaped with a few of his men to the Lamanites. The others were returned to Zarahemla, either to give support to the cause of freedom or to be put to death. Thus peace was brought to the land for a time. Helaman and the high priests did much to maintain the spiritual morale of the Church (46:30-41).

While among the Lamanites, Amalickiah by treachery and deceit made himself king over all of the Lamanite forces. In so doing, he brought about the death by poisoning of Lehonti, king of the Lamanites, and married the queen (47:1-35).

It was the desire of Amalickiah to rule over all of the people of the land, Nephites as well as Lamanites,. He therefore used all of his powers of fraud and deceit to bring about his desires (48:1-7). However, he did not reckon sufficiently with Moroni, the great Nephite general. While Amalickiah was preparing the Lamanites to attack the Nephites, Moroni prepared his people to resist them by strengthening Nephite fortifications and the places in the land that were weakest (48:8-10). Here is an outstanding tribute to the Nephite commander:

And Moroni was a strong and a mighty man; he was a man of perfect understanding; yea, a man that did not delight in bloodshed; a man whose soul did joy in the liberty and the freedom of his country, and his brethren from bondage and slavery; yea, a man whose heart did swell with thanksgiving to his God, for the many privileges and blessings which he bestowed upon his people; a man who did labor exceedingly for the welfare and safety of his people. (48:11-12)

After such a tribute it is not necessary to say any more about the great character of this man. Moroni, Helaman, and their aids kept up the righteous spirit of the Nephites to such a degree that God helped them mightily in the wars in which they were compelled reluctantly to contend with the Lamanites. The Nephites did not delight in shedding the blood of their foes; but they could not afford to allow their families to be massacred by dissenters and savage, unreasoning enemies (48:14-25).

The war preparations of the Nephites were so excellently carried out under Moroni's direction that when the Lamanite armies under Amalickiah's captains invaded the land, they were baffled and badly defeated. This infuriated Amalickiah no end, and he swore to drink Moroni's blood. On the other hand, the Nephites thanked God for their deliverance. The Church prospered during these troublous times under the leadership of Helaman, Shiblon, Corianton, Ammon and others (49:1-30). The Nephite defense preparations continued, but their prosperity and spirituality were such that the sacred writer could say:

But behold there never was a happier time among the people of Nephi, since the days of Nephi, than in the days of Moroni, yea, even at this time, in the twenty and first year of the reign of the judges. (50:23)

The success of the Nephites both in and out of battle is attributed by Mormon to the fact that they were close to God during all of their difficult experiences. They had faith in their leaders and kept the commandments of God. The record testifies thus:

And thus we see how merciful and just are all the dealings of the Lord, to fulfilling of all his words unto the children of men; yea, we can behold that his words are verified, even at this time, which he spake unto Lehi, saying: Blessed art thou and thy children; and they shall be blessed, inasmuch as they shall keep my commandments they shall prosper in the land. But remember, inasmuch as they will not keep the commandments they shall be cut off from the presence of the Lord. And we see that these promises have been verified to the people of Nephi; for it has been their quarrellings and their contentions, yea, their murderings and their plunderings and their idolatry, their whoredoms, and their abominations, which were among themselves, which brought upon them their wars and their destructions. And those who were faithful in keeping the commandments of the Lord were delivered at all times, whilst thousands of their wicked brethren have been consigned to bondage, or to perish by the sword, or to dwindle in unbelief and mingle with the Lamanites. (50:19-22)

We notice in this quotation that the usual Nephite philosophy of history is cited: if the people keep God's commandments, they shall not be cut off from the presence of the Lord. These accounts of the wars and contentions of the Lamanites and Nephites are therefore intended by the writers to be faith-promoting.

The second rebellion among the Nephites took place under the leadership of a man by the name of Morianton. The people of the land of Morianton claimed a part of the land of Lehi. Consequently a warm contention took place between the two peoples, who were determined to battle out their rival claims. The people of the land of Lehi, who were in the right, came over to the place where Moroni's army was encamped. The people of Morianton were fearful that Moroni would come back and destroy them. Therefore they determined to flee to the north, away from the main body of the Nephites. Hearing of this fact, Moroni headed off the recalcitrants. Morianton was slain in battle, and his people were returned to Moroni's camp. Following the account of these dissensions, the texts records the fact that Nephihah, the second chief judge, died (B.C. 68) and his son, Pahoran, a just man, took his place (50:25-40).

Chapters 51-62 deal with the internal difficulties of the Nephite people and with the wars continued against them by Amalickiah and his brother Ammoron. Pahoran, the newly-appointed chief judge, was embarrassed by a group of so-called king-men who wanted to depose him and establish a king over the land. The voice of the people was in Pahoran's favor, however, and he retained his judgment seat. At about this time the king of the Lamanites, Amalickiah, began to stir up his men to war again. Moroni, the Nephite general, found it necessary to slay upwards of four thousand king-men before he could get the unity necessary to prosecute the war successfully against the Lamanites. In the meantime, Amalickiah had taken many Nephite strongholds (51:1-28). Finally, however, the Nephite forces began to contain the Lamanite advances. Teancum, one of Moroni's impetuous but able generals, headed off Amalickiah and his men in a pitched battle. This general was so angered by the strife caused by Amalickiah that he slipped over into the Lamanite camp by night and slew him. (51:29-35).

Unfortunately, this brave act did no stop the fighting. The brother of Amalickiah was appointed king of the Lamanites in his stead. This man, who was named Ammoron, continued the battles against the Nephites. Chapters 52-55 give an interesting narration of the able strategy of Moroni and his two commanders, Teancum and Lehi. The greatest war story and the most faith-promoting one in all of Nephite history is found in chapters 56-58. This war story is contained in a letter written by Helaman to Moroni. Helaman had taken the command over two thousand young Lamanites whose parents (the Ammonites) had sworn never to take up arms against their enemies. (See 53:10-22.) But their sons, who had not taken the oath, placed themselves under Helaman's command and helped the Nephites in their severe battles against the Lamanites. So great was the faith and the ability of these young men that they played an important part in defending the rights of the Nephite people. Moreover, God protected them so marvelously that although all of them were wounded, some severely, not one was slain. Let us cite Helaman's own testimony:

And it came to pass that there were two hundred, out of my two thousand and sixty, who had fainted because of the loss of blood; nevertheless, according to the goodness of God, and to our great astonishment, and also the foes of our whole army, there was not one soul of them who did perish; yea, and neither was there one soul among them who had not received many wounds. And now, their preservation was astonishing to our whole army, yea, that they should be spared while there was a thousand of our brethren who were slain. And we do justly ascribe it to the miraculous power of God, because of their exceeding faith in that which they had been taught to believe-that there was a just God, and whosoever did not doubt, that they should be preserved by his marvelous power. (57:25-26)

Doubtless Helaman's epistle was used by the Nephites in days to come as a powerful faith-promoting document.

When Moroni had received Helaman's epistle, he rejoiced over the successes narrated therein. He immediately sent a letter to Pahoran, asking for additional troops to help Helaman maintain the territories he had so miraculously regained. Meanwhile, Moroni prepared to regain the remainder of those cities and possessions lost to the Lamanites. Unfortunately, the Nephites suffered other losses before Moroni could move (59:1-13).

Chapter 60 contains a powerful letter of censure from Moroni to Pahoran for his neglect of the armies in the field. Chapter 61 contains Pahoran's noble reply, in which he explains that Nephite dissenters had driven him away from the seat of government and had made it impossible for him to give aid to the armies. He advised Moroni to leave most of his armies under the direction of Lehi and Teancum and come to his aid with a small force of men.

Moroni did so, and with the aid of those who gathered to his small force he successfully beat down the rebellious forces that had unseated Pahoran (62:1-11). The remainder of Chapter 62 relates how the Nephites finally succeeded in bringing the wars to a conclusion. Peace and prosperity returned to them, and they became spiritually strong. The death of Helaman is recorded as having taken place in the thirty-fifth year of the rule of the judges (62:52).

The third and last division of the Book of Alma consists of Chapter 63, which is for the most part Mormon's abridgment of Shiblon's record. After the death of Helaman, his brother Shiblon took over the sacred relics and records which had been left in Haleman's hands by Alma, their father (63:1; cf. 37:1-2). Shiblon seems to have kept the records for a little over three years, (cf. 63:1; 63:10) before he died. Mormon indicates that he was a just and upright man (63:2). The death of Moroni, the great Nephite general of this period, is recorded as having taken place in the thirty-sixth year of the reign of the judges (63:3).

The remaining verses of the abridgment of Shiblon's records (63:4-9) relate the occurrence of important emigrations of Nephites by means of ships to the land northward. A man by the name of Hagoth, "he being, an exceedingly curious man," (63:5) built ships which carried several thousands of persons to the north. We must consider the possibility that many of these people reached what is now the United States and spread over parts of this country. Certain of these Nephite ships were never heard of more, and it is a favorite supposition of the Mormon people that they reached, or were wrecked on, the Hawaiian Islands. Hence the origin of certain groups of the South Sea Islanders, who are believed to be descendants of the Nephite branch of Israel.

In verse 10, Mormon records the death of Shiblon (B.C. 53) and then hastens to explain that his younger, brother Corianton had also gone northward in a ship to carry provisions to the people who had previously emigrated north. Inasmuch as Corianton was not present (and possibly he was never more heard of), Shiblon had felt it expedient to center the sacred relics and records upon Helaman's son, whose name was also Helaman (63:11). It is of interest to us to notice that Corianton had reformed as his father Alma had desired, (42:30-31) and was known to be just and upright. (Cf. 63:2.) Had he been present, Shiblon would have conferred the sacred records into his hands. Such is the plain implication of Mormon's words in verses 10 and 11. We may justly suppose that verses 12 to 16 contain some things which Mormon extracted from the younger Helaman's record-at least he mentions two things of importance. The first is that copies of all the scriptures in Helaman's possession were written and distributed throughout the land, with the exception of those parts which Alma had expressly forbidden (37:27-32) to go forth. The second is that certain Nephite dissenters went forth to the Lamanites, stirred up trouble, and with a great force came against the army of Moronihah, the Nephite general who was a son of Moroni (63:43). They were beaten back with great losses. This ended the thirty-ninth year of the reign of the judges (63:14-16).
