## 37087-Third Nephi (Continued)

Third Nephi (Continued)

Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 21

Third Nephi (Continued)

Chapters 12, 13, and 14 of 3 Nephi form a compact unit of themselves, inasmuch as they contain the Nephite version of the Sermon on the Mount. The American Gospel here closely parallels the Gospel of Matthew, Chapters 5, 6, and 7. Jesus delivered to the Nephites, with a few variations from the way it reads in Matthew, that great discourse on the good life. It should be a particular source of gratification for the Mormon people to call attention to the fact that the American Gospel first of all presents the Christ as one teaching the basic facts of spiritual life. Marvelous and unusual things were taught later, but Jesus saw to it that his people were first taught the fundamental ethical principles underlying human conduct.

One of the interesting facts about the Sermon in 3 Nephi is that it much more closely parallels the text of Matthew than that of Luke 6:20-49. Moreover, the Nephite account would tend to bear out the view that Jesus, when in Palestine, addressed himself to the multitude as well as to the newly appointed Twelve. One section of the Nephite version, however, was directed to the Twelve disciples alone and did not apply to the masses of the people. This is the part beginning with the words, "Remember the words which I have spoken . . . Therefore I say unto you, take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat," and ending with "Sufficient is the day unto the evil thereof." (3 Nephi 13:25-34; cf. Matthew 6:25-34 ) There is no suggestion in the text of Matthew that this section was addressed to the disciples of Jesus only. The wisdom of the Book of Mormon version is very evident. What would happen to the world if people took no thought of the morrow or failed to look forward to their supply of food and raiment? Almost utter chaos would ensue. On the other hand, we can readily understand the application of this section to the chosen Twelve, whose labors and thoughts were to be in the ministry. God would see to it that their needs were taken care of.

The Sermon in 3 Nephi, as also in its counterpart in Matthew, states the moral law of the kingdom of God. It lays down the common denominator of thought and conduct which must prevail among men if they are to live together in harmony, peace, and love in this world. Without it the kingdom of Heaven cannot come. It would be very interesting and profitable to analyze and consider in some detail the moral and ethical implications of the Sermon as given by our Lord. Since this is not possible within the space at the writer's command, 1 a limited outline of the Sermon must suffice:

I. The blessed state of those whose character is such that they may inherit God's kingdom.

A. Introductory: The blessings of the Nephites who believe Christ's words and are baptized. (12:1-2)

B. The Beatitudes. Types of character that are blessed. (12:3-12) The text at this point is more full and clear than its parallel in Matthew.

II. The practical aspects of character. Its place in the world. (12:13-16)

III. The relationship of the New Covenant to the righteousness of the Old Covenant. (12:17-48)

IV. The Savior's doctrine concerning men's motives and worship. (13:1-18)

V. The Savior's doctrine concerning wealth. (13:19-24)

VI. Our Lord's instructions to the Twelve concerning their freedom from anxiety. (13:25-34)

VII. The Savior's ideals as expressed in reference to social attitude. (14:1-12)

VIII. The duty of men toward Christ's ideals. Character needful; endurance the test. (14:13-27)

When Jesus had finished giving the Nephite equivalent of the Sermon on the Mount, he turned to some in his audience who marveled concerning his teachings. These wondered what he would do about the law of Moses, for they did not understand his saying to the effect that old things had passed away and all things had become new. He instructed them that the law of Moses was fulfilled in him, that it was he who gave the law and covenanted with his people, Israel. He pointed out that he was the law and the light, that the people should look unto him, endure to the end, and live; for unto him that endured to the end he would give eternal life. The Savior also said that he would not destroy the things of the prophets, for as many of their sayings as had not yet been fulfilled in him, would all be fulfilled. It was not his intention to destroy that which had been spoken concerning things which are to come. The covenant that he had made with his people was not all fulfilled, but the law that he had given unto Moses, had and end in him (15:1-10).

A second teaching, spoken to the Twelve only, gives a clear and unequivocal explanation of the statement quoted in John 10:16:

And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd. (Cf. 3 Nephi 15:17; Isaiah 56:8; Matthew 15:24)

Scholars have given various interpretation to this statement of Jesus Perhaps one of the commonest is that the Gentiles, are the "other sheep" spoken of. Indeed, the Savior said that his disciples in Jerusalem had that very concept:

And they [the disciples in Jerusalem] understood me not, for they supposed it had been the Gentiles; for they understood not that the Gentiles should be converted through their preaching. (15:22)

Jesus explained, however, that the Nephites to whom he was ministering were the "other sheep" to which he had reference, and that the Palestinian disciples had not understood his word "because of stiffneckedness and unbelief." (15:18, 21) For that reason his Father probably had not given him instructions to tell the disciples at Jerusalem concerning the Nephite inheritance of this land (15:11-24).

The Nephite Twelve were then informed of the existence of yet another body of Israelites whom the Father had commanded him to visit:

And verily, verily, I say unto you that I have other sheep, which are not of this land, neither of the land of Jerusalem, neither in any parts of that land round about whither I have been to minister. For they of whom I speak are they who have not as yet heard my voice; neither have I at any time manifested myself unto them. But I have received a commandment of the Father that I shall go unto them, and that they shall hear my voice, and shall be numbered among my sheep, that there may be one fold and one shepherd; therefore I go to show myself unto them. (16:1-3)

That these "other sheep" are the Ten Tribes so long lost to man there can be little doubt. (See 17:4.)

In still other instructions, the Savior informed his disciples that the remnant of Israel would come eventually to a knowledge of him, their Redeemer, through the believing Gentiles. Israel would be gathered in from the four quarters of the earth, and the believing Gentiles were to be blessed, but the Lord pronounced woes upon the unbelieving Gentiles, who should at that day sin against the gospel with their many abominations. The house of Israel would be shown that the Gentiles were not to have power over them, and the Lord would remember his covenants with Israel (16:4-12).

If the Gentiles repented, the Lord said, they were to be blessed; otherwise the house of Israel would be permitted to tread them down, and they would be as salt that has lost its savor. Then would the words of Isaiah 52:8-10 be fulfilled, at that time (16:13-20).

Jesus turned again to the multitude and perceived that they were weak or tired, and apparently incapable of understanding all that he had to say to them. He therefore prepared them to come on the morrow and told them that he was going to show himself to the lost tribes of Israel. But the multitude were in tears and looked as if they were intending to ask him to tarry longer. He therefore told them to bring forward any who were lame, blind, maimed, or physically incapacitated in any way. These he healed, and all bowed down at his feet and worshipped him. In fact, as many as could get near him bathed his feet with their tears. In the midst of this tender but dramatic scene, Jesus had all of the children brought forward and placed upon the ground about him (17:1-12). The multitude were commanded to kneel down, and as they did so, the Savior prayed earnestly to the Father. Here is the testimony of the sacred record concerning the prayer:

He prayed unto the Father, and the things which he prayed cannot be written, and the multitude did bear record who heard him. And after this manner do they bear record: The eye hath never seen, neither hath the ear heard, before, so great and marvelous things as we saw and heard Jesus speak unto the Father; and no tongue can speak, neither can there be written by any man, neither can the hearts of men conceive so great and marvelous things as we both saw and heard Jesus speak; and no one can conceive of the joy which filled our souls at the time we heard him pray for us wife the Father. And it came to pass that when Jesus had made an end of praying unto the Father, he arose; but so great was the joy of the multitude that they were overcome. (17:15-18)

Finally, Jesus had the multitude rise, and he blessed them. His humanity and the depth of his feeling is shown by the fact that he wept. Then he blessed their little children, one by one, and prayed in their behalf. He wept again, and bade the people to behold their little ones. They saw angels descending from heaven, encircling them about and ministering to them. All were encircled with fire (17:19-24).

We must confess that Chapter 17 is one of the most dramatic in the Book of Mormon. Mormon, in characteristic fashion, bore a testimony concerning the events with which it deals for the benefit of this generation. Here it is:

And the multitude did see and hear and bear record; and they know that their record is true for they all of them did see and hear, every man for himself; and they were in number about two thousand and five hundred souls; and they did consist of men, women, and children. (17:25)

Jesus next instituted the sacrament of bread and wine among the Nephite people. He had the multitude seat themselves upon the earth while his disciples secured the necessary bread and wine. Our Lord blessed the bread and passed it to the Twelve, who partook of it, and then in turn he had them administer it to the people. The same procedure took place in the administration of the wine (18:1-9). The reader should notice that Jesus recognized the preeminent position held by his disciples. They were honored in the eyes of the people by having the sacrament administered to them first. The Book of Mormon makes clear, if there is any doubt about it, that the doctrine of transubstantiation is untrue. Here are the Savior's own words:

And this shall ye always observe to do, even as I have done, even as I have broken bread and blessed it and given it unto you. And this shall ye do in remembrance of my body, which I have shown unto you. . . And this shall ye always do to those who repent and are baptized in my name; and ye shall do it in remembrance of my blood, which I have shed for you, that ye may witness unto the Father that ye do always remember me. . . (18:6-11; italics mine.)

These words of Jesus to his disciples make certain, as far as we are concerned, that the elements of the sacrament, the bread and wine, do not, when blessed by one in authority, mysteriously turn into the very body and blood of the Christ.

When our Lord had taught the necessity of partaking of the sacrament and the blessedness in doing so, he emphasized the value of prayer as insurance against temptation and evil. He also charged men to pray in their families, as well as to welcome others in their midst even as he had permitted those present to come unto him (18:12-25).

The disciples were commanded not to knowingly permit any one to partake of the sacrament unworthily. But they were also instructed with some emphasis as to how to deal with persons who might be unworthy: such were not to be cast out and made to feel unwelcome in places of worship. Jesus seems always to have been thinking of the worth of the human soul (18:26-33).

The Lord, before he departed from them and ascended into heaven that first day, conferred upon his apostles the power to give the Holy Ghost? 2

Beginning with Chapter 19, we have an account of the events and teachings of the second day of our Lord's ministry among the Nephites. The first appearance of Jesus had been noised abroad, and the morrow saw an even greater multitude gathered to behold and listen to the Master. An interesting human touch is revealed herein:

Yea, and even all the night it was noised abroad concerning Jesus; and insomuch did they send forth onto the people that there were many, yea, an exceeding great number, did labor exceedingly all that night, that they might be on the morrow in the place where Jesus should show himself into the multitude. (19:3)

When the people had gathered, the Twelve went forth and stood in their midst. We have already pointed out that they had been chosen the day before, with Nephi at their head. Fortunately, their names are given: Nephi, Timothy (Nephi's brother), Jonas (son of Nephi), Mathoni, Mathonihah (brother of Mathoni), Kumen, Kumenonhi, Jeremiah, Shemnon, Jonas, Zedekiah, and Isaiah.

The names "Timothy" and "Jonas" deserve a little special comment. Timothy is distinctly a Greek name. The name "Jonas" would seem to be a Graecized form of the Hebrew Jonah. (Cf. Matthew 12:39-40) These names indicate that Greek influence was not unknown in Palestine before the Nephites left there about 601 B.C. Apparently the names, either Greek originally or formed under Greek influence, were preserved on the Brass Plates and were commonly used among the Nephites. That Greek influence was not unknown in Palestine prior to 600 B.C. is attested by modern archaeological discovery.

It should be pointed out that although the Nephite Twelve were a quorum of apostles and contemporary with the Twelve in Palestine, they were not the Quorum of the twelve. The Twelve in Palestine must be given that honor. It will be remembered that Nephi, the son of Father Lehi, saw in vision the Palestinian Twelve and perceived that they would judge the twelve tribes of Israel, including the Nephite Twelve (1 Nephi 12:9). In any question of ultimate authority, however academic, it must be admitted that the Twelve in Palestine had seniority over the Nephite Twelve.

When the Nephites had gathered together, the Twelve divided them into twelve bodies and proceeded to teach them. They also caused the multitude to kneel and pray unto the Father in the name of Jesus. The members of the Twelve also prayed, more especially that the Holy Ghost should be given them (19:4-9). In all of this, the Twelve were probably doing as they had been previously instructed by the Savior. After the prayer service, the Twelve proceeded to the water's edge, followed by the multitude. Here Nephi went down into the water and was baptized. He in turn baptized the other members of the Twelve, after which the Holy Ghost fell upon them and they were filled with the Holy Ghost and with fire. Angels also came down from heaven and ministered to them (19:10-14).

It may be asked why Nephi, and possibly other members of the Twelve, had to receive authority to baptize (11:22) and were themselves required to be baptized, when they had baptized many long years before the Savior's appearance (7:23-26). The answer probably lies in the fact that when our Lord appeared to the Nephites, he proceeded to organize the Church in its fulness, and baptism under the law of Moses was done away with. The ordinances of the Church were now performed under the requirements of the Melchizedek Priesthood, and not according, to the Aaronic Priesthood as under the law of Moses. (Cf. D&C 22)

Even more impressive in Chapter 19 is its description of an ineffable outpouring of prayer when Jesus again stood in the midst of the people (19:15-34). In all scripture there can be found no description of a prayer service as powerful and marvelous as this. Only men with a high degree of spirituality can begin to comprehend and appreciate it. Near the end of the service Jesus said to his disciples:

So great faith have I never seen among all the Jews; wherefore I could not show unto them so great miracles, because of their unbelief. Verily I say unto you, there are none of them that have seen so great things as ye have seen; neither have they heard so great things as ye have heard. (19:35-36)

On account of its drama, loveliness, and high spirituality, I rank this chapter (19) as one of the greatest in the Book of Mormon.

Chapter 20 relates that Jesus again administered bread and wine, miraculously provided, to his disciples, who in turn administered the sacrament to the multitude. When this ordinance was completed, the people cried out with one accord and gave glory to the Master (20:1-9). Then Jesus gave to all present instructions concerning the day when the Father would fulfill the covenant made with Israel and gather its remnants from all parts of the globe. If the Gentiles did not repent after receiving their blessing (Book of Mormon?), said he, they were to come under the power of Israel, as Micah the prophet had foreseen (20:10-19; cf. Micah 4:12-13, 5:8-9). Jesus emphasized that the sword of God's justice would hang over the Gentiles in that day; on the other hand, he would establish his people Israel in this land, which should be a New Jerusalem to them (20:20-22). Our Lord identified himself as the prophet who would be raised up as predicted by Moses in Deuteronomy 18:15, 18-19; having done so, he spoke of the Nephites as children of the prophets and of the covenant which God had made with Abraham. He spoke of the future might of the Gentiles, who would scatter Israel and be a scourge to the remnant on this land. The gathering of Israel is again mentioned, and their inheritance in Palestine is spoken of. When the gospel is preached to Israel and they begin to believe in Jesus Christ, then certain prophecies of Isaiah will be fulfilled. Those cited include Isaiah 52:1-3, 6-7, 9-15. (Cf. D&C 113:7-10) The emphasis placed by the Savior upon Israel's gathering and future glory is notable in this part of the American Gospel. There is no mistaking the fact that Jesus instructed Mormon to put in this Gospel those teachings of practical and vital importance to us in this generation (20:23-46).

In Chapter 21, the Savior continues his discussion of the Father's work in the last days. He mentions the gathering of Israel again and points out that by the power of the Holy Ghost the Gentiles should be made to know concerning the remnant of the house of Jacob in this land who are scattered by them. In the wisdom of the Father, the Gentiles would be established in this land and be set up as a free people in order that the revelations of the Book of Mormon might come forth from them to the remnant of Father Lehi's seed. Our Lord set forth the fact that if the Gentiles would repent and be baptized and come to know the true points of the Father's doctrine, they might be numbered among the people of the house of Israel. In that day the Father should do a great and marvelous work among the children of men, but some would not believe it even when told (21:1-9). The Master then pointed out anew that Israel would have power over the unrepentant Gentiles, and quoted Micah 5:8-15 to that effect (21:12-21). The Gentiles were promised, however, that if they would hearken unto his words and join themselves to the covenant people, they should have the privilege of helping to build the city of the New Jerusalem in this land. Their future should be glorious in assisting God to gather in the dispersed of Israel from all parts of the land unto the New Jerusalem, and the power of heaven would be among them (21:22-25). The Master's discussion cannot fail to give the thoughtful reader a thrill as he contemplates the great future of Israel and America, if the course prescribed by God is followed by his people.

Chapter 22 is almost entirely a quotation from Chapter 54 of Isaiah. The superscription of it reads: "And then shall that which is written come to pass"; this is, of course, an indication given by our Lord that the prophet Isaiah saw the things of which He had been speaking (ch. 21) and wrote concerning them, or at least concerning what would happen when they were fulfilled.

The fulfillment of this beautiful poem-Isaiah 54 is all poetry-is to be found in this dispensation. Part of it has probably already been fulfilled since the restoration of the gospel; the remainder will be in a time yet future.

In the first three verses, Zion is initially represented as a woman separated from her husband, bereft of spiritual offspring and barren, but now (in the latter days) to be the happy mother of a multitude of children; indeed, she will have more children than before her unfortunate separation (because of her unfaithfulness) from her husband. One is reminded of Isaiah's words when he said:

Then you [Zion] will say in your heart: "Who has borne me these? I was bereaved and barren, exiled and put away, but who has brought up these? Behold, I was left alone; whence then have these come?" (Isaiah 49:21)

Because of the great number of her children, Zion is commanded to enlarge her habitation, represented as a tent. This can be done by lengthening the cords attached to stakes which are moved farther from the center of the tent. Notice Isaiah's use of the word "stake," a word now in constant use in Latter-day Saint circles. Certain of the Lord's words in our day come to mind:

Go ye forth unto the land of Zion, that the borders of my people may be enlarged, and that her stakes may be strengthened, and that Zion may go forth unto the regions round about. (D&C 133:9; cf. 82:14)

Zion's "strength" is, of course, the authority of the priesthood in her midst. (D&C 113:8)

No more will Zion be confounded or ashamed, because she will again be the Lord's beloved wife. The trials and troubles of the past will be forgotten.

The Lord acts as a husband who invites back a divorced wife and announces to her that his anger is gone and his love has returned.

Even as in the days of Noah the Lord covenanted that water should no more cover the earth, so now he swears in effect that Zion shall never be cast off. Though the mountains depart and the hills be removed, his love shall never more depart from her.

The Lord describes the building of Zion with precious materials. All of her children shall be taught of him, and great shall be their peace, that is, their well being, prosperity, and fruits of righteous living. They shall be established in righteousness and be free from fear and oppression.

Inasmuch as the Lord created the smith who forges a weapon for a particular purpose, he can also create someone who is able to render it of no avail. No weapon raised against Zion shall prosper, and the Lord will condemn every tongue that speaks against her. The Lord vindicates and rewards his servants.

When the Savior finished quoting this beautiful scripture to his great Nephite audience, he made this impressive comment concerning it:

An now, behold, I say unto you, that ye ought to search these things. Yea, a commandment I give unto you that ye search these things diligently; for great are the words of Isaiah. For surely he spake as touching all things concerning my people which are of the house of Israel; therefore it must needs be that he must speak also to the Gentiles. And all things that he spake have been and shall be, even according to the words which he spake. (23:1-3)

After advising the people to write down his words and search the prophets, the Lord expounded to them the scriptures they had received. He also made known to them that there were other scriptures they should write down, which they did not have (23:4-6). Nephi was then requested by the Master to bring forth the record which had been kept. Casting his eyes upon it, the Lord noticed that the fulfillment of some predictions of Samuel the Lamanite (Helaman 14:25) had not been recorded. Following the command of Jesus, these omissions in the record were rectified. A command was also given to teach the things which he had expounded to them (23:7-14). The lesson which the Lord gave concerning the keeping of accurate records is of importance to Latter-day Saints, for these reasons: the Savior seems to have been very anxious that proper records, especially Church records, should be kept. That he would be any more anxious for Nephite history to be kept than that of the Church in Palestine and adjacent lands seems highly improbable. Yet numerous scholars insist that Jesus had little or nothing written; some insist that even the Four Gospels were not written down until from thirty to fifty years or more after his death. Many maintain that Jesus never organized a Church; consequently there would be no point in insisting on "Church" records during his lifetime. Teachings such as those found in the Sermon on the Mount are often assumed to be collections of oral instructions which were long kept in the memories of the people and finally committed to writing. The American Gospel in the Book of Mormon demonstrates how unlikely some of these suppositions are. The fact that Jesus gave the Sermon on the Mount to the Nephites substantially as it appears in Matthew 5-7, that he organized the Church, and further, that he insisted on the keeping of careful records put us on our guard against accepting too easily certain theories respecting the Palestinian Church and its written history.

Our Lord now proceeded to quote Chapters 3 and 4 of Malachi and expounded them to the Nephites. These two chapters are given in 3 Nephi 24-25 substantially as we find them in the Authorized Version. Let us briefly consider them under the following heads:

I. The coming of a messenger to prepare the way of the Lord; the Lord to purify and refine the sons of Levi that they may offer an offering in righteousness. (24:1-4; cf. Malachi 3:1-4)

II. Condemnation of Israel for various sins, with promised blessings if she complies with God's requirements (24:5-18). These verses have reference to Malachi's own times, but application may be made of them to future Israel.

III. The coming of Elijah the prophet before the great and terrible day of the Lord, in which judgments shall befall the wicked. (25:1-6)

Let us quote the verses under the first heading and then interpret them. Some scholars believe that the Book of Malachi is anonymous, but it is evident that the Savior didn't think so when he quoted the prophet's words to the Nephites. Malachi's words were not upon the Brass Plates because he lived about 450 B.C., long after the Nephites left Jerusalem.

These verses deal with events of the latter days, as the context shows, especially as seen in verse 2, which has reference to the Second Advent of the Savior ("who may abide the day of his coming" etc.). Nevertheless, there is much of importance in the verses that would have practical spiritual import for the Nephite people as well as sheer interest for them. The verses refer to four striking events: In the first place, a messenger is to come and prepare the way before the Lord's coming. Second, the Lord is to appear suddenly in his temple. Third, his coming is to be one of purification and judgment. And fourth, he is to make it possible for the sons of Levi to "offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness."

The messenger who was to prepare or clear the way for the Lord's coming (vs. 1) is none other than John the Baptist. According to the Gospel of Matthew the Savior said:

This is he about whom it is written, Lo, I send my messenger before thy face, and he shall prepare thy way before thee. (11:10)

When the priests and Levites in our Lord's day questioned John as to his standing, he frankly admitted that he was acting in the office of Elias, one preparing the way before the Lord, by saying:

I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord, as said Isaiah the prophet. (John 1:23; cf. 3:1-3)

It should be noted that John was quoting Isaiah 40:3 when he affirmed himself to be the "voice" crying in the wilderness. If one examines this verse and its context, it is found that many of the events recorded therein could be fulfilled only in our dispensation. (See Isaiah 40:1-5; cf. D&C 49:23; D&C 133:19-25.) The text of Isaiah would seem to imply that if John the Baptist is the "voice" spoken of, his mission also included the preparing of the way of the Lord in the latter days. The Angel Moroni, in all probability, explained this to the latter-day Prophet Joseph Smith and pointed out to him that he would yet receive the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood from the resurrected John the Baptist, who would thus fulfill his two-fold mission of preparing the way before the Lord. And, indeed, John appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery on May 15, 1829, and conferred the needed keys upon them. (See D&C 13.)

The Lord, "the messenger of the covenant", referred to in verse 1, will, in all probability, suddenly come to his temple in the New Jerusalem, yet to be built in Jackson County, Missouri. This appearance in the temple will doubtless be to the Lord's appointed servants and righteous saints gathered unto Zion. (See D&C 36:8; D&C 133:2.)

The Lord's coming is to be accompanied with great judgments upon the wicked:

Who may abide [endure] the day of his coming, And who shall stand when he appeareth? (Vs. 2)

Obviously, only the more righteous will survive, and even they are to be further purified and prepared for the Lord's service. Special mention is made of "the sons of Levi" who are to be purged and refined as gold and silver in order that they "may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness". (Vs. 3) Now who are the sons of Levi, and what is meant by their offering in righteousness? The answers to our question seem to come from the Doctrine and Covenants. The Prophet Joseph Smith was discussing the doctrine of baptism for the dead; in the process he quoted the substance of Malachi 3:2-3 and drew important conclusions from the passage which are of interest to us:

Behold, the great day of the Lord is at hand; And who can abide the day of his coming, And who can stand when he appeareth? For he is like a refiner's fire, And like fuller's soap; And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, and he shall purify the sons of Levi, And purge them as gold and silver, That they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness.

Let us, therefore, as a church and a people, and as Latter-day Saints, offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness; and let us present in his holy temple, when it is finished, a book containing the records of our dead, which shall be worthy of all acceptation. (D&C 128:24; italics mine.)

The Prophet seems clearly to infer that the "offering in righteousness" referred to by Malachi is an allusion to temple work for the dead and the preparing of proper records of the same. The saints who do the work are therefore in a certain sense "sons of Levi." That this conclusion is correct is made quite certain by another passage in the Doctrine and Covenants, where the Lord calls the holders of the Melchizedek Priesthood and the Aaronic Priesthood "sons of Moses" and "sons of Aaron" respectively. That is to say, they are, to all intents sons of Levi, since both Moses and Aaron were literal descendants of Levi.

Therefore, as I said concerning the sons of Moses--for the sons of Moses and also the sons of Aaron shall offer an acceptable offering and sacrifice in the house of the Lord, . . . and the sons of Moses and of Aaron shall be filled with the glory of the Lord, upon Mount Zion in the Lord's house, whose sons are ye; . . For whoso is faithful unto the obtaining these two priesthoods of which I have spoken, and the magnifying of their calling, are sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies. They become the sons of Moses and of Aaron and the seed of Abraham, and the church and kingdom, and the elect of God. (D&C 84:31-34; italics mine. Cf. D&C 124:39 where the saints doing temple work are called "sons of Levi.")

The application of these scriptures to the ancient Nephites is quite obvious. The Savior quoted Malachi to them mainly in order to introduce the subject of temple work for both the living and the dead. As far as 3 Nephi 24:3 is concerned, they as holders of the Priesthood, sons of Moses and Aaron (i.e., in effect, "sons of Levi"), were to do temple work for the dead and present to the Lord an acceptable record of it. When the Nephites and future generations of Israel performed then duties in this respect, the Lord would be pleased:

Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem Be pleasant unto the Lord, As in the days of old, And as in former years. (3 Nephi 24:4; cf. Malachi 3:4)

In connection with the above explanation of who is meant by the "sons of Levi," it should be kept in mind that neither the ancient Nephites nor present-day Latter-day Saints were or are literal descendants of the Tribe of Levi. When the members of the Tribe of Levi. When the members of the Tribe of Levi come into the Church, they, too, will be obliged to do temple work for the dead and present to the Lord a suitable record of it. In ancient times the Lord gave the Tribe of Levi special spiritual prerogatives as far as the house of Israel was concerned. Hence the allusion to the "sons of Moses" and the "sons of Aaron" (i.e., "sons of Levi) in our day (see D&C 13) because of the high spiritual prerogatives given to us. The same high privileges were accorded the Nephites by the Savior when he appeared among them.

Now we may consider the teachings of Malachi in 24:5-18. (See heading II above.) In these verses the prophet is mostly rebuking the people of his own day. But what he says could of course be taken to heart by the Nephite people in their own spiritual life.

The Lord in his judgment, Malachi points out, will be a swift witness against the sorcerers who became numerous among His people after the Babylonian captivity; against the adulterers, who were all too prevalent because of the influence of foreign peoples; against the false swearers or perjurers and those who hold back the pay of poor men and defraud or oppress the widow and the orphan; and, finally, against those who thrust aside the foreigner, stranger, or guest and fail in other ways to fear God. These indictments through Malachi show how alert and aware the prophet must have been of social injustices among his people. Malachi knew, as did Amos, that men cannot worship God acceptably and be unjust to their fellows. To find God, a man must first find his neighbors.

Malachi proceeds to rebuke the people because they have robbed God of tithes and offerings. In ancient Israel, tithes were paid to the Lord for his servants the Levites, who had been given no other inheritance. They in turn were tithed, and the proceeds were given to the priests (Numbers 18:24-29). The offerings were of several varieties, such as bread and cake (Numbers 15:19-20), the annual halfshekel (Exodus 30:13-15), the tabernacle offerings (Exodus 25:2, 3; Exodus 35:5, 21, 24; Exodus 36:3, 6), and offerings for the second temple (dedicated 516 B.C.) when it was first erected (Ezra 8:25). The prophet then implies that because they rob God of these things, the blessings of the fields have been withheld from them. The teaching that there is a relationship between man's service to God and the way in which the earth yields her fruits is most interesting:

After the prophet has disclosed why the Lord has withheld his blessings from the people, he proceeds to show them that their complaints against Him are unjust, and that in the forthcoming judgment day a clear distinction will be made between the righteous and the wicked. The wicked who mourn and fast before God and then complain that their piety has brought them no gain are contrasted with the righteous who do not believe that mere outward worship is sufficient to please him. In respect to the righteous,

When Malachi mentions these things to his people, he sees the Second Advent of the Lord and the great judgments to accompany it. This is the time in which the Lord will make up his jewels and "discern between the righteous and the wicked." In Chapter 25:1-6 (see heading III above) we have the prophet's description of this great period, which we shall now consider.

In my opinion, Malachi foresaw many of the same events mentioned by Joel, Obadiah, Zephaniah, and others of the prophets. Prior to and at the coming of our Lord, the world will be visited with sorrow, distress, and devastation. Malachi states this fact in the following words:

When Moroni was explaining this verse to the Prophet Joseph Smith, he quoted it with a little variation from that given. The lines that were changed read as follows:

And all that do wickedly shall burn as stubble; For they that come shall burn them. (DHC 1:12)

This verse in question is alluded to in the Doctrine and Covenants least three times (29:9; 64:23,24; 133:64; cf. 1 Nephi 22:15), and in every instance the Lord explains it as having to do with the judgments to be poured out upon the wicked at the time of his Second Advent. D&C 64:2:3, 24 is a good illustration.

Behold, now it is called today until the coming of the Son of Man, and verily it is a day of sacrifice, and a day for the tithing of my people; for he that is tithed shall not be burned at his coming. For after today cometh the burning--this is speaking after the manner of the Lord--for verily I say, tomorrow all the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, I am the Lord of Host; and I will not spare any that remain in Babylon.

Malachi now turns from the unhappy state of the wicked and gives in somewhat figurative language a picture of the fortunate situation of the righteous:

Malachi now reminds his people to remember the statutes and judgments prescribed by Moses at Horeb (vs. 4), and in the final verses of the prophecy (5, 6), he gives notice of a glorious event that is to precede the "coming of the great and terrible day of the Lord," which, as we have already seen, "shall burn as an oven." He makes reference to the coming of Elijah the prophet, but the real meaning of these verses has always eluded commentators, and not until the Lord sent heavenly messengers to Joseph Smith with explanations has it been possible to clear up the difficulties. The notion was widespread in ancient times, among the rabbis and fathers, that Elijah the prophet, who was caught up to heaven without tasting death, would sometime reappear.

When the Angel Moroni quoted this part of Malachi to Joseph Smith, he did so with some changes as follows:

Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, By the hand of Elijah the prophet Before the coming Of the great and dreadful day of the Lord. And he shall plant in the hearts of the children. The promises made to the fathers, And the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers. If it were not so, The whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming (D&C 2; DHC 1:12.)

This may be a paraphrase of the original text to help Joseph Smith comprehend its true significance. Otherwise, we should find it difficult to explain why the Savior, in his appearance to the Nephites, quoted it in accordance with the text found in the Authorized Version. We do not know, of course, the exact words of Moroni to Joseph Smith explaining the mission of Elijah, but they must have been in accordance with the Prophet's writings on the subject. Moroni taught the Prophet at intervals for several years, and during that period Joseph must have become thoroughly grounded in the principles underlying Elijah's keys and authority.

The mission of Elijah has to do with the higher Spiritual functions of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Elijah was the last prophet to hold the keys of the sealing powers of the Priesthood--that is, to seal in heaven what is bound upon the earth. The spirit of Elijah implies the power to invoke a fullness of Priesthood. The Prophet Joseph Smith explains it in this way:

The spirit, power, and calling of Elijah is, that ye have power to hold the key of the revelation, ordinances, oracles, powers and endowments of the fullness of the Melchizedek Priesthood and of the kingdom of God on the earth; and to receive, obtain, and perform all the ordinances belonging to the kingdom of God, even unto the turning of the hearts of the fathers unto the children, and the hearts of the children unto the fathers, even those who are in heaven. (DHC, 6:251.)

Through the powers of the Priesthood given to Elijah, men and women may be sealed to each other in marriage for time and eternity in the temples of God. Children born of these unions may be claimed by their righteous parents forever, since the latter are united by an everlasting covenant. The family organization thus continues beyond the grave, and one generation is thus sealed to another back to the days of Adam. Families that have passed into the spirit world without a knowledge of the gospel, and hence without being sealed to each other, must have the work done vicariously for them in the temples of the Lord. All of the gospel ordinances that are necessary to be performed for a living person to obtain salvation must also be performed for the dead. The Lord had made no exceptions other than for children who die under the age of eight years. That is the reason why the fathers (the dead) spoken of in 25:6 (Malachi 4:6) turn to their children, their living descendants, to have all the gospel ordinances, from baptism to marriage, performed vicariously for them in the temples. If the children do not turn their hearts to their ancestors and perform this necessary work for them, it will make it impossible for the Lord to accomplish his purpose of making this earth the celestial abode of the righteous. "Blessed are the meek," said the Savior, "for they shall inherit the earth." In consequence of default in performing the ordinances required, the only course left for the Lord would be to "smite the earth with a curse." Said the Prophet Joseph Smith:

I wish you to understand this subject, for it is important; and if you will receive it, this is the spirit of Elijah, that we redeem our dead, and connect ourselves with our fathers which are in heaven, and seal up our dead to come forth in the resurrection; and here we want the power of Elijah to seal those who dwell on earth to those who dwell in heaven. This is the power of Elijah and the keys of the kingdom of Jehovah. (DHC, 6:252)

The sublime mission of Elijah to return and restore the keys of his power before the "great and dreadful day of the Lord" was duly fulfilled in April 3, 1836, when he appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple in Ohio. Here is their description of that notable appearance:

Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death, stood before us, and said: Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi--testifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come--to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse--therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors. (D&C 110:13-16)

From the explanation given, it is quite obvious why the Savior quoted Chapters 3 and 4 of Malachi to the Nephite people. They, too, were to be held responsible for the instructions given by Malachi. Unfortunately , the Book of Mormon does not tell us about any appearance of Elijah to them.

And now it came to pass that when Jesus had told these things he expounded them unto the multitude; and he did expound all things unto them, both great and small. And he saith: These scriptures, which ye had not with you, the Father commanded that I should give unto you; for it was wisdom in him that they should be given unto future generations. (3 Nephi 26:1-2)

Why were these chapters (3, 4) from Malachi, so important to Latter-day Saints, inserted in 3 Nephi without the Savior's interpretation of them being included? 3 The answer, it seems to us, is relatively simple. Mormon quoted the two chapters in full for the purpose of emphasizing their importance. The Lord, however, forbade him to insert His exposition of them, because of the fact that they deal with certain matters pertaining to the latter days, which it was the prerogative of the Prophet Joseph Smith to reveal after receiving the keys of the sealing powers of the Priesthood. (See D&C 110:13-16.). The second advent of the Savior, the purification of the sons of Levi, the keys of the sealing power, temple work, and the mission of Elijah were among the subjects with which Malachi deals in the two chapters concerned.

Mormon further tells its that the Savior expounded all things to the Nephites, from the beginning until he should come in his glory--yes, and even until the earth should pass away and all people stand before God to be judged. The great historian then explains that he was permitted to write only a few of the "lesser" things which Jesus taught the Nephites. Most of the things which he taught the people were written upon the Large Plates of Nephi (26:3-8). The events and teachings which Mormon was permitted to write were to test the faith of this generation. If the people in this day refuse to receive them, then the greater things will be withheld, to their condemnation. Mormon was about to write down all of the things written upon the Large Plates, but the Lord expressly forbade it, saying that he would try the faith of his people (26:9-11). The Lord probably further restrained Mormon in his writing, as the paucity of detail in 4 Nephi and Mormon 1-7 shows. (See Mormon 5:9.) The prophet does say that after the Savior's three-day ministry, our Lord showed himself often to the Nephites and administered the sacrament to them (26:12-13). He also taught and ministered unto the children of the multitude in a marvelous way (26:13-14; cf. 17:21-24), and he healed the physically handicapped who were not present the first day (26:15; cf. 17:7-10). One man was even raised from the dead.

We are disappointed that Mormon writes concerning only one incident that happened on the third day of the Savior's ministry. It deals with certain unusual powers given to children (cf. 26:14):

Behold, it came to pass on the morrow that the multitude gathered themselves together, and they both saw and heard these children; yea, even babes did open their mouths and utter marvelous things; and the things which they did utter were forbidden that there should not any man write them. (26:16)

The three-day ministry of the Master was now completed. Mormon relates that the disciples of Jesus now actively began to baptize and teach; as many as were baptized were filled with the Holy Ghost and added to the Church. Many baptized believers saw and heard unspeakable things, which are not lawful to be written. All things were had in common among the people, and all men dealt justly, one with another (26:17-21).

Chapters 27 and 28 form the last literary unit of the American Gospel. In them are set down the events that transpired in the last recorded meeting of Jesus with the Nephite Twelve. Our Lord taught his disciples that the Church should be called after his name, for there had been disputations among the people concerning the matter. He took pains to explain that the Church, if it were called in Moses' name, should be Moses' church; if it were named after a man, it should be the church of a man; but it it were to be the church of Christ, it should be called after his name and be built upon his gospel. If the Church is built upon the gospel, the Father will show forth his own works in it (27:1-10). If it is not built upon the gospel, but upon the works of men, it will eventually be hewn down and cast into the fire. The Savior explained that he was lifted up upon the cross in accordance with his Father's will; then he was to draw all men after him, that they might be judged according to their works. Whosoever repents, is baptized in his name, and endures to the end will be held guiltless at the judgment day. No unclean thing may enter his kingdom; the command to repent is "to the ends of the earth." The command to his disciples was to do the things they had seen him do. If they did so, they would be blessed and lifted up at the last day (27:11-22). The disciples were commanded to write the things they had seen and heard. This was important, because the people would be judged by that which was written in the books. Furthermore, the disciples were to be judges of the Nephite people; hence the importance of their manner of life. The Lord told them to ask, and they should receive; knock, and it should be opened to them. He also expressed his joy in the fact that none of that generation of Nephites would be lost. But he was grieved because the fourth generation would be led away captive as was the son of perdition. 4 Jesus then commanded his disciples to enter in at the strait gate which leads to life (27:23-33).

Chapter 28 deals almost entirely with promises of their hearts' desire which Jesus made to each of the Twelve, and more especially to three of their number who were given the assurance that they should live to bring souls to him and behold all the doings of the Father unto the children of men until Christ should come in his glory. Nine of the Twelve were promised that they should come into his kingdom after they were seventy-two years old. The three were promised, however, that they should have the same blessing as that granted to John the Beloved, on the Eastern continent (28:6; cf. John 21:22-23; D&C 7). Mormon describes at considerable length what the Savior said to them (28:6-11), and how they were caught up into heaven and saw and heard unspeakable things, how they performed their ministry among the Nephites, how they were cast into prisons and fiery furnaces which could not hold them, and how they were cast twice into a den of wild beasts and were delivered (28:12-23). During their ministry all of that generation were converted to the Lord and blessed as Jesus had said they would be. Mormon was forbidden to disclose their names, but he writes that he had seen them and they had ministered unto him. In the wisdom of God they should minister to the Gentiles, the Jews, the scattered tribes of Israel, and all nations. Great and marvelous works would be wrought by them in the earth (28:24-32). The prophet then writes a short warning to those who do not hearken to the words of Jesus, or to those messengers sent forth by him. Finally, he explains that the three had a change wrought upon their bodies so that they could not die; in this state they were to remain until the judgment day of Christ, at which time they were to undergo a greater change and be received into the kingdom of the Father. They were to suffer no pain or sorrow except for the sins of the world; the Evil One, Mormon points out, was to have no power over them whatever, and the powers of the earth could not hold them (28:33-40).

Chapter 29 and 30 form the last literary unit of 3 Nephi. Mormon points out that when the account as given in the American Gospel comes to the Gentiles, the world may know that the Father is beginning to fulfill the covenant he made with the house of Israel. Moreover, the words of the prophets shall all be fulfilled. Men need not imagine in their hearts that the words of the Lord or his servants are spoken in vain (29:1-3). As if aware of the religious indifference in our day, Mormon writes a stiff rebuke to those who spurn and ignore the Lord's doings and who deny his revelations and spiritual gifts. His words are of serious importance to us, and will bear our exacting attention. Here they are:

And when ye shall see these sayings coming forth among you, then ye need not any longer spurn at the doings of the Lord, for the sword of his justice is in his right hand; and behold, at that day, if ye shall spurn at his doings he will cause that it shall soon overtake you. Wo unto him that spurneth at the doings of the Lord; yea, wo unto him that shall deny the Christ and his works! Yea, wo unto him that shall deny the revelations of the Lord, and that shall say the Lord no longer worketh by revelation, or by prophecy, or by gifts, or by tongues, or by healings, or by the power of the Holy Ghost! Yea, and wo unto him that shall say at that day, to get gain, that there can be no miracle wrought by Jesus Christ; for he that doeth this shall become like unto the son of perdition, for whom there was no mercy, according to the word of Christ! Yea, and ye need not any longer hiss, nor spurn, nor make game of the Jews, nor any of the remnant of the house of Israel; for behold, the Lord remembereth his covenant unto them, and he will do unto them according to that which he hath sworn. Therefore ye need not suppose that ye can turn the right hand of the Lord unto the left, that he may not execute judgment unto the fulfilling of the covenant which he hath made unto the house of Israel (29:4-9)

Chapter 30 contains Mormon's forceful call to the Gentiles to repent and hearken to the words of Jesus. The prophet's call is given at the Lord's command. The list of sins of which Mormon says the Gentiles of the latter days are guilty is impressive:

Turn, all ye Gentiles, from your wicked ways, and repent of your evil doings, of your lyings and deceivings, and of your whoredoms, and of your secret abominations, and your idolatries, and of your murders, and your priestcrafts, and your envyings, and your strifes, and from all your wickedness and abominations, and come unto me, and be baptized in my name, that ye may receive a remission of your sins, and be filled with the Holy Ghost, that ye may be numbered with my people who are of the house of Israel. (30:2)

Thus ends 3 Nephi, a great book, in serious vein.
