## 37088-Fourth Nephi

Fourth Nephi

Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 22

Fourth Nephi

The book commonly known among us as Fourth Nephi was, like Third Nephi, originally known as "The Book of Nephi." For convenience in reference Elder Orson Pratt, in the 1879 edition of the Book of Mormon, put the caption "4 Nephi" over the original title. According to the superscription of the book it was named after Nephi, the son of Nephi mentioned in 3 Nephi, who was the chief disciple of Jesus Christ. It seems strange that his father should give up the sacred records to him so quickly after the coming of Christ. Perhaps the work of the ministry was so exacting and occupied so much of his time that he felt obliged to turn them over to his son in order that the great events of the time could be recorded adequately. The superscription states that this book gives an account of the people of Nephi "according to his record." However, a quick glance at the one chapter of this book--it contains only 49 verses--reveals that it is the abridgment of the work of four men. It is unfortunate--at least vexing--that the great Golden Era of Nephite history, a period of about two hundred and eighty-five years, 1 should be so sparingly treated by Mormon, the abridger. We shall have to content ourselves with the thought that Mormon was commanded to refrain from revealing details of the great social system of having all things in common, which was developed among the Nephites during the period immediately following the Savior's appearances to them.

The original authors of this book, other than Nephi, were these men: two named Amos, who were Nephi's son and grandson, respectively; and Ammaron, also a grandson. It is convenient to analyze the text according to the authorship of its various parts:

I. Abridgment of the record of Nephi. A.D. 34--A.D. 110.

A. All people converted to the Lord. They have all things in common. Building activities. Their great happiness. (Vss. 1-19)

II. Abridgment of the record of Amos, son of Nephi, A.D. 110--A.D. 194.

A. A small part of the people revolt and call themselves Lamanites. (Vs. 20)

III. Abridgment of the records of Amos, grandson of Nephi. A.D. 194--A.D. 305.

A. Nephites become wealthy. They begin to divide into classes. They deny parts of the gospel. Three disciples of Jesus exhibit great power in overcoming their enemies. In A.D. 231 there occurs a great division among the Nephites. Gadianton robbers reappear. Nephites begin to be proud. (Vss. 21-47)

IV. Abridgment of the record of Ammaron, brother of Amos and grandson of Nephi. A.D. 305--A.D. 320.

A. Constrained by the Holy Ghost, Ammaron hides up the sacred records unto the Lord in A.D. 320. (Vss. 48-49)

The above analysis of 4 Nephi reveals how severely Mormon abridged the writings of the four record keepers. One gets the impression from the book that Mormon was not only cautioned not to reveal many important matters of Nephite history during this period, but was also in a great hurry to finish his literary labors.

As we have already pointed out, it is vexing to the student of the Book of Mormon to find the Golden Era of Nephite history so summarily dealt with by Mormon. He was doubtless commanded by Lord not to reveal the details of the system which the Nephites had of having all things in common. These things would be revealed in due course to this generation by latter-day prophets and were not to be mad known prematurely. The period in question, which immediately followed the ministry of the Savior among the Nephites, must have been filled with great events, and especially with great social changes.

From the writings of Nephi, we gather the fact that the disciples of Christ had organized the Church "in all the lands round about" by A.D. 35 (1:1). Moreover, verse 2 records the fact that by that same year all of the Lamanites and Nephites upon the face of the land had been converted to the Lord and had ceased from all disputations. Every man dealt justly with his fellows. Furthermore, the people had all things common among them, as we have said. For that reason there were no rich or poor. All were alike in the sight of God. The apostles of Jesus performed many great and marvelous works. They healed the sick, raised the dead, and caused the lame to walk and the deaf to hear; in fact, all manner of miracles were worked among the people. In the course of years, many of the cities which had been destroyed at the time of the Savior's crucifixion were restored. Some cities could not be rebuilt because of the fact that they had been sunk, and water had come up where they once stood. The text relates that the people, under their new social and spiritual order, became strong and multiplied very fast. They are described as being an "exceedingly fair and delightsome people." (Vs. 10 ) The people no longer worshipped according to the requirements of the law of Moses, but acted in accordance with the commandments which had been given b the Savior during his ministry among them. There was no contention among them, and it was possible for the disciples of Jesus to perform many mighty miracles because of their faith. It is stated that there could not be a happier people than these Nephites during this golden era (vs. 16). There were no robbers or murderers, because the people were one in heart and heirs to the kingdom of God. Mormon says:

And how blessed were they! For the Lord did bless them in all their doings; yea, even they were blessed and prospered until an hundred and ten years had passed away; and the first generation from Christ had passed away, and there was no contention in all the land. (Vs. 18)

It would appear that about the year A.D. 110 Nephi passed away, and the record was kept by his son Amos.

Less than two verses are devoted to the record which Amos kept. He had the plates for about eighty-four years, but nothing of special importance is said about him or about the history which he wrote except the fact that a small part of the people revolted from the Church and took upon themselves the name of Lamanites. "Therefore," so the record says, "there began to be Lamanites again in the land." (Vs. 20 ) This statement deserves some special comment. Thoughtful readers will have noticed that during the period we are discussing, all classes of the people lived in common and doubtless intermarried. For the sacred record explicitly says:

There were no robbers, nor murderers, neither were there Lamanites, nor any manner of-ites; but they were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of God. (1:17)

We must conclude, then, that all elements of the peoples that had been spared from death at the time of the Savior's crucifixion--Nephites, Mulekites, and Lamanites--had intermingled through marriage and had become one. When, therefore, dissident groups broke away from the Church about the year A.D. 194, they were composed of persons with much Nephite or Mulekite blood in their veins, not to mention Lamanite blood. These groups were called "Lamanites," and very probably the curse pronounced against the enemies of the Nephites in their early history came into force again. (See 2 Nephi 5:21.) We should not forget, then, that the Lamanites of our day undoubtedly have a strong strain of Nephite (including Mulekite) blood flowing in their veins. It is no wonder that the Nephite prophets looked forward to their welfare with especial interest.

Beginning with verse 21 we observe the abridgment of the record of Amos, the son of Amos and grandson of Nephi. It is during the period when the younger Amos kept the records that we begin to notice a falling away of the Nephites from the teachings which they had previously received. The sacred text says that the people were spread upon all the face of the land, and that they had become exceedingly rich. The fact that they had become wealthy is of more than minor importance. It should teach us today that under the gospel plan all people could become rich in material as well as in spiritual things. The gospel teaches us to be our brother's keeper and to help one another. If people would only realize it, by being one in spiritual things they could be rich in the material things of the earth. When men are in harmony one with another, they look after each other's interests; consequently, what benefits one is bound to help all. Amos writes (vs. 24) that about the year A.D. 201 certain persons became so lifted up in pride that they began to wear costly apparel and all manner of fine pearls; apparently they were interested more in the material things of the world than the spiritual. From that time on, the Nephites no longer had their goods and substance in common among them (vs. 25). The date given is most important in this period of Nephite history. The sacred historian also indicates that at that time the people began to be divided into classes. They built up churches to themselves in order to get gain, and some of them began to deny the true Church of Christ. Many of these churches professed to know the Christ, but they denied many parts of his gospel. They seem to have administered some of the sacred ordinances of the gospel to those who were forbidden because of unworthiness to receive them. True members of the Church began to be persecuted. Moreover, wicked men attempted to exercise power and authority over the three disciples of Christ who still tarried among the people. But no prisons could hold them, and they proceeded to go forth among the people doing many mighty miracles. Attempts were made to take their lives; verse 32 relates that they were cast into furnaces of fire but received no harm. Like Daniel of old, they were cast into dens of wild beasts, but came forth from among them without any harm. Wickedness multiplied among the people until finally, in the year A.D. 231, a great division took place among them (vs. 35). The wicked and the righteous were again divided into camps such as existed among the people prior to the coming of Christ. The true worshippers of Christ, on one hand, were called Nephites, Jacobites, Josephites, and Zoramites; on the other hand, those who rejected the gospel were known as Lamanites, Lemuelites, and Ishmaelites (vss. 36-38). The three last groups willfully rebelled against the Church and deliberately taught their children not to believe in the true teachings of Christ. Wicked men grew in power and influence; eventually the wicked became more numerous than the people of God. Verse 42 tells of the appearance again of the secret oaths and combinations that were known among the Gadianton robbers. About A.D. 300, so the sacred record informs us, the people of Nephi and the Lamanites were alike in being exceedingly wicked (vs. 45). The Gadianton robbers spread all over the face of the land, and there were no righteous left except the disciples of Jesus. After a long life, Amos died about the year 305 (vs. 47). His brother Ammaron kept the record in his stead. Ammaron seems to have kept the Nephite archives until about the year 320, when, acting under inspiration, he hid all of the sacred records. In the last verse of Fourth Nephi it is said that "he did hide them up unto the Lord, that they might come again unto the remnant of the house of Jacob according to the prophecies and the promises of the Lord." Thus the book ends.

What are the great lessons that we are to learn from this little book? It would appear to the writer, at least, that the principal lesson of the book--and we have already lightly touched on it--emphasizes the importance of the people of God being united and remaining faithful to him. When the Nephites had all things in common among them, they became exceedingly rich and happy. But when their riches caused them to be lifted up in pride, they began to fall away from the true teachings of Christ, and the result was their eventual downfall. Another obvious lesson which may be drawn from these facts is that although riches are good in their way, they can be rightly dealt with only by persons of strong spirituality and unselfishness. Riches do not seem to be good for the great mass of mankind, much as the Lord would like to give them. It would appear that the injunction "Before ye seek for riches seek ye for the kingdom of God," is well taken (Jacob 2:18).
