## 37089-The Book of Mormon

The Book of Mormon

Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 23

The Book of Mormon

It is unfortunate--viewed purely from the standpoint of convenience in reference--that Mormon's writings have received the same title as that given to the Nephite record as a whole. The Book of Mormon consists of the brief memoirs of Mormon plus two chapters, which means that the book contains a total of nine chapters. It occupies about 18½ printed pages in the current edition. The prophet Ammaron--mentioned in the preceding chapter--was the one responsible for bequeathing to Mormon the responsibility of taking over the sacred records and of writing the history of the Nephites in his time (1:2-4). The purpose of Mormon is thus made clear. In the very first verse of the book he writes:

And now I, Mormon, make a record of the things which I have both seen and heard, and call it the Book of Mormon. (See also 5:9-15.)

Mormon must have been a close observer of the doings of his people for about sixty five years. In a later chapter he indicates that what he writes is but a small account of what he has seen:

I write a small abridgment, daring not to give a full account of the things which I have seen, because of the commandment which I have received, and also that ye might not have too great sorrow because of the wickedness of this people. (5:9)

From this explanation it would appear that the account of Mormon is nothing but a small abridgment of what he had previously written on the Large Plates concerning his life and times. The "commandment" which he says that he received must refer to an order given him by the Lord not to write extensively concerning the latter days of the Nephites. Possibly this was done for a number of reasons. One of these must have been for the purpose of withholding an account of the Nephite social system, although they had no longer at this time their goods and substance common among them. (See 4 Nephi 1:25.) Another must have been for the purpose of not revealing too many details concerning the iniquities of the Nephites (2:18; cf. Ether 8:20).

The seven chapters written by Mormon cover Nephite history from about A.D. 321 until 384. It should be kept in mind, however, that Mormon did not obtain the Large Plates of Nephi upon which to write in accordance with Ammaron's request until about the year 334, when he was twenty-four years old (1:3-4). The two chapters (8-9) written by Moroni were not completed until at least 400 (8:6).

It is convenient to analyze the Book of Mormon under two divisions, following its authorship:

I. Brief memoirs of Mormon including some of his commentaries and addresses to the Lamanite remnant. A.D. 321-384. (Chs. 1-7)

A. Prophet Ammaron gives charge to Mormon concerning sacred records. Mormon taken south to Zarahemla by his father. Wars and wickedness of Nephites and Lamanites. Savior visits Mormon. Three Nephite disciples forbidden to preach; taken out of land. Mormon warned not to preach. Gadianton robbers. Mormon leads Nephite armies. Spirit of Lord departs from Nephites. Division of territory between Nephites and Lamanites. Mormon refuses to lead Nephites armies because of their wickedness. His words to future generations. (Chs. 1-3)

B. Nephites wage war of revenge against Lamanites. Nephites begin to lose. Mormon removes sacred records from Hill Shim. He again consents to lead Nephites. Terrible scenes of blood and carnage. Mormon writes to Gentiles and remnant of Israel. Final struggle between Nephites and Lamanites at Cumorah. Mormon deposits most of Nephite records in Hill Cumorah. Mormon's final admonitions to Lamanite remnant of latter days. (Chs. 4-7)

II. Brief memoirs of Moroni, his description of calamities and conditions in latter days, and an address to unbelievers. Written between A.D. 400 and 420. (Chs. 8-9)

A. Moroni writes as commanded by his father. A.D. 400. Conditions after great battle at Cumorah. Moroni alone. He has little to write and finishes--as he supposes--the record. (8:1-13)

B. At later time (probably about 420) Moroni begins to write again, Nephite record to come forth in day of abominations and wickedness. Moroni's address to unbelievers in Christ. How Nephite record was written. (8:14-9:37)

From the standpoint of literature the first seven chapters in Mormon consist mainly of simple historical narrative and religious teaching. A lamentation will be found in 6:17-22. The last two chapters by Moroni consist of historical narrative, prophetic prediction, and exhortation.

Perhaps it is not too much of an exaggeration to say that Mormon was called to the ministry when he was about ten years of age. At least we can say he was given responsibility and knowledge that only a prophet should have. It is a striking fact that the Lord has called many of the greatest prophets to his work in very early years. The prophet Jeremiah was called as a lad; so also was Nephi. Joseph Smith was called as a youngster in his teens. Now we observe the responsibility put upon Mormon at an early age. He was commanded by Ammaron to take charge of the sacred records--doubtless also the other holy relics--which had been hidden in a hill called Shim in the land of Antum. Here is Mormon's description of Ammaron's charge:

And about the time that Ammaron hid up the records unto the Lord, he came unto me, (I being about ten years of age, and I began to be learned somewhat after the manner of the learning of my people) and Ammaron said unto me: I perceive that thou art a sober child, and art quick to observe; therefore, when ye are about twenty and four years old I would that ye should remember the things that ye have observed concerning this people; and when ye are of that age go to the land of Antum, unto a hill which shall be called Shim; and there have I deposited unto the Lord all the sacred engravings concerning this people. And behold, ye shall take the plates of Nephi [Large Plates] unto yourself, and the remainder shall ye leave in the place where they are; and ye shall engrave on the plates of Nephi all the things that ye have observed concerning this people. And I, Mormon, being a descendant of Nephi, (and my father's name was Mormon) I remembered the things which Ammaron commanded me. (1:2-5)

It appears from 1:6 that Mormon must have lived as a child in the northern part of the Nephite lands. He tells us that when he was eleven years of age his father (also named Mormon) took him into the land southward, the land of Zarahemla. The prophet comments on the fact that the whole face of the land was covered with buildings and that the people were as numerous almost as the sands of the sea (1:7).

Mormon then tells of wars between the Nephites and the Lamanites. Wickedness prevailed upon the whole face of the land, so much so, in fact, that the Lord withdrew the beloved three disciples who had been promised that they should live until Jesus came in his glory. Mormon sadly writes that the Lord had withdrawn from the people his great gifts and that the Holy Ghost did not come upon any because of the wickedness and unbelief of the people (1:8-14).

We should not fail to notice that Mormon's call to God's service was capped by his being visited by the Savior when only fifteen years of age; he writes that he "tasted and knew of the goodness of Jesus." The ability of this young man to become a special witness of the Christ is a great object lesson to all of us. Mormon endeavored to preach to the Nephites but was finally forbidden because of their willful rebellion against God. The Lord cursed the land so that treasures proved difficult to hold; moreover, Gadianton robbers infested the domain (1:15-18).

With the disappearance of the Holy Spirit, it should be observed that the people took up with pseudo-spiritual practices, practices which emanate from the evil one, such as sorceries, witchcrafts, and magic. The power of the devil in the land was such as to fulfil the prophecies of Abinadi and Samuel the Lamanite (1:19).

Such were the conditions among the Nephites during Mormon's early life when he was called to the ministry.

Mormon's abilities as a leader were demonstrated by the fact that in his sixteenth year he was appointed by the Nephites to be the commander of their armies. The modesty of Mormon is illustrated--somewhat to our amusement--by these words, in which he explains his elevations:

And notwithstanding I being young, was large in stature; therefore the people of Nephi appointed me that I should be their leader, or the leader of their armies. (2:1)

Largeness of stature doubtless had its advantages in the leadership of armies in ancient times, but even then it could not supplant intelligence, personality, and inspiration as characteristics of a successful field general. The innate greatness of Mormon must have been recognized very early by the rank and file of the Nephites. High spirituality does something to mark a man; we must remember that Mormon assumed the command of the Nephite armies only about a year after the Savior had visited him.

Chapter 2 is almost completely devoted by Mormon to a discussion of the fate of his armies in the face of Lamanite power. They began to withdraw northward in full retreat before their foes. Notwithstanding their terrible predicament, the people failed to see the goodness of God and, save for short periods, to repent of their sins (2:3-13). Mormon says, "I saw that the day of grace was past with them, both temporally and spiritually." (2:15) In 2:18 the prophet-general writes that he made a full account of all the wickedness and abominations of his people upon the Plates of Nephi (Large Plates), but in the record which he made for our benefit he states that "I did forbear to make a full account of their wickedness and abominations, for behold, a continual scene of wickedness and abominations has been before mine eyes ever since I have been sufficient to behold the ways of man." (2:18)

Mormon seems to have been a person with a great heart, for he was filled with sorrow because of the wickedness of his people. Moreover, he had the absolute assurance that personally he would be "lifted up at the last day." (2:19 ) This personal assurance of Mormon that, in the midst of great wickedness and abominations, he would be saved, is of more than passing interest. It shows that men, if righteous, may on occasion receive a perfect assurance from God that they will be saved (cf. Enos 27). Their calling and election is made sure. Mormon's heart sorrowed because of the fact that even when his armies did defeat the Lamanites, they did not repent. The Spirit of the Lord did not abide in them. For that reason they became weak (2:26).

It was now about the year A.D. 350, and the Nephites made a treaty with the Lamanites and Gadianton robbers, in which they were given the land "northward" and the Lamanites the land southward." (2:28-29) Mormon had now been commanding the Nephite armies for a period of upwards of twenty-two years.

The Lamanites seem to have kept the terms of the treaty for about ten years. But knowing what was to come, Mormon employed his people in preparing their lands for the day of battle. At the Lord's command Mormon attempted to get his people to repent, be baptized, and build up his Church again, but all to no avail. The people seem not to have realized that the ten years of peace was a time of grace in which the Lord had granted them a chance to repent and be spared. Despite all of Mormon's efforts, his people only hardened their hearts the more against the Lord their God (3:1-3).

The Nephite armies beat down another Lamanite invasion; because of their victory they began to boast of their own strength, and swore that they would go to battle against their enemies and cut them off from the face of the earth. There was no spirit of conciliation, of thankfulness, or love in their acts. Because of this fact, Mormon utterly refused from that time to be a commander and leader of his people. He can hardly be blamed; a righteous man hates to be a leader of wicked people. The character of Mormon is well brought out in 3:12, where he writes that notwithstanding their wickedness he had many times led them to battle, had shown his love for them, and had poured evil his sent in prayer to God all the day long for them. Despite the victories which he had enabled them to achieve against their enemies, they did not repent of their sins. Mormon was especially grieved because of the fact that the Nephites lusted for vengeance against the Lamanites. He took no pleasure in watching his people seek to shed blood of others. Therefore, Mormon stood as a witness of their wickedness and abomination, and he testified about them as the Spirit moved him (3:4-16).

In 3:17-22, Mormon addressed himself to the Gentiles and also to the house of Israel unto whom the Book of Mormon should come. He speaks of the fact that all souls must eventually stand before the judgment seat of Christ to be judged of their works, whether good or evil. He also expresses a desire that Gentiles and Israelites alike should believe the gospel of Jesus Christ which should come among them. His desire is that he may persuade all the ends of the earth to repent and prepare to stand before the judgment seat of Christ.

In Chapters 4 Mormon writes to the effect that the Nephites took it upon themselves to attack the Lamanites. Except for that, the Lamanites could have had no power over them (4:4). The statement that the Lamanites "could have had no power over them" is of unusual interest, because it is accord with the teachings given in Section 98 of the Doctrine and Covenants, verses 32-37. In this passage, the Lord makes known that under no circumstances were his people to go evil to battle against another people unless at his express command. At any rate, we find that the judgments of God were upon the Nephites for their rash act in making war against the Lamanites. According to Mormon's account, the carnage among the Nephites was horrible (4:11). He states that such great wickedness had never been among all the children of Lehi--for that matter, among all the house of Israel. The Lamanites gained such power over the Nephites that they began to sacrifice Nephite women and children to their gods. The Nephites seem to have retreated steadily northward in the face of their enemies. In view of Lamanite victories, Mormon was afraid that Lamanites were about to overthrow the country. For that reason he went to the Hill Shim, where Ammaron had hidden the sacred archives. He took all the records, and from that time forth they were carried along with the Nephites. We are not told how they were conveyed, but they eventually found their way into the Hill Cumorah.

Mormon repented of the oath he had taken and again went forth among his people in order to assist them as much as he could. The Nephite armies were again put under his command. The people seemed to think that somehow or other he could deliver them from their calamities. This great prophet-general, however, was without hope, because he knew that he could not help his people to any great extent unless they repented of their iniquities and called upon the Lord their God. The Nephites had some passing victories, but in general the weight of the Lamanite armies heavily against them (5:1-6). The expressions of Mormon's horror at the terrible scenes of battle should be remembered by us (5:8-11). When a people go forth to battle who are filled with iniquity and abominations, they cannot hope to obtain victory for long. Eventually God will bring them to the ground.

In the latter part of Chapter 5 Mormon tell of reasons why he writes to the house of Jacob. He informs the remnants of Jacob that the writes the intent that they may be persuaded that Jesus is the Christ, the son of the living God, and that the Father may, through his love, eventually restore the whole house of Israel (5:12-14). He bemoans the fact that the Spirit of the Lord had ceased to strive with their ancestors:

For behold, the Spirit of the Lord hath already ceased to strive with their fathers; and they are without Christ and God in the world; and they are driven about as chaff before the wind. They were once a delightsome people, and they had Christ for their shepherd; yea, they were led even by God the Father. But now, behold they are led about by Satan, even as chaff is driven before the wind, or as a vessel is tossed about upon the waves, without sail or anchor, or without anything wherewith to steer her; and even as she is, so are they. (5:16-18)

Mormon explains that the Lord had reserved their blessings, which they might have received themselves, for the Gentiles who should hereafter possess the land. Moreover, the remnants of the house of Israel should be driven and scattered by the Gentiles. before the Lord would remember the covenant which he had made with Abraham and the rest of the house of Israel (5:19-20). He then appeals to the Gentiles to repent and turn from their evil ways. "How," says he, "can ye stand before the power of God?" (5:22) The Gentiles are advised to repent and humble themselves before God, lest the remnant of the seed of Jacob come among them and tear them as a lion with none to deliver (5:24; cf. Micah 5:8-15).

Approximately five years had passed away after Mormon had again consented to lead the Nephites armies, (cf. 4:16; 5:6) before he began to finish his record concerning the destruction of his people. He seems to have realized that the end of his people was very near at hand. Mormon therefore wrote a letter to the Lamanite king requesting time in which to gather his people together in the land of Cumorah, by a hill called Cumorah. The Lamanites king consented, for he was evidently glad to accommodate Mormon in a final test of strength (6:1-6).

It is now my very carefully studied and considered opinion that the Hill Cumorah to which Mormon and his people gathered was somewhere in Middle America. The Book of Mormon evidence to this effect is irresistible and conclusive to one who will approach it with an open mind. The evidence has been reviewed by a few generations of bright students in graduate classes who have been given the challenge to break it down if they can. To date none has ever been able to do so. Let us now sum up the main evidence, part of which has already been considered in earlier pages. It is a well-known fact to all Book of Mormon students that the Hill Cumorah around which the last great battles to the Nephite took place was the very same hill around which the last great battles of the Jaredites were fought (Ether 15:11). We shall therefore also present the evidence found in the Book of Ether.

Omer departed out of the land with his family, and traveled may days, and came over passed by the hill of Shim, and came over by the place where the Nephites were destroyed, and from thence eastward, and came to a place which was called Ablom, by the seashore, and there the pitched his tent. (Italics mine.)

The "hill of Shim" sounds a familiar note, because it was the place in Middle America where the prophet Ammaron hid the Nephite record. (Mormon 1:3) And when Moroni mentions in such a casual way that Omer passed from the Hill Shim "and came over by the place where the Nephites were destroyed, " it is hard to believe that Cumorah was not in the same general region as the Hill. This is especially so when Moroni explains that Omer's friend Nimrah.

. . . gathered together a small number of men, and fled out of the land, and came over and dwelt with Omer. (Ether 9:9)

How easy is it to believe that Nimrah and his men "came over [2,500 miles!] and dwelt with Omer" in what is now New York? No, the evidence of these two verses (Ether 9:3, 9) almost force one to acknowledge that the "place where the Nephites were destroyed" was close to the Hill Shim in the land of Desolation.

Now the land of Moron, where the king dwelt, was near the land which is called Desolation by the Nephites. (Ether 7:6; cf. Alma 22:30-32; italics mine.)

Where were the last great battles of the Jaredites taking place? Obviously in the land of or near the first inheritance of that people, near "the land which is called Desolation by the Nephites," a long way, as every Book of Mormon student knows, from what is now Cumorah in the state of New York. One would have to be very credulous, indeed, to believe that Coriantumr and Shiz would lead their already exhausted armies about 3,000 miles from the region of Moron to fight their very last battles around the Hill Ramah in what is now New York state. The logistical problems for both armies would be immense and completely ridiculous to assume.

When Moroni first showed Joseph Smith the Nephite gold plates, he doubtless called the hill in which they were uncovered, "Cumorah" after the name of the hill wherein Mormon hid the sacred records of his people prior to their last battle (Mormon 6:6). Hence the reason for two Cumorahs.

In the last edition of the Documentary History some words have been inserted into the account, the historicity of which I question. In any event, it does not change the first-hand evidence in the Book of Mormon.

Having now considered the problem of the location of the Hill Cumorah around which the last battle of the Nephites took place, let us return to Mormon's account.

About A.D. 384 the work of gathering the Nephites together seems to have been completed. Mormon hid in the Hill Cumorah all of the sacred records that had come into his hands with the exception of those that he left in the care of Moroni and that in turn came into the hands of Joseph Smith (6:5-6). Thus they would be preserved for the benefit of people in the latter days.

Mormon paints a graphic picture of the awful fear of death which filled the breasts of his people as the Lamanite armies approached them and of the ensuing struggle which snuffed out the lives of hundreds of thousands. The Lamanites in overwhelming numbers moved in against their hated enemies with all of their weapons of war. With the sword, bow, arrow, the ax, and whatnot they cut down the Nephites until only twenty-four were left alive, including Mormon's son Moroni. Mormon himself was wounded. From the top of the Hill Cumorah the survivors beheld the fallen of their people. The ten thousand men led by Mormon and the ten thousand led by Moroni had all been cut down in addition to like addition to like numbers led by twenty-one other commanders. It would seem that at least 230,000 Nephites lost their lives. To this total should be added, at a conservative estimate, about 300,000 Lamanites dead. The grand total would be roughly 530,000 slain!

Aside from the twenty-four persons who survived the active battle, Mormon relates that a few Nephites escaped into the "south countries," and a few dissented to the Lamanites (6:15; cf. 8:2; Moroni 1:2).

After the destruction of his people, Mormon mourned their passing. He had led them or had attempted to counsel them for nearly fifty-eight years. His lament is, of course, characterized by intense grief and sorrow. A very poignant religious spirit is manifested throughout. The writer has arranged it in poetic form. Here it is:

And my soul was rent with anguish, because of the slain of slain of my people, and I cried:

MORMON'S LAMENTATION

O ye fair ones, how could ye have departed from the ways of the Lord!

O ye fair ones, how could ye have rejected that Jesus, who stood with open arms to receive you!

Behold, if ye had not done this, ye would not have fallen.

But behold, ye are fallen, and I mourn your loss.

O ye fair sons and daughters, ye fathers and mothers, ye husbands and wives, ye fair ones, how is it that ye could have fallen!

But behold, ye are gone, and my sorrows cannot bring your return.

And the day soon cometh that your mortal must put on immortality, and these bodies which are now moldering in corruption must soon become incorruptible bodies; and then ye must stand before the judgment seat of Christ, to be judged according, to your works; and if it so be that ye are righteous, their are ye blessed with your fathers who have gone before you.

O that ye had repented before this great destruction had come upon you.

But behold, ye are gone, and the Father, yea, the Eternal Father of heaven, knoweth your state; and he doeth with you according to his justice and mercy.

Chapter 7 concludes the formal part of Mormon's literary labors. He ends his record by addressing himself to the Lamanite remnant of the latter days. He affirms to them that they are of the house of Israel. He tells them that they must repent in order to be saved. Weapons of war must be laid down, and they are to delight no more in the shedding of blood. They must gain a knowledge of their fathers and believe in Jesus Christ as the Son of God, and also believe that in him will the sting of death be swallowed up. He calls upon the remnant to repent and be baptized, and hold fast to the gospel of Christ, which shall be presented to them not only in the Book of Mormon but in the record that should come to the Gentiles from the Jews (the Bible). He informs the remnant that the Book of Mormon is written for the purpose that they may believe in the Bible, and that if they believe in the Bible, they will believe in the Book of Mormon. If they accept the gospel and follow it, he promises that it will be well with them in the day of judgment.

Mormon is one of the most remarkable characters in the whole of the Book of Mormon. The more one follows the prophet in his comments and teachings, the more one loves and admires his great and magnanimous character. He is to be ranked with Nephi, the younger Alma, and others of the greatest characters of the Book of Mormon. The spirituality of his nature and the way in which he found God should make a profound impression upon the careful reader of the Nephite record.
