## 37092-The Book of Ether

The Book of Ether

Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 25

The Book of Ether

When Moroni completed his father's record, the Book of Mormon, he decided to abridge the twenty-four plates containing a record of the Jaredite nation which had been found in the days of King Limhi. (See Mosiah 8:7-9,) These were known as the Book of Ether, after the last great prophet who had worked among the Jaredites. Indeed, Ether was responsible for writing this history of his people. His records had been preserved among the Nephite prophets and historians until the days of Mormon, when they were hidden with the other sacred writings in the Hill Cumorah (Mormon 6:6). It is very probable that Moroni abridged the Book of Ether about the year A.D. 420.

From Ether 1:2 one naturally assumes that Moroni made his abridgment directly from the plates themselves. If he did so, we are driven to the conclusion that it was necessary for him to find his way into the Hill Cumorah, where his father had hidden them. Inasmuch as the language of the plates was that of the Jaredite people, it would have been incumbent upon Moroni to translate them by means of the holy "interpreters" or Urim and Thummim before he could abridge them. This would have been a tremendous task, because Moroni says (15:33) that he had not written the hundredth part of the record, and as it is we have 15 chapters or about 31½ printed pages in our current edition. It seems much more reasonable-for the writer at least-to believe that Moroni abridged the translation of the Book of Ether which had been made many hundreds of years before by King Mosiah (Mosiah 28:1-20). This translation would also have been available to Moroni in the hill.

The title of the book is now "The Book of Ether"; in the early editions of the Book of Mormon the title was simply "Book of Ether." The article seems to have been first added by Elder Orson Pratt in the 1879 edition. Immediately beneath the title of the book there now occurs an explanatory note in italics reads: The record of the Jaredites, taken from the twenty-four plates found by the people of Limhi in the days of King Mosiah. This is wanting in all but the current editions of the Book of Mormon and is not to be regarded as part of the original text. The note seems to have been inserted by the committee appointed to edit the text now in common use.

The greater part of the Book of Ether is plain historical narrative. The only extended genealogy in the Book of Mormon is to be found in the first chapter of the book. It is a genealogy which tells of the prophet Ether's ancestry back to Jared, who came forth from the Tower of Babel (1:6-33).

The Book of Ether, as was previously indicated, deals with the history of a people called the Jaredites, who came forth from the Tower of Babel to this continent and became a great nation. They were led by prophets and were acquainted with the gospel, but finally, because of wickedness, they were destroyed at about the time the Nephites came to possess the land. The book appears to be a severely condensed version of Ether's original, except in the first three and the last two chapters, where certain personalities are dealt with in considerable detail. The personality of Moroni, the abridger, impresses itself strongly at intervals on the reader.

His spiritual commentaries and abominations to the future readers of the book are notable. The philosophy of history underlying the writing of the Book of Ether is clearly expressed in Chapter 2:8-12 and also in 8:18-25. In the last-mentioned reference, Moroni explains the nature of the secret orders, oaths, and combinations of a sinister nature that existed among the Jaredites and that threatened to destroy them as a nation. After pointing out that the Lord "worketh not in secret combinations, neither doth the will that man should shed blood," Moroni says:

And whatsoever nation shall uphold such secret combinations, to get power and gain, until they shall spread over the nation, behold, they shall be destroyed; for the Lord will not suffer that the blood of his saints, which shall be shed by them, shall always cry unto him from the ground for vengeance upon them and yet he avenge them not (8:22)

This verse illustrates the philosophy of history we have alluded to which dominated Moroni in his abridgment. The thoughtful reader will compare this philosophy with that in Ether 2:8-12, which is essentially that found in other books of the Nephite scripture. Moroni clearly attempts to show that the causes which led to the destruction of the Jaredite nation were the same which brought about the downfall of his own people (see 8:21). In other words, if men keep God's commandments on this land, they shall prosper; otherwise they shall be cut off.

The purposes of Moroni in abridging the Book of Ether are thus clear. Aside from showing God's loving care over the nation that preceded the Nephites, he desired to expose for our profit and benefit the terrible end of a people who persisted in iniquity.

The Book of Ether may be analyzed under three major headings as follows:

I. Early history of the Jaredite people before coming to this (the American) continent. (Chs. 1-4)

A. Moroni's discussion concerning the twenty-four plates. Genealogy of the prophet Ether. Language of Jaredites and friends not confounded at Babel. Brother of Jared told by the Lord to prepare his people for migration to a land choice above all others. (Ch. 1)

B. Jaredites go into valley of Nimrod. They gather flocks, fowls, bees, and seeds. They travel to the great sea. The Lord talks again with the brother of Jared and tells of his decree concerning promised land. The people build barges for their journey. (Ch. 2)

C. Brother of Jared prays on Mount Shelem. Because of his great faith the Lord manifests marvelous things to him, including his pre-existent body. He commands brother of Jared to write and seal up great things revealed to him. Two stones provided for their translation, which would be done in the Lord's own due time. (Ch. 3)

D. Moroni's commentary. He seals up writings of brother of Jared together with the holy "interpreters." These writings no to go forth to Gentiles until they repent of their iniquity. Exhortations to Gentiles and the house of Israel. (Ch. 4)

II. Moroni writes to future translator of his writings. (Ch. 5)

A. Translator of Book of Mormon forbidden to touch sealed portion of plates. Plates may be shown those who assist in bringing forth the Book of Mormon. Three witnesses to be shown plates by power of God. (5:1-4)

B. Those of the world who repent shall be received into the kingdom of God. Moroni asserts his authority for what he says. (5:5-6)

III. History of Jaredite people from time they set sail for the promised land until their final destruction as a nation. With commentaries and admonitions by Moroni. (Chs. 6-15)

A. Jaredite vessels, lighted in miraculous manner, reach promised land. Leaders oppose kings as rulers but give way to demands of people. Death of Jared and his brothers. Great strife and contention during reigns of kings from Orihah to Com. When people were righteous they prospered, when they were wicked destruction followed. (Chs. 6-10)

B. Many prophets in days of Com predict utter destruction of Jaredites except they repent. In days of the kings from Com to Coriantumr the words of the prophets generally remained unheeded. Moroni bids farewell to the Gentiles. Words of Ether, last Jaredite prophet, disregarded. He lives to write of entire destruction of his people. Moroni quotes Ether's last words. (Chs. 11-15)

In studying the Book of Ether, one is struck by an expression of Moroni's which, with certain variations, nearly always appears after he has diverted from his main task of abridging. After a lengthy commentary or admonition of his own, he may say: "And now I, Moroni, proceed to give an account"; "and now I proceed with my record"; "and now I, Moroni, proceed with my record"; "and now I, Moroni, proceed to finish my record." (Ether 1:1; Ether 2:13; Ether 6:1; Ether 9:1; Ether 13:1. Cf. 1 Nephi 10:1)

Moroni informs us that the first part of the Book of Ether tells about the creation of the world and of Adam, and also gives an account from that time to the days of the Tower of Babel. Inasmuch as he supposed that the same account was to be had among the Jews (the Old Testament), he did not propose to write about it (1:3-4). He would not give the full account, but instead, restrict his writings to giving a history of the Jaredite people from the time of the Tower until the days of their destruction (1:5). The genealogy of Ether, the prophet and writer of the record, is indicated in 1:6-32: The genealogy traces Ether's descent to Jared, who came forth from the Tower of Babel with his brother and their friends and families. That the genealogy is not complete might seem indicated in verses 6, 16, and 23, where the usual "son of" is supplanted by the phrase "descendant of," but the reader is cautioned against coming to any such conclusion. (Cf. Ether 1:6; Ether 11:23; Ether 10:1; Ether 1:25). Including Ether and Jared, some thirty names are found in the list.

Of interest to the critical reader is the fact that the beginnings of the Jaredite nation are attributed by Moroni to the Tower of Babel episode, mentioned also in the Book of Genesis (1:3). At the present time, most Bible scholars do not believe in this episode as an actual fact; they consider it a myth. 1 If this belief were correct, we should have to assume that the whole of the Book of Ether is based on a misconception. It should be pointed out, however, that one of the great values of the Book of Mormon is the fact that it affirms the essential truth of the Bible. The Tower episode is a case in point. The Mormon people do believe in it. Despite the claims of critics to the contrary, we believe that in the due time of the Lord the Genesis account of the Tower of Babel will be found to be correct.

The leaders of the Jaredite people were men known as Jared and the brother of Jared, respectively. When the Lord was confounding the language of the people who were building the Tower of Babel, Jared and his brother, who were highly spiritual men, did not want their own language and that of their friends confounded. The Lord listened to the prayer of the brother of Jared and had compassion upon him and his followers (1:33-37). Jared requested his brother to inquire again of the Lord whether he would drive them out of the land, and if so, where they should go. The Almighty commanded them to gather together their flocks and seeds and their families and the families of their friends, and go into a valley to the north. There the Lord promised to meet them and guide them to a land which was choice above all other lands. Not only that, but he promised to make of them a great nation, and told them that there should be no a greater nation upon the face of the earth than the one which he would raise up of their seed. This he said he would do because of their persistence in crying unto him (1:38-43)

The Jaredite people went into the valley to the north known as the valley of Nimrod, in accordance with the Lord's instructions. They not only took their flocks but took pains to catch the fowls of the air; they even prepared a vessel to carry with them the fish of the local waters. The honey bee (deseret) and seeds were also taken along. In the valley, the Lord came down and talked with the brother of Jared; however, he was in a cloud and was not manifest in person to his servant. It is a marvelous fact that the Lord went before this little band of travelers and talked with them from time to time as he stood in a cloud and gave instructions concerning where they should travel in a land where man had not been before. The little band journeyed in the wilderness and occasionally found it necessary to build barges to carry them across bodies of water which they encountered (2:1-6). It is the writer's view that the Jaredites traveled in an easterly direction across what is now Asia to the shores of the Pacific or to waters contiguous thereto. Moroni took pains to explain the divine decrees which the Lord had made concerning the land of promise to which the Jaredites were journeying. It was to be a land choice above all other lands, and those who possessed it should serve God or be swept off. In this connection, Moroni addressed himself to the Gentiles of the latter days. He advised them to repent and not continue in iniquity until the wrath of God came upon them as it had done upon the inhabitants that had been in this land previously. He emphasized that whatsoever nation possessed this land should be free from bondage and from captivity and from all other nations under heaven, if they serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ (2:7-12). This is one of the great teachings of the Book of Ether.

The Lord finally brought Jared and his brethren safely to the shores of the "great sea which divideth the lands." (2:13 ) Here they pitched their tents and named the place "Moriancumer." Inasmuch as it was quite customary in ancient times-even now at times for that matter-to name a place after the name of the most prominent individual who helped settle it, we may rightly guess that the name of the brother of Jared was Moriancumer. In connection with the name Moriancumer, Elder George Reynolds relates the following interesting incident:

While residing in Kirtland Elder Reynolds Cahoon had a son born to him. One day when President Joseph Smith was passing by his door he called the Prophet in and asked him to bless and the name the baby. Joseph did so and gave the boy the name of Mahonri Moriancumer. When he had finished the blessing he laid the child on the bed, and turning to Elder Cahoon he said, 'the name I have given your son is the name of the brother of Jared; the Lord has just shown (or revealed) it to me.' Elder William F. Cahoon, who was standing near, heard the Prophet make this statement to his father, and this was the first time the name of the brother of Jared was known to the Church in this dispensation. (Improvement Era, 8:705)

The Jaredites remained at Moriancumer on the seashore for four years, but for some reason or other they did not call upon the Lord to help them. Then the Lord stood in a cloud and talked with the brother of Jared for three hours. He chastened him because of his neglect in not calling upon the Lord's name. And herein we may take to heart an obvious lesson. The brother of Jared repented of his sins and called upon the Lord in behalf of his brethren (2:14-15). The Almighty forgave him and proceeded to give the brother of Jared instructions to build barges similar to those which they had hitherto constructed for the purpose of crossing the great seas. The brother of Jared and his associates proceeded to build the barges according to the pattern given by the Lord. They were peculiar in shape, light, and tight like a dish. They would remind us today of a kind of submarine with two holes in them, for the Lord had commanded that one hole should be put in the top and one in the bottom for the purpose of obtaining air. The barges were so designed as to ride the great waters during storms like whales without endangering the occupants. The peculiar construction, however, did not allow for light to come into them. Therefore the brother of Jared cried unto the Lord concerning that fact. The Lord pointed out that they could not have windows because they would be smashed. The vessels were to be as whales in the midst of the sea because of the mountainous waves that would dash upon them. The Lord seems to have left the matter of light up to the brother of Jared to decide; he made the problem more difficult by forbidding him to go by the light of fire (2:16-25). The Lord does not command men in all details (cf. D&C 58:27-28). He leaves them to use their own good sense whenever possible.

The brother of Jared had imagination and great faith. He went upon Mount Shelem, so called because of its great height, and melted out of a rock sixteen clear, white stones, two for each of the eight vessels that had been built. After doing this, he carried the stones to the top of the mount and there offered up a powerful but humble prayer that the Lord would touch the stones in order that they might shine forth in the darkness of the vessels (3:1-5). The Lord listened to this remarkable man and stretched forth his hand and touched the stones one by one with his finger. The veil was taken from the eyes of the brother of Jared, and he saw the Lord's finger. The brother of Jared was struck with fear and fell down before the Lord, who asked why he had fallen. Jared's brother explained that he was fearful lest the Lord should strike him, because he did not know that the Lord had flesh had blood. The Almighty then told the brother of Jared that because of his exceedingly great faith, greater than that of any man who had ever come before him, he had seen that the Lord would take upon himself flesh and blood. When Moriancumer explained to the Lord that he had not seen more than his finger, he implored the Redeemer to show himself to him. After testing his servant to his satisfaction, the Lord manifested his body and explained his divine role as Jesus the Christ, who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem his people (3:6-14).

In Ether 3:15 the Lord informed Moriancumer that "Never have I showed myself unto man whom I have created, for never has man believed in me as thou hast."

These words have disturbed many students of scripture because they know that the Lord did appear to many of his servants long before his appearance to the brother of Jared. He appeared to Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden (Moses 4:14-27; cf. Moses 5:4), to Enoch (Moses 7:4, 28-30; Genesis 5:24), to Noah (Moses 8:27; Genesis 6:9), and again to Adam and many of his righteous posterity before the great patriarch's death (D&C 107:53-54). What, therefore, did the Lord mean when he told the brother of Jared that he had never before showed himself unto man whom he had created? I now believe there is a simple explanation based on well-recognized scriptural idioms and usages. In order to present it clearly, it will be necessary to consider carefully the Lord's words to the brother of Jared just preceding those in Ether 3:15:

Behold, I am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem my people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ. I am the Father and the Son. In me shall all mankind have light, and that eternally, even they who shall believe on my name; and they shall become my sons and my daughters. (Ether 3:14)

Observe that the Lord is talking about those who believe in him. Believers shall have light, eternally, and become his spiritual sons and daughters. Believers are elsewhere called "the sons of God."

And Noah and his sons hearkened unto the Lord, and gave heed, and they were called the sons of God. (Moses 8:13)

The unbelievers are known as "the sons of men."

Mine anger is kindled against the sons of men, for they will not hearken to my voice. (Moses 8:15; cf. Moses 8:14)

Now, having explained to the brother of Jared that believers shall become sons and daughters of God (Ether 3:14), the Lord implies in 3:15 a contrast between his course of action with the brother of Jared (a believer) and that with the "sons of men" (unbelievers, carnal men). He appears in person to his servant, a believer, but never in times past has he ever done so to the unbeliever, natural man. Let me present the Lord's words with explanations in brackets to make my meaning clear.

And never have I showed myself unto man ["sons of men," unbelievers] whom I have created, for never has man [the unbeliever] believed in me as thou hast. (Ether 3:15)

This explanation is simple and fits nicely into the context.

The Lord proceeded to call the brother of Jared's attention to the fact that he and all men were created in his own image; that the body which he saw was his spirit body, and as he appeared in the spirit, so would he appear unto his people in the flesh (3:15-16). The explanation which the Lord gave of his own personality to the brother of Jared is one of the great contributions the Book of Mormon makes to this generation. Men need not be in ignorance of the God they worship. Moroni makes this very pertinent statement:

And now, as I, Moroni, said I could not make a full account of these things which are written, therefore it sufficeth me to say that Jesus showed himself unto this man in the spirit, even after the manner and in the likeness of the same body even as he showed himself unto the Nephites. And he minstered unto him even as he ministered unto the Nephites; and all txis, that this man might know txat he was God, because of the many great works which the Lord had showed unto him. And because of the knowledge of this man he could not be kept from beholding within the veil; and he saw the finger of Jesus, which, when he saw, he fell with fear; for he knew that it was the finger of the Lord; and he had faith no longer, for he knew, nothing doubting. Wherefore, having this perfect knowledge of God, he could not be kept from within the veil; therefore he saw Jesus; and he did minister unto him. (3:17-20)

The Lord commanded the brother of Jared not to permit the great things which he had seen and heard to go forth unto the world until the time should come when he would glorify his name in the flesh. He was to treasure up in his own mind and heart the things which he had seem and heard; moreover, he was to write them, but they were to be sealed up, so that no one could interpreted them. The language in which they were to be written, the Lord had confounded; for that reason he gave two stones (holy interpreters) to the brother of Jared in order that in his own due time they might be translated for the benefit of the children of men (3:21-24).

Having given these instructions, the Lord showed unto the brother of Jared all of the inhabitants of the earth, past and future. He had previously told this prophet and seer that if he would believe that he could show him all things, it would be done. Because of Moriancomer's great faith, nothing could be withheld from him. He must be reckoned one of the greatest men who have ever graced this planet. These additional things he saw were also to be written down and were not to be disclosed to men until the Lord so directed. The brother of Jared was also commanded to seal up the interpreters, and not show them; the Lord would do this at his own pleasure (3:25-28).

When the brother of Jared came down from the mountain, he wrote down all of the things that the Lord had commanded him. But in accordance with the Lord's command, the younger Mosiah saw to it that they should not come unto the knowledge of the world until after Christ should show himself unto his people. After the Christ came in person among his people, he commanded the writings of the brother of Jared to be made manifest. Moroni wrote down upon the sealed plates-later in possession of the Prophet Joseph Smith-the very things which the brother of Jared had recorded, and he indicates that there never were greater manifestations given to man than were given to the great Jaredite prophet. The Lord directed Moroni to seal up these great writings along with the interpreters (Urim and Thummim). (4:1-5)

In 4:6-19 we find a revelation mainly concerning the Gentiles which was received by Moroni from the Lord.

In these verses, the Lord makes known that the great visions which the brother of Jared saw shall not come forth unto mankind until the Gentiles repent of their iniquity and become clean before the Lord. When the day comes that the people exercise faith in Christ, then will the Lord manifest to mankind all the things which the brother of Jared saw. In fact, all of the revelations of God will be given unto man. Those who content against God's word shall be accursed, and he will not show them greater things than have hitherto been given. The Lord pleads with the Gentiles to come unto him and receive the greater revelations which have been hidden away because of unbelief (4:13). He also admonishes the house of Israel to come unto him. He tells them that when they call upon the Father in his name with a broken and a contrite spirit, then shall they know that the Father has remembered the covenants which he made with their ancestors. Then the revelations of John the Beloved will be unfolded before the eyes of all the people. Following this, the Savior proceeds to call upon all the ends of the earth to come unto him, to believe in his gospel, and to be baptized in his name. Those who believe and are baptized will be saved, but those who believe not will be condemned.

These admonitions of the Lord are of real interest because they indicate the great spiritual character of Moroni. The channel of revelation was open to him; without it we should have been deprived of great words from the Savior himself.

Chapter 5 of the Book of Ether is in reality a prophetic epistle. It is unusual in that it is addressed to an individual who was destined to come into the world at least 1400 years after it was penned. We believe that Joseph Smith was the man to whom the letter was written. In verses 1-4 of this chapter, Moroni gives directions to the future translator of the Book of Mormon not to touch the sealed portion of the plates which contain the writings of the brother of Jared. The plates should be shown only to those who were to assist in bringing forth the Book of Mormon. Three witnesses were to behold them by the power of God. In the last two verses of the chapter, Moroni writes that those who repent and come unto the Father in the name of Jesus will be received into the kingdom of God. He then asserts his authority for the things which he says.

When the brother of Jared descended from the mount before the presence of the Lord, he put the sixteen light-giving stones in the vessels as he had originally desired. The members of the eventful expedition put water, animals, and all needful supplies into the barges which they had built and set forth unto the promised land. They were blown to their destination by a furious wind which the Lord raised. In the midst of the great waters, the party, and more particularly the brother of Jared, sang praises to the Lord. After being driven for 344 days, they reached the shores of the promised land, where they humbled themselves before the Lord and shed tears of joy. The pary went forth upon the land began to till the earth (6:1-13). In addition to Jared and his brother, twenty-two of their friends came with them. All of these, together with their sons and daughters, made up a respectable number of immigrants in the new land. They multiplied and became strong in the land. Before the death of the brother of Jared, he and his brother called all of their people together and counted them. After doing so-the total is not given-they requested what the people might desire of them before the brothers went down to their graves. The people, to their dismay, desired that one of their sons be anointed as king over them (cf. 1 Samuel 8). None of the sons of the brother of Jared would consent to be king, but finally, Orihah, one of Jared's sons, accepted the kingship. Jared and his brother in due time passed away, but Orihah was a righteous man and walked in humidity before his people, who prospered greatly (6:14-30).

Apparently the Jaredites landed somewhere in Central America, because in 7:6 their land of Moron is spoken of as being "near the land which is called Desolation by the Nephites."

Moroni's chronicle of Jaredite history from the time of the deaths of Jared and his brother is centered about the fortunes of the kings. It is a constant recital of intrigue and plotting for power, interspersed with periods of righteousness. One king follows another in rapid succession, because Moroni intended only to give us a brief overview of Jaredite history. Occasionally he is diverted from his description of kings and kingdoms to warn our generation of lessons to be learned, or to give us some unusual sidelights on what the Jaredites did. Thus in 8:23-25, Moroni warns us as "Gentiles" about the great dangers of secret combinations to deprive us of freedom and liberty. Verses 24 and 25 seem especially directed to the "awful situation" of our day. The prophet seems to have sensed that we would be living in perilous times. In Chapter 5 we have already dealt with this at some length. Chapter 9:3 is of especial interest because a righteous king, Omer by name, after having been warned by the Lord in a dream, fled "many days," passed by the Hill Shim of Nephite fame, came to the place (Cumorah) where the Nephites were later destroyed, and reached the seashore eastward at a place called Ablom. Moroni's statements concerning horses, asses, elephants, cureloms and cumoms are also very interesting (9:19), not to mention the episode in which tremendous numbers of poisonous serpents played an important part in certain Jaredite travels (9:31-34; 10:19).

Perhaps the following table of the kings may give the reader a satisfactory overview of their history:

Orihah: Righteous son of Jared. (7:1-3)

Kib: Son of Orihah's old age. (7:3-10)

Corihor: Son of Kib. He rebels and captures his father. Shule, son of Kib's old age successfully battles Corihor and restores the kingdom to Kib. Kib gives him the kingship. Corihor repents. (7:3-15)

Shule: Son of Kib. Noah, son of Corihor, captures Shule in battle. Sons of Shule slay Noah and restore their father. Cohor, son of Noah, sets up rival kingdom but is beaten by Shule. Shule's reign a righteous one. He aids the prophets. (7:7; 8:1)

Omer: Son of Shule. His son Jared rebels and takes him captive. Other children of Omer raise army and restore their father on throne. Jared and his daughter plot with Akish to slay Omer. Omer warned by Lord to depart out of the land and loses kingdom to Jared. Jared and Akish eventual victims of own plotting. Omer is restored to the throne. (8:1; 9:15)

Emer: Son of Omer's old age. His righteous reign. His people prosper. Sees the Lord. (9:14-22)

Coriantum: Son of Emer. A great builder. He has no children until old. 142 years old at death. (9:21-25)

Com: Son of Coriantum. He reigns 49 years and begets Heth. Heth wicked and slays his father. (9:25-27)

Heth: Wicked son of Com. Prophets cry repentance to his people. Many people flee before poisonous serpents. Heth perishes of hunger. (9:25; 10:1)

Shez: Son of Heth. A righteous ruler. His eldest son, Shez, rebels against him, but is smitten by a robber for his wealth. Shez builds many cities. He dies at a very old age. (10:1-4)

Riplakish: Son of Shez; unrighteous. He subjects his people to heavy taxes and burdens. After reign of 42 years his people rebel and slay him. His son ("descendant," 10:9), Morianton, after many years fights people to regain throne and finally succeeds. (10:4-9)

Morianton: Son of Riplakish. He eases burdens on people, but is personally immoral. Great builder. His people become rich. He lives to very old age. His son Kim reigns eight years before death of his father. (10:9-13)

Kim: Son of Morianton; unrighteous. His brother rebels against him and brings him into captivity. He begets Levi in old age. (10:13-14)

Brother of Kim: Name not given. He is deposed by Kim's son Levi who served in captivity for 42 years after his father's death. (10:14-15)

Levi: Son of Kim; righteous king. His people prosper. (10:14-16)

Corom: Son of Levi, righteous ruler. He dies in old age. (10:16-17)

Kish: Son of Corom. (10:17-18; cf. 1:19)

Lib: Son of Kish, righteous king. In his days the poisonous serpents destroyed. A great hunter. People prosper by selling and by producing metals, fine clothes, tools, etc. He dies in old age. (10:18-29; 1:18)

Hearthom: Son of Lib. Kingdom taken from him after reigning 24 years and he served in captivity the remainder of life. Direct descendants, Heth, Aaron, Amnigaddah, and Coriantum, live in captivity all their days. (10:30-31)

Unknown kings in control during period from captivity of Hearthom to Coriantum. At end of that period Amgid seems to have been king. Com, son of Coriantum, gains control of half the kingdom for 42 years. After many years he gains control of entire kingdom. Robbers with ancient plans and oaths attempt to destroy kingdom. Com did not prevail against them. (10:29; 11:4)

At this point we may interrupt the overview of the succession of kings to point out an interesting fact. Whenever a king was deposed by some rival, perhaps a son, he was usually placed in captivity but seldom slain. Good care seems to have been taken of most royal prisoners.

With the coming of Com upon the throne, one begins to realize that the end of the Jaredite people is not too far distant. Moroni informs us that many prophets came upon the scene prophesying the destruction of the nation unless the people repeated, turned to the Lord, and forsook their murders and wickedness. The people rejected the prophets, who fled to Com for protection. Com was a righteous king, and he saved the prophets whose lives the people sought. The Lord blessed Com all the remainder of his life. In his old age, he had a son born to him whose name was Shiblom, 2who reigned in his stead. Shiblom's brother rebelled against him and put to death all of the prophets who predicted the destruction of the Jaredites. Tremendous calamities and destruction took place during Shiblom's days, so much so that the people began to repent of their iniquities (11:1-8).

Although it is not so expressly stated, it would appear that Shiblom's brother must have prevailed in their sanguinary struggle, because Shiblom was slain, and his son Seth (1:11) was held in captivity all his life (11:9). In some manner unknown to us, Ahah, the son of Seth, obtained control of the kingdom and reigned with blood and iniquity during his short life. Two wicked descendants of Ahah ruled in succession over the Jaredites. They were Ethem and Moron. The prophets arose again in great numbers to warn the people, but they repulsed the Lord's servants, who mourned and withdrew from them. Moron consolidated his kingdom only with great difficulty in the face of a determined rival, but even he was dethroned by a mighty descendant of the brother of Jared. Moron dwelt in captivity the remainder of his days (11:10-18). The descendant of the brother of Jared is the final monarch mentioned before Coriantumr, the very last king of the Jaredites, but it may be presumed that one more king intervened in the succession of royalty. Of this we cannot be sure, but our reasoning is as follows: While Moron was in captivity there was born to him a son, whose name was Coriantor. Coriantor lived in captivity all of his life and became the father of Ether, the last great prophet of the Jaredites Ether lived in the days of Coriantumr, who was then king of the land (12:1). Even as Coriantor comes between Moron and Ether, so another king may well have come between the descendant of Jared's brother and Coriantumr. In the days of Coriantor, prophets again made their way among the people and exhorted them to repent or the Lord would bring about their utter destruction and replace them with another people. But the Jaredites rejected the prophets, because of the influence of secret societies and wicked abominations among them (11:19-23).

It may be well to give this skeleton overview or summary of the appearance of kings form Com as described more fully above, as well as to indicate the prophet Ether's descent.

Com: Son of Coriantum. (10:31-11:4)

Shiblom: Son of Com. Son Seth in captivity all his days. (11:4-9)

Brother of Shiblom: Overthrew Shiblom. (11:4-6)

Possible unknown king during days of Seth? (11:9-10)

Ahah: Son of Seth. Wicked. (11:10-11)

Ethem: Son of Ahah. Wicked. (11:11-14)

Moron: Son of Ethem. Wicked. Overthrown. Grandfather of Ether the prophet through his son Coriantor. (11:14-18)

Unknown king, descendant of brother of Jared. (11:17-18)

Possible unknown king during days of Coriantor, son of Moron? (11:18-23)

Coriantumr: Son of ________? Last king of the Jaredites. Discovered by people of Zarahemla after all of his people had been slain in civil wars. (12:1-2; 13:15-15:32; Omni 21-22)

When we reach Chapter 12 of Ether, we realize that the last days of the Jaredites are close at hand. Ether, the last great prophet of his people, prophesied in the days of Coriantumr, the last king (12:1-2). He went forth to the Jaredites unrestrained because of the Spirit of the Lord which was in him. Whenever a prophet goes forth with such a spirit, calling repentance to his people, we know that they still have an opportunity to save themselves as a nation. Even at the dawning of the twelfth hour, true repentance will bring a reprieve. So it would have brought a reprieve to the Jaredites had they listened to Ether. The sacred record speaks of him thus:

For he did cry from the morning, even until the going down of the sun, exhorting the people to believe in God unto repentance lest they should be destroyed, saying unto them that by faith all things are fulfilled-wherefore, whoso believeth in God might with surety hope for a better world, yea, even a place at the right hand of God, which hope cometh of faith, maketh an anchor to the souls of men, which would make them sure and steadfast, always abounding in good works, being led to glorify God. (12:3-4)

Ether prophesied great and marvelous things to his people, which they neither regarded nor believed (12:5).

Moroni's sources, which were the original records giving a detailed account of Ether's prophecies, must have saddened him greatly. The rejection of Ether by the Jaredites brought with it their destruction. If the people had had faith and hope in God, their history might have been changed. The realization of this fact seemingly caused Moroni to discuss the principles of faith, hope, and charity, for our benefit. Chapter 12:6-37, in which he does this, is the Book of Mormon equivalent of Hebrews 11 in the New Testament.

The prophets intent is to show the world that "faith is things which are hoped for and not seen." (12:6 ) But one will not receive a witness until after a trial of his faith. Christ showed himself unto the Nephites by faith, but he did not show himself unto them until after they had faith in him. Because of men's faith, the Christ showed himself to the world, glorified the Father, and prepared a way whereby others might be partakers of the heavenly gift, that "they might hope for those things which they have not seen." (12:8 ) Wherefore, we may also have hope and be partakers of the heavenly gift, if we will but have faith (12:9). Men of old were called after God's holy order (the Higher Priesthood) by faith. It was by faith that the law of Moses was given, but in the gift of his Son God prepared a more excellent way; by faith it was fulfilled. Without faith among men God can do no miracle among them; for that reason he did not show himself until after the test of their faith 12:10-12). Moroni then cites numerous other incidents in past history which illustrate the power of faith. Alma and Amulek, Nephi and Lehi (Book of Helaman fame), Ammon and his brethren, the three Nephite disciples who did not taste of death, were men who all figured in these illustrations (12:13-18). Of great interest is an observation made by Moroni that many men in ancient times had faith so strong, even before the time of Christ, that they could not be kept from within the veil and saw things which they had beheld with the eyes of faith. One of these men was the brother of Jared, already discussed in this chapter (12:19-21). Also pointed out by Moroni was that the promise of "these things," meaning the history given by the Book of Mormon, to come forth among the Nephites, descendants through the Gentiles, was obtained through faith by his fathers. For that reason the Lord commanded him (Moroni) to be a means to that end (12:22). The prophet told the Lord that the Gentiles would mock at the writings in the volume, for the Lord had not made his servants mighty in writing as he had made them in word by faith through the Holy Ghost. In this vein he continued, but to his words, the Lord gave this answer:

Fools mock, but they shall mourn; and my grace is sufficient for the meek, that they shall take no advantage of your weakness; and if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them. Behold, I will show unto the Gentiles their weakness and I will show unto them that faith, hope and charity bringeth unto me-the fountain of all righteousness. (12:26-28)

With these words, Moroni was comforted, and indicated to the Lord with examples that he understood that the Almighty works among the children of men according to their faith (12:29-31). The prophet also remembered what the Lord said about the mansions which he has prepared for men who have a more excellent hope; he also spoke about the love or charity which Christ has for men, which love or charity men must also have if they inherit the mansions of the Father. Moroni prayed that the Lord would give grace unto the Gentiles, that they might have charity-probably he meant charity for their ('the Nephites') writings (12:32-36). To him the Lord replied:

If they have not charity it mattereth not unto thee, their hast been faithful; wherefore, thy garments shall be made clean. And because thou hast seen thy weakness thou shalt be made strong, even unto the sitting down in the place which I have prepared in the mansions of my Father. (12:37 )

In the remainder of Chapter 12 (vss. 38-41), Moroni bids the Gentiles a gentle-almost tender-farewell. His heart is obviously full of love for them as well as for his "brethren," the Lamanites of that future day. He speaks with absolute assurance, inasmuch as he had talked with Jesus face to face. But let Moroni's words tell their own story:

And now I, Moroni bid farewell unto the Gentiles, yea, and also unto my brethren whom I love, until we shall meet before the judgment-seat of Christ, where all men shall know that my garments are not spotted with your blood. And then shall ye know that I have seen Jesus, and that he hath talked with me face to face, and that he told me in plain humility, even as a man telleth another in mine own language, concerning these things; and only a few have I written, because of my weakness in writing. And now, I would commend you to seek this Jesus of whom the prophets and apostles have written, that the grace of God the Father, and also the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of them, may be and abide in you forever. Amen. (12:38-41)

Moroni relates that the Jaredites rejected all of the words of Ether, despite the great and marvelous things that he told them. He told his people of all things from the creation of man; he said that after the waters (doubtless the Deluge) had receded from the face of this land, it became a choice land above all other lands to the Lord. For that reason, the Almighty desired that all men who dwell upon it should serve him. Naturally this desire included the Jaredites. This land, so Ether revealed, was to be the place of the New Jerusalem, which should come down out of heaven, and should be the Lord's holy sanctuary (13:1-3). Ether saw the days of Christ, and he spoke concerning a New Jerusalem upon this land (13:4; cf. 3 Nephi 21:23-25). He also spoke concerning the house of Israel and pointed out that the New Jerusalem to be built upon this land should be built unto the remnant of the house of Jacob. The Lord was to be merciful to Joseph's seed; and this land is intended to be the land of Joseph's inheritance. No more will the seed of Joseph be confounded (13:5-8). Ether told of the coming of a new heaven and a new earth; he also added more concerning the New Jerusalem, the Old Jerusalem, and of scattered Israel being gathered in from the four quarters of the earth, including the north countries (13:9-11; see D&C 133:26-34). Moroni was forbidden to include more of Ether's great prophecies, but he tells how Ether was forced to hide in a rock cavity, where he wrote the remainder of his record, going forth by night to view the continued destruction of his people. We need not spend too much time in describing the terrible scenes leading up to the end of the Jaredites. In the first year of Ether's sojourn in the rock cavity, a great war began among the people, for many great men sought to overthrow Coriantumr the king. In the second year, Ether was told by the Lord to prophesy to Coriantumr the following: (1) That if he and his household would repent, the Lord would give him the kingdom and spare his people; otherwise all his household would be destroyed except himself; (2) if his household failed to repent, he alone would live to see the fulfilling of the prophecies spoken concerning another people receiving this land for their inheritance; (3) Coriantumr would receive a burial by these people; and (4) every Jaredite would be destroyed except Coriantumr (13:16-21). But neither Coriantumr, his household, nor the people repented; the wars went on, and attempts were made on Ether's life, but he escaped to his rock cavity. Coriantumr lost in battle to one Shared, but in the fourth year of Ether's exile, he was restored by his sons. In successive battles Coriantumr finally slew Shared, who succeeded, however, in wounding his opponent before dying (13:22-31). For two years there was no formal war, but the people shed blood, and a great curse came upon the land. People could not hold on to their possessions; so bad was the situation that men would not either lend or borrow, and they kept sword in hand to defend their property and families (14:1-2).

After two years' time, Coriantumr was attacked and overthrown by the brother of Shared, whose name was Gilead. Gilead was then slain by Lib, his high priest. Coriantumr was forced to remain in the wilderness and add to his army. He then attacked Lib in battle, and although reverses came to him, he finally slew the murderous upstart. Unfortunately, Lib's brother successfully attacked Coriantumr. This brother, Shiz by name, was the last powerful opponent of Coriantumr. He was ruthless, killing women and children and burning cities as he swept after Coriantumr. The fury of the terrible war cannot be adequately described, but finally Coriantumr began to gain some advantage. Nevertheless, in a certain battle, Shiz wounded Coriantumr badly and he fainted for loss of blood. Apparently the leaders in these great battles very often reached each other and crossed swords in mortal combat. The loss of men, women, and children in battle was so great that Shiz could not follow up the temporary advantage he had over Coriantumr (14:3-31).

After Coriantumr had recovered from his wounds, he began to remember the prophecies of Ether to him. He realized with sorrow the evil he had committed, and saw that the prophets had been completely correct in their predictions. Two million people had been slain. If the figure given (15:2) has reference to fighting men only (which is doubtful), we may assume conservatively that a total of about eight million souls had been slain in the bloody struggles, struggles abetted and brought on by a few willful men like Coriantumr and his opponents, who selfishly were holding on to power or seeking it. But let it be said to the credit of Coriantumr, that he now mourned and refused to be comforted (15:1-3). He wrote an epistle to Shiz in which he offered to give up the kingdom on condition that the people be spared. The vengeful Shiz replied he would do so only on the condition that Coriantumr would give himself up to be slain by his opponent's sword. This condition was not accepted, and the battles began anew. The fortunes of war favored first one side, then the other, but in due course the struggle began to center around the Hill Ramah, later known to the Nephites as Cumorah, where Mormon hid (Mormon 6:6) the sacred records of his people (15:4-11). Then for four years the prophet Ether observed that both sides gathered up all possible manpower for a final test of strength (15:12-14). It is very possible that this Jaredite precedent of taking time out to gather all possible manpower led Mormon, the great Nephite commander, to write a letter to the Lamanite king, requesting time in which to do the same things. (See Mormon 6:2-4.)

When every man, woman or child had been gathered together on one side or the other, armed and clothed in the military fashion of the day, they commenced the final battle. For two days the battle went on without decision, but the lamentation each evening over the slain rent the air. Again Coriantumr wrote an epistle to Shiz urging him to take the kingdom and spare the people, but without result. The Spirit of the Lord ceased striving with them, and Satan had full power over their hearts (15:15-19).

On the eighth day of this tremendous and bloody contest, when only Shiz and Coriantumr had survived, Coriantumr leaned upon his sword and rested a little, and then smote off the head of his vindictive enemy, who had fainted from loss of blood. Then Coriantumr fell to the earth and lay as if dead (15:20-32). We know that Coriantumr survived as had been predicted, and if Ether's prophecy was completely fulfilled, he was the only survivor (Ether excepted) of the Jaredite nation. (See 13:21.) How long he wandered upon the face of the land of Desolation before meeting and living with the Mulekites (Omni 20-22) and finally being buried by them, we know not. Neither do we know how many Jaredites were slain in that last, great eight-day battle. The number must have been very large.

When the struggle was over, the Lord told Ether to go forth. He did so and found that the Lord's words had been completely fulfilled. After finishing his record, he hid the plates where the people of Limhi found them (Mosiah 8:7-9). For some reason or other Moroni felt inspired to record the very last words which were written by Ether. Here they are:

Whether the Lord will that I be translated, or that I suffer the will of the Lord in the flesh, it mattereth not, if it so be that I am saved in the kingdom of God. Amen. (15:34 )

Why did Moroni quote the last words of Ether? Is it to give its a hint that Ether was translated by the Lord? Or shall we conclude that Moroni, like most human beings, shows his interest in the last things which are said by a famous person?
