Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Preface

Few men in this dispensation have had so profound an effect on the growth and progress of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as has President David O. McKay.

After becoming President of the Church in 1951, President McKay effectively led the dynamic growth of the Kingdom of God on earth. Through increased missionary efforts directed by him the membership of the Church more than doubled. There was rapid increase in wards, stakes, branches, and missions. Thousands of new chapels and five new temples were erected. Great programs of home teaching and family home evenings were instituted, and correlated Priesthood programs were taught wherever units of the Church are established.

President McKay was always concerned with the growth and development of the members of the Church, and in preparing them for the responsibilities and challenges which he saw ahead for the Church and the world. His vision extended far beyond today's needs, though he daily gave guidance and direction for the Church's immediate problems. His counsel, his concern, and his desire were for continued growth through effective development of the individual testimonies of all members of the Church.

As his sister, I witnessed this great man grow to the full stature of a Prophet of God. I was close to him in family problems. I attended the University of Utah while he was also a student there. I taught at the Weber Stake Academy while he was its principal. I also served on the Weber Stake Sunday School board while he was in the superintendency. I saw him overcome worldly things to fulfill the full measure of his creation. I shared many of his joys and sorrows, and knew part of the weight that he bore so well as a leader among his people.

Because I know he was a powerful witness of the divinity of Jesus Christ and a true emissary of the Living God, it has been my desire to share with others some highlights in my brother's life as I viewed it.

This book, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay, is by no means a complete biography. Such a presentation would require many volumes, and is yet to be written. This is just as the title says—some of the highlights in the life of a great man.

I offer it to the world as my own testimony that the Spirit of God moved upon President McKay and enabled him to lead the only true and living Church upon the face of the earth.

Throughout his ministry, President McKay testified to all men everywhere that only through obedience to the teachings of the Lord Jesus Christ can this world know peace and happiness. It is my profound desire that this sketch of his life and testimony may be an inspiration to all who read it to forsake the things of the world and seek first the Kingdom of God.

Jeanette McKay Morrell

Ogden, Utah

This striking portrait of President David O. McKay taken by Salt Lake photographer Ida Wilcox reveals the strength of character and the depth of soul which have always characterized the life of this great man.
