Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 1

Ancestry

Pride in their clan is a feature which has marked all who share in the ancient traditions of great Scottish names. Though they are now scattered throughout the world there is still a brotherhood within the clan or name, and this links all Scots together, particularly because this pride of name has never depended on wealth or rank.

The Clan McKay or McKay developed in the northern highlands of Scotland early in the Fourteenth Century and had its roots in the old royal houses of McEth and Moray.

The first historic chief of the clan was Angus Dubh, who lived from 1380 to 1429. Early in the 1400's, Donald, Lord of the Isles, claimed the Earldom of Ross and invaded Sutherland, the territory of the MacKays. He was opposed by Angus and those of the Clan MacKay, but he succeeded in defeating them and taking Angus captive. Later they became reconciled and Angus married Elizabeth, daughter of his captor, with whom he received many lands. Angus was killed in 1429 at the time of the Battle of Drumnacoub.

In 1626 Sir Donald MacKay, then chief of the clan, raised an army of 3,000 men for service in Bohemia, and afterwards in Denmark. Because of his distinguished service, Donald was created Lord Reay in 1628, with the remainder of his male heirs continuing to claim the name and arms of MacKay. The major portion of the MacKay lands were sold during this period to pay the cost of maintaining and transporting the men whom Lord Reay had recruited for foreign service. The remainder of the MacKay country was sold in 1829 to the house of Sutherland.

One of the fascinating traditions of the clans was the claiming of coats of arms as identifying symbols. These symbols always included a crest, and early clan chiefs began taking this crest and forming it on a metal plate. The metal plates were given by the chiefs to their followers to wear as badges, and this became a symbol of kinship with the clan. The badge was affixed to the clansman's clothing by a strap and buckle and when not in use the strap and buckle were coiled around the crest badge.

The modern conventional representation of the old metal plate crest badge takes the form of the chief's crest encircled by a metal strap and buckle and the chief's motto cut or engraved on the strap. This is the only form in which a clansman is permitted to display his chief's crest. Its use, in the correct and approved manner, indicates that the wearer is a kinsman of the chief whose crest is thus shown.

The McKay crest badge is a dexter cubit arm holding erect a dagger in pale. The motto inscribed is "manu forti" literally meaning "with a strong hand."

Though this motto was claimed for the clan by its historic chieftain, no more appropriate description could be found today to portray the life and works of a modern kinsman, David O. McKay, the President of The Church of

Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Throughout his life he has exhibited the "strong hand" of leadership, and for more than half a century as a general authority of the Church his has been a strong and valiant hand in carrying out the work of the Lord.

President McKay has always been proud of his name, and of the ancient traditions in which it is steeped. His trips to Scotland, his frequent mention of this land of his ancestry, and the love he has exhibited for the people and their culture are evidences of this pride.

Indicative of the ancient nature of the McKay name is this excerpt from a poem, The True-Born Englishman, written by Daniel Defoe, who lived from 1661 to 1731. He wrote:

Even Scotland, too, her elder glory shows

Her Gordon's, Hamiltons, and her Monroes,

Douglases, MacKays, and Grahams, names well known,

Long before ancient England knew her own.

On his mother's side, President McKay's ancestry includes the names of Evans and Powell, which date back into the ancient history of Wales, and are as prominent there as are the McKays in Scotland. Both his paternal and maternal ancestry were known for their deep religious convictions.

Ellen Oman McKay, grandmother of President McKay, was one of ten children—seven girls and three boys. Her father, David Oman, for whom President McKay was named, was the manager of the estate of the Earl of Caithness at Thurso. He was a widower with two small sons when he married Isabella Sutherland, and they became the parents of one son and seven daughters.

When the two older sons were grown, they went to India to live. They later sent for their younger brother, and the three became successful owners of a large tea plantation. Their families were reared in India, but were sent to London for their education.

The seven daughters remaining in Scotland were given the best education available. They all sang in the Presbyterian Church choir, and were popular among the young people of the church and in Thurso.

A word picture of their home and the town of Thurso was given some years ago by Isabella McKay Edward, a grand niece of Ellen Oman McKay. Mrs. Edward visited the area before leaving Scotland to make her home in Ogden, Utah.

She wrote:

As I walked toward Thurso, I was looking for the cottage in which Ellen Oman McKay lived at one time. I soon located it some distance off the highway, with a background of lovely shrubs hanging with red berries. The path leading to the house was flagstone, and the surrounding country was beautiful. There were yellow corn fields, green turnip fields, and, most striking of all, were the moorelands covered with gleaming purple heather. Hawthorne hedges divided the small farm, and grew along the roadsides.

Thurso is a picturesque town with its Castle and Lodge, an academy, grade schools, and several churches. One walks down the main street, unaware of the beautiful view that lies just ahead. There is a high wall with an arch, and on stepping through this, the scenery takes one's breath; the shining white sand, the waves rolling in with their white caps, and the Victoria Walk leading around east to the Port of Thurso, which is the safest and most sheltered port of the north for all kinds of shipping.

It was from here that the British hero, Lord Kitchner, sailed on that fateful night in June, 1916, when his ship, the Hampshire, was blown up by a submarine a few miles out. A spot not for from here marks the German cemetery, Scappa Flow, where the German fleet was sunk.

This part of Scotland, with its wild scenery, is a favorite one for tourists, and especially for artists who never tire of the stormy Pentland Firth. The castle and lodge are open to visitors now, since the airport has been completed.

It was in this picturesque setting that Ellen Oman met and married William McKay, a contractor from Strathnaver, Sutherlandshire. They built their home in Thurso, and it was here that their family, three daughters and two sons, were born to them. Their children were Isabella, Williamena, Katherine, Isaac, and David.

The year 1850 was a momentous one for the William McKay family, for it was in this year that they learned of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ from missionaries of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. William and Ellen embraced the new faith with great enthusiasm, and on November 3, 1850, they, and their three oldest children entered the waters of baptism. The whole family became enthusiastic workers in their new faith.

Ellen was greatly surprised and grievously disappointed when her parents and sisters refused to accept the gospel as she explained it to them. Though they never destroyed the books and tracts which she gave them to read, they refused to accept any of the doctrine which she tried to teach them. However, this rebuff from her family failed to cool Ellen's ardor, and when her husband was ordained an elder in 1852 and became the branch president in Thurso, she was right beside him in proclaiming the tenets of the Church.

Along with many other saints, William and Ellen felt the urge to emigrate to the headquarters of the Church in Utah, and so began making their preparations. When the time came for them to leave Scotland, Ellen's family pleaded with her to desist from what they termed "this mad adventure." The Presbyterian minister visited her, at the request of her family, and spent many hours arguing against her leaving. He left her home saying, "I am sorry to lose such a strong Christian member." The Earl and Countess of Caithness added their pleas for her to remain, but Ellen Oman McKay knew she was right, and nothing could change her conviction.

After William had disposed of the property and made the arrangements to leave Scotland, the children developed measles and their departure had to be postponed. A friend of the family took advantage of the delay and asked William to lend him sufficient money to take his family to the United States, promising to return the amount when the McKays arrived in New York with a later company.

The McKay family finally left Liverpool on Sunday, May 4, 1856 on the sailing vessel Thornton, commanded by a Captain Collins. They reached New York on June 4, and to their great disappointment could find no trace of the friend to whom they had loaned their money. They found themselves in a new country with no means to continue the journey to Utah.

Undaunted, William and Ellen called the children together and held a family council. With the advice of the president of the New York branch of the Church, William and the two boys, Isaac, sixteen, and David, twelve, found work, the father going to Connecticut, Isaac to New Jersey, and David to upstate New York. Ellen and her three small daughters rented an unfurnished upstairs apartment with only their bedding and the few household articles they had been able to carry on the ship.

Since the family observed the word of wisdom, there was an accumulation of tea which had been issued to them on the ship. Ellen used this to exchange for bread and groceries which lasted them until they had earned their first money.

After living two years in the east, the McKays were ready for the journey west. They traveled as far as Iowa, where they remained for another year to prepare for the long journey across the plains. They moved from Iowa City with a company of ten wagons to Florence, where they joined the company of Captain James Brown, which headed westward on June 13, 1859.

As the family was leaving, word reached Ellen that the company included a lame woman and her daughter who had no means of travel. Ellen immediately offered the woman her own place in the wagon, and walked the entire distance to Salt Lake City, where they arrived on Monday, August 29, 1859.

It would seem to be more than coincidence that the experiences of President McKay's mother's family in Wales paralleled those of the McKays in Scotland.

His maternal grandfather, Thomas Evans, was born in Glamorganshire, South Wales, in October of 1812, a son of Edward and Jennette Powell Evans. His forebears included many professional people, among whom were lawyers, ministers, and teachers.

President McKay's maternal grandmother, Margaret (Peggy) Powell, daughter of Thomas and Ann Lewis Powell, was born July 2, 1813, in Brecknockshire, South Wales. The family members were devout adherents to the Methodist faith.

Margaret Powell and Thomas Evans were married March 27, 1837, and established their home in Cofen Coed, near Merthyr Tydfil, Glamorganshire, where their eleven children were born to them.

In 1850, the same years as the McKays embraced the gospel in Scotland, missionaries contacted the Evans family in South Wales. They responded to the gospel message, and were baptized in May, 1850. Because of his baptism, Thomas was disinherited by his family and had no further contact with family members before his death in Ogden, Utah, May 25, 1877. Since that time some descendants who came to the the United States, but remained in the east, have exchanged visits with those in Utah.

Thomas Evans was ordained an elder by William Richards, and later became president of the branch in which he lived. With his wife and children he made plans to emigrate to Utah, and on May 25, 1856 the family sailed for America on the packet ship Horizon, arriving in Boston harbor, June 30. They immediately boarded a train for Iowa City, arriving there July 8, 1856.

The Evans family remained in Iowa three years, and after securing wagons, teams, and an extra cow to supply them with milk, they left Florence, June 7, 1859 in the private company of Philip H. Buzzard, arriving in Salt Lake City, August 24, 1859.

Thus, these two families, living in different parts of the British Isles, were baptized in the same year, sailed for the United States during the month of May, 1856, and reached America about the same time. The McKays remained in New York two years and Iowa one year, while the Evans family spent three years in Iowa. Both families arrived in Utah during August, 1859, but neither was conscious of the other until they met in Ogden.

The Evans family remained in Salt Lake City only about two weeks before they decided to settle in Ogden. They purchased property that is now between Adams and Madison Avenues and 28th and 30th Streets. Here they built a temporary log cabin and later a four-room rock house. This was a comfortable and quite elaborate house for the time, and was occupied by family members continuously until 1951 when it was replaced by an apartment house built by a grandson, Thomas Edward Gibbons.

David McKay, a lad of fifteen, saw Jennette Evans as she on the tongue of the Evans' wagon shortly after the family arrived in Ogden. He said he could not forget the large, brown eyes under her pink sunbonnet. She became one of the most beautiful and popular young women in Ogden, and a girl in whom David McKay showed much interest. The two fell deeply in love, and David succeeded in convincing her parents that they should be married, even though she was not yet eighteen. The marriage was performed by Apostle Wilford Woodruff on April 9, 1867 in the Endowment House in Salt Lake City.

Prior to his marriage David had lived with his family in Huntsville, Weber County, where his father had taken up farming. Father William, David and his brother all had their own farms by the time of David's marriage. The father had large herds of cattle and sheep from which he supplied his meat market in Ogden. The family lived in a log cabin, with David's sister Williamena keeping house for the family. Even as a young man David was active in the religious affairs of the community. Indicative of his diligence was the discovery of his name on a list of builders who erected the old Huntsville school and chapel in 1866. When the old rock structure was torn down in 1934, the cornerstone was removed and a sealed jar was found which contained the following:

"Huntsville, Weber County, Utah Territory, United States of America, July 4, 1866. The following named persons, members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, agree to assist in building a house in Huntsville, wherein to worship God and educate their children." Then followed a list of names, including that of David McKay. This was nearly a year before his marriage.

After claiming Jennette Evans as his bride, David settled in a log cabin in Huntsville where he and his wife commenced life as pioneers. Indians came frequently to the village, and David and Jennette tried to follow Brigham Young's counsel to feed them rather than fight with them. They were always welcomed as friends at the McKay cabin.

At one time a large group of Indians visited the Huntsville area, bringing some concern to the townspeople. The Deseret News indicated that the party included seven chiefs of the Shoshones, accompanied by about 1,000 of their men, women, and children. They arrived on a Thursday, and made their camp one mile west of the settlement. On Sunday the chiefs attended the meetings of the Church. President Francis A. Hammond asked for a donation of food to be brought the next day to the public square, and the Indians were invited as an entire party to come and receive the gifts from the townspeople. The Indians came, singing and dancing, and concluded their performance with a sham battle. They were given four beeves, nine sheep, several sacks of flour, and from fifty to seventy-five bushels of potatoes, carrots, beets, and turnips. Such visits were not uncommon in Huntsville, but the Indians generally came in smaller groups.

On one occasion a young Indian brave decided that pretty Jennette Evans McKay would make a good bride for him. He came to the cabin one morning while she was washing clothes, and startled her with the exclamation, "You be my squaw!" She grabbed a wet towel from the washtub, struck the surprised Indian in the face, and ran to the room where Grandfather McKay was sleeping. As soon as the Indian realized that she was not alone in the cabin he hurried to his horse and disappeared.

During the months that followed Jennette was always a little nervous when Indians approached the cabin. Although she fed a great many of them she always said she was relieved when they were on their way back to camp.

Life continued happily for the newly-weds in their log cabin, and two daughters were born there before the front part of the rock house, now known as "The Old Home," was completed. Margaret was born January 22, 1869, and Ellena, May 22, 1870. It was a happy day for the young family when they moved into the larger and more comfortable rock home. It was in this home that President David O. McKay was born on September 8, 1873.
