Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 2

President McKay's Home Town

Huntsville, where President McKay was born in 1873, is situated in beautiful Ogden Valley about thirteen miles east of Ogden City. The Huntsville of President McKay's youth was an industrious, growing community with homes clustered around the church, school, post office, general store, and park. From this hub of community life extended out in every direction the farms that sustained the lives of the people.

The community was an independent commonwealth, for each family owned its own home, with ample acreage for a good sized vegetable garden, fruit trees, and attractive shrubbery. Each lot also had its barnyard with horses, cows, pigs, sheep, chickens, and frequently ducks and turkeys. Hay stacks were in evidence, along with graneries for wheat and feed grains. There were also dirt cellars for storage of potatoes and other vegetables during the winter months, along with basements where butter, eggs, and canned fruits were kept.

Each family was expected to provide the greater part of its daily living requirements, including milk, butter, eggs, vegetables, wheat for grinding into flour, and meat. Each autumn the community butcher would make his rounds and the family would slaughter a pig to furnish ham, bacon, chops, and sausage. Often two or three families would combine in raising and slaughtering a beef for winter needs, each taking a half or their own portion. Lamb and veal were also popular meat dishes. Each home usually was equipped with a large meat grinder, fastened to a wooden bench, for the making of sausage, head cheese, and fagots.

Scraps of fat not used on the table were carefully saved for use in manufacturing soap. Waste tallow was used to make candles, and every kitchen included several molds for making candles. Many homes also boasted cheese presses, and an excellent quality cheese was made and properly aged to add to the food supply. The wooden churn, also a common household item, was the source of fresh butter and delicious buttermilk, always flecked with tiny pieces of golden butter.

As President McKay grew up in Huntsville the town's services included a blacksmith shop, tin shop, a shoemaker, a wooden shoe or clog maker, two dress makers, a tailor, a milliner, a cloth weaver, a carpet weaver, a printer, butcher, basket weaver, an artificial flower maker, a flour mill, and a saw mill. In addition there was a caterer who served wedding suppers and a man who had a special formula for smoking and curing hams and bacon.

Entertainment was usually simple and often combined with the necessities of family life. There were sewing bees at which a group of neighbors and friends were invited to tear or cut rags into strips, then sew and wind them into balls for the carpet weaver. At quilting parties, the quilt, having been pieced into a lovely design, was stretched on frames around which the women sat to use their skill in making tiny stitches back and forth through the lining and padding of wool, which required patience and dexterity. At the end of the day the quilt was bound and added to the store of bedding used during the cold, winter weather. At these parties the hostess always served luncheon and often "tea" during the afternoon, the latter usually consisting of a barley coffee, mint tea, or chocolate, with cookies or thin buttered slices of currant cake. There was usually some harmless gossip, but more often the conversation consisted of pioneer experiences, latest news from a husband or son away from home doing missionary work, or items of interest from the semi-weekly Deseret News, which was always more eagerly awaited than our daily newspapers of today.

A familiar man-about-town was the cow herder who came every morning on his trusty steed to drive the cows to the foothills to graze until the evening milking time when they were returned to their several barnyards.

Families also depended on their personal flocks of sheep for wool. At shearing time the wool would be washed thoroughly, and then carded into pads for quilts, or into rolls to be made into yarn at the spinning wheel for knitting socks, gloves, mittens, or sweaters.

One of the most difficult times of the year for mothers and older girls, and yet one of the most delightful occasions for youngsters, was threshing season. Each autumn, after the harvest was gathered, the old-fashioned threshing machines operated by horsepower would go from farm to farm to thresh the grain.

The threshing machines required from six to twelve men to keep them going, in addition to regular farm help. The crews spent from two days to a week at each farm, depending on the amount of grain. As neighbors pooled their efforts to help one another, the womenfolk did their part also. They were expected to provide three hearty meals a day, and only these women knew just how heartily the threshers could eat. But doing this for their husbands, brothers, and neighbors gave them a satisfaction in knowing that they had made their contribution toward the year's harvest and a winter's supply of wheat for flour and oats to feed the horses and other farm animals.

Young David grew up with all of the blessings of farm life. He learned how to work hard and how to enjoy the fruits of honest toil. As he grew into the responsibilities of the Aaronic Priesthood he learned how to keep busy with useful projects in the service of others. The Aaronic Priesthood boys were organized each winter, in addition to their regular meetings and Church duties, to go into the canyons and secure firewood.

The older boys would go into the canyons and bring the logs into town, and the younger boys assumed the responsibility of sawing, splitting, and piling the wood in the sheds until the supply was sufficient to carry the family through the coldest months. They also saw to it that plenty of wood was available for the widows and the wives of those away on missions.

After these mountain excursions, and days of strenuous work in the wood sheds, the Relief Society sisters would prepare banquets to which all the willing workers were invited.

Sundays in Huntsville were special days, and meetings and family visits provided a restful change from the hard work of the rest of the week. On Sunday mornings at 9:30, the bell in the old church tower would be rung, telling everyone that they had one-half hour to get ready for Sunday School. Then, just a few minutes before ten it would be rung again so that everyone could be seated in time for the opening exercises promptly at ten o'clock.

When illness came to any home the neighbors were soon aware of it, and if it became serious the news spread through the entire town. A death in any family was mourned by all the townspeople, for they were all friends and many of them relatives. There were no florists in the town, but around every home there were flower gardens and from these could be made many bouquets to be placed on or around the casket by loving, sympathetic hands. During the winter months the blossoms came from window boxes and flower pots. David's mother always had one window box of carnations, and these, added to the more common garden flowers, made unusually lovely bouquets. On Memorial Day there were wild roses, larkspur, and other flowers in the fields and meadows to make appropriate wreaths or arrangements.

Like so many other pioneer farming communities, Huntsville's civic center was its old rock school house. In addition to serving its school functions five days a week, it was also the dance hall, theater, and concert hall. The stage was in the center of the building's west wing, with rooms on each side for storage of scenery and stage properties.

On every holiday the school was the scene of afternoon dancing parties for the children, and in the evening for adults. Dances were also held frequently on Friday evenings between holidays. During the winter months at least three plays were produced by the Home Dramatic Association, and more often than not David O. McKay was found in one of the leading roles.

Concerts gave local talent the opportunity to perform, and many excellent programs were produced by those in the community.

A fond remembrance of all who grew up in Huntsville were the ward sleighing parties. Many farmers owned bobsleds and teams of spirited horses, and these were sufficient to allow everyone in town to participate. These were gay, winter parties with sleigh bells ringing, and red-cheeked youngsters singing at the tops of their voices. After riding and singing, the groups would gather in different homes for hot suppers and evenings of games, unless a dancing party was scheduled at the school house.

Summers were times for strenuous work, but there was still opportunity for fun and recreation. When young David's father was made bishop in Huntsville he suggested that the farmers set aside Saturday afternoons for baseball, and after the noon meal all the youngsters in town hurried to the public square for this activity.

Frequently the time on Saturday afternoons was used for picnic excursions to the canyons or to the grove south of town. These activities usually ended with a huge bonfire around which there was singing and story telling.

Two special holidays in Huntsville were the Fourth and Twenty-Fourth of July. For these July celebrations a bowery was constructed in the southeast quarter of the public square. The townsfolk were awakened at daybreak by the firing of a cannon, and then serenaded by the town's brass band. After breakfast everyone witnessed a parade, which was always a credit to those in the community.

The meetings held in the bowery were always inspiring. On the Fourth of July they consisted of the reading of the Declaration of Independence, a patriotic oration, introduction of the individuals chosen to be the Goddess of Liberty and Uncle Sam, interspersed with band music and vocal selections. In the afternoons there were races with numerous prizes for the children, baseball games, and fireworks in the evening, followed by a dancing party in which both old and young took part.

Celebrations on the Twenty-Fourth of July were a repetition of this schedule, except the theme was always the pioneer heritage of the area.

As young David O. McKay grew to manhood in this town of the mountains he found peace, love, and neighborliness. Everyone knew everyone else, and friendships were formed which will always continue among those who were fortunate enough to participate in the joys and sorrows of this little village commonwealth.
