Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 3

Early Experiences

Huntsville, President McKay's birthplace, has always been an ideal spot for the rearing of families. Nestled at the foot of majestic mountains, it is near beautiful canyons with excellent fishing streams and camping grounds. Its farm lands yield bounteous crops, and its people are humble in their endeavors. Pine View Lake is nearby, and Ogden City, with its urban advantages, is only a short distance away.

David's birth was a momentous event in the McKay family, for he was the first son. He was ushered into the world by Mary Heathman Smith, lovingly known to those in the area as Grandma Smith. She was more than the ordinary midwife of her time, for she had received medical training in England and was prepared to go beyond the practice of obstetrics if her skill was required.

Young David's childhood was a happy one, and his pleasures were those which any child seeks. He owned a dog, a pony, pigeons, rabbits, and a magpie that he taught to talk. He was active in all the games known to youngsters of his day, and most important of all, he grew up in a home full of love, discipline and yet sympathetic understanding.

His first great sorrow came in 1880 when he was seven. It was in that year that his two older sisters became ill and died. Margaret the eldest, had contracted rheumatic fever and when school opened in the fall of 1879 she was too ill to attend classes. Since little was known about rheumatic fever at that time she grew steadily worse through the winter until death came on March 28, 1880. The grief of the family became more severe, however, when Ellena, the second daughter, developed pneumonia and died on April 1, the date of her sister's funeral. The grave, prepared for Margaret, was enlarged and the two were placed side by side, just as they had been during their brief lives of eleven and nine years.

It was just one year later that father David McKay received a call from the Church to do missionary work in Scotland. When the call came it brought much concern, for Jennette was expecting a child soon, and David was reluctant to leave her alone with the family, as well as the responsibilities of the farm. They had just recently made the last payment on the farm, and seemed to have within their grasp the fulfillment of their dreams and hopes to enlarge the house and furnish it. But now the acceptance of the mission call would mean postponement of everything.

There was really only one decision, and Jennette insisted that her husband accept the call and join the group of missionaries going to Scotland. Remembering the courage of her own mother, Jennette knew she was equal to any sacrifice, and bade her husband farewell on his long journey to the British Isles on April 19, 1881. On that day, David O. McKay's childhood came to an end, for his father had instructed him to "take care of Mama," and the responsibilities he assumed at that time were far beyond his eight years.

The new baby, a daughter, and the sixth child of the family, was born ten days after her father's departure, but the news of her birth did not reach him until he was settled in Scotland. Then, as always during his mission, the letter said ". . . everything at home is going smoothly and we are all well, and you must not worry about us." Many times during his absence there were serious problems to be solved, but their existence never reached him in the mission field. He received only encouraging reports of the baby's development, the wonderful help the two boys, David, and Thomas E., were giving, and of the great kindnesses of relatives, neighbors, and friends.

Before he left, Father McKay had arranged for a man to take the responsibility for the cattle and other heavy outside work. He came, bringing with him a yoke of oxen, which only became an additional barnyard worry. He had not been there long when he went away to visit distant relatives, leaving the oxen for young David to attend. One evening when David and his mother were feeding the animals in the barnyard, they came to the discouraging task of carrying sufficient hay to satisfy the huge bovines, who always seemed to eat faster than they could be supplied. With tears in his eyes, David hefted the heavy hay, and said to his mother, "Now, let's give them two large armfuls of hay and run to the house before they eat it."

In spite of the difficulties, Jennette kept her two sons, David O. and Thomas E. in school, and also taught them to assume part of the household duties, which they did willingly because it was "helping mama."

Family prayer was an established procedure in the McKay home, and when Jennette was left alone with her small family it seemed an ever more important part of the day's events. David was taught to take his turn at morning and evening prayers and learned the importance of the blessings of heaven in the home.

Brethren of the priesthood assisted in planting the spring crops, and the season proved to be a bounteous one for the McKay farm. Hay brought a good price, but grain prices dropped, and so the family was advised to keep that part of the harvest until prices were better. Jennette, at some sacrifice, stored the grain until spring when prices were higher than ever and she realized a generous return. She took comfort in an ample bank account at the end of the season.

Encouraged by their success, Jennette and her sons worked harder the next season and again enjoyed a profitable year. Their bank account increased until they felt justified in making the additions to the house which had previously been planned. The home in which they were living had been built by William Christy, and the missionary who had converted the McKay family in Scotland. By coincidence his name was William McKay, though he was not a relative. Unfortunately these brethren had moved from Huntsville, and so Jennette had to locate other builders to do the work. She found good help in the community, and the addition to the house was built without disclosing the work to David in Scotland. It was truly a joyous reunion when he returned in 1883 to find not only a fine young daughter but also the new home for which he had dreamed and planned so long.

Only a few months after he returned home, David McKay was called by the Church to be bishop of the Eden Ward. He assumed that calling on November 20, 1883, and served until March 29, 1885, when he was called to succeed Bishop Francis A. Hammond in the Huntsville Ward.

Bishop McKay's home was always welcome to visitors in Huntsville, and since the town had no hotel or restaurant, many travelers took advantage of the McKay hospitality. The table in the large dining room was always kept out at full length, and guest rooms were usually always occupied, especially on weekends. Young David met many general authorities and other Church leaders as they visited in his father's home. Patriarch John Smith was a frequent visitor, coming often to spend several weeks giving patriarchal blessings to members of the three wards in the valley. On one of these occasions, July 17, 1887, just a few weeks before his fourteenth birthday, David received his patriarchal blessing. After pronouncing the blessing, Patriarch Smith placed his hands on David's shoulders, and looking into his eyes said "My boy, you have something to do besides playing marbles." David went to the kitchen where his mother was preparing dinner and said, "If he thinks I'm going to stop playing marbles, he is mistaken." His wise mother set aside her meal preparation long enough to sit down with her son and explain what the white-haired patriarch really meant, though even she could not realize the full impact of the words that had been spoken, for among other things, the patriarch had said to young David:

Brother David Oman McKay, thou art in thy youth and need instruction, therefore I say unto thee, be taught of thy parents the way of life and salvation, that at an early day you may be prepared for a responsible position, for the eye of the Lord is upon thee. . . . The Lord has a work for thee to do, in which thou shalt see much of the world, assist in gathering scattered Israel and also labor in the ministry. It shall be thy lot to sit in council with thy brethren and preside among the people and exhort the Saints to faithfulness.

It was a McKay family custom that the children were baptized on the day of their eighth birthday anniversary. When David's sister Ann was baptized in 1889, there were also three cousins and a friend who were baptized at the same time. As the group came from the swimming hole toward the house, they met Elders Richard Ballantyne, George Goddard, and William Willis, the general superintendency of the Church Sunday Schools. They had come to attend a Sunday School conference the following day, but were invited to assist with the confirmations of the young people who had just been baptized. That evening at family prayer in the McKay home Elder Goddard offered a prayer of gratitude that he had been permitted to witness these young people become members of the Church. The McKay children had often taken baptism as a matter of course, but as David and the others knelt in prayer with these brethren they were more impressed by its sacredness than they had ever been before.

Members of the Weber Stake presidency, Lewis W. Shurtliff, Charles F. Middleton, and Nels C. Flygare, were as well known in the McKay home as if they were relatives because of their regular visits to the ward. Stake officers of the auxiliary organizations also came regularly, and were always honored guests. Some of these included Jane S. Richards, Emily Shurtliff, Harriet Brown, Josephine West, Elizabeth Stanford, Aunt Rose Canfield, Harriet Woodmansee, and many others. Jennette McKay often wearied from so much entertaining, but she would always say to her family, "They always leave a blessing in our home, so we are happy to have them."

One of the happiest days in the McKay home was a visit from the First Presidency of the Church, President Wilford Woodruff and his counselors George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith. As they sat around the table enjoying a fine meal, Ann was tending the young McKay baby, Morgan, in another room. After the meal she brought the baby into the living room. President Woodruff took the child in his arms and gave him a beautiful blessing. The experience was an inspiration to all present, and President Cannon remarked that it should be recorded and given to the boy when he was old enough to appreciate it.

An occasional visitor in the home was Elder Orson F. Whitney of the Council of the Twelve. On one of these visits Apostle Whitney composed one of his longest poems. In the evenings, around the large fireplace, he would entertain the family by reading his own poems and those of his favorite authors. After one of his visits to Huntsville he sent the McKays an autographed copy of his poems, which is still among the treasures of the Old Home.

It was in this environment that President McKay spent his boyhood years, though his life was far from being consistently serious. He enjoyed swimming, horseback riding, reading, baseball, dancing, and singing in the glee club in addition to his Church duties. In all of these activities he was known as an enthusiastic leader.

At the age of fifteen he was called as secretary of the Sunday School in the Huntsville Ward, and served from January 27, 1889 until August 20, 1893 when he was called to serve as a Sunday School teacher. Prior to that time he had served in the presidency of the deacons quorum when the duties of the deacons included keeping the chapel clean, seeing that chopped wood was always available for the chapel's stoves, and also going two by two to chop wood for the widows of the ward.

On one occasion as a youngster David accompanied his father to the canyon to get a load of timber to build a large barn. As his father would chop the large trees, David would hitch them to the single-trees and snake them down the mountainside to the wagon. Finding it necessary to spend the night in the mountains, David and his father made a bed of pine boughs and settled down for a well-earned sleep. During the darkness of the night David was awakened by the howls of coyotes and the crashing of bears through the brush near the camp. He was so frightened he nearly cried out, but hearing his father's even breathing he nestled up to him and knew instinctively that there was protection and security as long as he was near. So, under the stars, young David slept peacefully next to his father for the rest of the night. Such was the influence of loving security and understanding sympathy that David McKay gave to his family.

Christmas experiences in the Old Home were always joyous occasions. Perhaps the finest description of these days is contained in a letter written in 1938 by President McKay to his brother, Thomas E., who was at that time presiding in the Swiss-German Mission of the Church.

Salt Lake City, Utah

December 12, 1938

My Dear Brother and Playmate, Thomas E.,

I went to Huntsville the other day and visited the Old Home. It was a typical wintery day, so you can easily imagine how cold the rooms were in which no fires were burning, and in which none had been for weeks. The house was just like a large refrigerator.

There were a few things which I wanted to do so I threw your old coonskin coat over my shoulders, and soon felt warm and comfortable. For a few moments I strolled leisurely from room to room, and, being in a reminiscent mood, I let my mind wander at will down the lanes of memory. I saw "Tommy" and "Dadie" go up stairs to bed, and felt the tender touch of the dearest, sweetest mother that ever lived as she tenderly tucked the bed-clothes around her two roguish boys and gave them good-night kisses.

Again it was Christmas Eve. Our stockings having been hung where Santa couldn't help but see them, we lay half expecting to hear the jingle of the sleigh bells announcing the approach of good old St. Nick to the chimney top—sleep came tardily, but finally the sandman succeeded in closing our eyes.

Christmas morning. I can see those boys creeping down the stairs before daybreak—no electric switch to press and flood the room with light; no flashlight at hand. They didn't even light the old kerosene lamp. Step by step they groped their way in the dark, and sought the nail (or chair) on which each had hung respectively his empty stocking. Who can ever forget the thrill of that first touch of the stocking filled with Santa's treasures! Apple in the toe, sticks of red and white candy protruding from the top, and trinkets and presents hidden in between! Perhaps a trumpet stuck out with the candies; but the drum and sled were standing near by.

The air in the room was cold even though the last embers in the kitchen were still smouldering—evidence, if the boys had stopped to think, that father and mother had sat up late enough to welcome St. Nick to our house.

Soon the girls were awake also, and the lamp was lit—then the "oh's" and the "ah's," and the medley of sounds of drums, jewsharp, harmonica, and music box!

As the sun came smiling over those snow-capped mountains, he turned the frost into diamonds that sparkled from the leafless trees and seemed to dance on the twelve-inch blanket of pure white snow.

Then came the playmates with their merry cry "Christmas Gift."

In the afternoon the children's dance! (One of those boys danced with a sweet little girl eleven successive times!) Oh the romance of childhood!

Chores—evening shadows, supper and bed, and another Christmas was gone. Why, to childhood, is Christmas day so short, and the next far away?

Christmas again, anticipated by the trip up South Fork to get our own Christmas tree from the hillside. They were older then, those boys, but their stockings still were hung, and good old Santa never failed to fill them.

Summer time and the swimming hole in Spring Creek; base-ball on the "square." Boys and girls strolling "across the Creek," over on the knoll plucking flowers—daisies, blue bells, and the modest forget-me-nots, then leisurely back to town where we played croquet—parlor games in the evening where we had to redeem the forfeits!

Later came school and missions, yet still the tender ties that radiated from a devoted father and loving mother ever pulled us back to the Old Home, the dearest, sweetest spot on earth.

It is only an old country home, but no palace was ever filled with truer love and devotion on the part of parents, brothers, and sisters, than those which pervaded the hearts of the loved ones in that family circle.

Hanging your coat in its accustomed place, I walked out of the front door; as the night-latch clicked, I thought it might have been the click of the lid of a treasure chest that held the wealth of memories that no money could buy.

Well, my brother and pal of youthful days, I just wanted you to share with me this glimpse of happy memories, and to say as the Yuletide now approaches, my heart is full of loving wishes to you, that you and yours may enjoy the happiest Christmas ever, and that the New Year may come laden with happiness and joy supreme.

After completing the eighth grade in the Huntsville school David attended Weber Stake Academy in Ogden. During this time he lived at the home of his Grandmother Evans, and her old rock home on Twenty-eighth Street became a second home to him. He remained at the Academy two years and then returned to Huntsville as a teacher in his own boyhood school.

By this time, David, Thomas E., and two of the sisters, Jeanette and Ann, were ready for advanced schooling at the University of Utah, but the limited farm income of father McKay was too little to meet the demand. Fortunately, around that time Grandmother Evans made a gift to each of her three living children of $2,500 each. This seemed like a small fortune at the time. David's mother, recipient of this gift, was urged by her brother and sister to invest her money in stocks or bonds for future security. In her own tender way she replied to them. "Every cent of this goes into the education of our children." Even though they economized in every possible way, the four years these young people spent at the University would have been impossible without their mother's willingness to sacrifice for them.

David was graduated as president of his class at the University in 1897. He also played as a member of the first football team to win high honors for the U.

The University days were important ones to David for it was during this time that he met Emma Ray Riggs, who later became his beloved wife. When they first met, David was dating a beautiful classmate, and Ray was engaged to a fine, young man in the business world. Their real romance did not begin until several years later when David became principal of the Weber Stake Academy and she was teaching at the Madison School in Ogden.

While at the University David also became acquainted with Stephen L Richards, a man with whom he enjoyed a life-long companionship, including service together in the General Superintendency of the Sunday Schools, the Council of the Twelve, and the First Presidency of the Church. The young McKays attending the University spent many pleasant evenings together in the beautiful Richards home in Salt Lake.

Following his graduation from the University, David made plans for a teaching career and had his work all planned when he received a letter calling him to do missionary work in Great Britain. At first he was concerned about the call because it meant changing all his well-made plans. But in his family he realized that no one had ever refused a call to work in any capacity in the Church, and even though the decision meant his own plans had to be set aside, he accepted the call and prepared for his two years as a missionary.

When the call came to David, the McKay household consisted of four brothers and four sisters, and his leaving was the first break in the family circle. While all the family was proud of his worthiness and willingness to go, there was some sadness at his parting. The distance from the British Isles seemed great, but he had received a blessing and setting apart for his new work, and he knew that he would have the prayers of his parents, brothers, and sisters, and so he bade them farewell knowing that all would be well with those at home as well as with him.

President McKay's tribute to his mother, entitled "Mother's Influence," was printed in a booklet presented by the Downey (Idaho) Ward Sunday School on Mother's Day, 1929.

MOTHER'S INFLUENCE

Among my most precious soul treasures, is the memory of mother's prayers by the bedside, of her affectionate touch as she tucked the bed clothes around my brother and me, and gave each a loving good night kiss. We were too young and roguish, then, fully to appreciate such devotion, but not too young to know that mother loved us.

It was this realization of mother's love, with a loyalty to the precepts of an exemplary father, which, more than once during fiery youth, turned my steps from the precipice of temptation.

If I were asked to name the world's greatest need. I should say unhesitatingly wise mothers; and the second, exemplary fathers.

If mother love were but half rightly directed, and if fatherhood were but half what it should be in example and honor, much of the sorrow and wickedness in the world would be overcome.

The home is the source of our national life. If we keep the spring pure, we shall have less difficulty in protecting the stream from pollution.

My mother! God bless you!

Your purity of soul,

Your faith, your tenderness

Your watchful care

Your supreme patience,

Your companionship and trust

Your loyalty to the Right,

Your help and inspiration to father,

Your unselfish devotion to us children—

These and every other virtue

that contributes to ideal motherhood,

I associate with you,

My Mother!

David O. McKay
