Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 4

The First Mission

President David O. McKay was set apart as a missionary to Great Britain by President Seymour B. Young, August 1, 1897. He was then assigned to labor in Scotland. The first part of his mission was spent in Sterling, where he made many lasting friends for the Church, as well as for himself.

On June 9, 1898, he received a letter from the presidency of the British Mission about which he wrote the following in his diary: "Upon opening the letter I found it to be an appointment to the presidency of the Scottish Conference. Realizing to some extent what a responsibility this is, I seemed to be seized with a feeling of gloom and fear, lest in accepting I should prove incompetent. I walked to a secret spot in the wood, just below Wallace's monument, and there dedicated my services to the Lord and implored him for his divine assistance."

He found the Conference House in Glasgow a large, poorly furnished place. With the assistance of the elders and the sister in charge he purchased linoleum and necessary furniture to change it into liveable headquarters for the missionaries, for their many callers, for the saints and returning European elders, all of whom sailed from Glasgow, for the United States at that time.

During this mission Doctor James E. Talmage and Elder George W. Palmer gave lectures on Utah with accompanying stereoptican slides in a number of cities in Scotland. While these were not a financial success, and the elders in the conference made up deficits, they felt that much prejudice was allayed, and many who attended became interested investigators.

On May 29, 1899, a memorable priesthood meeting was held in Glasgow in connection with the Scottish Conference, and it illustrates the spirit of this mission and the love and sympathy existing among those who labored there. President McKay records the events in his diary, excerpts from which follow:

A peaceful, heavenly influence pervaded the room. Some of the elders were so affected by it that they expressed their feelings in tears.

Just as Brother Young sat down after giving his report, Elder Charles Woolfenden said, "Brethren there are angels in this room," and everyone present, impressed with the spirit of the occasion, and sensing the divine influence, could testify to the truth of his remarks. Elders wept for joy; sobs came from different parts of the room, and they were fitting, too, for it seemed manly to weep there.

At the conclusion of the reports, all joined in a prayer of thanksgiving to the Lord for his blessings and manifestations. President James L. McMurrin then addressed the meeting and said, among other things, "The Lord has accepted our labors, and at this time we stand pure before him." He continued, "Yes, brethren, there are angels in this room;" and the announcement was not startling, but seemed wholly proper. Designating two of the brethren, he said their guardian angels were present, then turning to me he continued, "Let me say to you, Brother David, Satan has desired you that he may sift you as wheat, but God is mindful of you, and if you will keep the faith, you will yet sit in the leading councils of the Church."

It was no coincidence that on July 17, 1887, when David was thirteen years old, Patriarch John Smith had also said, in his blessing, "For the eye of the Lord is upon thee—the Lord has a work for thee to do, in which thou shalt see much of the world. It shall be thy lot to sit in council with thy brethren, and preside among the people, and exhort the saints to faithfulness."

President McKay said of the meeting in Scotland, "It was a manifestation for which, as a doubting youth, I had secretly prayed most earnestly on hillside and in meadow. It was an assurance to me that sincere prayer is answered, 'sometime, somewhere.'"

On one of his regular visits to Edinborough he witnessed all the pomp and splendor accompanying the annual visit of the Prince of Wales in Scotland.

It was during this mission, also, that he visited Thurso, the birthplace of his father. Here he met people who remembered his grandfather and grandmother McKay, as well as his father, Bishop David McKay, when he did missionary work there in 1881-82.

Later he went from a conference in Liverpool to his mother's birthplace in Wales. It had been arranged that he and President McMurrin would attend the International Eisteddfodau together, but President McMurrin became ill and so David went alone to Cardiff where this annual festival of music and the arts was held. He took with him a letter of introduction from Professor Evan Stephens, director of the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir, to Dr. Parry, the presiding officer of the festival. He was received very warmly by this great musician, who introduced the young missionary to Dr. Edwards, assistant director, and his two daughters from Pennsylvania, as well as many other dignitaries and visitors at the festival.

After enjoying the competitive and cultural events of the festival, David went to Merthyr Tydfil where he found relatives and friends of his mother. He wrote a letter to her from the room in which she had been born.

Before he completed his missionary duties in Scotland he received a letter of appointment as a teacher in the Weber Stake Academy. He was thrilled with this opportunity to take up the career he had left to enter the mission field, and so after his missionary release in August, 1899, he went directly to Ogden to take up his new post.

In September of 1900 he was called to the Weber Stake Sunday School board, and became second assistant to Superintendent Thomas B. Evans. He was assigned the responsibility of classwork, and sensing the need for more organization, worked out a plan of graded departments with definite courses of study in each, as well as an adequately trained staff of teachers in each ward and a corresponding supervisor of each department on the stake board. These and other contributions which he made to the work of the Sunday School are detailed in Chapter 7.
