Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 5

Wonderful Family Life

David O. McKay and Emma Ray Riggs were married in the Salt Lake Temple on January 2, 1901. The ceremony was performed by Elder John Henry Smith. The couple had first met on the University of Utah campus, though neither had any serious thoughts of marriage at the time. However, when David returned from his mission and began teaching at the Weber Stake Academy, he learned that Ray had become a teacher at the Madison School in Ogden. Their friendship was renewed, and blossomed into a long, happy, and successful married life.

After their marriage they established their first home in Ogden, and here their seven children were born and reared as members of the Ogden Fourth Ward.

Ray was a natural homemaker—artistic, hospitable, loving, kind, and patient. David was a devoted husband and father, and their children, and all who entered their home, felt the refining influence of a united couple whose ideals conformed in every way to those taught by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

David and Ray reared their children in an atmosphere of love, harmony, and security, where father and mother were respected, not because they demanded their place as leaders, but because the children naturally made them their ideals and respected their judgment.

Because David and Ray lived the ideals of the Church in their home, spiritual things came naturally to their children. Typical of this is the experience of one of the sons when he was a small boy. One day he was visiting his grandfather's home, which was next door, while spring house cleaning and re-papering of the rooms were in progress. The little fellow, with his hands clasped behind his back, stood in a doorway watching the work and attracted the attention of a workman. The workman asked him, "When you are a man, would you like to be a painter and paper-hanger?" Without hesitation the child answered, "No, sir." The workman persisted, and said "Then what would you like to be?" The boy, again without hesitation, replied seriously "I should like to be a 'Twelve Apostle.'"

From the first years of his married life, David's Church duties required him to spend a considerable amount of time away from his family. Responsibilities as principal of the Weber Stake Academy, member of the Weber Stake Sunday School superintendency, and later as a general officer of the Sunday School and one of the Council of the Twelve kept him away from home a good deal of the time. During this time it was necessary for Ray to assume a large role in the home life. This she did most admirably. She could prepare and serve a delicious meal, direct the conversation at the table, and after the dining room was cleared, lead the family into the living room and entertain them by her piano artistry, or accompany them in their singing. While the family was small it seemed that every night in the McKay home was "family night." Later, when the three oldest children became talented performers on violin, piano, and clarinet the home musicals continued as part of their artistic training.

While the children were young Ray did not accompany her husband in too many of his travels, saving this opportunity for later years. She remained at home, directing the education of the children, and also encouraging them in their Church activities. She always tried to be at home when the little ones returned from school, or came rushing in from the outside calling "Mother, I'm home," or "Mother, where are you?" Her assurance, "Here I am dear," was great security and protection to the growing family.

David and Ray tried to become personally acquainted with their children's teachers in public schools and in the Church. They cooperated with them in the preparation of home work and special assignments. At one time one of the boys returned from Sunday School with a firm declaration, "I am not going to that class once more because there is so much noise I can't hear what the teacher says." Ray counseled with him, and offered to go with him next Sunday to see what could be done about the matter. When she went she found conditions as he had reported them. After some private consultation with the superintendent, the inexperienced teacher was given the assistance she needed and there was no further disorder in that classroom.

On another occasion, when the boys were playing with their baseball, it inadvertently went through a basement window. As was the custom, the culprit went immediately to his father, saying, "It was an accident and I am very sorry." The wise father replied, "I am sorry, too, but just being sorry will not repair the damage."

The boy asked, "How much will a new window cost?"

"I do not know," replied his father, "but we shall have a repairman come up and he can tell us the exact amount."

The child offered, "I haven't much money, but I am willing to pay what I have."

He was allowed to share in the expense, and when his mother remonstrated, "How could you take his money when he has such a small allowance?" David O. replied, "He has received a valuable lesson in the cost of keeping up a home, and now he has a monetary interest in this home which he will protect." It may have been a coincidence, but there were no more windows shattered by baseballs.

Of course there were times when differences of opinion arose, or when mischievous brothers teased sisters, or when jokes were played on unsuspecting members by older planners—all the upsetting experiences that happen in any group of lively young people. But father and mother always met these problems quietly and settled them in strict kindness.

There were no company manners in the McKay home. Father and mother were as courteous to each other and to their children when only the members of the family were present, as when the most respected guests were in the home. The same courtesy and respect for each other's rights were required of the children in their association and play together.

Besides rearing and educating their own family, the McKays invited many students to live in their home, and these they assisted in their efforts to secure an education. These young people, now with families of their own, still sing the praises of this ideal home which they were permitted to share.

There were traditions that became loving memories in the lives of all the family. Birthdays were always celebrated by special cakes and appropriate candles, and when each one reached school age, by parties in which friends participated. Summer holidays were usually spent at the Old Home in Huntsville, which was also the scene of occasional winter sleigh rides. There were always horses to ride on the farm, and hayrides that delighted even the smallest children.

The day before Christmas was a special occasion when the McKay children with all their cousins met at the home of an uncle and aunt to present a Christmas play, written especially for them, with a part for each child. The parents were the audience, and the party was always over in time for each family to return home before Santa's visit on Christmas Eve.

Missionary work made the first break in this ideal home life, and as each son reached maturity, he gave several years to his Church in France, Germany, England, or South America. Then followed temple marriages, until there were six new homes established on the exact pattern of the original where they had received their training.

They are still a unit, meeting with parents for birthday, anniversary, and Christmas celebrations. It would be difficult to find a more united and loving group in this world than the David O. McKay family.
