Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 6

Weber Stake Academy

Before David O. McKay was released from his mission in Scotland, in August, 1899, he received a letter from the Board of Education of the Weber Stake Academy, offering him a position as teacher in the institution. His work commenced in September of that year, and continued until April 17, 1902, when, upon the resignation of Professor Louis F. Moench, he was appointed principal.

The school was handicapped because of the many men students who were detained on the farms in the fall, and were compelled to leave before the close of school in the spring. This meant educating the parents and students alike to the necessity of attending during the entire school year. While this meant sacrifices in some instances, the difficulties were overcome to a very great extent, and the number of graduates each year was greatly increased.

One of the first innovations made at the school was the establishment of a little paper. The staff of the paper was organized in 1903, and Principal McKay suggested that it be called The Acorn. The first number was published in February, 1904, and was sent out without carrying the name of the school. When exchanges returned, addressed simply to Ogden, Utah, one of them asked, "Where does the little Acorn grow?" The first souvenir edition was dated 1905.

A lecture course was established in 1902, with the following committee in charge: Professor Wilford M. McKendrick, chairman, Dr. John G. Lind, and Jeanette McKay. The first year's program brought the best talent the state afforded. The second year Professor S. H. Clark, of the University of Chicago, supplemented the course with a series of dramatic recitals.

The Acorn of December, 1904, contained the following: "For two years past the Weber Stake Academy has offered to its students and friends, two of the finest lecture courses in the state. In fact, we have been the pioneers in presenting an outlined course of lectures from our leading home talent, and from the east."

The course for 1905, listed Professor S. H. Clark, Edmund Vance Cook, F. Hopkinson Smith, Albert Armstrong, W. J. Clarke, noted electrician of New York, and two local notables, Professor Maud May Babcock, and the Honorable Brigham H. Roberts.

In 1905, '06, and '07, the following outstanding attractions were added to the already remarkable roster of the Weber Stake Academy Lecture Course, which had now become a permanent part of the institution: Montaville Flowers, Opie Read, Sylvestor H. Long, Frederick B. Hopkins of Chicago, Jacob H. Riis, Russel H. Conwell of Temple College in Philadelphia, Whitney Brothers Quartette, Dr. Richard G. Moulton of the University of Chicago, Alton Packard, cartoonist, Van Vachton Rogers, Professor John B. De Mott, Dr. Thomas H. Green, Dr. George Riddle of Harvard University, William Jennings Bryan, and others. To accommodate the increased attendance, some of the lectures were transferred to the Orpheum Theater, where later most of them were held.

In 1903, the Domestic Arts Department was added, with Mrs. Sarah T. Evans in charge, and during the year more than fifty girls were registered in sewing and art needle work. It was not until 1906, however, that the Domestic Science Department was formally established with Eve Farr as director. Its success was assured by the large number of students who registered immediately for the classes in this practical division of vocational education.

In 1902, the school was represented by two excellent basketball teams, one of men, the other of women. The Ogden City Council granted Weber Stake Academy the use of the pavilion in Lester Park for practice, as there were no facilities for this purpose in their building. In 1903, during Field Day exercises, an interclass meet was conducted, and following this a school track team was organized. In this same year, after a successful season, the victorious basketball boys were given their W sweaters. A baseball team came into existence in 1905, and on May 20 of that year, won its game with the University of Utah.

A student body organization was perfected in 1904, and this added greatly to the group enthusiasm and support of school activities. The creation of a football team was one of the first evidences of its activity, to participate with the few teams already playing in the state. This was not a major sport, however, for some years.

In the souvenir edition of The Acorn for 1906, the following report was made:

One of the most important features of the school this year, and one which has attracted a great deal of attention, is the Music Department. At the beginning of the year the choir was organized, and has held regular weekly rehearsals. Professor Joseph Ballantyne has worked hard to bring it to a high standard, and some beautiful anthems have been rendered in daily devotional exercises.

Another feature of the school, of real importance, is the Conservatory of Music, which was established last September, with Professor Joseph Ballantyne, Professor John J. McClellen, and Professor Willard E. Wehie, as instructors. Voice culture, piano and organ, and violin, are the branches taught. It has proved to be a pronounced success, and will, no doubt, become a permanent part of the Academy. There is already a large enrollment in the Conservatory, and they have given two recitals of which we are very proud, and in which the public took a great deal of interest.

The school band has been working diligently, with Professor E. W. Nicols as Director, to maintain its excellent standard. Our orchestra is deserving of a great deal of praise. They have had regular practices all year, and the music has, at all times, been a source of great satisfaction.

One of the best and most successful musical treats we have had for a long time was the operetta, The Witch of the Woods, given by our students, under the direction of Mrs. Harriet Purdy Smith. The production is one requiring a great number of characters, and gives opportunity for a great variety of performance. Everything was attractive and very well worth while for the spent in practice, and worthy of the large audience which filled the Opera House at each of the three performances. The proceeds have been given to the fund for the new building.

In 1908, the school band rendered twenty-one numbers and the orchestra eleven. The choir of eighty-five voices produced the beautiful cantata, Father, by William B. Bradley.

Two women's literary clubs were organized under the sponsorship of Miss Jeanette McKay, of the faculty. The HCP Club announced that its membership was open to all junior and senior girls who were willing to live up to its constitution. Men's clubs were also available to students. A debating team brought success to the school on April 25, 1908, by defeating the Salt Lake City High School.

The school grew very rapidly, and it was not long before Principal McKay realized that the existing quarters were inadequate. When he explained to the Board of Education, and asked for additional housing facilities, they explained, "You may have a new building if you can raise the money to pay for it, but do not expect any assistance from us." Knowing that these men had mortgaged their own homes to pay for the original building, he did not blame them for taking this stand, but their decision did not alter his determination to have some more class rooms and a larger auditorium.

The problem was discussed at a special meeting of the faculty, and a plan was adopted to visit every ward in the stakes interested, besides soliciting personal assistance. In the history of education probably no faculty of comparable size ever worked more diligently or with greater determination than did David O. McKay and his teachers. The result was the erection of a $60,000.00 addition, and the board was not asked to contribute one cent. This gave the school additional class rooms, a chemical laboratory, a geological laboratory, space for a vocational training shop, and a large auditorium. This served as a community center for students and the public alike, for lectures, theatres, assemblies, and other meetings, and was still in use by Weber State College until very recently. Not one of that faculty group ever forgot the generous response of the large number of friends of the Weber Stake Academy.

While the building program was still underway, Principal McKay was called on April 8, 1906, to serve as a member of the Church's Council of Twelve. He willingly accepted the many added responsibilities as an apostle, but asked for permission to remain as principal also until the new building was completed. This was accomplished with the structure's dedication in 1908.

One distinct advantage of the new building in the Weber curriculum was the addition of a manual arts training program. The need had long been recognized, but no room had been available. Now, with the opening of a shop, and adequate new tools, instructor W. O. Ridges and some eighty students began making desks, benches, tables, and other equipment needed for classrooms. Repairs of doors, windows and other parts of the campus buildings were also possible.

When Principal McKay left the school, the annual issue of The Acorn was dedicated to him, and the following are excerpts from that number.

To him who planted our Acorn so dear,

To him who has nurtured it gently each year,

Discov'ring its faults with an eye but to bless,

So ready its beauties and truths to confess.

To him who has shared all its joys, cares, and fears,

We dedicate now and we hallow with tears.

"Fortunate, indeed, are the students who have been registered in his classes, for when he taught religion he gave truths he believed and had proved in practice. His lessons in literature were interpreted in the light of love and charity for all mankind, and his moral teachings had behind them all the force of a perfect moral life."

During his years as principal the growth of the school was phenomenal, and with the added facilities of the new building, he left a remarkable foundation upon which to build the Weber Academy and later the Weber State College.

The resignation of Principal McKay did not terminate his service to the institution, for he was invited to become the president of the board of trustees. In this capacity he was still able to function in its development. He remained in this position until called by the Church to preside over the European Mission in 1922.

On this occasion, the Weber Herald of November 9, 1922, with Willard Marriott as editor, published a long article, headed, President McKay Leaves For the European Mission, from which the following extracts are taken:

He was connected with Weber as student, teacher, principal, and president of the board of trustees.

In the calling of Elder David O. McKay to preside over the European Mission, the Weber Academy loses the active service of the President of the board of trustees. We wish Brother McKay an earnest farewell, and wish him success in his important calling.

In doing this, however, it might be profitable for us to review some of the important incidents which connect the history of Weber with the life of David O. McKay.

Brother McKay entered Weber as a preparatory student in the Fall of 1889, the second year of the Weber Stake Academy, then occupying the Second Ward Institute. Later, Brother McKay attended the University of Utah, graduating, and took up the work of teacher. Very soon he was called on a mission to Great Britain. Here his active, energetic life asserted itself, and soon he found himself presiding over the Scottish Conference.

Upon his return home he was appointed a teacher in Weber, entering the school as head of the English department. He labored as a teacher in the school for three years, then became the principal of the institution in 1902.

The seven years during which Brother McKay was principal were years of remarkable growth for the school. Some of the buildings were entirely outgrown. Classes had to be conducted on the stairways and in the halls. Something had to be done in order to have more room. But the board remembered the hard time which it had experienced in raising the money to pay for the first building. Naturally it hesitated. It did not like to undertake a new building. In this crisis the energy and soul of Brother McKay asserted themselves. He went before the board of education with the proposition that the teachers would build an addition to the old building if they were given permission to solicit funds. Permission was granted. Brother McKay became the central figure in the campaign for money. The teachers rallied to him and assisted in the work. The money was collected. The Church assisted out of the tithing funds. Individual contributions ranging from one dollar to five thousand dollars in one case, were received. The building was built and paid for.

While this campaign was on, Brother McKay was chosen a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, but he remained as principal of Weber until after the building was completed.

Since that time Brother McKay has served the school continuously as president of the board of trustees. Although his duties as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve have taken most of his time, yet he has found ways and means to boost for Weber.

Weber is dear to the heart of Brother McKay. He loves the school, and in return is beloved by Weber and by every boy and girl who has attended the school. May God bless him as he goes from us to his new field of labor.
