Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 7

Sunday School Activities

The portion of President David O. McKay's life which he devoted to Sunday School activities is one of the most significant and interesting phases of a notable career.

He had a natural love for teaching and great ability as an organizer. Combining these with tremendous enthusiasm for the work, he was able to bring about improvements in the Sunday School programs that are still valuable today.

Like most Latter-day Saint children he was enrolled in the Sunday School at an early age, and learned to love the association and spiritual atmosphere resulting from regular attendance. His first major responsibility came on January 27, 1889 when he was called as secretary of the Huntsville Ward Sunday School. On August 20, 1893 he was sustained as a teacher in this Sunday School, and served until October 4, 1896 when he was released because of a move to Salt Lake where he was attending the University of Utah.

Following his missionary service in Scotland he was called to the Weber Stake Sunday School board in September, 1899. Early in 1900 he was sustained as second assistant to Superintendent Thomas B. Evans in the stake Sunday School superintendency. It was while serving in this capacity, a position he held for six years, that his great leadership ability enabled him to make many significant contributions.

He was assigned the responsibility of Sunday School class work. Because of his educational background, and his work as a teacher at Weber Stake Academy, he sensed in the Sunday Schools a lack of proper teaching methods and little or no lesson organization. After careful, prayerful study he prepared a plan of grading students within the Sunday School, and outlined a definite course of study for each department. An adequate teaching force in each ward was specified, and corresponding supervisors for each department were included on the stake board level. He further suggested the outlining of lessons and cooperative discussion of each month's work at the stake union meeting. Thus began the real work of gospel education within the Sunday Schools.

Teachers were asked to study each lesson at home, and decide on a definite aim. They were then to arrange topics logically, suggest a timely illustration from outside the text and write a practical application of each lesson to the child's life.

There was then to be a weekly preparation meeting for all officers and teachers in each ward where every detail of the coming Sunday service would be discussed and teachers would cooperate in perfecting the lesson outline and dividing the work of the class period so that there would be no time wasted and no time for pupils to become unruly because of delays in teaching.

Then, at the monthly stake union meeting, all officers and teachers of the wards in the stake would come together, and after receiving general instructions from the stake superintendency in opening exercises, would separate for departmental work. Here, under the supervision of stake board members, the ward workers in each department would discuss problems and plans for the coming month's work. At the close of the union meeting each teacher had in his or her notebook some suggested composite outlines for the coming month's work. An example of this type of lesson outlining, taken from President McKay's notes, is as follows:

THE TEMPTATION OF CHRIST

Text: Matt. 4:1-11; Luke 4:1-13

Lesson setting: The time, place, etc.

I. The First Temptation

A. Physical condition after fasting

B. Tempter seeks to have the Savior turn stones into bread.

C. The Savior's reply

II. The Second Temptation

A. Tempted to cast himself from pinnacle of temple

III. The Third Temptation

A. To worship Satan

Suggested Aim: Resisting temptation strengthens character.

Illustrations: Stories and experiences drawn from members of the class.

Application: Suggestions from pupils as to practical application in their daily lives.

This type of Sunday School planning is taken for granted now, but in 1900 it was a major innovation. As President McKay presented it, it was first accepted by the stake board, then by the superintendencies of the wards, and most important of all, by the various teachers. Many of the teachers, even though they had served for many years, expressed their inability to outline lessons and adopt the new methods, but the great majority of them became the most ardent supporters of the plan when they saw how their lessons came alive and were so much more effective in the lives of their pupils as compared with the unorganized material of earlier years.

It was not long before each teacher felt that unless every pupil left his class with a burning desire to do something as a direct result of the Sunday morning lesson, he had failed in his presentation of the subject. To David O. McKay this fulfilled the admonition "Be ye doers of the word and not hearers only."

Sunday School work under the direction of Superintendent Thomas B. Evans, Charles J. Ross, and David O. McKay became a living, moving force in the lives of all who participated. Attendance, punctuality, intelligent and thorough preparation, and class cooperation became watch-words that brought the organization to heights never before realized. Many testimonies were strengthened which might never have reached maturity.

President McKay also organized and directed a parent's convention which was held in the Ogden Tabernacle, and attended by Church President Joseph F. Smith. Out of this gathering came the Parents Class, a new addition to the regular Sunday School.

With his call to serve in the Council of the Twelve came a release for President McKay from the Weber Sunday School stake board. At a testimonial given in his honor on May 16, 1906, Superintendent Evans, speaking in behalf of all the stake Sunday School workers said:

"His unusual ability and integrity in his class work have enabled all to get a clearer conception of their duty. His devotion to the Sunday School cause, his untiring zeal and purity of life and conversation have inspired all to nobler deeds and awakened in them a determination to perform their labors with an eye single to the Glory of God.

"His kindness of spirit and grace of conduct have touched the hearts and won the love of all his associates who unite in praying Heaven's greatest and choicest blessings to attend him at all times, wherever he may be."

Even after moving to Salt Lake City he returned weekly to Ogden to give an extended course of lectures to officers and teachers of the Weber Stake.

On October 6, 1906 he was called to serve as second assistant to President Joseph F. Smith in the General Sunday School superintendency. He became the first assistant in the general superintendency on April 14, 1909, and then was called to serve as the general superintendent on November 27, 1918. At that time he called his long-time friend Stephen L Richards as first assistant, along with George D. Pyper as second assistant.

Several months after the new superintendency was sustained, Elder Edward P. Kimball, writing in the Juvenile Instructor of February, 1919, paid the following tribute to President McKay:

Elder David O. McKay is signally honored by his call to preside over the Sunday Schools of the Church in all the world. His appointment comes as a merited recognition for the faithfulness and zeal which he has displayed during his long association with the Sunday Schools. That confidence in his training for the great responsibility of his new calling, and in his capabilities in and fidelity to the great Sunday School cause, exhibited by his brethren in placing him at the head of this wonderful work, will find an echo in the heart of every Sunday School worker throughout the Church. His name is synonymous with the Sunday School movement, and those who are most intimately acquainted with him know best how close to his heart are the youth of Zion, and how devoutly and indefatigably he has applied himself for their improvement and salvation. His mind is constantly busy with new problems and plans for the growth of the work. While he looks to and into the future, he is no idle dreamer; he has a wonderful capacity for making men see his vision, and then of solving the details of his plan which will make this vision a living reality. His sure and unfailing testimony of the truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ is exemplified in his every thought, word, and deed for the young people of the Church. His kindly, gentlemanly bearing toward everyone whom he meets is proverbial; his testimony is inspiring; and his example compels admiration.

As general superintendent he began to apply throughout the Church the successful plans that had been developed in Weber Stake. Parents classes became general throughout the Church, and a progressive course of study from the kinder-garten to the parents classes was instituted. The lessons were graded and the members of each department had a definite assignment to complete before being promoted to the next higher division.

Ideal class instruction which he had begun to develop in Ogden found its way into all the Sunday Schools of the Church, and there was a great general move forward in gospel instruction.

Bryant S. Hinckley, in an article published in the May, 1932 issue of The Improvement Era, described President McKay's work in the Sunday School as follows:

"This work appealed to the best and the finest that is in Elder McKay. He brought to it, not only an undivided heart, but the strength and devotion of all his splendid powers. He put into the organization a part of the sublime and attractive faith so manifest in his own life. Through the Sunday School he has fostered two major objectives of the Church—the development of faith and the building of character and he has left forever upon it the impress of his shining personality.

"David O. McKay has made a lasting contribution to the Sunday School cause. No history of the Church hereafter will be written that will not exalt him to a high place because of this work."

He continued as general superintendent until October 30, 1934 when he was sustained as second counselor to President Heber J. Grant in the First Presidency of the Church.
