Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 8

World Tour

One of the most important missionary ventures of the Church began on December 2, 1920, when David O. McKay of the Council of the Twelve, and Elder Hugh J. Cannon, editor of The Improvement Era, were set apart by President Heber J. Grant and President Anthon H. Lund to make a tour of the missions and schools of the Church in every part of the world.

From the day of their leaving until they returned on December 24, 1921, they traveled 24,277 miles by land, and 32,819 miles by water, which is two and one half times around the earth's circumference. Among the intensely interesting experiences in every country and island visited, only a few can be mentioned here.

Christmas was spent in Japan, and after visiting the principal cities of that beautiful country, and spending a short time in Korea, the travelers entered China, with its ancient wall still standing as a bulwark, if not a protection.

Before they left Salt Lake, President Grant had instructed them, if they felt so impressed while in China, to set the land apart for the preaching of the gospel. As Peking is really the heart of the country, they decided it would be an appropriate place for this sacred ceremony. On Sunday, January 9, 1921, in a small grove of cyprus trees, Elder McKay dedicated and set apart the Chinese realm for the preaching of the gospel. He wrote: "Thus was the key turned that unlocked the door for the entrance into this faminestricken land, of the authorized servants of God to preach the Glad Tidings of Great Joy as revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith."

Not until they returned to Tokyo on January 21, 1921, to sail for Hawaii, did they receive letters and Christmas messages from home. In Honolulu they received a royal welcome, and were shown the beauties and points of interest on all the islands of this group. Elder McKay wrote in his diary:

I cannot describe the beauty of this tropical paradise, the trees, the gorgeous colored hedges, the profusely blooming flowers and shrubs, the sky and ocean, with bright, fantastically colored fish; all add interest to this wonderland of beauty. Later I told a reporter who came to interview us, that I had realized more than I ever thought possible, my childhood dream of fairyland.

After holding conference, attending feasts given in their honor, and blessing little children and members who were ill, it was necessary to return to the mainland to take a boat for the islands and continents of the South Seas. The Tahitian saints were visited, and several weeks were spent in New Zealand. In every town and village where meetings were held, members and non-members alike, city and government officials, joined to welcome their distinguished guests, entertained them royally, and showered them with flowers and lovely gifts. Everywhere there was beautiful music furnished by bands, choruses, and island serenaders. There were also many spiritual manifestations which strengthened the testimonies of missionaries and island people alike.

The month spent in Samoa passed all too quickly, with some of the largest conferences yet held, in preparation for which every detail had been carefully arranged. Missionary meetings were as satisfactory as the larger meetings, attended by members, investigators, and friends. When the time for farewells arrived, genuine friendships had been formed, and the parting was a sad one for the people who had never before had the privilege of meeting one of the general authorities.

At the last party there were beautiful interpretations of the island dances, in native costume, singing, and instrumental selections, and then, as they returned to the mission home, fathers and mothers brought their children to be blessed, occupying the last moments before the necessary departure. Of these last experiences Elder McKay recorded the following:

As we came out, we found the people standing in a double column from our door out across the lawn to the street. They had prepared a farewell song for us and all began to sing. As we passed through the lines, shaking hands with them, sobs interrupted the singing. Staunch old Papo, the head of the village, sobbed like a child, and clung to us as though we were his sons. As we mounted our horses, we looked back and saw the crowd, headed by the band, coming toward us for one more parting handshake.

From that spot to the dugway leading to the ocean, there was a straight, grassy roadway, lined with tall native trees and tropical vines. As we rode slowly up the gentle incline, the band leading, the people followed, as though they could not yield to parting. We had gained, perhaps, a quarter of a mile ahead of them, when I felt tempted to say, "Brother Cannon, I think we should return and leave our blessing with them here in this beautiful grove.

As we approached the sobbing crowd, I was thrilled with the picturesque setting. Hanging my folded umbrella on an overhanging limb, Kippin, our interpreter, told them why we had come back. Their sobs were louder than my voice when I commenced the prayer, but they became more subdued as I continued, and their "Amen" was distinct and impressive at the end.

An elder who remained with the crowd reported what happened after the visitors left:

The villagers watched as long as they could see their friends, then returned sadly to their homes. Kippin, the interpreter, immediately sat down and wrote the prayer as he remembered it. He and some of the others then conceived the idea of burying a copy of it on the spot where Apostle McKay had stood, and covering it with a pile of stones to mark the place. The town bell was rung, the people reassembled, and the plan was presented and approved. A copy of the prayer, together with an account of the entire proceedings, was sealed in a bottle and placed in a hole which was covered with stones, each of the heads of families throwing a handful of soil to assist in the covering. The branch on which the umbrella was hung was taken back to the village as a souvenir, and steps were taken to erect a monument at the sacred spot.

Another month was spent in visiting the missions of Australia, then on to Java, India, Egypt, and Palestine. Traveling through the Holy Land was like passing familiar towns, villages, rivers, lakes, mountains, and gardens, because of Elder McKay's long and intimate association with these places in Old Testament history, and especially because of his love of the life of Christ and his apostles.

President Grant had expressed a hope that in their travels the two could visit the Armenian Mission, which had received such harsh treatment during the great World War. On a special fast day, several thousand dollars had been contributed for the relief of these suffering people, but almost a year had passed since the brethren had left home, and they had no recent information about conditions in this part of the world. Cablegrams to the president of the European Mission and to the United States Consul at Aleppo, brought only information that J. Wilford Boothe was on his way to Aleppo. Elder McKay's diary, under date of November 2, 1921, reads:

We have no idea where President Boothe is. We shall leave Jerusalem for Haifa, enroute to Aleppo, tomorrow morning. We have concluded to go by auto through Samaria, visiting Bible scenes. At three-thirty p. m. of the same day, we ascended the Mount of Olives, and, choosing a secluded spot, near where Jesus is supposed to have stood, we knelt in humble supplication and thanksgiving to God, asking that we might be led by inspiration on our trip to the Armenian Mission.

Upon returning to the hotel, I felt strongly impressed that we should go to Haifa by train instead of by auto. When I said as much to Brother Cannon, he replied, "if you feel that way we had better take the train." Our greatest desire as we neared this mission was to meet Elder Boothe. Indeed, it seemed that our trip to Syria would be useless unless we should meet him. We were strangers. We knew no one. The branches of the Church in Syria were disorganized, and the members were scattered.

During all our travels, besides giving excellent addresses at every meeting, Brother Cannon had assumed the responsibility of arranging for train and boat tickets, and hotel accommodations, and had never failed in a single instance; but shortly after leaving Jerusalem, when asked if he had the name of a hotel in Haifa, he said he had forgotten to ask about it, but would contact the Allenby Hotel runner when the train stopped at Lud.

When they changed trains at that station, and were again on their way, they both realized that they had forgotten to speak to the hotel representative.

Arriving at Haifa, Brother Cannon remained with the luggage while Brother McKay left to make inquiry regarding a suitable hotel. After some difficulty, he returned in about ten minutes reporting that there seemed to be two fairly good ones, and they would take the one whose runner appeared first. The delay caused by locating a hotel brought them to the station office door just at the same moment that another traveler reached it. He said, "Isn't this Brother McKay?" Elder McKay then records in his diary:

Astounded beyond expression to be thus addressed in so strange a town, I turned and recognized Elder Joseph Wilford Boothe, the one man above all others that we were most desirous of meeting. We had met, too, at the most opportune time and place. Having known nothing of our whereabouts, he had come from the western part of the world, hoping in his heart to meet us. We had come from the east, praying that we might meet him, and there we had met at the very time and place best suited to our convenience, and to the success of our mission to Armenia.

As we recounted to each other our experiences, we had no doubt but that our coming together was the result of divine interposition. If we had taken an auto from Jerusalem, or if we had remembered to secure the name of a hotel before we left the Allenby, or if we had thought to ask at Lud, we should not have met Elder Boothe. It is true we would have been in town that same day, but we had intended to stay at a hotel across the city from the one he decided upon, where we never should have met him, and our visit to Armenia would have failed.

After visiting missions in Italy, Switzerland, Germany, and the British Isles, they sailed for home, arriving on Christmas Eve, 1921. These two men who had been as one during this eventful year, then made a complete report to President Heber J. Grant, and received an honorable release.

On January 15, 1936, President McKay was again sent to visit the Hawaiian Mission, and since has visited nearly all the missions of the world.
