Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 9

The European Mission

David O. McKay is one of the most effective missionaries the Church has had in this dispensation. His knowledge of the gospel, his sincerity, his courage to stand for his beliefs, his sympathetic understanding of people and their problems, his keen sense of humor, his charming personality, his exemplary life, his noble appearance, and his humility appeal alike to the great and the lowly of the earth.

When he was called by President Heber J. Grant late in 1922 to assume the presidency of the European Mission it seemed as though all the experiences of his life thus far had led up to this momentous assignment.

His early missionary experiences in Scotland, his work with young people at the Weber Stake Academy, his success in Sunday School work, and his world tour with Elder Hugh J. Cannon had all played influential roles in preparing him for this new challenge.

With his wife and five children President McKay left the Ogden railroad depot on November 8, 1922. Before sailing for Europe he wrote from the east, "Railroad officials at Chicago, Buffalo, New York, and Montreal, extended every possible courtesy, and their kind consideration contributed largely to our pleasant and comfortable journey across the continent."

After the family landed in England President McKay wrote that ". . . among the passengers aboard the S. S. Montcalm was Sir George McLaren Brown, European manager of the Canadian Pacific Railroad Company, through whose recognition and attention on the boat, our voyage across the Atlantic was made the most delightful of the many I had taken within the last two years."

The day after they landed in Liverpool President and Mrs. McKay attended their first meeting. This was one of some 525 they were to hold during the two years they spent in the mission field. They traveled in that time some 2,000 miles and visited every mission except South Africa, addressing more than 7,000 people. During their travels they also reorganized the French Mission and before leaving Europe had it flourishing with new interest aroused and new members being added.

The two outstanding accomplishments of his term as European Mission President were in overcoming the insidious attacks on the Church by British newspapers and in extending the assignment of missionary work to members of the Church as well as the full-time missionaries.

For some time prior to 1922 the newspapers of Great Britain had been publishing derogatory articles about the Church, and had refused to print refutations written by the missionaries or resident members of the Church. After studying the newspapers carefully, President McKay decided that to continue this effort would be futile, and so he embarked on a new course of action.

Without giving any information to reporters, President McKay wrote directly to the editors of the papers involved in the attacks, beginning with John Bull, one of the oldest and best weekly newspapers in Great Britain. His long letter appealed to English sportsmanship and love of fair play, and requested that only the truth be told about the Latter-day Saints instead of the untrue stories which had hitherto been published. To the amazement of all, the next issue of the newspaper contained a large headline which read "A DANIEL COME TO JUDGMENT," and under this caption appeared the complete text of President McKay's letter. Not another article in opposition to the Church appeared in that paper during the following two years. Similar results were achieved with the other newspapers to which President McKay wrote, and the Church enjoyed a respite from this unfair persecution.

In one town in Wales where members had been meeting in a public building the Town Council decided to prohibit any further Mormon assemblies. When informed of the matter, President McKay wrote a persuasive letter addressed directly to the Council and was effective in stopping this action against the Church. He was also effective in achieving better relations for the Church in Scotland.

The second area of significant achievement was his plan that every member of the Church should be a missionary. He traveled throughout the European mission appealing to the saints in each conference to accept the missionary work and pledge himself or herself to bring one new member into the Church each year. He suggested that the new convert might be a relative, friend, working companion, or even a casual acquaintance or a stranger. The result was a great increase in membership in the mission during 1923, exceeding that of previous years by a large margin. This same appeal for "every member a missionary" also proved successful throughout the Church after President McKay became President in 1951.

When he returned to Utah with his family in 1924 President McKay made a full report to the First Presidency, and among other things indicated the following:

Street meetings are now held without molestation in nearly every one of the fifteen conferences, and not one interruption has occurred in a hall meeting during the last two years. Attendance at the conferences has increased from twenty to one-hundred per cent.

Leading newspapers now refuse to print scandalous articles about the Mormons. The real need in Great Britain today is better meeting places. If the sum that we are now spending for rent were applied wisely in building societies, many branches might, in a few years, own their own Church buildings.

He commented favorably upon the sympathetic and able assistance given the Church by the ministers and consuls of the United States to whom it was necessary on occasion to make appeals in times of difficulty.

His report also contained a recommendation that the British Mission presidency be separated from the presidency of the European Mission. He stated that the duties and responsibilities of the British Mission were of such importance as to require the undivided and constant attention of the very ablest men in the Church.

He suggested, also, that missions be visited more frequently by members of the Council of the Twelve, adding that generally stakes were far better prepared to go without such official visits than were the missions.

Like all other returning missionaries he concluded, "This mission has been one of the most pleasant and worthwhile experiences of our lives."
