Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 10

A White House Conference

In 1930, a White House Conference on Child Health and Protection was called by President Herbert Hoover, and, by invitation, President David O. McKay was in attendance.

The objectives, as stated by President Hoover, were "to study the present status and well-being of the children of the United States and its possessions; to report what is being done for them; to recommend what ought to be done and how to do it."

The preliminary work done in preparation for the conference was of the highest order, and required sixteen months by one hundred sixty committees, made up of the leaders in the fields of child health and welfare. The work was divided into four sections, Medical Service, Public Health Administration, Education and Training, and The Handicapped.

President Hoover, in addressing the three thousand participants of the conference, said, "Let no one believe that these are questions which should not stir a nation; that they are below the dignity of statesmen or governments. If we could have but one generation of properly born, trained, educated, and healthy children, a thousand other problems of government would vanish."

The objectives outlined by the leaders of the conference were probably the most comprehensive and ambitious ever devised for child welfare by any nation. They included spiritual and moral training, personality development, pre-natal, natal, and post-natal care; health protection in all its aspects throughout childhood; wholesome physical and mental training; better schools from all angles; protection from physical danger, moral hazards, and diseases; universal education along the most sensible lines for the individual preparation for parenthood; care of the handicapped to insure independence as far as possible; intelligent handling of the delinquent; adequate standards of living; supplementing the home in all phases of child development; and providing adequate local organizations for carrying out the welfare plans.

The program was prepared and presented by the best qualified men and women available in the nation. The work of each department was done by capable leaders, and comprised a long-term plan of procedure destined to influence for good the entire lives of all people.

On completion of the White House Conference, state organizations were perfected for carrying out its plans. The Utah organization was effected at a meeting called by Governor George Dern, February 1, 1931, at which President McKay was appointed chairman of the state executive committee. Utah was the third state in the union to perfect such an organization. It was astonishing how widely the appeal was accepted throughout the entire state. A committee for community cooperation was organized, in addition to those originally active. A partial list of those accepting responsibility follows: Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, service clubs, social welfare leagues, Utah Federation of Labor, Utah State Kindergarten, Primary Association, Utah Manufacturer's Association, Utah Farm Bureau, Red Cross, Utah Federation of Women's Clubs, fraternal organizations, life insurance companies, transportation companies, motion picture houses, Forest Service, fish and game associations, Utah Press Association, Utah Tuberculosis Association, and Utah Education Association.

All Utah committees were filled with outstanding men and women of the state as members. The work was planned, surveys and reports made, and recommendations submitted. Local groups were organized for carrying out the work under the supervision of county committees. Reports were compiled in a single volume, which represented a mass of information never before available for study and planned activity for community benefits in the state.

With this start, it appeared that the state was on the way to great achievements in child welfare. All other states were also organized for carrying out the program. But the plans were altered when a change of administration occurred in Washington, and an entirely new plan of social activity came into being. The careful study and planning of the conference was forgotten and the organization which was set up never functioned in the manner intended. The data is still available in the combined reports, even though it was never used to any extent.
