Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 11

The Utah Centennial Celebration

In every calling or assignment which has been his, President David O. McKay has given it his best in leadership and organizational ability. His achievements have always exceeded those which he was expected to do. Such was certainly the case when he served as chairman of the Utah Centennial Celebration in 1947.

Initial steps toward a celebration commemorating the entrance of the Mormon pioneers into Salt Lake Valley on July 24, 1847, were made in the Utah State Legislature in 1938.

On April 1, 1938, members of the Twenty-Second Legislature passed Resolution No. 1, recommending the appointment of a committee ". . . to investigate the feasibility of holding a World's Fair in the State of Utah during the year 1947, and to report the findings to the Twenty-Third Legislature."

As a result of this action, Henry H. Blood, then governor of Utah, asked President McKay if he would chairman the committee for the study. Governor Blood then wrote to seventy-five of the outstanding men in the state, asking them to serve on the committee. His letter said in part:

The purpose is a worthy one. The event which the centennary will celebrate has a tremendous significance for this state, this western region, and for the nation. It devolves on this state to assume leadership in arranging appropriate recognition of the anniversary. To devise an effective and practicable plan involves many problems. To make proper recommendations to the Legislature as to how the desirable objective may best be accomplished seems to call for a study by a thoroughly representative group of leaders from all parts of the state, and from all walks of life.

I am therefore asking a number of persons to act on this committee, under the chairmanship of President David O. McKay, of Salt Lake City, who has consented to assume this responsibility.

The Legislature appropriated no funds to meet the expenses of the committee. I feel justified to ask you to serve because of the great public importance of the project. I do not believe that the financial burden imposed on you need be very great; I know that the advantage to the state will be large.

After consultation with Chairman McKay, it was decided he would issue a call for the first meeting. That call is enclosed.

Sincerely yours,

/s/ Henry H. Blood.

At the first meeting of the committee the work was divided into nine sub-committees, and a chairman was appointed for each of these groups. An executive committee was also formed to correlate the work of the sub-committees, and to prepare the final report for the governor and the legislature.

The committee's work went before the Utah Legislature in 1939, and legislation was enacted setting up the 1947 Utah Centennial Commission. Those appointed by Governor Blood to the commission included President McKay, chairman; Gus P. Backman, executive secretary; A. Hamer Reiser, corresponding secretary, and members, Samuel O. Bennion, F. P. Champ, Delbert M. Draper, A. O. Ellett, John F. Fitzpatrick, Ward C. Holbrook, James A. Howell, Rosella F. Larkin, Donald P. Lloyd, Charles R. Mabey, Nephi L. Morris, Mary K. Mower, I. A. Smoot, and John M. Wallace.

Letters from the Commission were sent first to all civic organizations of the state asking for recommendations of scenic or historic spots where improvements or developments should be made in anticipation of the centennial observance.

With the beginning of World War II the plans for a world's fair celebration had to be abandoned, but the idea of a state-wide observance featuring the dramatic history, spiritual traditions, scenic beauties, and distinctive cultural accomplishments of the area began to take shape.

As the plans progressed, President McKay sent a letter to many leaders throughout the state, outlining the programs that were underway. From this letter it is evident that he had caught the vision of a great event which would reach into all parts of the state, and those portions of surrounding states which were settled by the Mormon pioneers.

His letter is as follows:

Though Salt Lake City will be the hub of interest from which the centennial program of events and attractions will radiate, every beauty spot and point of absorbing interest in the state will be highlighted at some time during the centennial, and will have a share in the attraction of visitors and participants to the celebration.

Already, with enthusiasm and cooperation characteristic of the people of Utah, state-wide beautification projects are being formulated. Even the most isolated communities have caught the spirit and are busy remodeling, landscaping, and planting public and private property. Much of this work has been centered around churches and other public buildings, as a result of the work of an active department of beautification set up by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Utah abounds in majestic mountain, valley, lake, and desert scenery. Delightful recreational areas exist in abundance throughout the state. It is the purpose of the Centennial Commission to make these attractions easily, economically, and comfortably accessible to everyone by means of a system of excellent highways and comfortable lodging accommodations.

A great variety of recreational interests will be served. The already famous canyons of Cache, Weber, Salt Lake, and Utah Counties, and Zion, Bryce, Cedar Breaks, Wayne Wonderland, and in the San Juan and Uintah areas, will be enjoyed as never before. Camping, hiking, hunting, fishing, horse-back riding, will add still more to the variety offered. Swimming, golf, and other sports will be available. National athletic events and sports attractions will be sought for Utah for the Centennial year.

The brilliant and ever-changing pageantry of Utah scenery, with its flowering beauty of cloud, sunlight, and shadow, upon the wide range of form and color effects, will delight photographers and artists who find joy in capturing nature in repose or in dramatic mood.

All this Utahns plan to offer to their Centennial guests as a prelude and background for their understanding and appreciation of the inspiration which the pioneers of one hundred years ago caught from the land of beauty which was to be their home.

In this setting Utahns hope to have their Centennial re-create something of the pioneer purpose, community life and atmosphere, and by these means help their guests to recapture the spirit of the frontiers as it was expressed in the culture and life of the people of Utah in the early years after 1847.

To support this latter purpose, pioneer art, music, colonization, industry, and achievements will be appropriately featured. Museums, exhibits, pageantry, and dramatic presentations will be employed. The present facilities and resources of the state, expressive of the cultural interests of the people, such as their art centers, dramatic groups, and musical organizations, will play a major part. The organ and choir of the Salt Lake Tabernacle, and smaller but none-the-less beautiful facilities of musical groups in other towns in the state will have important places in the Centennial.

This state-wide Centennial Celebration will achieve its purpose if Utah's guests in 1947 partake of the spiritual serenity, strength of purpose, exaltation, and peace, which the pioneers experienced as they set to work to build their homes in the wilderness of natural beauty which is Utah; and if out of it their visitors can achieve the spiritual response and "peace that passeth understanding."

/s/ David O. McKay

Chairman

Utah Centennial Commission

At the general conference of the Church on April 7, 1946, President McKay delivered a major address on the plans of the Centennial Commission, outlining some of the preparations already underway for historical pageants, musical, dramatic, and educational programs, and athletic and sports events.

He said, in part:

Besides the best that home talent can produce, it is proposed to bring to the state outstanding educational and entertainment features which normally could not be presented in communities of our state-symphony orchestras, stars of stage and screen, Metropolitan Opera singers, sports events of the type our state normally could not finance. It is hoped that we might have these and other cultural entertainments that will be offered, not only in Salt Lake City, but also in other cities where large crowds can be accommodated. All towns and counties in the state are urged to unite in promoting this commemorative celebration.

Indicative of the detailed work of every division of the commission in preparation for the great celebration is this newspaper report from the Deseret News of November 14, 1946:

Some three hundred community planners and beautification workers are expected to attend the state-wide conference of the beautification division of the Centennial Commission, Saturday at the Newhouse Hotel.

At a general session, the five state chairmen of subcommittees, Gordon Weggeland, public relations; John D. Rice, clean-up and paint-up; A. B. Paulsen, state parks; George H. Smeath, landscaping; and Raymond J. Ashton, planning and zoning, will speak.

L. Deming Tilton, noted planning consultant of the University of California, Berkeley, will be guest speaker. Subcommittees will hold clinic sessions during the afternoon.

A general session will be held in connection with an evening banquet, at which President David O. McKay, chairman of the Centennial Commission, will preside. Carl Feiss, director of the School of Planning and Architecture, Denver University, will be principal speaker.

Each of the accredited committee members attending the session will receive a working manual containing complete and detailed outlines for their work in complete renovation, house-cleaning, and beautification of the state for the centennial celebration in 1947.

When the momentous year finally came, Governor Herbert B. Maw, in an opening message to the state legislature on January 14, 1947, said in part:

At last our Centennial year has arrived. The Centennial Commission under the chairmanship of President David O. McKay and the managership of Mr. Gus P. Backman has done a magnificent job of planning. Committees, made up of hundreds of leading citizens in every part of the state, are looking forward to events for the entire year of 1947 which will provide culture, education, inspiration, and amusement for all of us. In fact, it will prove to be one of the outstanding celebrations ever undertaken by any state-and rightly so, for it is in commemoration of one of the major events in the history of the nation.

Two days after the governor's message was delivered, the coronation of Utah's Centennial Queen, Miss Colleen Robinson of American Fork took place at the State Capitol. Forming the royal party with Miss Robinson were Mary Louise Gardner of Spanish Fork and Marie Burnett of Salt Lake City. More than 5,000 persons attended the elaborate and beautiful ceremony which was the first major event of the centennial year.

The official opening of centennial events was scheduled for May 1, and on that day a program was held honoring Utah's living pioneers. A reception was held for them at Hotel Utah, at 6:45 p.m., followed by a special meeting in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. Appropriate addresses and musical selections were presented in honor of these first citizens of the state. Each was given a pioneer certificate, indicating arrival in the valley before the coming of the railroad in 1869.

Earlier that same evening there had been a flag-raising ceremony at the State Capitol where Governor Maw and President McKay had both spoken, and then witnessed members of the U.S. Marine Corps raise a flag on historic Ensign Peak north of the Capitol where it was to remain during the entire time of the celebration. At 10 p.m., new floodlights were turned on to illuminate the Brigham Young Monument, and President McKay and Salt Lake Mayor Earl J. Glade each spoke briefly to the assembled crowd.

From this auspicious beginning there were instituted in every part of the state enthusiastic celebrations seldom equalled by the people of any community.

An inspiring pageant, The Message of the Ages, by Bertha A. Kleinman, opened May 5 in the Tabernacle and continued for twenty-five evening performances. It was witnessed by 125,000 people. There were six hundred in the cast, with a chorus of two hundred, elaborate costumes, (many brought from Chicago), and a plastic screen on which scenery was projected from behind the stage. This centennial production, subsidized by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, was a magnificent forerunner of all that followed in quick succession.

On May 15, 16, and 17, the Centennial Commission and the University of Utah Theatre, presented Judith Evelyn in Joan of Lorraine, by Maxwell Anderson, in Kingsbury Hall. The production was directed by C. Lowell Lees, and the cast that supported Miss Evelyn was made up of twenty local players. For the three-day run, enthusiastic audiences crowded the hall, and there were many disappointed because they could not gain admission.

On May 28, 29, 30, and 31, the Utah Centennial Commission and University Theatre, presented Orson Welles and his all-star cast in William Shakespeare's Macbeth. This was considered one of the rarest dramatic opportunities of Utah's theatre history. "But Not Goodbye," a Broadway hit, was presented by The University Players, under the direction of Dr. Lees, as a centennial feature.

Probably the most outstanding, original, musical play ever to be produced in the west was the spectacular Promised Valley, given at the University of Utah Stadium, July 21, to August 9, every evening except Sundays. It was written at the request of the Centennial Commission, and sponsored by them. The book and lyrics were by Arnold Sundgaard, of New York, and the music by Crawford Gates. The dances were by Helen Tamaris and Virginia Tanner, the musical direction by Jay Blackton, and the entire production directed by Dr. Lees. Promised Valley was written to portray the spirit motivating the pioneer migration from Winter Quarters to Salt Lake City.

Newspapers were generous in their publicity of the production, both before the opening night and in the reviews that followed.

The Salt Lake Telegram reported on July 19, 1947:

With more than a year of intensive preparation behind it, Promised Valley, centennial musical drama, was ready for its premiere Monday night in the University of Utah stadium bowl.

The play which will cost approximately $150,000, will hold performances every evening except Sunday until August 9. In addition to the initial cost, improvements have been made in the form of a $20,000 transportable stage, a $10,000 sound system and a $12,000 lighting system. Another $10,000 has been donated to the University of Utah stadium for improvement of seating facilities and general construction. The new improvements and changes will remain in the stadium after the show closes.

Stars Alfred Drake, Jet McDonald, Barton Mennan, and Nellie Fisher, have been working eight hours a day on rehearsal since their arrival in June. Helen Tamaris, noted choreographer, selected twenty candidates from the Salt Lake City applicants to fill ballet roles in January. Returning from London in June, she added ten more artists.

The total cast of the production will number 225, including orchestra, choruses, ballet, and leading players, and the show will be one of the largest outdoor attractions of its kind ever to be exhibited.

Following the opening night performance, the Deseret News said in a review, July 22:

Promised Valley is almost unbelievable. Not even the richest phrases of a Hollywood press agent could do justice to the great centennial production that opened before an audience of more than five thousand last night. You can go to the show expecting to see a spectacular Broadway musical, and actually see one.

During the eighteen-night run, highest praise was given by critics and audiences alike, and the memory of a thrilling, artistic, historical, musical drama will live always in the minds of the thousands who were fortunate to witness it.

The Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir gave brilliant performances of The Creation, The Restoration, and Elijah during the celebration, and the Utah Symphony Orchestra gave special concerts in cities and counties throughout the state. A light operetta, Blossom Time, was presented in roadshow performances all over the state.

On June 2 the Centennial Exposition at the state fair-grounds was opened formally for a sixteen-week exhibition. Queen Colleen Robinson snipped a green satin ribbon across the south gate, and Governor Maw escorted her and her attendants to a nearby stage where the festivities began. The governor and President McKay both congratulated the fairgrounds committee for their work in preparing the grounds for the opening-day crowd of more than 7,000. President McKay noted the addition of cement walks, new landscaping, and many general improvements.

Twenty-four of Utah's twenty-nine counties prepared exhibits which were housed in a newly remodeled Industrial Building at the fairgrounds. Displays were also sent from Colorado, Wyoming, Idaho, Nevada, San Francisco, and Los Angeles.

An editorial in the Salt Lake Telegram of June 3, 1947 indicated some of the work done at the fairgrounds:

A gigantic facelifting job has been done at the fairgrounds to make it into a worthy center of Utah's Centennial Celebration. All drives and walks have been paved. Low cement brick walls have been built to enclose patios where there are comfortable seats for exposition visitors. The grounds are all landscaped, with lawn, shrubs, and flowers. All the buildings have been painted, and there has been much interior remodeling and redecorating. This was a permanent contribution by the Centennial Commission. While the midway attractions, Holiday on Ice, light opera performances, Walter Follies, rodeo, auto races, etc., will be of interest, the major emphasis is still the presentation of one hundred years of Utah progress.

The Centennial Exposition is a big project. It is not by any means just another state fair. It will continue to run until September 20, sixteen weeks of interesting exhibitions, entertainment, contests, stock shows, art exhibits, music auditions, floral displays and many other attractions.

The million-dollar show, One Hundred Years of American Painting, opened at the fairgrounds June 30, and continued through July 29. Its gorgeous paintings received a warm welcome by Utahns. Students in schools throughout the state received special invitations to enjoy the rare pieces of art included in the exhibit.

Throughout the state, in every county and in most cities and towns, individual celebrations were held, and whenever possible, President McKay made it a point to be on hand for these.

One of the most colorful spectacles on the centennial sports program was held at Pine View Lake in Ogden Canyon, on July 4, and 5. It was directed by the Ogden Pine View Yacht Club. Fifteen thousand visitors viewed the races during the two-day celebration.

The historical pageant, A Link in a Mighty Empire, written and produced by Mr. and Mrs. M. W. Smith, and presented at the Sevier County Fair Grounds, at Richfield, Utah, was sponsored by that county's centennial committee.

July 15 to 19, marked the date of the Black Hawk encampment at Heber, Wasatch County, which was witnessed by thousands of visitors.

Santaquin's contribution was The Centennial Town Frolic, a two-day celebration under the direction of Mrs. R. J. Peterson, centennial chairman. A four-day celebration was held in Wayne County, The Rainbow Land. One of the many features was a pageant depicting the Wayne County pioneers.

Pleasant Grove, Utah County, adapted the annual Strawberry Festival to the centennial celebration.

Ogden's Loyalty Fete, with eleven thousand students marching in parade, was given in honor of approximately fifty Weber County pioneers, who, with President McKay, witnessed the spectacle from a grandstand erected for their convenience.

Smithfield's annual Health Day, was also adapted to the centennial theme, with President McKay as the principal speaker.

Hyrum, Cache County, dated its celebration for July 19 to 24. Beaver County's was on July 22. Spanish Fork's rodeo was also on July 22.

Saga of Sanpete, historical outdoor pageant, presented August 29 and 30 at the Sanpete County Fair Grounds, was dedicated to the Mormon pioneers.

Davis County Days included a unique parade shown in every major center in the county. The Salt Lake County Fair, at Murray, with a parade of centennial events, commenced August 25. Summit County held its celebration at Coalville August 28, 29, and 30, and Duchesne County at Roosevelt, on August 30.

Over the Labor Day holiday, vacationers had a choice of three celebrations, Bountiful's Cantaloupe Day, American Fork's Steel Day, and Payson's Golden Onion Day, the latter being extended to a five-day event for the centennial year. Brigham City's annual Peach Day started September 4. The Grand County Fair was scheduled in Moab for September 11 to 13. Iron County's celebration was held at Parowan September 15 to 19. In the south-western part of the state, the Deseret Rodeo, with honest-to-goodness cowboys, was held September 22 and 23. Richfield sponsored the Southern Utah Junior Livestock Show on September 3, 4, and 5.

These are but a few of the outstanding events sponsored locally and illustrating the extent to which the centennial celebration reached the remotest corners of the state, uniting as one the descendants of the pioneers who bequeathed a noble heritage to the sons and daughters of this vast western area.

The most important week of the centennial was that of July 24. On Sunday, July 20, President McKay delivered an address, Faith Triumphant, over the Columbia Broadcasting System's Church of the Air program, in which he paid tribute to the Mormon pioneers. Many congratulatory letters poured into his office from near-by and distant parts of the country following the address.

Tuesday, July 22, marked the date of arrival of the Sons of Utah Pioneers' Trek, from Nauvoo, Illinois, to Salt Lake City. Re-enacting drama of a century ago, 148 Sons of Utah Pioneers Centennial Trekkers followed the trail of their forefathers across more than half a continent. Along the 1,400 mile trail, spectators lined the streets of every town to watch the novel covered-wagon-topped and oxen-drawn cars—an excellent replica of the original wagon train of 1847. Elder Spencer W. Kimball, of the Council of the Twelve, who accompanied the caravan all the way, said: "Citizens all along the trail, from Nauvoo to Salt Lake City, will have a higher regard for Utah and her people as a result of this trip."

President McKay met the company at Fort Bridger, Wyoming, and addressed them at their last encampment. President George Albert Smith and Governor Maw, met the caravan at Henefer, and led them into the city, where an appropriate welcome was given them.

Members of the Sons of the Utah Pioneers taking part in this unique contribution to the centennial celebration, made the trip at their own expense.

On July 24, at 9:30 a.m., the great This is the Place Monument was dedicated. The monument was commenced under the direction of President Heber J. Grant, the Monument Commission carrying on and completing their great task under the leadership of President George Albert Smith, who presided at the dedicatory exercises. President McKay addressed the fifty thousand people in attendance at the ceremony.

At 12:15 p.m., a formal luncheon honoring the Utah pioneers was served at the Hotel Utah, ushering in the use of the Centennial Stamp. Joseph J. Lawler, the Third Assistant Postmaster General, and R. E. Fellers, Stamp Superintendent of the United States Post Office Department, from Washington, D. C., were present for this occasion. Mr. Lawler lauded the hardy Mormon pioneers who elected to settle in the new-found freedom of the far west. He said that in selecting a design for the new Utah stamp, the Post Office had endeavored to bring a motif symbolic of that memorable and historic scene of the first wagon train arriving on this spot, July 24, 1847.

President McKay pointed out that the Centennial Stamp had done much to publicize Utah, and commended the Post Office officials for issuing a most appropriate commemorative stamp. Already half a million stamp collectors had requested stamps. Three million stamps were issued to Utah for the Centennial, and 125 million stamps had been printed. This was one of the largest and most popular issues the Post Office Department had witnessed.

At 4 p.m. that day the Immigrant Pioneer Plaque in the State Capitol was unveiled. A message of congratulation was received from President Harry S Truman, and he was sent a special centennial medal, which he acknowledged with appreciation.

On July 23, at 8:30 a.m., the long anticipated parade swept magnificently through down town Salt Lake before a thrilled crowd of two hundred thousand people.

Heralded by a flight of army pursuit planes, the giant street pageant swung into its march and for two hours kept a firm grip on the crowd which lined the sixteen blocks of march. More than seventy colorful floats, supported by more than twenty bands and some four thousand marching Boy Scouts, made it the longest parade in the city's century-long history.

Brigadier General J. Wallace West, state adjutant and marshall of the day, led the parade, followed by the color guard and the United States Marine Band from San Diego, California. They were followed by official cars carrying Governor and Mrs. Maw, the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Mayors Lowell Horton, of Nauvoo, Illinois, and Earl J. Glade, of Salt Lake City, and The Centennial Commission. Then came the Boy Scouts, interspersed with Utah high school bands. The first division of floats drew expressions of appreciation from the massed onlookers.

Fourteen horsewomen in colorful Spanish costumes, followed by the Pasadena City College Tournament of Roses Band, brightened the marching column. Twenty nations of the world were represented by some of Utah's loveliest girls, dressed in elaborate national costumes, each carrying the nation's flag.

Centennial queen, Colleen Robinson, dressed in her coronation robes, and seated on her sego lily throne, with her two attendants, brought murmurs of approval. Then followed floats depicting every phase of Utah's one hundred years of history, interspersed by colorful bands.

The parade was repeated on July 24, at 6 p.m. The Salt Lake Telegram on July 25, said: "It was indeed a great parade—one that not only outranked anything hitherto presented in this state, but one which also ranks well with any parade ever presented in the West."

A Deseret News editorial, September 8, 1947, said:

"Although the Centennial year still has a part of its course to run, it has become plain to us here in Utah, and to many people the world over, that no people has ever had before the kind and caliber of celebration that has graced our efforts here in these mountain valleys.

"To President David O. McKay and the Centennial Commission, to Governor Herbert B. Maw, to Gus Backman, and to a host of others too numerous to mention, the people of Utah owe a vote of deep appreciation for the planning and management of the thousands of special Centennial events. The good that has come to Utah and the West as a result of their planning and leadership is difficult to estimate."

"No state has ever received greater publicity through an undertaking," says a Salt Lake Chamber of Commerce announcement, "than has the State of Utah through its Centennial."

Nearly every major magazine in the country has told the story of our history and achievements. Newspapers everywhere have done likewise. Hours of radio network time have been devoted to Brigham Young and his followers, and to the things being done here today to memorialize their achievements.

Utah has gained much from her centennial. Our greatest rewards, however, will come through the years as we practice what has passed before our eyes this year in one grand panorama.

The Salt Lake Tribune of July 30, 1947, carried the following: "Rodney C. Richardson, Coordinator of California centennial affairs, came to Salt Lake City to study Utah's Centennial, which, he said, was conceded to have 'the best planning in the nation. Lack of commercialism is one of the outstanding features of the Utah Centennial. It has been a true historical celebration.'"

Mr. Richardson expressed great appreciation for the way Centennial officials have worked with cities and counties to extend the celebration to all corners of the state. He said that an astonishing job had been done in getting organizations to work together.

Many other states wrote for plans and other literature of the celebration.

When all reports were in, the results showed many permanent improvements left in different parts of the state, besides the ones already noted. Instead of a deficit, as is often the case, at the close of the celebration, the Centennial Commission returned to the state the half million dollars appropriated by the Legislature as a revolving fund. This was a procedure entirely unique in the annals of finance.

Saturday evening, September 20, the Exposition gates were closed, after a summer-long tribute to the pioneers, emphasizing the theme of the Centennial—"One hundred years of Empire building." On October 15, the entire program ended.

During all these months of strenuous work, President McKay had kept up his Church duties and responsibilities, making a double load for him to carry. He did it in his usual cheerful and efficient manner, making a success of both.

In the Salt Lake Tribune of Sunday, September 21, 1947, there was a report of a letter in which President McKay praised sincerely the men and women whose indefatigable labors contributed so much to the success of the Centennial. He wrote: "Perhaps never before in the history of our state have so many people willingly, energetically, and ably, united to accomplish a single purpose. Thank you one and all for your loyalty to a great cause. Your masterful efforts in planning and in execution have been a worthy tribute to the pioneers, and have brought credit and honor to Utah and her surrounding commonwealths."

Then, commencing with the governor and legislature, he mentioned all committees and individuals, county committees and Church committees who worked so valiantly for the success of the great celebration. No one was omitted from this letter of generous and sincere appreciation.

That President McKay's efforts in heading the planning and administration of the details of the celebration were appreciated, is evident from the many tributes received. A few of these are quoted:

"Dear President McKay:

I spent an hour last Saturday in reading the General Report of the 1947 Utah Centennial Commission. The work of the Commission was ideally well-done, artistically and financially. The good results will be felt for years to come.

This is just a word of congratulation to a man, yourself, who has done more for the public welfare, within and without the Church, than any person should be called upon to do. May life in health and strength long wait upon you.

Cordially your friend and brother,

John A. Widtsoe."

"Dear President:

This is to acknowledge with sincere thanks your wonderful letter of December 13. I can only say in reply that the privilege of having served under your direction for the last two and a half years, provided the greatest happiness I have ever experienced in my business life. I only hope that at sometime in the very immediate future, I shall have the privilege of again serving under your direction.

The success of the Centennial was possible only through your great leadership, and the unselfish work done by all of the members of the Centennial Commission. It has been a real joy to me to have been associated with these fine people who served so efficiently with you.

Sincerely Yours,

Gus P. Backman."

Salt Lake City, Utah, Nov. 3, 1949.

David O. McKay, Chairman,

Utah Centennial Commission,

Salt Lake City, Utah.

Dear President McKay:

It was indeed with mixed feelings that I received your letter of Oct. 25, as the last official communication of the Utah Centennial Commission. It is with keen regret that I note the passage into history of the Centennial Commission; and yet, at the same time, I have a feeling of real pride in having been permitted to take part in the great work of the Commission.

No state has yet presented a finer or more artistic Centennial Celebration Program, and no state can even approach the financial handling of this great program. The physical improvements made throughout the state, the spiritual awakening, the community pride, to say nothing of the tremendous national publicity gained for the state and its people, can be marked up as a credit to the Centennial that will live and enrich the state and its people for many years to come.

The greatest personal satisfaction to me, however, was the knowledge of working with you, and under your inspirational leadership. To you must go the individual credit for the brilliant success of this grand undertaking.

Personally, I know some of the heartaches, disappointments, and obstructions, that you encountered, but never once did you falter or give up that radiant hope and enthusiasm which you imparted to every individual connected with the project. It was a fine job, and I am proud and happy indeed, to have been connected with it. I salute you as a great leader, and would be willing, and feel honored, to be chosen to follow you in any undertaking.

With all good wishes to you, and with my warm personal regard, I am,

Yours Very Sincerely,

J. F. Fitzpatrick.

At a meeting of the Centennial Commission held January 2, 1948, a scroll expressing appreciation of President McKay's outstanding leadership as Chairman of the Centennial Commission, together with a gold fountain pen, were presented by their representative, Judge James A. Howell, who stated:

Apart from the consciousness of a task well done, your reward, Sir, for this outstanding service you have thus rendered, will be the practically universal satisfaction that the celebration you have led is as worthy of the pioneers whom it honored, as it could be. However, the committee felt that you should have some memento that you can always keep as a commemorative of the fine association which has been established between the members and you as we have worked together throughout the years of this common cause.

This scroll symbolizes the sentiments I have endeavored to express and which is signed by members of the commission, and also this gold pen, which typifies in the purity of the metal, the purity of the affection which is ours for you. The inscription on the scroll reads: "In appreciation of David O. McKay, from co-workers on the Utah Centennial Commission. To know you is a joy, to work with you is a privilege, and to be guided by you is an inspiration. There is no finer man."

In President McKay's response he said:

It has been truly said that there is no thought which cannot be expressed, but that there are feelings too deep for expression. I know this is true. This is one of those moments in my life in which I sense the inadequacy of words to express the feelings of my heart.

The tribute you have given me comes wholly unexpected and uninvited, and I say that sincerely. Every word of commendation in your beautiful, impressive presentation, I should like to apply to each member of this Board. All you have said to me, I want to say to you, because you are the men and women who have made this Centennial Celebration successful, and have carried out the high ideals to which Judge Howell has referred.

Nine years have passed since Governor Blood and the State Legislature appointed this Centennial Commission, and assigned to me the task of chairmanship. At that time, I knew some of you intimately; others of you I had not met, and I knew you only by reputation. I knew little about your ability, and nothing about your innermost feelings and thoughts; but I want to tell you that tonight I can say with all my soul, I love you, and I esteem as one of the greatest experiences of my life the opportunity I have had to associate with you on this Centennial Commission.

I believe we can truly say that no celebration of events in the history of Utah has been supported more unitedly by the people of the state than has our Centennial Celebration. The counties have united; the people have reflected unity.

Letters of congratulation came to President McKay from every member of the Commission, from mission presidents, from chambers of commerce, from governors of states, from organizations, local and national, from the Utah State Legislature, and from hundreds of citizens.
