Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 12

A Solemn Assembly

The year 1951 was momentous in the life of David O. McKay.

As plans were being completed for the April Conference of the Church that year, President George Albert Smith's health weakened, and his doctors advised that he rest in bed. Then his condition took a turn for the worse, and death came at 7:27 p.m. on Wednesday, April 4, his 81st birthday anniversary.

President Smith's counselors, President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and President McKay, carried on with the sessions of the general conference, while plans were made for President Smith's funeral services on Saturday, April 7.

Following the impressive funeral service and the regular Sunday sessions of the conference, a Solemn Assembly was held on Monday, April 9 at 10 a.m. in the Salt Lake Tabernacle for the sustaining of a new Quorum of the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

The arrangements for the Solemn Assembly were the same as those that had been held since John Taylor was sustained as President of the Church in 1889. The entire lower floor of the Tabernacle was reserved for bearers of the priesthood, and they were seated in quorums. They voted in their respective groups.

Before the names were presented, the vast audience was reminded that, as individuals, they were free to express themselves for or against any one named for the offices to be filled. A sincere spirit of love pervaded the assembly, and a unanimous vote was offered in sustaining David Oman McKay as Prophet, Seer, and Revelator, and the ninth President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Sustained as counselors in the First Presidency were President Stephen L Richards and President J. Reuben Clark, Jr.

After this unanimous vote of confidence, President McKay told the members of the Church assembled in the Tabernacle:

My beloved brethren and sisters, fellow workers:

I wish it were within my power of expression to let you know what my true feelings are on this momentous occasion. I would wish that you might look into my heart and see there for yourselves just what these feelings are.

It is just one week ago today that the realization came to me that this responsibility of leadership would probably fall upon my shoulders. I received word that President George Albert Smith had taken a turn for the worse, and that the doctors felt that the end was not far off. I hastened to his bedside, and with his weeping daughters, son, and other kinfolk, I entered his sick room. For the first time he failed to recognize me.

Then I had to accept the realization that the Lord had chosen not to answer our pleadings as we would have had them answered, and that he was going to take him home to himself. Thankfully, he rallied again later in the day. Several days preceding that visit, as President Clark and I were discussing problems of import pertaining to the Church, he, ever solicitous of the welfare of the Church, and of my feelings, would say, "The responsibility will be yours to make this decision," but each time I would refuse to face what, to him, seemed a reality.

When that reality came, as I tell you, I was deeply moved. And I am today, and pray that I may, even though inadequately, be able to tell you how weighty this responsibility seems.

The Lord has said that the three presiding high priests, chosen by the body, appointed and ordained to this office of presidency, are to be "upheld by the confidence, faith, and prayers of the Church." No one can preside over this Church without first being in tune with the head of the Church, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. He is our head. This is his Church. Without his divine guidance and constant inspiration, we cannot succeed. With his guidance, with his inspiration, we cannot fail.

Next to that as a sustaining potent power, comes the confidence, faith, prayers, and united support of the Church.

I pledge to you that I shall do my best to live to merit the companionship of the Holy Spirit, and pray here in your presence that my counselors and I "may indeed be partakers of the divine spirit."

Next to that we plead with you for a continuation of the love and confidence as you have expressed it today. From you members of the Twelve we ask for that love and sympathy expressed in our sacred Council. For the Assistants to the Twelve, the Patriarch, the First Council of the Seventy, the Presiding Bishopric, we ask that the spirit of unity expressed by our Lord and Savior when he was saying goodby to the Twelve, may be manifest by us all.

You remember he said as he left them:

"And now I am no more of the world, but these are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one as we are.

"Neither do I pray for these alone, but for them also who shall believe on me through their word:

"That they all may be one, as thou, Father, art in me and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, that the world may believe that thou hast sent me." (John 17:11, 20-21.)

Brethren and sisters, brethren of the general authorities, God keep us as one, overlooking weaknesses we see, keeping an eye single to the glory of God and the advancement of his work.

And now to the members of the Church. We all need your help, your faith and prayers, not your adverse criticism, but your help. You can do that in prayer if you cannot reach us in person. The potency of these prayers throughout the Church came to me yesterday when I received a letter from a neighbor in my old home town. He was milking his cows when the word came over the radio which he had in his barn, that President Smith had passed. He sensed what that would mean to his former fellowtownsman, and he left his barn and went to the house and told his wife. Immediately they called their little children, and there in that humble home, suspending their activities, they knelt down as a family and offered prayer. The significance of that prayer I leave for you to understand. Multiply that by a hundred thousand, two hundred thousand, half a million homes, and see the power in the unity and prayers, and the sustaining influence in the body of the Church.

Today you have by your vote placed upon us the greatest responsibility, as well as the greatest honor that lies within your power to bestow as members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Your doing so increases the duty of the First Presidency to render service to the people.

God bless you brethren and sisters. May the spirit of this session remain in your hearts. May it be felt throughout the uttermost parts of the earth, wherever there is a branch in all the world, that that spirit might be a unifying power in increasing the testimony of the divinity of this work, that it may grow in its influence for good in the establishment of peace throughout the world.

I bear you my testimony that the head of this Church is the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. I know the reality of his existence, of his willingness to guide and direct all who serve him. I know he rendered, with his Father, to the Prophet Joseph Smith, the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ in its fulness. I know that these brethren whom you have sustained today are men of God. I love them. Don't you think anything else. God's will has been done.

May we have increased power to be true to the responsibilities that the Lord has placed upon us, and I pray this in the name of Jesus Christ, Amen.

Thus, with a great spirit of humility and placing his trust in God from whom he knew would come the needed strength, President McKay assumed the greatest honor and responsibility that could come to him in the Church.

This new responsibility came forty-five years after that April in 1906 when he was called as an Apostle—forty-five years of devoted service and unexcelled leadership in the Restored Church of Jesus Christ. Of those years, nearly seventeen were as second counselor in the First Presidency, first to President Heber J. Grant from 1934 to 1945 and then to President Smith since 1945.

Now the mantle of presidency had fallen on his shoulders. He was the rightful successor to the Prophet Joseph Smith. As prophet, seer, and revelator since 1951, President McKay has truly brought inspired direction to the Church, and has won the trust, love, and respect of a vast Church membership.
