Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 13

A Visit to Europe

On Wednesday, May 28, 1952, the announcement was made through the press that the members of the Church residing in the British Isles and on the European continent were to have the rare privilege of a visit from the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It was also stated that he was to fly from New York on June 1, and arrive in Scotland on June 2. The special purpose of the trip was not to be announced until after his arrival in Europe.

Accompanying President McKay on this trip were Mrs. McKay and their son and daughter-in-law, David Lawrence and Mildred C. McKay, the former an assistant general superintendent of the Deseret Sunday School Union, and the latter a member of the Primary Association general board.

Before leaving home President McKay was advised by his physician that it was imperative that he have time to rest each day; otherwise the trip as outlined would prove too strenuous for him. Instead of taking time out for relaxation, however, the itinerary was enlarged to include additional cities and many more meetings than were included in the original plan.

President Stayner Richards, Assistant to the Council of the Twelve, and president of the British Mission, had arranged the tour, and he and Mrs. Richards met the President and his party when they landed at the airport in Glasgow, Scotland, on Monday, June 2, at 3:30 p.m. At 7:30, they arrived for the dedicatory exercises of the new Glasgow chapel, and were greeted by more than 300 people.

A group of Primary boys presented President McKay with a gold McKay crest fastened to a McKay tartan, and a book of scenes of Scotland. The president was deeply touched by this presentation, and by the hearty welcome given him by the audience. He spoke of his previous visits to Europe, first as a missionary to Scotland in 1897, then on his world tour with Elder Hugh J. Cannon in 1921, and as President of the European Mission in 1922-24.

The Glasgow press heralded the dedication of the first chapel of the Church in Scotland. One newspaper, commenting on President McKay's visit, said, "it will probably surprise most people to learn that Mormon missionaries from America have been working in Scotland for more than one hundred years."

All the papers made much of the fact that President McKay, world leader of the Mormons, made the trip to Scotland from America in order to dedicate the Glasgow chapel. Some recounted the history of the Church in Scotland, and others gave fair treatment of some of the doctrines of the Church.

On Wednesday President McKay addressed the members of the Edinburgh Branch and dedicated their chapel. As an introduction to his address he said:

Before I tell you how grateful I am for the hearty welcome extended to Sister McKay, our son and daughter, and me, in Glasgow and Edinburgh, let me just briefly state that it has been more than one hundred years since my grandfather, William McKay, and grandmother, Ellen Oman McKay, left Thurso, Scotland, having become converts to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

They settled in Ogden, Utah, and so, in the same year, did the Evans family from, Wales. And William McKay's second son, David McKay, met a little girl nine years of age, Jennette Evans, who nine years later became his wife.

About 1877, William McKay, my grandfather, returned to his native land as a missionary, and went up to Wick, Thurso, and Aberdeen, bearing witness that the gospel had been restored, and that he knew it to be true.

About 1881, his son David, my father, came over here as a missionary. He, too, labored in Glasgow, Dundee, Aberdeen, and in Thurso, and he appointed president of the Glasgow Conference.

And so as I look back in reminiscent mood upon those events, and many others that have crowded my mind, there is gratitude in my heart that a humble elder, a hundred years ago, knocked on a door in thurso, and testified that the Gospel of Jesus Christ had been restored. I am thankful that my grandfather and grandmother believed that, because that was the beginning of the events that have happened in the century leading to this moment.

After a powerful sermon on the subject, "Happiness, the Aim of the Gospel of Jesus Christ," the President dedicated the chapel in the beautiful city of Edinburgh.

On Thursday morning he and his party arrived in London. Here he spent several busy days attending to special business matters, meeting with missionaries and members of the Church. On Sunday, conference sessions were held, attended by approximately one thousand members of the British Mission.

Through a slight change in his previously planned itinerary, President McKay was in Basel, Switzerland, on Tuesday, June 10, where he attended to special business pertaining to the purpose of his European trip.

From Berne, President McKay and his party arrived at the Schiphol Airport, in Holland, on Wednesday. They were met by President and Mrs. Donovan H. Van Dam, who traveled with them to Scheveningen, to their suite in the Palace Hotel.

On Thursday morning, the President and his party were taken to Soestdyk, where Queen Juliana entertained President and Mrs. McKay at her palace. During the visit President McKay gave her greetings from the thousands of Dutch saints in America, and explained the missionary system of the Church. He told his royal hostess, the Queen, he would like to present her with a Book of Mormon, which she said she would be very happy to accept.

The visit, which lasted for more than half an hour, was arranged by the Dutch Consul General in San Francisco, through the cooperation of the Vice-Consul, Bas Van Dongen, in Salt Lake City.

After this visit, President McKay had several interviews with news correspondents from Holland's leading papers, and also from the United Press and Associated Press.

On Friday, June 13, there was a mission-wide conference of missionaries and members in Rotterdam, attended by 1,024, which represented one third of the membership of the mission. At this meeting there was a presentation of a Delft Blue China plate to President and Mrs. McKay, and one also to Elder and Mrs. David Lawrence McKay.

During his remarks, the President said:

Today, Sister McKay and I stood on the ruins of the place where thirty years ago a very remarkable experience occurred to me. I was speaking to an audience here in Rotterdam, and President Zappey was interpreting, when it happened that the gift of interpreting tongues was given to me. There may be some here today who were present at that time. President Zappey was making a statement following my remarks, and even though I could not understand the language, I knew that he had given the wrong interpretation, and I told him so, and corrected him. He turned to me and said that I really had no need for an interpreter, since I understood the language so well. This is an illustration of the spirit directing the minds of each.

Now that building is gone—destroyed by the power of man. May the Lord hasten the day when there shall be no more war. Nobody is helped by it. The victors are losers and the innocent suffer.

As I stood on that barren spot, I felt moved to offer a prayer to the Lord to hasten the day when peace may once more come to the world.

That evening President and Mrs. McKay were guests of honor at a banquet of all missionaries in Holland, held in the Palace Hotel in Scheveningen. He addressed the gathering following the dinner program.

The President's arrival in Copenhagen, Denmark, on June 14, was a thrilling experience for hundreds of Latter-day Saints, many of whom awaited his arrival at the Copenhagen airport. As the plane arrived from Amsterdam, his tear-blurred vision beheld a large Danish flag, and at its side, the Stars and Stripes floating proudly in his honor. Reaching his ears were the lovely strains of the famed Mormon hymn, "Come, Come, Ye Saints."

As the last notes of the hymn faded, the President, visibly moved by this greeting, waved to the group and went with his party into the Customs office. While they were going through the customs, the large crowd assembled in the waiting-room of the administration building and sang, "Now Let Us Rejoice...," then as the President came through the door-way, all joined in singing, "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet." This was not just a song. It was a sincere expression of appreciation and gratitude that the Prophet of the Lord had set foot on Danish soil. One of the newspaper reporters present, later wrote, "The President of the Mormon Church, David O. McKay, received an exceptional welcome at the airport as several Danish Mormons sang welcome songs and completely drowned out the loud speaker's announcing the arrival and departure of planes."

President McKay took time, before leaving the airport, to greet personally and shake hands with everyone who came to welcome him. then he and his party were taken to the mission home to be the guests of President and Mrs. Edward H. Sorensen.

Then began a busy week-end. A concert was presented in the evening. An hour before the concert began, the hall was filled and many were standing. President Ejnar Nielsen of the Danish Mission Presidency presiding, reminded the audience that it was just one hundred years to the day, June 14, 1852, that the first Apostle, Erastus Snow, came to Denmark, to bring the gospel to the Danish people.

Sunday, June 15, was a spiritual feast for the hundreds who packed the Copenhagen chapel, and listened to words of inspiration from President McKay. Four outstanding meetings were held—priesthood meeting at 8:30 a.m., Sunday School at 10. Bouquets of roses were presented to Sister Emma Ray McKay and Mildred C. McKay. At the conclusion of the Sunday School session, President Sorensen, in behalf of the missionaries and members, presented to President and Sister McKay a sterling silver salt and pepper set and a figurine, "The Harvest Girl," of world-famous Copenhagen porcelain. A beautiful sterling silver berry spoon was given to Brother and Sister David L. McKay.

A special missionary meeting was held in the afternoon, and the evening service climaxed an outstanding day, typical of the busy days the President was spending in each of the European missions visited during the tour. As he closed his address, he said: "Goodbye my friends, we must leave in the morning to visit the Saints in other missions. Let me assure you that as we take the plane, and leave this lovely land of Denmark, we shall carry with us the love and fond memories of one of the choicest people in all the world. God bless you."

After the closing prayer, while the President and his party were still seated, the congregation arose and sang, "God Be With You Till We Meet Again."

After each of the meetings, opportunity was given members and friends to shake hands and receive greetings and blessings from President McKay.

On Thursday, June 19, in the late afternoon, a large group of members and missionaries assembled at the Stockholm airport to greet the Presidential party. Press and newsreel representatives joined the welcoming crowd as President and Mrs. Clarence F. Johnson welcomed the President to the land of the midnight sun, and presented the traditional floral bouquet—a token of welcome.

On arrival at the Hotel Malmen, President McKay, in spite of a tiring journey, just completed, met the news representatives for nearly an hour at an official conference.

The Swedish Mission Mutual Improvement Association Conference scheduled to meet July 10 to 14 was changed to June 20 to 25 to coincide with this visit. There was also a conference of Swedish missionaries, followed by an evening's entertainment presented by various Mutuals of the mission, which received the warm congratulations of the President.

At the Sunday morning session the message was a beautiful admonition to the Saints to remain true to their covenants with their Heavenly Father; that with all their power they live in accordance with those principles of righteousness on which a true Latter-day Saint's life is based and dependent.

At the Sunday evening meeting, held in one of the largest auditoriums in Stockholm, and at which members of the Swedish Church, representatives of the national press, and non-members from every walk of Swedish life were present, President McKay delivered a powerful and highly impressive address in the packed hall. His theme was the burning need in the world for a return to a belief in the existence and power of our Heavenly Father. He said, "The most ominous threat to the peace and happiness of mankind is not the probable misuse of the atomic bomb, but the dwindling in men's hearts of faith in God." With a brilliant insight into the true situation of the world today, he portrayed a picture so true to life, that no one present was left in doubt as to the veracity of his message. On this pertinent and inspiring note ended probably the most significant public meeting held so far in the Swedish Mission.

Next morning farewells were said to the Swedish saints and missionaries to the strains of "God Be With You Till We Meet Again," when the party continued on to Helsinki where the Finnish members were awaiting their arrival.

For the first time in history, a president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints visited Finland. What a royal welcome the more than 350 members of the Church in that comparatively young mission gave to President and Mrs. McKay and his party at the Malmi Airport, Helsinki!

June 23 was a special day for Mrs. McKay as she was celebrating her 75th birthday, and as the party left the airport in Stockholm about 300 people waved goodbye and sang "Happy Birthday." President Henry Matis of the Finnish Mission escorted the party to the mission home where an American dinner was served, complete with birthday cake and candles, and the missionaries and members of the Relief Society sang "Happy Birthday" in Finnish, and then all repeated it in English.

After the dinner, the party drove about ten miles to Vihtijarvi, a lake, on the edge of which the Latter-day Saint youth of the mission were gathered for the first Scout encampment in Finland. The camp was sponsored by the Mutual Improvement Associations and ably directed by Mr. and Mrs. Martti Hartiala, who were formerly active in scout work for the state. They were assisted by Elder Don Brown, a missionary from Salt Lake City.

As President McKay approached the camp, one of the girl scouts stepped forward, very formally and in good English, welcomed the President and his party to Finland and to the scout camp. Then, successively, different girl scouts each brought a rose to Sister McKay, wishing her a happy birthday. Other girls pinned corsages of wild lilies of the valley on each of the party. Twenty-five missionaries then presented Sister McKay with birthday roses. The group then sang some Finnish songs, and "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," and "Come, Come, Ye Saints" in the Finnish language.

By this time all were in tears—they were tears of gratitude, for they realized that they were singing to a true prophet of God.

The following day was mid-summer "John's Day"—a holiday—and the streets of Helsinki were deserted. President McKay and his party were staying at the new Vaakuna Hotel, and all restaurants were closed during the day, so the Utahn's were guests of President and Mrs. Matis. Members of the Church from outlying districts were coming in all day to Helsinki for the general meeting which was to be held in the evening, and all brought their own food.

That evening a public meeting was held at which 450 members of the Church and their friends were inspired by the wisdom and counsel from the lips of their beloved and revered prophet.

On Wednesday, June 25, President McKay and President Matis flew to Turku, where they were escorted to the summer estate of Finland's President, T. H. Paasikivi, who welcomed them cordially, and visited with them for some time. On their return to Helsinki in the late afternoon, they met with Minister John Cabot at the United States Embassy for a pleasant visit.

The following day, as President McKay and his party were at the airport to take a plane for Germany, many members of the Church and their friends were there to say good-bye, and as the plane left Finnish soil, the strains of "God Be With You 'Till We Meet Again" floated with them into the air.

From Helsinki President McKay went to Hamburg, Germany, where he was met on June 26, by President and Mrs. Edwin Q. Cannon of the West German Mission, missionaries of the Hamburg area, as well as representatives of the press.

That evening he addressed a capacity crowd of 900 members and friends in Hamburg's Gewerbehaus, appealing especially to the young people of the group. He said, "Let us make our ideals in life the Kingdom of God." He also stated that next to life itself, man's free agency is the greatest gift from God, and after free agency is the sense of mastery over the evil of the world—abstinence from intoxicating liquors and other poisonous substances, and keeping one's self pure from sexual indulgence. These will determine if a man will be master of himself or be subject to his passions.

"Young men and women, yes, old men and women also, who resist temptation, grow in strength of character, and place themselves in a position to respond to the influence of the Holy Spirit. Strength of character and service to mankind are attributes of nobility we can take back to God," he said.

After this brief visit to Hamburg, the Presidential party left for Berlin where they spent the week-end.

In reporting this visit, the secretary of the East German Mission wrote: "A fitting climax to one of the greatest weeks of activity in the history of the East German Mission was the long-awaited visit here of President David O. McKay. He came in time to complete a combined missionary and mission conference which had extended from Tuesday, June 24, through Sunday, June 29.

"Many factors combined to make this conference an unusual one. About 1,500 members of the Church, and German missionaries, came from beyond the Iron Curtain, from the Russian Zone of East Germany, at great personal sacrifice. Their unusual comment was, 'Although we don't have sufficient to live on here, we will see our president and prophet at any price.'"

Another factor making the conference a success was the technical delays in putting through a government order preventing the East Germans from crossing their border into the Berlin sector.

Incidental to the signing of the German peace treaty, Communist dictators had sealed the borders so that nobody could cross into West Germany from the Soviet Zone. They tried to carry out a similar order to stop the flow to Berlin from East Germany, but on technical grounds were unable to stop trains coming into the city. At least they were not able to do so until Tuesday, July 1, the very day members of the Church were safely returned to their homes.

If these measures had been successful three days earlier, most of the 1,500 from the Soviet Zone would not have been able to come to the conference.

Climaxing this missionary conference was the testimony meeting held with President McKay on Friday, June 27. Without resting or even going to his hotel room from the Berlin Templehof Airport, where he had arrived from Hamburg, President McKay was driven directly to the missionary meeting. For most of them it was the first opportunity they had ever had to meet a President of the Church, and all were overjoyed at the experience. As these missionaries were singing "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," tears were streaming down many cheeks.

President McKay expressed astonishment at the presence of so many missionaries from the East Zone. He spoke to them on the subject of authority and restoration of the gospel, and the obligations of a missionary.

On the next day, Saturday, June 28, he dedicated one of the small chapels located in Charlottenburg, in Northwest Berlin. More than 600 crowded into the two small assembly rooms, and on the surrounding grounds where an elaborate public address system had been installed by Radio Station RIAS.

The highlight of the entire conference was the session for all the members of the West German Mission, which was held on Sunday morning in the Mercedes Palast, the largest hall in North Berlin. Although the capacity of the hall was about 1,850, a total of 2,600 persons crowded into the building, filling the stage, aisles, and every available space. The Berlin police permitted members to stand in the aisles, although it was contrary to the city ordinances. The President expressed appreciation for this special privilege, and for other courtesies extended by the officers.

Another chapel was dedicated on Sunday morning in Dahlem, South West Berlin, where another overflow crowd gathered to hear the President. The same public address system carried his message to the entire audience.

The subject of the address was, "The Immortality of the Soul," and he called on the nations of the earth for obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Everyone present had an opportunity to shake hands with President McKay.

The party left Monday morning for Hanover where a third chapel was dedicated. They were accompanied by President and Mrs. Glaus of the German Mission.

From Hanover the President went to Frankfurt, and then to Switzerland, Paris, and thence to England and Scotland.

Wednesday evening in Frankfurt President McKay bade a formal farewell to West Germany's ten thousand members of the Church, in an address before more than one thousand, including eighty missionaries and about three hundred servicemen and their wives. He said in part, "I have been greatly impressed with Germany. When I came here twenty-nine years ago I had a great respect for the German people, but now I have even a greater regard for them."

The party flew from Frankfurt to Zurich, Switzerland, where they were met by President and Mrs. Samuel E. Bringhurst. They were driven by car to Berne where they remained until Friday. They then proceeded to Basel, the place of the conference on Saturday and Sunday.

At the Sunday morning session, all members of the President's party spoke, representing the Sunday Schools, the Primary, and the mothers of the Church. During the President's address he said:

Membership in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and obedience to the restored gospel, will make a man nobler, will make him a better husband, will make his wife a better and truer wife, will contribute to happier homes, will help discouraged people to rise above discouragement, will prove by actual experience that religion, rightly lived, as preached and expounded by the Church, is at once the most delightful and most useful experience in the world.

Now, there are many people right here in Basel who do not believe that. But whether they believe it or disbelieve it, what I have said is an actual fact, and I have experienced it in all parts of the world.

It has been my privilege to travel a good deal in the world, and to meet members of the Church in the islands of the sea and on every continent and in every place. We found that those who lived up to the teachings of the Gospel are happy, cheerful, and useful.

In another talk he said in part:

"May the Stars and Stripes of the United States and the White Cross of Switzerland, with its red background, ever wave together in defense of individual liberty, and in opposition to dictatorship and tyranny in any form."

At the Sunday evening session, President and Mrs. Bringhurst and the missionaries presented President and Mrs. McKay with a beautiful oil painting of one of Switzerland's most famous peaks, the Matterhorn. Before leaving Switzerland, the party, accompanied by President Bringhurst, visited Interlaken, Zurich, Luzerne, Wengen Scheidegg, Lausanne, and Geneva.

President McKay left by plane for Paris on Thursday, July 10, where he remained for four days. Among other duties, he inspected the new mission home, and held conferences with missionaries, members, and their friends. He addressed a meeting held in the Pleyal Concert Hall on Sunday afternoon where over fifty percent of the membership of the entire mission was in attendance, some coming from as far distant as Nice, Lille, Liege and Brussels in Belgium and Geneva in Switzerland. The meeting was also open to the general public.

While in Paris the President visited the United States Ambassador to France, the Honorable James Dunn, who received him and his party most graciously.

President McKay told an inquiring audience that the main purpose of his trip was to investigate the possibility of setting up chapels throughout Europe—to encourage Church members to remain at home and not to emigrate to America.

President McKay and party left Paris Tuesday morning, July 15, and arrived in London on the last stage of a six weeks' visiting tour of the missions of the Church in Europe. After a hurried trip to Wales, where he visited his mother's birthplace, and addressed a large assembly at Cardiff, he returned to London to be in attendance at a party at Buckingham Palace, given by Queen Elizabeth II.

While in London, President McKay explained the Church's genealogical project being carried out in Europe. He said hundreds of thousands of dollars are being spent to enable nearly fifty full-time researchers to microfilm every scrap of information dating back for centuries in Great Britain and on the Continent. He explained that the project is rooted in the Church's belief that one's ancestors can be "baptized for by proxy," even though they died long ago. Salvation, thereby, is not denied to ancestors who had no opportunity to receive divine revelation.

He pointed out that the Mormons' great gathering together of data on millions of Europe's inhabitants down through the centuries will prove of priceless value in cases where war and other disasters destroy the original records.

From London the President's party returned to Scotland, and on July 22, in Glasgow he made the announcement that he had obtained a site in Berne, Switzerland, for the first European temple of the Church.

During the fifty days in Europe, President McKay visited ten missions, nine countries, addressed forty-five meetings, dedicated five chapels, selected a temple site in Berne, Switzerland, and held numerous conferences with mission presidents and with the press. He visited the president of Finland, Queen Juliana of The Netherlands, several American ambassadors, and attended a Royal Garden Party given by Queen Elizabeth II of Great Britain.

Only the European members of the Church can realize fully the extent of the comfort, guidance, and inspiration which President McKay's visit brought to the Saints in a troubled world.

The President and his party left Glasgow's Prestwich Airport at 1:00 a.m. on Wednesday, July 23, on their return home. They arrived in Salt Lake City on July 26, receiving a royal welcome from the nearly two thousand relatives, friends, and associates gathered at the Union station to greet them. President McKay said in appreciation of this sincere demonstration of affection, "Our trip everywhere has been glorious, but it is wonderful to be home with you all again."
