Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 14

The Mormon Pioneer Memorial Bridge

In response to an invitation from the North Omaha Bridge Commission, President David O. McKay traveled to Nebraska in June, 1953, to dedicate a bridge across the Missouri River at the site where thousands of Mormon Pioneers had crossed the river to begin the journey west.

Accompanying President McKay on a special train from Salt Lake to Omaha were President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., of the First Presidency, President Joseph Fielding Smith of the Council of the Twelve, Elder Eldred G. Smith, patriarch to the Church, and fifteen other of the general authorities, as well as more than a thousand members of the Church. Many of the members traveled to Omaha in chartered buses.

The $3,500,000 steel bridge which President McKay was to dedicate, connected Florence, Nebraska, the site of the pioneer encampment known as Winter Quarters, and Council Bluffs, Iowa.

It was in February, 1846, that the Latter-day Saints, driven from their homes in beautiful Nauvoo, Illinois, had commenced their journey westward under the leadership of Brigham Young. It was late in September when they reached the banks of the Missouri River, near Council Bluffs, and were advised to camp there until spring before beginning the long and hazardous journey to the Rocky Mountains.

A temporary camp was established near Council Bluffs, but the group decided to seek higher ground for a more permanent location. A ferry boat was constructed, and President Young and others crossed the river and located the site they called Winter Quarters. In addition to serving as a winter encampment site, Winter Quarters also became the major outfitting point for the thousands who followed the pioneer trail to Utah in the next two decades before completion of the railroad.

The new community was laid out with streets at right angles, and crude log cabins were built. The camp was divided into wards, each having a bishop to preside over its affairs and the worship services. While those in the first company used it only as a winter resting place, the surrounding land was put under cultivation so that those who would follow could harvest crops to sustain their travels. This policy was continued as long as the pioneer companies used the site.

Since this was the first white settlement in Nebraska, the Indians of surrounding areas began to make trouble. The established policy of Brigham Young, however, was to make friends with their new neighbors, and trouble was kept at a minimum.

Because the homes were hastily constructed and the conditions quite primitive, many illnesses and deaths occurred during the long winter months. Food was also scarce. More than six hundred pioneers were buried at the Mormon Cemetery in Florence.

President McKay and his party arrived at Union Station in Omaha on Sunday morning, June 5, 1953. They were greeted by members of the Bridge Commission, Union Pacific officials, and many civic leaders. Signs of welcome were in evidence everywhere, and the facilities of the city were placed at their disposal.

Sunday's events were climaxed by a public meeting and pageant at Omaha's huge Ak-Sar-Ban Coliseum. More than 7,000 were in attendance to hear a narration of the history of the pioneers who began the journey westward from this point. Events connected with the settlement of Winter Quarters and Council Bluffs in 1846 were depicted, and the place of the pioneers in blazing the way for other western migration was emphasized.

Music for the meeting was furnished by one hundred singers from Brigham Young University. Stirring tributes were paid to the pioneers by President Clark, Elder Matthew Cowley of the Council of the Twelve, and Marvin G. Schmid, general chairman of the Bridge dedicatory services and a prominent Omaha attorney.

A special meeting was also held at the Mormon Cemetery near Florence, and tributes were paid to the memory of those who died during this trying period. President McKay and President Clark participated in the services, along with Elder Spencer W. Kimball of the Council of the Twelve, Omaha Mayor Glen Cunningham, missionaries from the Northern States Mission, and some 2,000 spectators.

The Monday activities began with a one-hundred car motorcade across the bridge to Council Bluffs, Iowa, then back to Omaha and to Winter Quarters. As the motorcade neared the starting point it became the first section of a colorful parade through the streets of Florence to the bridge entrance. Included in the parade were members of the Sons of the Utah Pioneers, dressed as soldiers of the Mormon Battalion. Their wives were dressed in appropriate pioneer costumes. Also participating were members of the Weber County Sheriff's Posse, with the men and horses having made the trip to Omaha in a special train.

The bridge dedicatory services were directed by Mr. Schmid as master of ceremonies. Tributes to the Mormon pioneers were given by Governor Robert B. Crosby of Nebraska and Governor William S. Beardsley of Iowa.

A tribute to Brigham Young was given by a grandson, Gordon C. Young. There was a bronze plaque unveiling at the bridge entrance by Kate B. Carter, president of the Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, and Richard A. Lambert, president of the Sons of the Utah Pioneers. The plaque was officially accepted by W. F. Schollman, past chairman of the Bridge Commission. A companion plaque on the Iowa approach to the bridge had been previously unveiled by Elder George Q. Morris of the Council of the Twelve when the motorcade made a brief stop there for that purpose.

President Joseph Fielding Smith gave an historical sketch of the Latter-day Saints from Nauvoo to Winter Quarters, narrating some of the tragedy of the flight from their enemies in the winter and spring of 1846.

In his remarks President McKay congratulated the North Omaha Bridge Commission members, Governors Crosby and Beardsley, the mayor and city council of Omaha, and all associated with the project for their suggestion that the bridge be made a memorial to the Mormon pioneers.

He termed the bridge another memorial to the faith and undaunted heroism of the Utah pioneers. He said, in part:

Their undying fortitude and heroism have been, and will continue to be a guiding light to all who read their simple but incomparable story. It was their faith in God who could guide them as a loving Father, through inspiration and revelation, if they sought him in sincerity, which supported them in this trying time.

It was a sublime confidence in inspired leadership that caused 15,000 Mormons to seek refuge on the plains between Nauvoo and Winter Quarters in 1846—men and women who offered their lives in maintenance of a great cause, just as truly as former-day Christians faced death in the Roman arena.

The trek of the Mormons from Nauvoo to Winter Quarters, and thence onward to Salt Lake City, is one of the most outstanding feats in all history of colonization. Bancroft, the historian, avers that "There is no parallel in the world's history to the migration from Nauvoo."

To these intrepid, faith-inspired lovers of liberty and freedom to worship God as conscience dictates, we shall formally and reverently dedicate the Mormon Pioneer Memorial Bridge.

The dedicatory prayer offered by President McKay follows:

With gratitude and praise, we come to thee, O God, the Eternal Father, in prayer on this auspicious occasion. Nearly a century ago, men of vision dreamed of the possibility of what tens of thousands witness today as a reality. We are grateful for these forward-looking men. They are the leaders of empires, contributors to the world's progress.

We are grateful for the government of the United States that fosters individual initiative, and thereby makes such achievements possible. We are grateful for the architect and the engineers, members of commissions, for the workmen, skilled and unskilled, who, day after day, month following month, have, through intelligence and industry, made this bridge a reality.

We are grateful for the spirit of true brotherhood manifested by the members of the North Omaha Bridge Commission that designated this great steel structure 'The Mormon Pioneer Memorial Bridge,' thereby commemorating the faith, dauntless courage, and unflinching heroism, of these pioneers who early founded settlements in this area and ferried across the Missouri River in a matchless trek westward. May that spirit of brotherhood become more potent in human hearts, until all will worship thee as Father, and recognize every man as brother.

In its designation as the Mormon Pioneer Memorial Bridge, this mighty steel structure becomes an unbreakable link uniting the past generation with the present, and the hope that the faith, industry, and undying fortitude of the pioneers will continue to be a guiding and encouraging light to all who read their simple but incomparable story.

From the ferry to this strongest bridge across the Missouri River, there has passed a century of progress. We pray, O Lord, that thou wilt inspire men to desire to make equal advancement in preserving and making applicable to society the principles of individual liberty and freedom of worship brought by the pioneers and vouchsafed by the Constitution of the United States.

May these ideals ever be connoted with this inspirational occasion, as we invoke thy protecting care upon this Memorial Bridge, and dedicate it for the convenience and use of millions whose progress and pleasure will be enhanced thereby.

For this realization of a dream come true, we praise thy holy name, and pray for desires and strength to emulate the faith and high ideals of the pioneers to whose memories we now dedicate it as a fitting memorial.

This we do reverently in the name of our Savior, Jesus Christ, Amen.

The climax of the visit to Omaha was a special Chamber of Commerce luncheon at which President McKay and President Clark were invited to speak. They extended the appreciation of the entire Church for the greeting, reception, and hospitality extended to the party by the officials and people of Omaha. There were expressions of brotherhood and friendship which will never be forgotten by the Church.
