Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 15

Visits to South Africa and South America

The Church Section of the Deseret News of December 26, 1953, contained the significant announcement that for the first time in Church history a president of the Church would visit missions in South Africa and South and Central America.

The announcement stated that President and Sister McKay would leave Salt Lake City on January 2, 1954, their fifty-third wedding anniversary, and would travel first to London and then on to South Africa and from there to South and Central America.

The entire trip was to be by air except for the train ride from Salt Lake City to New York City. When completed it would mark completion of an official visit by President McKay to every existing mission of the Church.

President and Sister McKay reached London on schedule where they were met by President A. Hamer Reiser of the British Mission. Meetings were held there with officials of the British and Swiss Missions concerning the forthcoming construction of temples in England and also Berne, Switzerland.

With business completed in London, President McKay, his wife, and President Reiser left the London airport on January 7, 1954 headed for South Africa by way of Madrid, Lisbon, and Dakar on the West African coast. They spent the night at Lisbon, and left the following morning for Africa. Along the African coast they rode in sunshine, the first they had seen since landing in London. Fog and overcast skies had covered all of England and the continent for several weeks. Because of some rough air conditions along the coast the pilot had to detour over the Atlantic Ocean, and this caused a one-hour delay in their arrival at Dakar.

Dakar, located in Senegal, French West Africa, is the most westerly point of the African continent, and the departure point for trans-Atlantic flights to the eastern coast of South America. As President McKay and his party arrived there and reviewed their itinerary, President McKay noted that he had to return to Dakar after his trip through Africa and spend a two-day layover there before leaving for South America. Anxious to make every minute of the trip as worthwhile as possible, he was pondering what could be done about the delay when an official of Pan American Airlines approached him, introduced himself, and asked the President if it would be permissible to shorten the layover at Dakar from two days to four hours. This, of course, met with instant approval.

From Dakar the group traveled to Johannesburg, an arduous trip of some twenty-four hours, with three stops enroute. The trip was through many rough storms, and was a trying one for President McKay. President Reiser, who described the trip for the press, said there were many thrilling experiences, the clouds and lightning being almost beyond description.

The plane landed at Johannesburg at 7:30 p.m., and was greeted by a huge crowd of saints and friends who had never before seen one of the general authorities, and were beside themselves with joy. They sang, "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," and "Come, Come, ye Saints," and they really meant every word of it. A touching greeting was given the party, flowers presented, and the visitors were then taken to their hotel.

The following day two sessions of the general conference of the Transvaal District were held in Duncan Hall, with about 450 people in attendance. The meetings were described by President Reiser as wonderful, but the greatest thrills came after the meetings, when everyone who desired had the privilege of greeting President and Mrs. McKay, and shaking their hands. These experiences were especially touching and would remain as treasured memories for a lifetime. The effects of the day's contacts could never be over-estimated in the lives of men, women, and children, who had hungered so long for such an experience. Now it had come with even greater pleasure than they had ever anticipated.

The entire experience was so touching and heartwarming that President Reiser said the language he was capable of using was inadequate to describe it. Presents were given, and appreciation expressed for the visit and the messages spoken by President McKay.

A side trip was made to Pretoria, only a short distance from Johannesburg, where government officials were visited, as well as the United States Ambassador to the Union of South Africa, Mr. W. J. Gallman. Visits were made to places of interest and they then returned to Johannesburg.

Capetown, at the very tip of the continent, and nine hundred miles south of Johannesburg, was the next place visited, and here a three-day conference was held. The missionaries from all the surrounding territory, some hundreds of miles distant, attended. The meetings with the missionaries and the local saints were inspirational, as were all the other meetings arranged for the President. Every word spoken was heard in deepest silence, and with the greatest interest and reverence. It is difficult to get a full appreciation of the meaning of this visit of the Prophet of the Lord to these remote places. The people had longed for such a contact for so many years, but had felt little hope that it would ever materialize.

President McKay had had a longing while in South Africa to see something of the wild life so attractive to all Americans. There was no time, however, to make any extended trip. From Johannesburg the journey to the famed Krueger National Park required three days. It was impossible to make this trip because of the meetings already planned. From Capetown, however, a short ride was arranged into the country where some thrills were experienced in seeing some zebras and a few families of baboons. The latter were encountered after all hope of seeing them had been lost. They had looked for them in vain, when, on returning toward Capetown they spotted a male baboon sitting atop the bonnet (hood) of an automobile, with others, adults and children romping about. The call to duty, however, precluded any extensive sight-seeing, here as elsewhere.

The intensity of the devotion to the spiritual program of the visit is apparent from the fact that the concluding day of the conference at Capetown was devoted to a testimony meeting. This meeting lasted ten hours, with a short recess for lunch, and two ten minute intermissions at mid-morning and mid-afternoon. Fifty-three elders spoke feelingly of their work, in such manner as is never apparent in any other gatherings of the saints. Youths, mature men, and some aged, all evidenced the wonderful influence of the contact with President McKay.

Personal contact was made, so far as was humanly possible, with every member of the Church, by President and Sister McKay on this South African visit. The difficulties and dangers of the trip were forgotten in witnessing the gratitude of the saints who had experienced the joys of the visit. It is typical of all the visits made to all the other isolated missions of the Church, where devotion and sacrifices of many years were rewarded by the intimate contacts with the President and his wife. In Capetown a visit was made to a woman member of the Church who was hospitalized, which made contact with the saints of that area almost one hundred percent.

The return trip to Dakar was made without inconvenience except for one violent storm which tossed the plane about as it flew over the equator. President McKay was thrown from his seat, but not injured.

The arrangements at Dakar, made at the previous visit, were followed, and there was only a four-hour delay instead of the two days. This gave President and Mrs. McKay an extra two days to spend in Rio de Janeiro, which they appreciated. The Pan-American manager, Joseph Makowski, who had arranged this convenience for them, also introduced them to The United States Consul-General, Charles Ferguson Jr., who informed them that arrangements had been made for their comfort at Dakar's best hotel, and for interesting entertainment while they were waiting the departure of their plane.

President Reiser bade them goodbye at Dakar, to return to London. He wrote enthusiastically of the trip to South Africa as a never-to-be-forgotten experience, with incomparable companions, on a significant and prodigious mission.

President and Mrs. McKay then made the trip by plane from Dakar to Rio, reaching their destination on Friday, January 22, at 1 a.m. The change in schedule had been made known by cable to the president of the Brazilian Mission, but was not transmitted to their son, Robert R. McKay, who was to meet them at Rio and serve as guide, interpreter, and secretary, for the South American part of the journey. Robert was at a hotel only a block away from his parents before he learned of their arrival. He then found them in excellent health and spirits.

The two extra days in Rio gave President and Sister McKay an opportunity to see some of the beauties of this famed city. This included the immense statue of Christ at Corcovado. To get close to the monument, it was necessary to climb eighteen flights of steps, a total of 220 steps. This they did without hesitation, in spite of their age and warnings they had received from relatives at home before leaving.

The Brazilian Mission headquarters are at Sao Paulo, a beautiful city about 75 miles south of Rio. Through a misunderstanding, plane reservations had been cancelled to that city, and a later plane was engaged for the President to make this trip for scheduled meetings. This gave him an extra evening in Rio which he might have used to rest, but instead he insisted on making a trip to a meeting with a few members of the Church at Tijuca.

Sunday morning they left Rio at 5:30 a.m. without breakfast, and with no prospect of dinner until after an afternoon meeting. Robert described the trip as one in which the steward told them in poor English that this would be the last trip the plane would make. The startled passengers asked what he meant, and were relieved when they learned that the plane was to be converted to a cargo ship. They had already viewed the plane with some apprehension, and were all relieved when they landed safely at Sao Paulo.

A touching greeting was given them at the airport, where the assembled saints sang the usual "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," and a little girl, with a beautiful bouquet for Sister McKay, planted a kiss on her cheek. This was typical of the receptions arranged everywhere.

It was a full day of meetings, with only a forty minute intermission for hand-shaking, until after 3 p.m. During the recess, the people were most expressive in their greetings. Robert described it thus: "A hand-shake and a clap on the back with the other hand, is the usual greeting between friends, but today the whole act of affection was shown, which included hugs and kisses on both cheeks. Mother was so busy being kissed, that she didn't notice all the girls and women adoring her husband."

The meetings went on into the night, and at midnight the town was at the height of a celebration of its fourth centennial, and the confusion and noise promised to go on uninterruptedly through the night.

The meetings during the day included one for a group of German-speaking saints. Another group had come from an outlying district, expecting to meet the plane from Rio. Due to the schedule change, with the plane not arriving until the following morning, the group asked permission to roll up in their blankets on the floor of the meeting house. Such was the devotion and interest of these people.

The following day was taken up with meetings and hearing reports of the missionaries. The work was found to be growing favorably and all were encouraged with the progress being made. A reporter for the United Press was given an hour and a half of the President's time, with President McKay explaining the work of the Church in Brazil. It seemed incredible to the reporter that the missionaries as well as the saints in Brazil did not drink coffee, this being the coffee-growing capital of the world.

Montevideo, Uruguay, was the next scheduled stop, and here again President McKay was met at the airport by the strains of a most beautiful chorus singing "We Thank Thee, O God, for A Prophet." An orchid was pinned on Sister McKay.

An appointment had been made for the afternoon with the President of Uruguay, but because of illness he could not keep the appointment. Instead, he sent his secretary, a person of great influence in the nation. With him were two sub-secretaries and an army official. The meeting was most cordial, and President McKay was told that Church missionaries were welcome in Uruguay, and would be given full religious freedom. He was also told that church and state were entirely separate in Uruguay, differing in this respect from nearby Argentina. It was agreed by all that this was very beneficial to Uruguay.

When President McKay's plane had arrived in Uruguay it was met by a member of the American Embassy who arranged a meeting for President McKay with the ambassador. A delegation from the embassy later came and escorted him to the appointment. Here he was most cordially received by Ambassador McIntosh. The ambassador had shown every possible courtesy and consideration to the missionaries in Uruguay, for which President McKay expressed appreciation.

One of the highlights of the trip in Uruguay was President McKay's visit to a new chapel under construction in Montevideo. Since this was the first new chapel of the Church in South America, President McKay was vitally concerned with its progress. He emphasized the great asset it would be to the work of the mission, particularly in attracting young people to the programs of recreation and culture which could be carried out in the new facilities.

On January 30, 1954, President McKay officiated at the laying of the cornerstone on the new chapel, and offered a special prayer on this occasion for the growth of the work in this part of the world.

That evening, President McKay met with the members of the priesthood in Montevideo, about one hundred in number, and told them of the authority of the Church and of their responsibilities in the priesthood. Most of those present had been bearers of the priesthood only a year or two, and President McKay's words were a great help to them in learning their duties.

The following day a conference was held in the nearly completed chapel, but it was not adequate to accommodate all who desired to attend. President McKay spoke fervently on the Ten Commandments, and asked some newer members of the Church to participate with him in a discussion. Reporters from the Uruguayan press were present for the meeting also.

While in Montevideo, President McKay was the guest for a ten minute interview on Radio Expectador. He commented on the wonderful climate of the country, its great resources, the charm and graciousness of its people, and the fair attitude of the government in granting freedom of worship, one of the greatest boons to humanity. The interview was a fitting climax to President McKay's successful visit in the country.

Leaving Montevideo by plane, the party flew across the LaPlata River, and in fifty minutes landed at Buenos Aires, Argentina, listening again to the welcoming strains of "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," sung by the saints who had gathered at the airport.

The day following his arrival in Buenos Aires, President McKay addressed a group of 200 businessmen and their wives in the American Church. He was introduced by Dr. William B. Giles, who was familiar with the life and activities of President McKay, and gave a thorough and accurate description of him and of the Church. He passed through the congregation three envelopes with cancelled stamps from the Utah centennial celebration. He spoke of the great success achieved by the Centennial Commission under President McKay's chairmanship.

Since the Group represented many Christian faiths, President McKay spoke on American Christian ideals, and the responsibilities of Americans to the rest of the world in achieving a stronger brotherhood. He quoted from the Book of Mormon that ". . . this is a land choice above all other lands." In a question-answer period he explained many points about the Church, especially in regard to recreational and welfare programs. One questioner, with an evident Scottish brogue, asked, "And how many members of your Church would you have in Scotland?" From this question President McKay was able to relate some of his own experiences in Scotland, as well as the progress of the Church there.

Many of the women in attendance were members of the Mother's Club, a group associated with the English school in Buenos Aires, which had just elected the wife of the Argentine Mission president, Sister Valentine, as its president. She was the only Latter-day Saint among the more than 300 members of the group.

On the day following this meeting Mr. Gilbert Chase of the United States Embassy called to say that President Juan D. Peron would grant President McKay an interview at 9:55 that morning, and that one other person could be present. Through circumstances too complicated to narrate, four persons, President McKay, President Valentine, Robert R. McKay, and Mr. Chase, all were received by President Peron. He was most gracious to them, and exhibited a considerable knowledge of the Church and its activities. He knew its history and said he had respect for a people who had to work and fight for what they had. He said he would like to offer them refreshments, but knew they neither drank nor smoked, so his hands were tied. President McKay replied that he had already given much in his gracious reception. He then said he was happy to have our people in his country.

President Peron knew that a conference was to be held in Buenos Aires on the following Sunday, and said the building in which it was planned to hold the meeting was not suitable. He then offered the Cervantes Theatre, the second in rating in Buenos Aires. The offer was gratefully accepted, but when the building was inspected, it was discovered that repairs were being made, and all the seats had been removed. This was not known by President Peron. It was then decided to return to the original plan, but those in charge of the remodeling, after a meeting, said they would have the theatre ready for the conference. A group of sixty men was put to work and the building was ready as promised.

President McKay and his associates were delighted with their reception by President Peron, and the visit received wide publicity over the air and through the press. The benefit to the work of the mission could readily be appreciated. On concluding the visit President McKay presented President Peron with beautifully bound copies of the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price, in Spanish. These he gratefully accepted and promised he would read.

It was the general feeling among the Americans that President McKay rendered a splendid diplomatic service for the United States, one which would have a wholesome effect in improving relations between the two countries.

Following this interview, there was another with the United States Ambassador to the Argentine, Mr. Alfred F. Nufer. Mrs. McKay and Mrs. Valentine were included in this fifteen minute interview. They were impressed by a picture of Temple Square in Salt Lake City which hung on a wall of the embassy.

A seven hour automobile trip was made to hold a conference at Rosario, 250 miles distant from Buenos Aires. This was a fatiguing journey but was much appreciated by the 250 people who could attend. On returning to Buenos Aires, a Time-Life reporter, Mr. R. A. McCoy, was awaiting an interview. He became so interested in the discussion of the missionary system, and the Church in general, that the interview was extended to two hours. This ordeal, at the end of a trying day, left President McKay extremely fatigued.

The conference was held as scheduled in the Cervantes Theatre, with eight hundred members and investigators in attendance. This was 250 more than could have been crowded into the original chapel. No charge was made for the use of the theatre, an offer to compensate them for the special services being likewise rejected. This was a radical change from anything previously known in the Argentine.

The conference was a great success, and the audiences were thrilled with what they had heard. Afterward, the Radio Excelsior gave a ten minute tribute to President McKay, and played two of Crawford Gates' arrangements as sung by the Tabernacle Choir.

The President and his party left Argentina on February 8, and made the flight over the Andes to Chile. They were met at the airport in Santiago by the only Church member in that nation. The Church then maintained no mission in Chile, and the stay there was only brief. They next visited Peru, where much of the history of the Nephites transpired. There were only a few North American Church members living there at the time. These families were congregated in Sunday School at Lima, where a meeting was held and a pleasant visit enjoyed. There was hope expressed that a mission could soon be opened in Peru.

The homeward journey was begun on February 10, with stops planned for Panama, Guatamala, and Mexico. Three days were spent in Panama City, where meetings were held, and one day in Guatamala City. Here plane trouble developed, the regular flight to Mexico City was cancelled. As it was impossible to reach there in time for the scheduled meetings, it was decided to fly direct to Los Angeles, and visit Mexico City at a later time.

Thus ended the epoch-making visit to the two Southern continents with such far-reaching possibilities. The extension of the missionary programs into other countries of the Southern Hemisphere now seemed nearer. The party returned home safely, with President McKay beginning at once the busy administrative duties always awaiting him.

The visit to the Mexican Mission was made during the week of March 20-28, by plane from Los Angeles. The saints of that country had been keenly disappointed because of the postponement of the conference. President McKay was determined to complete the tour of the missions as originally planned, and so scheduled this special visit to Mexico City. Sister McKay, and their son Robert accompanied the President, and an inspirational conference was conducted.
