Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 16

David O. McKay Day in Ogden

The Biblical statement that ". . . a prophet hath no honour in his own country," was effectively refuted by the citizens of Ogden in a community-wide tribute paid to President David O. McKay on July 16, 1954.

The celebration, designated as "David O. McKay Day" was a heartfelt display of the love and esteem held for President McKay by those in his native Weber County.

The event was planned by a citizen's committee headed by Arthur V. Woolley, Ogden attorney. Included on the committee were representatives of city and county offices, ministers from every denomination in the area, presidents of men's and women's civic and service clubs, educational administrators, and life-long friends of President McKay.

It was as if the community had but one heart beat that day—and that was one of appreciation for the outstanding accomplishments of a native son, David O. McKay.

The event began as a committee of civic and church officials met President McKay on his arrival in Ogden. They escorted him to the Hotel Ben Lomond where more than five hundred had gathered for a luncheon in the hotel ballroom. Master of ceremonies for the luncheon was The Reverend A. Cadman Garretson of Ogden's First Presbyterian Church. In this capacity he expressed the love and admiration for all of the people of Ogden and Weber County for President McKay. The invocation at the luncheon was offered by Catholic Monsignor Patrick F. Kennedy, who also paid a tribute of friendship to President McKay.

Following the luncheon, the program consisted of tributes to the various phases of President McKay's life. He was extolled as "The Farmer," by Chairman Woolley; "An Educator," by Dr. Henry Aldous Dixon, president of Utah State Agricultural College, Logan, and former president of Weber College; "Churchman," by A. Walter Stevenson, Ogden businessman and assistant general superintendent of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association; and "World Citizen," by The Reverend Henry C. Beatty, pastor of the First Methodist Church in Ogden.

Typical of the tributes paid to President McKay are the following.

Mr. Woolley said in part:

The tributes and hosannas to him, our most distinguished and revered citizen, are innumerable and have sprung from the hearts of people from all over the world.

We of this community, his home-town folks, have not been unmindful of his great distinction. We cannot hope adequately to express the warmth of our esteem and our pride in his greatness, which reflects upon us, his neighbors.

He grew tall and straight as a pine tree grows, the light of joy upon his face, that joy that comes from good deeds done. It is this kind of man that the Lord God made in his own image, to have dominion over sea and land. . . .

To his kind is given the blessing to multiply, and the command to replenish the earth and subdue it . . . to have dominion over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.

In the rough work of subduing the new land, he was a good hand. He ploughed fields. He sowed seeds. He harvested the crops. He was a logger and brought timber from the canyons to build houses, barns, and fences. He was a horse man, and played the games strenuous men play. That life did not produce "the man with the hoe" but it produced the man who does not forget the hoe.

As an educator, Dr. Dixon said:

President McKay has always had the power and the eagerness to give something extra, something higher in his teaching. . . . He has shown leadership in education. He was president of his class when he was graduated from the University of Utah in 1897. He became principal of the Huntsville School. After his mission to Great Britain he began teaching in the Weber Stake Academy, and three years later became principal of that institution. Although he was a young man, he was a strong spiritual force in the community as well as in the Academy. Suffice it to say that four institutions of higher learning have recognized his high merits by granting him honorary degrees.

No one in the west has helped more to keep schools better aware of their true aims than has President McKay. No one has come out as courageously in favor of education in Utah during the darkest hours than he, and no one is as devoutly beloved and revered in the educational profession.

As a churchman, Mr. Stevenson said:

This man we are honoring today established his true greatness as a churchman. . . . Throughout his life, President David O. McKay has been a living example of keeping the commandments. His rich life is filled with service to God and to his fellowmen. Behold, truly, here is a man in whom there is no guile.

President McKay, I salute you! You are a Christian gentleman. Your soul-piercing eyes can melt the hardest heart. Your smile gives encouragement to the most dejected. I admire your fearless courage in standing for the right, your sense of humor, your devout love for your fellowman. Many to whom you have given comfort and inspiration will ever call you blessed. You are a great churchman. More than that, I can say in all sincerity, that surely there has never been a greater prophet in Israel.

Reverend Beatty paid an eloquent tribute to President McKay as "World Citizen:"

With a dedicated sense of vision, David O. McKay has endeavored, with unique success, to build everywhere a community of good will, sympathetic tolerance, and creative humanitarianism. Actually this virile pioneer became a world figure back in 1920-21, when he, in response to the needs of his Church, made an around-the-world tour of its missionary undertakings into which he injected inspiration, direction, and purpose, through his profound personal conviction that the Kingdom of Heaven must be promoted and projected into the hinterlands of this planet. During these days, the pulse of the world started pounding within his sensitive ears.

Like the Prophet of ancient Galilee, whose life our honored guest magnetically emulates, he had come to feel so keenly the agony and aspirations of men that his life became, to the discerning mind, an enactment of dedication.

With calmness rooted in mature faith, a forcefulness animated with vision, and a firmness fortified with an appreciation of the principles of righteousness, President McKay has traveled through the world as an exponent of a spiritual heritage which alone possesses the historic positiveness, social drive, and spiritual grip sufficient to curtail and crush the atheistic forces of materialism, and the dangerous distortions of communism.

In President McKay's dedicated concern to the promotion of a righteous world community, there is a blending of three elements, namely, the latitude of his vision of human need, as a steward of opportunity; and the magnitude of his compassion as a disciple of the creative Carpenter of Nazareth who insisted, 'If I be lifted up, I will draw all men Unto me.'

Five times during the last thirty-four years, our esteemed citizen, who, once upon a time, bridled his horse to the hitching posts at Weber Academy, in his quest for culture, has ridden the sea and the sky lanes to remote places to exemplify, through his attitude, and action, the force of his teachings on Christian culture.

In brief, President McKay has discovered the heart-beat of the world and has come to stimulate it by the courageous commitment of his life to a mission which, apparently, continues moment after moment, to stretch his imagination. . . . Qualities so richly incarnate in President McKay clearly made him a world citizen extraordinary.

"The Woman at his Side" was the subject of a tribute paid to Sister McKay by Mrs. Francis L. Lund. She said:

I wish it were in my power to express the love and admiration we feel for this great man and his partner. Two great women inspired the life of our beloved friend, President David O. McKay, the wife by his side, and his mother.

The spirit of love and harmony have ever been present in the family home at Huntsville. On holidays, as a magnet, it draws the families even unto the second and third generations, from far and wide, to rejoice and celebrate together. We can appreciate what family solidarity means.

No less can be said for the home in Salt Lake City, where all the family gather at every opportunity. There Mama Ray reigns. She presides graciously when the president entertains notable guests, or she sweetly and kindly ministers to the needs of her family, or those needing understanding, seeking her advice or just a shoulder to weep on. Our congratulations to a wonderful couple whose lives together have been idyllic.

Igor Gorin, of New York City, sang "Prayer for a Safe Journey," from "All Faces West," by Roland and Helen Parry.

Sister McKay responded to the tribute given her, and told of President McKay's tenderness toward Ogden and her people: "His grandparents were among the early settlers of this community; and we spent the first twenty-five years of our married life here. All of our seven children were born here. It was here also that he started his intensive religious work. Only he and I know how hard he worked at it."

In his response, President McKay told of his courtship with Emma Ray Riggs as she taught in the Madison School, near Weber Academy where he taught. He told of his worry over the anticipation of this hour because "I was coming into the hearts of old friends and cherished, whom I love as I love my own." He declared he was deeply touched by the things said which came from the heart, although he did not merit the praise. With marked emotion the President said:

I am trembling because of appreciation.

This day is one of those rare occasions which are delightful to experience and to be treasured sacredly in memory forever. It is one of those experiences which awaken the heart to a realization of two great attributes of the soul—the first, appreciation, the other a sense of responsibility.

I thank you with all my heart. No person can associate with the nobility of souls in their homes or anywhere, without a greater sense of responsibility than ever before.

He paid a glowing tribute to the spirit of brotherhood and love present on this occasion. "I could but hope that a little of this spirit manifest here today, could enter into our international relationships."

President and Mrs. McKay were presented with a beautiful painting of the La Platta Valley in the mountains beyond Huntsville. It was done by Farrell E. Collett, chairman of the art department of Weber College. Its presentation touched President McKay, because here was the scene of his labor of earlier years. When La Platta was a boom mining town of some 3,500 miners and their families, he carried mail to them on horseback.

An expression of appreciation also marked President McKay's remarks at the laying of the corner stone of the Ogden Tabernacle which followed the luncheon. His message on this occasion stressed the full value of the great contributions of those who have preceded us, and hoped that those who come after will have an equally strong foundation on which to build.

Services at the tabernacle were under the direction of the stake presidents of the area, with President William J. Critchlow Jr., of the South Ogden Stake officiating.

Following an informal reception held in the open court of the building, President and Mrs. McKay retired with members of their family for a buffet supper at the "Old Home" in Huntsville.

A climax to the day was their keen enjoyment of the performance of "All Faces West," Ogden's Pioneer Day festival program, with Igor Gorin depicting the character of Brigham Young.
