Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 17

Dedication of the Swiss Temple

In his two visits to Europe, described in Chapters 13 and 15, President David O. McKay had arranged for the construction of a temple near Berne, Switzerland and had carefully followed its progress.

For many years members of the Church had been looking forward to the time when a temple would be built on the European continent. The announcement to build the first temple in Europe at Berne had been made by President McKay in July, 1952, at the completion of his first tour of the European missions. President McKay officiated at the ground breaking services in August, 1953, and actual construction work on the building began in October of that year from plans drawn by Elder Edward O. Anderson, temple architect. The cornerstone was laid on November 13, 1954 by President Stephen L Richards of the First Presidency.

By mid-1955 the work had progressed sufficiently that the Deseret News carried an announcement in its editions of May 21, 1955, that dedicatory services were planned for September 11, 1955, and that President McKay would officiate.

The newspaper article indicated that Elder Anderson, the architect, had just returned from a month's visit at Berne, and had reported that, while it would require heroic effort on the part of the builders, the structure would be completed by September. Also scheduled to be completed were a chapel for the Berne Branch, and a home for the temple president. President McKay would also dedicate these buildings.

The Swiss Temple was the first in a series of edifices begun under the direction of President McKay. Others either were contemplated or were under construction near London, England, in New Zealand, and at Los Angeles, California. It was expected that while he was in England on this trip President McKay would break ground for the temple near London.

It had long been planned that the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir would participate in the dedicatory services of the Swiss Temple. This would be the crowning event of a tour and a series of concerts which would take the choir to Scotland, England, Wales, Holland, Denmark, Germany, and France. The choir would be accompanied by many relatives and friends of the members, and by Elder Richard L. Evans of the Council of the Twelve, announcer for the Tabernacle Choir broadcasts over the Columbia Broadcasting System.

It was arranged that the choir would make the trip by boat from Montreal, Canada, ahead of President McKay. He would fly, arriving in Scotland before them, and would meet them when they arrived at Greenock, Scotland, the port near Glasgow, where their first concert would be given. The tour was arranged by W. J. (Jack) Thomas, the tour manager of the choir.

Arrangements for a trip of this magnitude were difficult to complete, and at times when it seemed almost a hopeless project President McKay would lend his encouragement and the spark necessary to go on, for he clearly saw the results that would be obtained from such an undertaking.

As it was finally arranged, the choir, along with many of the traveling party, were permitted by the Soviet government to go behind the Iron Curtain and give concerts in Berlin. This was an unprecedented event in the cold-war relations between the Soviet Union and the United States.

President McKay indicated to the choir that he would travel with them on a large part of their tour, and emphasized to the members their responsibilities in representing not only the Church but also the United States.

Press response to the announced choir tour was overwhelming, and the newspapers, as well as radio, television, national magazines, and many national leaders hailed the event as a major effort in diplomatic relations and world affairs, apart from its cultural and entertainment value. It was noted that no other American group of comparable size had ever undertaken a similar tour through the countries of Europe, and certainly not at such a critical time in cold-war relations. But the Church leaders and members of the choir felt they were equal to this responsibility, and were determined to be ambassadors of good will wherever they traveled.

The financing of the tour itself was a tremendous undertaking. The Salt Lake Tribune of August 10, 1955, listed some of the sources from which this support was obtained. Salt Lake City business men had raised approximately $30,000. The Mutual Improvement Association's dance festival brought $15,000. A Lowell Thomas concert realized $9,000. Many concerts and other benefits were given, private contributions made, too numerous to mention, and many groups and organizations raised funds in various ways. The Church contributed unknown amounts to complete the necessary budget. The Tribune estimated the amount to exceed $100,000. Many felt that it perhaps would reach much more, possibly double that amount.

The choir left Salt Lake City by Union Pacific train on August 10, accompanied by about two hundred relatives and friends. Ted Cannon, columnist of the Deseret News, went along to provide day to day comments for the readers. They reached Montreal without incident, and sailed on the S.S. Seconia on Saturday, August 13, for Scotland. The sailing from Montreal was preceded by the singing of God Save the Queen, from the decks of the Seconia.

President and Sister McKay, with their son and daughter-in-law, Dr. and Mrs. Edward R. McKay, and his secretary, Miss Clare Middlemiss, left the Salt Lake City airport for New York City, on Tuesday, August 16, at 9 a.m., and were scheduled to leave New York City's International Airport August 17, at 4 p.m., arriving at Prestwick Airport, Glasgow, the following day at 9 a.m. This gave the President one day to meet the choir, which arrived at Greenock, Scotland, on Friday, August 19.

President McKay's itinerary called for several appearances with the choir, particularly at Glasgow and Edinburgh, in Scotland; Cardiff, Wales; and at the groundbreaking ceremonies for the London Temple. From there President McKay planned to go to Berne to prepare for the dedicatory services on September 11. The choir, in the meantime, planned concerts at Amsterdam and The Hague in Holland; Copenhagen, Denmark; Berlin, Frankfurt, and Wiesbaden, Germany. After these appearances the Choir would participate in the dedicatory services at Berne, and then conclude their trip with concerts at Zurich, Switzerland, and Paris, France.

This schedule was carried out with notable success, by both the choir and President McKay. Crossings of the Atlantic were made without incident. The President met the choir when the Seconia steamed up the Clyde to dock at Greenock. From that time it was a busy period for both parties to meet the schedule planned, and to save a little time for sight-seeing by the choir members, most of whom were visiting Europe for the first time. For President McKay the trip was no novelty, and he could direct the plans with the confidence of long experience. The thrill of having the great choir participate at so many places was a new one, and there was some apprehension as to how their concerts would be received.

The choir trip had been well publicized by the American and European press, and the national magazines of both continents. There had been radio and television broadcasts from the Tabernacle, and through Voice of America, and other channels. The choir was also widely known from the publicity given by Lowell Thomas and "Cinerama." All the favorable impressions gained must now be justified by personal appearances before critical audiences, and austere professional critics. The choir would be judged in comparison with the great professional musical organizations of the world, and they were yet to demonstrate their ability to meet the test.

The degree of favor extended to the choir by the audiences and the press would determine the probable extent of its missionary influence. That the impressions made would be favorable few Latter-day Saints doubted. Probably none was prepared, however, for the extravagant praise heaped upon the entire organization from the beginning to the end of the trip. The good it did, not only for the Church it represented, but also for the entire nation, cannot be overestimated. It was widely hailed as an ambassador of peace and good will, and by some as the greatest gesture for good relations sent by America to Europe in a trying period.

The concerts were presented to capacity audiences in the great music halls of Britain and the continent. The first, at Glasgow's Kelvin Hall, was watched with unusual interest. The critics were extravagant in praise of the renditions, and doubt of the success of the tour was dispelled. Equal praise was given to the rendition of the religious numbers by the great composers, patriotic songs, and the beautiful old Mormon hymns. The reception by the audience of all numbers was tremendous, with numerous encores demanded.

The success of the initial concert was duplicated throughout the entire tour. There were variations in the comments made at the different concerts, but the general reaction was always the same, a wonderful and gracious organization, well-trained and capably conducted, and a credit both to the Church and to the nation it represented. Speeches of welcome and approval were given at receptions arranged at various places, and additional praise given to the choir and officials accompanying the singers.

The Church members, in the various countries visited, experienced new thrills in the singing of the choir, and in contacts with President McKay and the general authorities who were also seen and heard. Elder Richard L. Evans of the Council of the Twelve was with the choir at all concerts and served as contact man and commentator in his usual, impressive manner. Elder Ezra Taft Benson, also a member of the Council of the Twelve, and Secretary of Agriculture in President Eisenhower's cabinet, joined the party at Copenhagen, and also attended the dedication exercises at Berne.

The relatives and friends of Church members who had migrated to Utah came to the concerts and meetings, and many remained to seek information regarding friends and loved ones, or to learn of the Church and its teachings. All seemed to be stimulated by the favorable receptions and the press comments, and wished to add their personal approval of what they had seen and heard.

This was a new experience for the Church leaders and the missionaries present, who remembered the difficulties of past years in getting hearings for their Gospel messages. People never before contacted now seemed anxious to hear, and to extend praise and favors. The favorable impression created will remain and become more apparent with the years, in the easier approach for the elders in the mission fields. The singing of the choir will be an opening wedge for conversations, which will, in turn, offer opportunities for teaching the Gospel.

The official receptions were especially heart-warming to the Church leaders who were invited to attend. Each city seemed to be anxious to out-do the others in its welcome. The Lord Mayor of Cardiff called the group "brothers and sisters," and various presents were given to individuals. President McKay noted that in Glasgow, where, as a missionary fifty-seven years before, he had been barred from the marble halls of St. George Square, they now were received and extended honors by the Lord Provost. In London the County Council entertained President McKay and other members of the party at an official function, where they also were interviewed by the press. Similar favorable welcome was also extended to them in all cities of the continent where they visited.

In Amsterdam, the concert was dedicated to Queen Juliana and her mother, the former Queen Wilhelmina. A tribute was paid by Elder Evans to the Netherlands for its great contributions to America, in the outstanding leaders developed from its emigrants. Holland had also served the Church nobly in the quality of its people who had accepted the gospel and migrated to Utah.

The soloists with the choir, Miss Ewan Harbrecht, with her superb singing, and Alexander Schreiner and Frank W. Asper, organists, came in for constant praise. The capable directing of the choir by its leaders, J. Spencer Cornwall and Richard P. Condie, was noted by the writers in every city visited. That no great body of singers had ever shown more capable training was the universal comment.

The concert given at Copenhagen received the same enthusiastic reception extended to the choir in Great Britain and at Amsterdam. The trip by train from Holland, which began at 4 a.m., was especially trying, but the singers reacted with the same enthusiasm as always. The concert was attended by the American Ambassador, Robert Coe, and by Elder Benson. Because the scheduled concert was completely sold out long in advance, and many had been unable to hear the choir, a special concert had been arranged at Copenhagen's famed Tivoli Park for the men's chorus, where thousands were able to hear and applaud, who otherwise would have been denied the pleasure they had looked forward to for so long. They said that the most enthusiastic reception given to the choir, thus far, was that given them at Copenhagen.

The visit of the choir to Berlin was a notable one in many ways. The difficulties encountered in getting permission from the Russian government to pass through the Soviet zone to Berlin, were finally overcome, and the first body of American civilians granted that privilege, passed by train into Berlin, escorted by a party of United States' State Department officials. They were met at the station in Berlin by the Singing Mothers of the Berlin Branch, with the chorus, "For the Strength of the Hills." A tour of the war-damaged, formerly beautiful capital of Germany, caused many heartaches for the choir members.

The concert in Schoenberg Sport's Palace was sold out, and many were turned away. Hymns and numbers were sung from German composers, including Bach, Beethoven, and Handel, which pleased the audience greatly. A splendid feature of the visit to Berlin was the presence at a rehearsal, of especially invited guests, refugees from East Germany who were unable to attend the regularly scheduled concert. This, like the extra concert given in Copenhagen, brought unstinted praise. The German critics were generous in their praise of the choir, a source of satisfaction from this center of music for generations. Officials of Berlin extended a welcome to the delegation of choir members. The Berlin concert was broadcast over the Radio Free Europe network to unseen millions behind the Iron Curtain. East Germany, and all the satellite countries heard the special message of greeting and hope, and prayers for the people from the lips of Elder Evans.

From Berlin the choir went by special train for concerts at Frankfurt and Wiesbaden. On arrival at Frankfurt they were given a reception by Obergeburgmeister Waldo Kolb, at the City Hall. They enjoyed a day of rest and sightseeing in Frankfurt, before their concert the following day in nearby Wiesbaden.

There is much of interest in the neighborhood of Frankfurt, and the time was spent visiting Heidelberg, Baden-Baden, and other places with interesting histories. The concert at Wiesbaden was described by Ted Cannon as "another climax in a never-ending series of climaxes." There were hundreds of servicemen from the surrounding areas who were in attendance under the supervision of General William Turner, the Commanding General of USGFE; Oscar C. Holder, Consul General; and Wiesbaden's Ober ger Hoister, Dr. Eric Mix. The General was so impressed that he said that if he had had any idea of the scope and magnitude of the performance he would have arranged for an outside setting where ten thousand servicemen could have attended. As it was, many servicemen from home were contacted, and the wonderful effect of the concert was apparent to all.

The trip from Frankfurt to Berne was made in twenty busses, and it was a trying ordeal. One writer described the more than five hundred people as being "groggy" when they reached Berne. They were greeted enthusiastically by President McKay who had been in Berne for several days, making final arrangements for the most important work of the tour, dedication of the first temple to be built by the Church in Europe.

President McKay had left the choir in London, and had gone to Berne by way of Paris, to direct the final work of preparation for the dedication of the temple. There was so much still to be done in the final days that it seemed to be a hopeless task to have it ready at the time specified for the dedicatory services. President McKay, however, was the inspiration, as always, in the face of obstacles, and assured them that it could and would be ready, and on time. By working around the clock for the last few days, everything was in order. This was the crowning event of this epochmaking tour, and all were prepared to make it the impressive feature its importance demanded.

This event was to climax the tour of President McKay and the choir. The services were conducted on Sunday, September 11, as planned. Members of the Church from all the countries of Europe were in attendance, as well as the large group from America accompanying the choir, their relatives and friends. There were also four members of the Council of the Twelve, Richard L. Evans, who had been continuously with the choir, and Spencer W. Kimball, Ezra Taft Benson, and Henry D. Moyle, who were already in Europe on other assignments, and were now participating in the dedicatory exercises.

Two sessions were held on Sunday, September 11, one at 10 a.m. and the other at 2 p.m. Two sessions were held each day thereafter through Thursday, September 15. At each session all available space was occupied, the six hundred permanent seats being supplemented by nine hundred folding chairs. The choir participated at all sessions, and talks were given by President McKay, the members of the Council of the Twelve who were present, and others, including President William F. Perschon, of the Swiss-Austrian Mission, and Samuel E. Bringhurst, president of the temple. A number of addresses were delivered in German by former missionaries of the German speaking countries. President McKay spoke at all the sessions and gave the dedicatory prayer. In addition to English, services were also conducted in German, French, Dutch, Swedish, and Finnish languages.

The President expressed his personal gratitude, and that of the entire Church, to all who had worked so valiantly from the time of the selection of the site for the temple, the acquiring of the property, the struggles of the building, and the completion of the structure and final arrangements for the dedication. It was a valiant service.

The choir was most impressive, the singing of the solo by Ewan Harbrecht, "Bless This House," the inspirational talks, and the dedicatory prayer, all impressing the President to note that there was a great unseen audience from the spirit world participating in the solemn exercises. He felt that the veil between earth and heaven was very thin at the time.

The prayer expressed gratitude for many blessings enjoyed by the Latter-day Saints, for the restoration of the Gospel in its fullness, with its priesthood authority, the freedom-loving governments of the United States and Switzerland, where man's free agency and his rights to worship were all respected, for the great leaders who had guided the Church in this dispensation, and for the cooperation of the Church members in making possible the building of the temple. An appeal was made for the hastening of the day when peace would come to the world. That the temple would serve all good purposes, and eventually the immortality and eternal life of man, were the hopes anticipated, and the temple was dedicated to the Lord to these ends. The plea was made that the temple would be regarded by all who enter as sacred, and respected as the House of the Lord.

Ordinances were begun on the day following the dedication, with three sessions. President and Mrs. McKay and some of the choir members participated in the first session which was conducted in German. The second was also in German and the third in French.

Following the dedicatory exercises the choir left Berne for Zurich, for another concert. President McKay was present at this concert, and, as with all the others, the choir sang to a full house. Liberal praise was given by all the critics.

The final concert of the tour was given to an audience of three thousand in Paris. Here, too, the reception was most cordial and the praise liberal for the quality of the singing. One Paris newspaper summed up the reaction to the recital thus: "With the Parisians, the Mormons will have left the memory of a marvelous vocal ensemble of incomparable quality."

President McKay went from Paris to London, and left by plane for New York after what he described as "one of the most inspiring weeks of my life." Of the choir he said, "nothing we have ever done—nothing that I know of, equals the choir trip for encouraging good will." He described the entire trip as "a highly successful European visit."
