Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 18

Dedication of the Los Angeles Temple

A prophecy by President Brigham Young in August, 1847, that "In the process of time the shores of the Pacific may yet be overlooked from the temple of the Lord," was fulfilled in part at least by President David O. McKay when he dedicated the Los Angeles Temple on Sunday, March 11, 1956.

Land for the temple site had been purchased as early as 1937 while President Heber J. Grant was President of the Church. But it was not until January, 1949, that any plans were begun by the Church architect.

Ground-breaking ceremonies for the temple were conducted by President McKay on September 22, 1951, and he also presided at the laying of the cornerstone on December 11, 1953, with some 10,000 persons present at the exercises.

It was an important milestone when the temple was ready for dedication in 1956, for the Los Angeles Temple was the largest to be built by the Church in this dispensation.

The building is beautifully situated on a hill in Westwood village, towering 257 feet, with the spire rising 30 feet from the center, topped by a statue of the Angel Moroni ascending another 15 feet. It is visible to ships twenty-five miles out at sea, and is an addition to the Los Angeles sky line that awakens pride in every Southern California Saint.

The building has a structural steel framework, and is fire proof and earthquake resistant. The sparkling white exterior, made of crushed Utah and Nevada quartz and cement, is self-cleaning. Grills covering the long vertical windows, provide maximum light, while cutting down the direct rays of the sun. The head of the architecture department of the University of Southern California, when asked to describe the type architecture of the building, used only one word, "everlasting."

An almost unbelievable result in landscaping was accomplished during the weeks of completing the building, by transplanting twelve species of full-grown trees, shrubs, gorgeous lawns, and flower gardens. Palms, which had taken many years to grow, were transplanted to the grounds as rapidly as the planting area could be made ready. Twenty specimens of olive trees line the main walk, and there is also a beautiful rose garden. It all seemed a miracle to the thousands visiting the great temple, knowing how recently the building had been completed.

The temple contains ninety rooms, furnished in excellent taste, including a chapel which will seat 380 persons, and an assembly room on the third floor which will accommodate 2,600.

In many of these rooms there are beautiful murals depicting scriptural scenes, harmonizing with the rich furnishings, making the interior as attractive and impressive as the first glimpse of the noble building itself. The modern baptismal font, patterned after the one in Solomon's Temple, is made of stainless steel, and rests upon the shoulders of twelve bronze oxen. The mural depicting Christ's baptism by immersion, in the River Jordan by John the Baptist, adds much to the impressiveness of this room.

Prior to the dedication, the building was opened to the public, and from December 1955, through February 18, 1956 some 682,361 persons walked through the magnificent structure. The old and the young people from all walks of life, government leaders from this and many other countries, visitors from near and far, some in wheel chairs, came to view the new addition to the Los Angeles sky line. During the week-end following the "open house," a crew of workers swarmed over the six-million-dollar edifice, cleaning the rich carpets and the rooms generally, in preparation for the dedication which began on Sunday, March 11.

The dedication rites were held in the Assembly Room, using closed circuit television for members assembled in other rooms, with a total attendance of 6,700. In the days following, with two assemblies each day, more than 50,000 members were privileged to participate in these sacred ceremonies.

There was absolute silence in the building until the sweet strains of the choir rose in a sacred hymn, "The Morning Breaks—The Shadows Flee." The hymn was followed by the opening prayer, given by Elder Eldred G. Smith, Patriarch to the Church. The second song by the choir was "Joseph Smith's First Prayer."

President McKay, in his introductory remarks said: "This is one of the most memorable dedicatory services, if not, in many respects, the most memorable temple dedicatory service ever held in the Church. All the general authorities are present, or will be, in one or more of these sessions. Only one is absent this morning, because of the illness of his wife. This is probably the largest congregation ever assembled at a dedicatory service. Every one of the fifty thousand persons in attendance at this and succeeding sessions, will have increased responsibility as never before, in the words of an ancient prophet, 'to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.'" (Micah 6:8)

President McKay then read, or referred to several telegrams and resolutions: From the Honorable Norris Poulson, Mayor of Los Angeles:

Congratulations upon the selection of Los Angeles as the site of your magnificent Mormon Temple, and allowing the citizens an opportunity to view the building before the dedication. Both Mrs. Poulson and I will be ever grateful that we were among your guests. The stately building, rising as it does majestically into the sky, has already enhanced the city as a tourist attraction; thousands more visitors will daily tour the premises, but more important still are the spiritual values and the great labor of love that will proceed from the sacred edifice. Best wishes to you and the Latter-day Saints of the area on this magnificent and important period.

The Honorable J. Goodwin Knight, Governor of California, sent the following wire:

I am glad to join in extending greetings upon the occasion of the dedication of the new Latter-day Saint Temple in Los Angeles. It was a privilege for Mrs. Knight and me to have the opportunity to inspect the magnificent edifice a short time ago. This temple truly reflects the profound devotion and dynamic force of your faith on the side of justice, morality, and human dignity. The entire aspect is indeed one of grace, solidarity, harmony and serenity. Our visit was one of the most impressive and inspiring experiences we have ever enjoyed.

Congratulatory resolutions were unanimously passed by the Los Angeles City Council, and also by the Board of Supervisors of the County of Los Angeles, and sent to the temple exercises at this time.

President McKay referred to three men who were instrumental in securing the land upon which the temple stands: President Heber J. Grant, Preston D. Richards, former counselor in the Los Angeles Stake presidency, and Bishop David S. Howells. He said:

These names will ever be associated with the early history of this temple, and their hearts are full of rejoicing at these messages and for this eventful hour of dedication. One of the most appreciative feelings I shall ever associate with this temple is the faith, loyalty, and devotion of the people of this Los Angeles district in their voluntary contribution of one million six hundred thousand dollars in addition to their participation in building chapels during this same period.

To all assembled I extend a hearty welcome, and with all my soul I pray God to bless us this day with a rich outpouring of His Spirit, and with a realization that He is near us, as He was to the Prophet Joseph when He answered that boy's prayer.

President Noble Waite, of the South Los Angeles Stake, representing the members of the Los Angeles area, said: "This morning our dream has come true. We have waited for this moment for four years." He thanked the general authorities for building a temple in Southern California, and for their patience, kindness, and encouragement. He continued: "Of course we had our moments of discouragement, and when these seemed darkest we would wire or call President McKay, who would immediately respond and meet with us to discuss our problems. Always after such a meeting the clouds would lift and everything would proceed smoothly again. For the most part, however, it has been no sacrifice for our people, but rather a glorious opportunity with many resultant blessings."

He praised the local temple committee, Presidents John M. Russon, Hugh C. Smith, and Howard W. Hunter, with all the other stake presidents and their counselors, and all who had assisted in any way. "We can never give enough to have the Lord in debt to us." He said he had been instructed by the people of Southern California to promise that they would do everything possible to make the temple fulfil the purpose for which it was built.

After remarks by President Stephen L Richards and President J. Reuben Clark Jr., Ewan Harbrecht, standing in the pulpit, sang, "Bless This House." Then came the inspiring dedicatory prayer by President McKay.

There were few dry eyes in that vast congregation of more than six thousand as the services were concluded by the choir singing "Hosanna," followed by the congregation singing "The Spirit of God Like a Fire is Burning." The closing prayer was offered by President Russon of the Los Angeles Stake.

There were many prayers of gratitude both during and following the session for the privilege of participating in such a sacred service. Those present felt it a great spiritual experience, and one that carried them as near to heaven as is possible while still on the earth.

The other seven sessions of the dedication resembled the first, with members of the general authorities as speakers, and with music furnished by various choirs. President McKay gave an address before repeating the dedicatory prayer at each of the sessions.

Following is the impressive dedicatory prayer which he offered:

O God, Our Eternal Father, Creator of the Earth and of the teeming manifestations of Life thereon, we, Thy children, assembled in dedicatory services in this House built to Thy most Holy Name, plead that we may be accepted by Thee.

May we feel Thy presence and the presence of Thy Beloved Son Jesus Christ, by whom all things were made and only through whom will the consummation of Thy Divine purposes pertaining to the inhabitants of this earth be wrought. That we may thus sense Thy Presence, and have assurance that our prayers are heard by Thee, may every heart in this Edifice this day be clean and pure before Thee, and every mind be willing to do Thy will, and to work for the accomplishment of Thy purposes.

When our first parents chose to take upon themselves mortality, they knew that they would be driven from Thy divine Presence, and that their only hope of ever regaining it would be dependent upon Thy revealing Thyself to them through Thy Beloved Son, who would give to them the Plan of Salvation. Today, we express heartfelt gratitude to Thee for having given in the Beginning the Gospel plan, the power of God unto salvation, and with it man's Free Agency, a part of Thy divinity wherein man may choose the Right and merit salvation, or choose the wrong and merit condemnation.

Down through the ages men have been free to accept or to reject Thy Righteous Plan. Thou knowest, and history records, how many in wickedness yield to the enticements of the flesh, and how few, comparatively, follow the path of Light and Truth that leads to happiness and eternal life.

But, Thy mercy, Thy love, Thy wisdom are infinite! And in dispensations past Thou hast pleaded, as Thou dost now plead, through chosen servants for Thy erring children to repent and come unto Thee.

We thank Thee that Thou, O Great Eloheim, and Jehovah, Thy beloved Son, didst appear to the Prophet Joseph Smith, and through the subsequent administrations of angels didst enable him to organize the Church of Jesus Christ in its completeness with Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers, Evangelists, etc. as it was established in the days of the Savior and His apostles in the Meridian of Time.

In keeping with the unwavering truth that Thy Church must be established by divine authority, Thou didst send Heavenly Messengers to bestow upon the Prophet Joseph Smith and others the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthood, and subsequently all the Keys of the Priesthood ever held by Thy Prophets from Adam through Abraham and Moses, to Malachi, who testifies of the authority of Elijah to "turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers," down to the latest generation. For this completeness and consistency of restoration of authority, we express gratitude today, and praise Thy Holy Name.

We are grateful for this land of America, "choice above all other lands." The freedom vouchsafed by the Constitution of the United States, which guarantees to every man the right to worship Thee in accordance with the dictates of his own conscience, made possible the establishment of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Oh, may the American people not forget Thee, Our Father! Help us to see the greatness of this country, and to minimize its weaknesses. We express gratitude for the right of the people to resort to the ballot, and for freedom to meet in legislative halls to settle problems and disputes without fear or coercion of dictators, secret police, or slave camps. Help people everywhere to sense more clearly that government exists for the protection of the individual—not the individual for the government.

Bless, we beseech Thee, the President of the United States, his Cabinet, the Houses of Congress, and the Judiciary. Give the President health and wisdom needful for the world leadership now placed upon him.

We express gratitude to Thee for the men whom Thou hast chosen to lead the Church from the Prophet Joseph Smith, his brother Hyrum, and other associates, their successors through the years down to the present General Authorities—The First Presidency, the Council of the Twelve, the Assistants to the Twelve, the Patriarch to the Church, the First Council of the Seventy, the Presiding Bishopric.

Continue to reveal to the President and his counsellors, The First Presidency, Thy mind and will concerning the growth and advancement of Thy work among the children of men.

We have felt Thy presence, and in time of doubt and perplexity have hearkened to Thy voice. Here in Thy Holy House, in humility and deep gratitude we acknowledge Thy divine guidance, Thy protection and inspiration. This is truly Thy Work. Help us to be able representatives, faithful and true!

Bless the Presidencies of Stakes, the High Councils, the Presidencies of Missions, the Bishoprics of Wards, Presidencies of Branches, Presidencies of Quorums—Melchizedek and Aaronic; Presidencies and Superintendencies of Auxiliary Associations throughout the world—make them keenly conscious of the fact that they are trusted leaders, and that they are to keep that trust as sacredly as they guard their lives.

This edifice, as eleven other Temples dedicated to Thy Holy Name, is a magnificent monument testifying to the faith and loyalty of the members of Thy Church in the payment of their tithes and offerings. Not only the building of Temples is thus made possible in different parts of the world, but the proclaiming of the Restored Gospel, and the carrying out of Thy purposes by the building of Chapels, Tabernacles, Recreation Halls wherever needed by churches organized in many lands and climes.

In this respect, we invoke Thy blessing particularly upon Thy people and their friends in this Temple District who have so willingly and generously contributed their means, time, and effort to the completion of this imposing, impressive House of the Lord. May each contributor be comforted in spirit, and prospered a hundred fold! May all be assured that they have the gratitude of thousands perhaps millions on the Other Side for whom the prison doors may now be opened, and deliverance proclaimed to those who will accept the Truth and be set free.

For this purpose Thou has revealed that the Gospel is to be preached to those who have passed beyond the Veil, as well as to the millions now living whose faith in Thee and in Thy Gospel is faltering and unstable, who are now being influenced by false ideologies, which are disturbing the peace of mind and distorting the thinking of honest men and women. May the Temples, Tabernacles, Churches, wherever a Branch or Ward of the Church is organized, declare even in silence that Jesus Christ is the Way, the Truth, and the Light, and that "there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved."

Guide us, O Lord, in our efforts to hasten the day when men will renounce contention and strife, when "nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more." To this end, we beseech Thee to influence the leaders of nations that their minds may be averse to war, their hearts cleansed from prejudices, suspicion and avarice, and filled with a desire for peace and righteousness.

Temples are built to Thy Holy Name as a means of uniting Thy people in bonds of faith, of peace, and of love.

Today, therefore, we come before Thee with joy and thanks-giving, with spirits jubilant and hearts filled with praise that we are permitted to participate in the dedicatory service of this, the twelfth Temple to be dedicated to Thee since the organization of Thy Church. Millions have had their attention drawn to it—many through curiosity, some because of its beauty in structure, others because of its lofty purpose. Help all, O Father, to realize more keenly and sincerely than ever before that only by obedience to eternal principles and ordinances of the Gospel of Jesus Christ may Loved Ones who died without baptism be permitted the glorious privilege of entrance into the Kingdom of God. Increase our desire, therefore, to put forth even greater effort towards the consummation of Thy purpose to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of all Thy children.

To this end, by authority of the Holy Priesthood, we dedicate this, the Los Angeles Temple of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and consecrate it for the sacred purposes for which it has been erected. We ask Thee to accept this edifice and to guard it from foundation to statue. Protect it from earthquakes, hurricanes, tempestuous storms or other devastating holocausts. We dedicate the ground on which it stands and by which it is surrounded. May the Baptismal Font, the Ordinance Rooms, and especially the Sealing Rooms be kept holy that Thy spirit may be ever present to comfort and to inspire. Protect all mechanical parts pertaining to lighting, heating, ventilating system, elevators, etc. Bless the persons who are charged to look after all such installations and fixtures that they may do so faithfully, skillfully, and reverently.

Bless the President of the Temple and his wife as Matron. Let humility temper their feelings; wisdom, and kind consideration guide their actions. May they, and others, who will be appointed as assistants and custodians, maintain an atmosphere of cleanliness and holiness in every room. Let no unclean person or thing ever enter herein, for "my spirit," saith the Lord, "will not dwell in unclean tabernacles"; neither will it remain in a house where selfish, arrogant or unwholesome thoughts abide. Therefore, may all who seek this Holy Temple come with clean hands and pure hearts that Thy Holy Spirit may ever be present to comfort, to inspire, and to bless. If any with gloomy forebodings or heavy hearts enter, may they depart with their burdens lightened and their faith increased, if any have envy or bitterness in their hearts, may such feelings be replaced by self-searching and forgiveness. May all who come within these sacred walls feel a peaceful, hallowed influence. Cause, O Lord, that even people who pass the grounds, or view the Temple from afar, may lift their eyes from the groveling things of sordid life and look up to Thee and Thy Providence.

Now, dear Lord, our Eternal Father, through love for Thee and their fellow men, faithful members of Thy Church, and others who believe in Thee, by tithes and other generous contributions, have made possible the erection and completion of this Thy Holy House, in which will be performed ordinances and ceremonies essential to the happiness, salvation, and exaltation of Thy children living in mortality and in the spirit world. Accept of our offering, hallow it by Thy Presence, protect it by Thy Power. With this prayer, we dedicate our lives to the establishment of the Kingdom of God on earth for the peace of the world and to Thy Glory forever, in the name of Thy Beloved Son, Jesus Christ, Amen.
