Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 19

A Tabernacle in Ogden

Just prior to the dedicatory services of the Los Angeles Temple, President David O. McKay officiated at the dedication of the new Ogden Tabernacle, an occasion for him which was filled with much personal satisfaction and reminiscence.

As a young man, and later as an educator and leader in the area, President McKay had participated in many meetings in the old tabernacle. The structure, dedicated on October 10, 1859, had served for many years as the center for stake conferences and special meetings in the area. There was much respect and reverence for the historic structure, but it had become inadequate to accommodate the conference audiences of the eleven stakes now using it.

Though the need for a new tabernacle was long recognized, it was 1953 before financing and other details could be arranged and approval obtained from the First Presidency of the Church to proceed with plans.

At a meeting early in 1953 the eleven stake presidents utilizing the old building met to begin planning for the new tabernacle. A special committee was appointed to supervise the building, with President Scott B. Price of East Ogden Stake selected as chairman. Chosen to assist him were Albert L. Bott, president of the Mount Ogden Stake, and Laurence S. Burton, president of the Ogden Stake.

Planning proceeded rapidly with cooperation from all concerned, and the ground-breaking services were set for July 24, 1953. Elder Harold B. Lee of the Council of the Twelve represented the general authorities, and participated in the services with many local Church and civic leaders.

The site selected for the new building was in the north half of the old tabernacle square, and was a beautiful spot adjoining the business section of the city.

Work began at once, and in a year the building had progressed to the point that the cornerstone could be laid. As indicated in Chapter 16, this event was planned to coincide with "David O. McKay Day" in Ogden, July 16, 1954, so that President McKay could officiate. At the services he placed a sealed box filled with memorabilia in the cornerstone and placed the stone bearing the date of the occasion over the opening. In his remarks the President noted that ". . . this stone is laid for the erection of a tabernacle where the priesthood can meet, and for stake conferences and other appropriate purposes."

Completion of the building, with its many details, continued through 1955, and it was then ready for dedication on February 12, 1956.

The tabernacle, a beautiful structure of white cast stone, faces the Wasatch Mountain range, only a few miles to the east. At the east end of the building is a majestic spire extending some two hundred feet into the sky. The furnishings of the building include 2,000 opera-style seats to facilitate the comfort of those attending meetings. Cost of the building, when completed, was approximately $725,000.00.

The dedicatory services were very impressive. Obviously all those from the eleven stakes desiring to attend could not be accommodated in the building, but as many as possible filled the beautiful auditorium. A choir of 145 voices was chosen from the eleven stakes, and included many of the members of the old Ogden Tabernacle Choir, a group which had given many years of musical service to the area. Choir director was Lester H. Hinchcliff, with Wayne N. Devereaux at the organ. The music for the service was particularly impressive and thrilling to the large audience.

The new pipe organ in the building, heard for the first time by the public at the dedication, gave promise of much beautiful music to be heard in the ensuing years. The organ included 2,280 pipes, housed in special chambers behind a grill designed as an appropriate background for the choir.

President McKay delivered the principal address and offered the dedicatory prayer. Present with him from the general authorities were President Stephen L Richards of the First Presidency, Elders Henry D. Moyle and Richard L. Evans of the Council of the Twelve, Thomas E. McKay, Assistant to the Council of the Twelve, and the Presiding Bishopric of the Church, Joseph L. Wirthlin, Thorpe B. Isaacson, and Carl W. Buehner. Many civic leaders were also present, including Ogden Mayor Raymond S. Wright, and E. J. Allison, city manager.

President McKay's address was most stirring. He spoke of the tabernacle as an important building, having a particular radiation. He told of other great buildings throughout the world, each with a special purpose. This tabernacle, he said, "is a house which stands for a message which 2,700 other chapels throughout the Church give to the world—the message of Peter, 'There is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.'"

He spoke of United States Ambassador to the United Nations, Henry Cabot Lodge, attempting through a letter to the various delegations, to have the existence of God as a Divine Being recognized officially by the United Nations. He spoke of the day as a memorable one in the history of the United Nations. The desire to have the Lord's support in the affairs of this body, almost was a re-enactment of a scene in the Constitutional Convention, when Benjamin Franklin made a similar plea to the delegates to invoke the blessings of God upon the efforts of that body to frame a constitution.

President McKay spoke of Lincoln's reliance upon Deity for wisdom in guiding the affairs of the nation during the Civil War, and the security he felt in the knowledge that his prayers were heard. He then cited the rejection by Russia of Mr. Lodge's suggestion as "unnecessary."

This fact in recent history, President McKay felt, was an adequate reason why we should want this tabernacle to stand as a testimony to the divine mission of the Savior, and his sacrifice for us. He lauded the united action of eleven stakes, where only one functioned originally, in declaring the message, "There is no other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. We must have faith in him as a divine Being, as our Lord and Savior. Such faith enabled the doubting Thomas to say, 'My Lord and my God,' and which also brought a glorious vision to Joseph Smith, enabling him to declare beyond question that God lives. The same faith prompted Peter to say, 'Thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living God.' It also sustained Paul when he stood before King Agrippa.

"The restored Gospel of Jesus Christ proclaims that he lives, that he is the Son of God, our brother and Savior, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace."

In the dedicatory prayer, President McKay expressed gratitude for the testimony of Joseph Smith's mission, for the true plan of salvation, for the organization of the Church, offering opportunity for so many to serve and to assume responsibility, and for America, with its inspired constitution. He made a plea for the preservation of the government, that freedom should still be guaranteed through the constitution.

He dedicated the tabernacle to the Lord, with all its physical properties, to be regarded with reverence by all who entered. He prayed for blessings upon all services therein, that faith would be established, and good accomplished by what was done.

A spirit of unity was invoked for all who served here. "Keep them one, as thou, Father, and thy Son are one," he prayed.

President McKay spent more than an hour greeting all who came to the stand, shaking their hands, and giving each a word of encouragement. He saw and greeted many old friends from his years of residence in Ogden and Weber County.
