Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 20

The New Zealand Temple

A significant step forward in the Church's program of temple building was taken in 1958 when, in that one year, two new temples in opposite parts of the world were completed and dedicated by President David O. McKay.

The New Zealand Temple, at Hamilton, was dedicated by President McKay on April 20, 1958. Dedication of the London Temple in Great Britain came on September 7, 1958. Both were constructed under the careful direction of President McKay.

The general authorities had felt for some time that a temple should be constructed in the South Pacific. Missionary work among the Polynesian people had met with continuing success since it first began in 1851. Thousands had accepted the gospel during the ensuing years, and proved to be loyal and faithful members of the Church. However, lack of contact with a temple was a serious deterrent to the growth of these individuals. Some had been able to reach the temple in Hawaii, but this involved considerable expense and much loss of time for a people who generally were of meager circumstances.

Discussion of a temple in the South Pacific was underway even at the time President McKay and Elder Hugh J. Cannon made their world tour in 1921. The Hawaiian Temple had been completed and dedicated in 1919, and it was hoped that this would help somewhat among the members in the islands of the South Pacific. However, it became apparent as the work continued to grow that a temple would have to be built nearer these faithful saints.

In 1954 the general authorities approved the building of a temple at once somewhere in the South Pacific. The location could not be determined so easily, since there were many Church members in all of the islands, as well as on the continent of Australia. All must be given consideration, but since only one temple could be built it would have to be located where it could serve the most people to the best advantage.

Accordingly, it was decided by the general authorities that President McKay should visit all the missions involved, and make a careful survey of conditions and needs and then determine the location of the new temple.

Such a trip was planned, and on January 1, 1955, President and Sister McKay left Salt Lake City by plane, accompanied by President Franklin J. Murdock of the Highland Stake who was to serve as secretary of the tour. Plans called for them to visit all of the missions of the Pacific Islands and make the trip a missionary tour as well as a fact-finding trip. Some of the islands had been visited by previous presidents of the Church, and President McKay had visited all of them in 1921. This visit, however, would be the first to all of the missions by the President of the Church.

First stop was San Francisco, where the party remained until January 4, 1955, then leaving by plane for Honolulu, Hawaii. As they left the airport they were informed that a hurricane warning was posted for the mid-Pacific area, and undoubtedly would alter their plans. Some concern was expressed about continuing the flight, but President McKay expressed no worry at all and insisted that they continue. He recounted his travels over almost all of the globe without any serious trouble, and said he felt secure while on this important mission.

The flight to the Hawaiian Islands was made without any difficulty. Only a few hours were spent in Hawaii since they planned to tour these islands on their return trip. They left Honolulu in the evening, with President and Mrs. Wendell B. Mendenhall of the San Joaquin Stake joining their party there.

During the night a stop was made at Canton Island, a small spot in the Pacific, where they were warned of the dangers of hurricane weather. Their next scheduled stop was at Nandi, in the Fiji Islands, and the plane's route was directly in the path of the storm. The pilot was apprehensive about continuing, but while they were waiting, an unexplainable thing occurred. Reports were received that the storm had suddenly changed its course, almost reversing itself, and they could proceed to Fiji with no concern.

This peculiar action of the hurricane caused a good deal of comment at Nandi and Suva, on the Fiji Islands. Weather officials explained in detail the abrupt change of the storm's path, but could offer no explanation for it, and called the typhoon "The Screwball." This was not the only instance of favorable changes in the weather during the trip. President Murdock, in his narration of the trip, referred often to sudden changes, cessation of violent storms at the last minute, and other happenings which enabled parts of the trip to continue or open air meetings to be held as planned. He reported that President McKay always anticipated good weather, and occasionally referred to some lack of faith on the part of those who worried. President Murdock said that such changes came with so much regularity that as far as he was concerned they were not accidental.

On Fiji an automobile trip of 135 miles was made from Nandi to Suva, where they would embark for the Tongan Islands. At Suva they were still talking about the typhoon and its unexplainable action. President McKay and the entire party felt that there was a protecting influence in this, as well as in so many other things on the trip, that made for security in the face of great danger.

One of the prime purposes of the detailed inspection of the island missions was expressed by President McKay at Suva. When asked specifically by a reporter, he answered that it was to be able to better the educational facilities of the natives. Agricultural and mechanical training would be stressed, "for here we realize that their destiny lies." He said further, "We come to give, not to take away."

Here on this Fiji Island the President remained quietly over Sunday; that is, it was so intended. But the few saints and missionaries had planned some interesting activity, and the results were typical of the personal interest President McKay has always shown in those he meets. There is no place so isolated, nor group so small, but that he shows the same interest that he would give to the largest congregation in the most beautiful chapel in the Church. And how he is loved and admired because of that tender feeling for everyone!

Here, near Suva, lived a brother, C. G. Smith, who had been on the island for many years, and had kept a little group of twenty-eight members together, with frequent meetings at his home. He had planned a meeting for 10 o'clock, at which all members, and the two missionaries on the island, would be present to meet the visitors, and welcome them to Suva. All were present when the President and his party arrived, and they were greeted wth the usual, "We Thank Thee, O God, For a Prophet," with feeling sufficient to bring tears to many eyes. A man and woman were present who, as youngsters, had seen President McKay on his first visit to the island in 1921, and who had witnessed the calming effect of a prayer he uttered during a storm at sea, when the boat was threatened with destruction.

President McKay explained that conditions on the Fiji Islands were such at the first visit, 34 years ago, that the mission could not be opened. He was not aware that active work was yet going on there. Now to find a few faithful members, and the work under way, was truly a pleasure. He was happy that circumstances had brought them together.

The intimate, spiritual session, at which many expressed themselves, brought them very close together, and when the "good-byes" were said, another sacred memory was left to be cherished until the next visit.

Before sailing for Tonga, the few Saints came aboard ship for a final visit of two hours with President and Mrs. McKay. It was an intimate and loving farewell from a small, isolated group, alone in the midst of the great Pacific Ocean, trying to maintain their faith under trying conditions.

The next step of the tour was made by boat to the Tongan Islands, and the landing was made at Nukulofoa. Each island visited brought back memorable hours spent by President McKay and his companion, Elder Cannon, on that first visit. Well-remembered faces still greeted them at almost every stop, and the wonderful experiences were re-lived again and again. Everywhere the stimulating evidences of the gospel appeal were apparent. Schools had been built, and new ones were ready for dedication. Appreciation was constantly being shown for what had been done, not alone by Church members, but also by non-members and by government officials.

The landing was made at Nukulofoa at 5:30 in the morning. The party was greeted by President and Mrs. M. V. Coombs, and by four Tongan members who had come 140 miles by open sailboat to meet them. After breakfast they were taken to the newly completed Liahona College. Here more than a thousand people greeted them, seated in a bowery in a beautiful coconut grove. Songs were sung, native rites and ceremonies conducted, and costumed dances given by the members. Following this a religious meeting was held, with the usual fine feeling, and the long handshaking period always given for an hour or more after such assemblages.

As the party left Nukulofoa, two thousand or more friends were on hand, including the British Consul, and all joined in singing, "God Be With You Till We Meet Again." A stop was made at Vavau, and another at the Tongan Islands, where they were greeted with songs by almost fifty members. A meeting was held in a branch chapel, built in 1912. A greeting was given by a member of parliament, who was not a Church member. President McKay gave them a wonderful message, with the usual responses of appreciation.

The Samoan Islands were next visited, and the first stop was made at Paga Paga. Here they were met by the Governor and the Crown Prince. The prince had been very friendly to the Church leaders, and offered the President a private car for his use at Paga Paga. He said he would soon make a trip to Europe, and hoped to see President McKay in Salt Lake City on his return trip through the United States.

One of the outward expressions of the love of these people for President McKay, was the erection of a monument at Suniatu, Samoa, to commemorate a touching incident of his first visit. The white shaft stands in a beautiful spot amidst trees of various kinds, at the place where the people had their last glimpse of him on that memorable first visit, and where he had given them a blessing. This is a shrine to which they have come again and again to live over the loving memories of those wonderful days. Another school was also dedicated before they left Suniatu, to be added to the many already in operation on these islands.

There were three Church schools on the Island of Upola, with new schools constantly being opened on the islands of the Pacific. A beautiful new school site was dedicated at Maupasago by the President. It was a 360-acre tract of choice land. The Pesaga school at Apia, is another fine example of Church schools, with good buildings and class rooms, and is called the "Garden Spot of Apia." A banquet was tendered the party here, arranged by the members, and attended by government, Church, and civic officials, and given in the recreation hall of the school. A new school at Suniatu was also dedicated by President McKay.

The schools dedicated or visited by President McKay were typical of Church efforts to better the education of those in the islands. Good teachers were provided in addition to the missionaries who spent quite a bit of their time teaching in the schools. The results of their efforts were seen in the building of strong Church members who were educated, capable men and women. President McKay expressed the thought that here was truly where the pure in heart dwelt.

The boats were now replaced by planes for the visits to the Tahitian Islands. These were usually short trips, with many stops in these island groups. Meetings were held early and late, with saints and missionaries, according to the time of arrival or leaving. Early or late, the President was always given enthusiastic welcomes, with songs, flowers, and leis. It was an opportunity of a lifetime to be able to see the President under any conditions, and to be permitted even a few moments to show their devotion. The weather was often hot and humid, but all possible time was given to these visits, which held such meaning for the people.

The return plane flight included short stops at the Cook, Samoan, and Fiji Islands, with brief visits at each stop. There was time to work in Sunday afternoon meetings at Suva and Nandi. Nandi was the last stop before leaving for the final leg of the journey to New Zealand.

The Auckland airport was twenty miles from the town, but a large crowd was there and ready with a greeting. The change in temperature was refreshing, for here it was early autumn, and already light wraps were needed. An enthusiastic welcome was given them here. They then motored to Auckland, and after only a short stay for an inspection of the new Auckland chapel, they were on their way for a seventy-mile ride to Hamilton, where the Church had a three-million-dollar college under construction. This impressive project promised to become a real landmark in the progress of the Church, as well as for the people of New Zealand.

The college campus is part of a beautiful 215-acre tract, with a rock quarry about seven miles distant. There was great building activity going on, utilizing mostly Maoris, who were using all kinds of American machines. Most of them had learned the intricacies of the various jobs from capable supervisors, and had become skilled workers. They were mostly serving two year work missions, and were apparently happy with what they were doing.

The Church has a large farm of 729 acres, near to the college campus. Here they raise cattle, horses, and sheep, as well as all the products useful in their economy. The rolling hills and wooded areas made an impressive landscape for the travelers.

The workers on the college buildings had their families with them, living in individual cottages, and having small tracts of ground for growing vegetables. They were interested, even fascinated, with the work they were doing, and were looking happily to the time when their children would be attending the college. They began the day with prayer, and were cheerful and happy with their work.

The party visited the city of Tauanga, only a short distance away, which was the center of activities of Elder Matthew Cowley, who spent so much time in this land, and who was regarded with such intense devotion. His wonderful influence seemed everywhere apparent.

A tour of the adjoining country was made with stops at various places where meetings had been scheduled. Local and government officials were usually present, and the greetings spontaneous and impressive. There was always the feeling that the nation was happy with what the Church was doing for the people of New Zealand, and they expressed their gratitude in many ways.

The Church officials and their wives had arranged all the details of the tour of New Zealand, with the greatest care. This had also been the case in all of the Pacific Islands, and as a result the programs everywhere were carried out smoothly and impressively.

At the schools and colleges under construction, the efficiency of the contractors and workers was everywhere evident. The long experience of the Church in its work in the missions all over the world, has resulted in economical construction and management. The loyalty of all was evident, with their attitude based on the conviction that all is planned by a divine source, and is being directed by inspired prophets of God. It would not be possible to carry on this massive program of spiritual and secular education otherwise. There is nothing comparable to it in the world. Here in the Pacific, alone, many observers have stated frankly that the Mormon Church is doing more for the spiritual, moral, and economic development of the people, than all other churches combined.

The President and his party left Auckland for Sydney, Australia, on January 31, just one month after leaving home. It had been an eventful trip, so far, probably one of the most productive ever made to these missions. The great continent of Australia would be the last to be visited, except for short stops on the homeward journey.

The plane ride to Sydney was made without incident. A large body of Church members and representatives of the Australian government greeted them at the airport. Only a short stop was made at Sydney at this time, as they would return at a later time for a longer visit. They left for Brisbane, and enroute encountered a violent storm. The pilot expressed concern because of the violence that appeared certain to be faced. The lights of the plane switched off and as suddenly returned. The storm melted almost miraculously, and the plane flew into the Brisbane airport in calm weather at 10 p.m.

A chapel was dedicated at Ipswitch, near Brisbane, at which the President spoke to a large congregation. He advised the people not to incur too great expense in order to go to the temples at Hawaii or on the continent, because it was very likely that a temple would be built nearer to them. This was the only public reference to the probability of another temple being built in the Pacific area, but it was generally understood that such a temple was in contemplation by the general authorities.

The President's party then returned to Sydney, but emplaned at once for a long trip to Adelaide. The route followed the coast-line generally, which is the productive area of Australia; the interior being largely desert. The passenger list on the plane included a group of young athletes who were to participate in a track and field meet at Adelaide. They were interested in the attitude of the Church toward athletics, as they were aware of the record of the Church missionary basketball team having won the Australian championship. They also commended the Church's attitude toward the use of tobacco and alcoholic beverages. Many of them did not indulge, and felt that they were benefitted as a result.

On reaching Adelaide, the athletes became excited when they discovered a large crowd at the airport. They naturally assumed that a great reception awaited them, and rushed off the plane. They were chagrined when they learned that the people were awaiting the arrival of President McKay, and greeted him with "We Thank Thee, O God, For a Prophet." They took it all good naturedly, however.

In the greetings in Australia, reference was made to the Tabernacle Choir's broadcasts. These had been used for more than twenty years over the entire system of stations in Australia, and were much appreciated. The vastness of this country can be appreciated when it is known that many saints had driven eighteen hundred miles, from Perth, on the west coast of Australia in order to see and hear the President. The nature of the country is also appreciated from the fact that one railroad leading to Adelaide had a stretch of track of four hundred miles without a curve or a hill.

Immigration is encouraged to Australia by the making of government loans to desirable European families who are unable to finance their passage. If they remain for two years, the loans become a gift. If they return sooner, they must repay the loan. Good citizens are thus acquired.

On leaving Adelaide the usual large crowd assembled at the airport. Many were in tears. One reporter asked the meaning of so much emotion. It was explained that the affection for their President was genuine and universal. This was their first experience of meeting their great leader, and it would be the last for most of them, in all probability. This last glimpse, a loving goodbye, and his blessing that would be the last event of the visit, would be cherished by them as long as memory lasted. The parting was always sad, but an experience of only a day, or even a few hours with him, would be a highlight in the lives of all of them.

President William Edward Waters explained further, that he had never met President McKay before, but he had been praying for his protection and success as his leader for many years, just as all these people had. The experience of seeing and hearing him now was wonderful beyond expression.

On the trip to Melbourne from Adelaide, the plane flew over vast areas of sand—sand and nothing else. President Murdock, in his fine narration, lapsed into a reverie of the things that impressed him most. The vastness of the Australian country stood out as he flew over this desert. He thought also of the waste, as he saw it everywhere, especially in the expenditures of twenty-one percent of the income of the people for tobacco and liquor.

At every airport on this trip, President McKay's party was greeted and assisted by government officials in every possible way. Many courtesies were extended, with solicitations for their comfort and convenience. Interviews by the press were the rule, and fellow travelers often were amazed, and asked many questions as to why so much attention was given by so many.

Missionary meetings were held at all places where elders were stationed, and these usually lasted for hours. Many young elders had never met President McKay personally, and these intimate meetings were appreciated beyond expression. The President's counsel in these conferences was always so helpful and inspiring that they were invaluable in the experience of the missionaries.

Visits were made at many places to the Governors or the offices of local officials. Many courtesies were extended at these visits, which would react in many ways for the good of the missionary work. Always the objective of the President was the creating of greater interest and respect for the Church and its representatives. The many similar foreign tours of President McKay have had that effect in great measure, and he has been in every respect the great missionary of the Church.

The greatness of the New Zealand and Australian countries was impressed upon the President more strongly than he had ever experienced it before. The change in sentiment in Australia was often commented upon. The gospel was introduced into Australia in 1851, by John Murdock and Charles Mandell. With world sentiment almost universally hostile at that time, one can easily appreciate the obstacles they faced, in order to find the few for whom the message would have appeal. It required courage and determination to carry the gospel message at that time, but the work was done, and without it, President McKay's tours of the world would have been of no avail.

The trip by plane from Melbourne to Sydney was the last leg of this epoch-making tour of these great countries. Sydney is a city of three million people, and is probably the greatest seaport, in some respects, of any in the world. It has 230 miles of shoreline, and handles easily all the greatest ocean liners.

The stay in Sydney concluded with a visit to the Zoological Gardens, one of the finest in the world. Australia is noted for its many strange animals, found nowhere else. The zoo was under the direction of Sir Edward Hallestrom, who was also its builder. He accompanied the party, explaining the various kinds of animals, with something of their habits and history. It was a revealing and most worthwhile visit.

During this tour President McKay had spoken twenty-two times, including responses to welcoming addresses, farewell speeches, and sermons. The largest audience was more than two thousand, in Samoa. There were twenty-six press conferences. The President talked intimately with officials of all ranks, explaining the ideals and objectives of the Church, and was received courteously and warmly everywhere. The one pleasing thing so often referred to was the great work that the Mormon Church has done for the welfare and advancement of the Polynesian people.

The effect of Mrs. McKay's presence on this tour, was noted especially by President Murdock. Her appeal to the people generally, was always apparent and her visits with missionaries brought a feeling of the presence of their own mothers. Her talks always carried a message of practical value.

The party left Sydney on February 8, 1955, reaching Honolulu on the following day. The plane flew low over the island of Molakai, where a view was had of the leper colony, and where twenty-four Church members were patients. They were anticipating an air visit from the President, and the group waved a greeting to the plane, which made a second circuit of the colony, and the passengers waved in return. Several stops were made at the different islands, where crowds always greeted the travelers. At one point, arrangements had been made for a broadcast by the President to all the Hawaiian groups of islands. The President, accordingly, gave a greeting and told of his impressions of what he had seen and heard thus far. He was given a huge, highly polished, key to the City of Maui in token of his visit. Various entertainments were provided at Maui, and a meeting held with eighteen missionaries.

Similar greetings were given by large crowds on the Island of Hilo, with sumptuous entertainment. Here the beautiful flowers intrigued him, gorgeous beyond description because of the wonderful climate, and the two hundred inches of rainfall each year. Seven hundred persons attended a meeting to listen to President and Mrs. McKay.

On the Island of Maui, President McKay and a number of others visited the little village of Puleli, where there is a monument commemorating the first baptisms in the Hawaiian Mission, and the first branch of the Church, organized in 1851. President McKay had some interesting narrations to tell of his historic visit to the same spot, with Elder Cannon in 1921.

The Island of Hawaii, which the group also visited, is known as the orchid island, with beautiful orchid gardens in every direction.

The last island visited was Oahu, on which Honolulu is located. The distance was one hundred miles to Honolulu, and it was made by plane in just thirty-two minutes. The President arrived just in time for a scheduled meeting, a habit he has had all his life. He never has a minute to spare, but he always arrives.

This special meeting was called to discuss plans for a Church college at Laie, forty miles from Honolulu. Laie had long been a Latter-day Saint community, and was the locale of the Hawaiian Temple. It is a beautiful spot in the great Pacific, all buildings clean and white, in a gorgeous setting of flowers. A feast of wonderful food was served amid striking native costumes and sweet Hawaiian music. A pageant followed, with an evening of varied entertainment.

The population here is a mixture of many nations and races, the Hawaiians, Caucasians, Chinese, and Japanese predominating. They get along well together, and, as Church members, support each other valiantly, to build up the work on these islands. This night they were at their best, to show their President what they were capable of doing.

Laie was to be the seat of the new college, and ground was broken by President McKay. The exercises were witnessed by a large crowd, including the mission and local officials, with the local members and some visitors from Utah.

A meeting with the missionaries was held at Honolulu, and this, as in all other places, proved to be the inspirational part of the visit. These meetings were always of three to six hours duration, and no time was wasted.

The tour of the Pacific Missions ended officially with this meeting. The departure from Honolulu was delayed three hours, however, because of some minor engine trouble experienced by the plane at Guam. Even though the leaving was at a late hour, a large crowd of officials and Church members was at the airport to see them off. This, President McKay said, was the climax to a continuous series of demonstrations of affection since they had left for the orient. It was necessary to spend a night in San Francisco, making their arrival back in Salt Lake City about twelve hours behind schedule.

After reviewing his tour with the Council of the Twelve, President McKay recommended that the temple in the South Pacific area be constructed at Hamilton, New Zealand. Here, it seemed, everything was ideal. The setting in the immediate vicinity of the Church college seemed perfect for a spiritual and educational center.

There was no need now for delay, and plans for the building matured rapidly under the direction of the Church architect, who had designed so many other wonderful structures for the Church.

It was not difficult to transfer the building activities from the college to the temple. There were now competent foremen, supervisors, and workers available, skilled and equipped with the necessary machinery to make good progress. "Work missions" would supply most of the labor on the temple, and the workers were eager to begin. There would be various ceremonies, and official inspections, in the course of building the temple, which, it was estimated would require about three years time. The material used would be the same as that used for the college structures, and it was certain that a beautiful and harmonious center would ultimately emerge. It would compare favorably, perhaps even surpass, many of the attractive centers built by the Church throughout the world, which had created so much comment and had done so much to change world sentiment for the better.

The work of building progressed favorably and without interruption. When the construction had advanced sufficiently to estimate the time for its probable completion, the date for the dedication was set for April 20 to 23, 1958. It is always necessary to set such dates as far in advance of completion as possible, so that all interested persons could plan ahead for their attendance. Here there would be many who would travel thousands of miles, and for all it would mean planned adjustments in order to meet the expense.

When the date was set for completion, all plans were directed toward that end. Like all other similar projects, however, unlooked-for difficulties arose, and there was fear that completion would be delayed. As the date for the dedication grew nearer, it seemed impossible that the structure would be ready. Postponement, however, was unthinkable to all concerned, as so many had made arrangements for the trip. The only thing was to speed up the work, and it seemed that already the pace was about as great as human effort could make it.

Just how serious this effort was to the workers is shown by one incident. The many Maori workers, who were on work missions, felt that the great responsibility for completion was theirs. One of the supervisors came unexpectedly upon a group, who, before beginning work for the day, were engaged in fervent prayer for help. They were appealing to the Lord that they might be given extra strength, that they might be able to go on continuously, without rest, or even food, if necessary, in order to complete the work. All said they had been blessed, so far, and that they were better off than when they began the work.

The temple was ready when the day set for dedication arrived.

President McKay again led the party from Salt Lake City for the temple dedication. He was accompanied by Mrs. McKay, and also by Elders Delbert L. Stapley and Marion G. Romney of the Council of the Twelve, Gordon B. Hinckley, Assistant to the Twelve, Rulon S. Tingey, secretary for the President, and Theodore L. (Ted) Cannon, who would write up many of the events of the trip. The wives of all these men accompanied them.

The party left Salt Lake City by plane on April 14, 1958. There were short stops at San Francisco and Honolulu before the longer ride over the vast Pacific. Short stops were made at Canton Island, and at Nandi in the Fijis. Arrival at Auckland brought the same enthusiastic reception accorded the President at airports all over the world. Crowds of Church members were on hand, as well as officials of Church and government. Songs were sung and welcoming addresses given. President McKay made a brief response, and then the party was on its way by auto to the home of the mission president, Ariel S. Ballif, twenty miles away.

There were other officials present including Wendell B. Mendenhall, chairman of the Church Building Committee, Edward L. Clissold, president of the Oahu Stake, George R. Biesinger, project supervisor, and E. Albert Rosenvall, president of the temple. All of the officers present went into conference with the President, to discuss the details of the many events impending.

On April 18, all made the eighty mile trip by automobile to Hamilton, to witness a program arranged by the Church members. They arrived just in time to witness a terrifying mystical performance by costumed natives, in a huge, natural amphitheatre, between the temple and the college. It was estimated that about eight thousand people witnessed this spectacle, lounging on the surrounding hillsides. The object was to determine whether there would be peace or war. In the ceremonial portrayal, a fierce-looking individual, with beaded skirt and head ornament, struck a defiant attitude before the President, and threw a long, carved staff on the ground, an emblem of authority. If the President picked it up, there would be peace. When the President complied, in the interest of peace, the defiant one picked up a carved hatchet and placed it on the ground before Mrs. McKay, which she recovered. This brought smiles to the fierce-looking face, but outlandish yells from an old woman who ran up and down before the assembly.

This was followed by an elaborate program put on by the Maoris, Samoans, and Tongans, in great numbers. There were songs, dances, and ceremonials, given partly in the native languages, and partly in English. At the conclusion, President McKay expressed his gratitude for the welcoming and interesting demonstration.

In the evening, a pleasing meeting was held in the two large connecting halls of the chapel. Singing Mothers were in one, and a mixed choir in the other. There were about five hundred singers in all. Short talks were given by the general authorities who were present, and those who had been in charge of the activities at the temple site. All the talks indicated the intensity of the devotion to the work by all concerned, and the spiritual atmosphere in which it had been carried on.

The opening day of the three-day dedication services, April 20, 1958, was the realization of the long-anticipated completion of this great project. Members from all the Pacific Islands were present, and about fifty from the States. Ted Cannon wrote that "an air of wonder hung over New Zealand this week, wonder that such a project as the New Zealand Temple, and the Church College, could be completed in such a spectacular way." The days preceding had seen many thousands of people, mostly non-members, who had waited in long lines, to view the interior of the temple. They were all amazed at what they saw. It was hard to realize the motive behind all this great effort, and enormous expense, which a Church, and its individual members, so willingly contributed toward world progress.

The explanation was given by President McKay, said Ted Cannon, in that the Church accepts the mandate given by the Savior to his Apostles, "Go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature." That commission has been re-imposed by the Lord to his prophets of this dispensation, and is accepted literally as one of their great missions in life. They are carrying out the mandate in every possible way, education through secular and spiritual development going hand in hand.

That is why the Church is willing to spend seven million dollars on the New Zealand College, and another million on the temple. That is why hundreds of members are willing to take work missions of one or two years, at enormous sacrifice, for the building programs. They do this for the pleasure of the service, looking forward to the time when they, and their children after them, will reap the benefits of the temple, schools, and chapels.

There were two sessions for each of the three days of the dedication services. Talks were given by Apostles Stapley and Romney, and Elder Hinckley, and the officials who had taken part in the work of building and preparation. President McKay spoke at each of the sessions, and gave the dedicatory prayer. The sessions were most impressive, those present sensing the great importance of this momentous event in the history of the Church.

The prayer given by the President expressed gratitude that the descendants of Father Lehi were guided to these islands, to become associated with other leading and influential nations of the world. Thanks was expressed for the United States Constitution, which made possible the re-establishment of the Church of Christ upon the earth. "We are thankful also for the liberty existing in other free nations, especially in New Zealand, so that this great temple could be built," President McKay said. Blessings were invoked upon the British Government, that it might continue to cooperate with that of New Zealand in upholding that liberty.

Gratitude was expressed for the restoration of the Gospel through heavenly visitations, with the authority and power as they were present in days of the Savior and the Apostles. "We are also grateful for the restoration of the plan by which the hearts of the children are turned to the fathers," President McKay said, "and we pray that all may sense fully the spirit of Elijah, and utilize the temple for the purpose for which it has been built. We are thankful for the system revealed, by which, through the payment of tithes, this great work of salvation can be carried on. The need for carrying the Gospel message to the world must continue to be appreciated, and strength given to resist the influences in the world today which would undermine the divine mission of the Church."

Thus was completed the great project which had marked another mile-stone in the progress of the Church. President McKay had completed another great missionary service, and even though advanced in years, had impressed the entire Church and the world with his vigor and strength in this strenuous activity.

There was yet another satisfying service to be completed before leaving New Zealand, that of dedicating the college which was now already in use. The general public of New Zealand took part in this function, and was represented by the Prime Minister, the Right Honorable Walter Nash, who gave an address in which he expressed the appreciation of the nation for this service to his people. Other New Zealand notables who attended were L. F. Enspr, superintendent of Auckland Schools, Dame Hilda Ross, member of parliament for New Zealand, Francis H. Russell, United States Ambassador to New Zealand, and George F. Fennemore, United States Consul.

On the college campus are twenty buildings and twenty residences. The school opened with 350 students, aged thirteen to eighteen. Most were Church members, the majority being Maoris. The school has the largest auditorium, organ, and gymnasium, and the most modern class-room equipment in New Zealand. The courses include agriculture, homemaking, commerce, fine arts, education, and engineering. The teachers are mostly Americans.

Generous tribute was paid by the President to the many Church officials who had worked so hard and so faithfully over the years on these great projects, which had now been completed. No clear estimate could be placed on the hours of study and planning in the preparatory stages of development. The actual work, the labor and supervision, entailed endless application and devotion over many years. No more devoted effort could be given to any project for education and spiritual uplift, than had been shown by those engaged in the development and completion of the New Zealand college and temple. Through all the final stages of the building, the presence and influence of Elder Matthew Cowley seemed to be felt by all the workers. He had spent so many years with them, offering encouragement and help toward this very end, that most of them felt his actual participation in the completion of the work. Appreciation was also expressed for the great service of those who had filled work missions, without whom this work could not have been completed.

The efforts of the President in New Zealand were now completed, and the little party left for home. There was another interesting event on the homeward trip, however, that of the dedication of the beautiful chapel at Suva, Fiji Islands. Here, it will be remembered, a little group of members had been kept together, and active, over many years by Elder C. G. Smith, who was employed at Suva. Their efforts had been so noteworthy that it had been decided to help them with a meeting place.

On arrival at Suva, preparations had been completed for the services. First there was entertainment and an elaborate feast, such as can be provided only in the Pacific Islands. The chapel, itself, was described by Mrs. McKay as "one of the most beautiful Church edifices I have yet seen." The labor mission had functioned here as it had in New Zealand, and with surprising effects. Coral rock had been gathered and placed in cement in a most effective way. "The windows are layers of glass, each of which can be opened by the touch of a finger, and the wood is from the marvelous New Zealand trees. All around the windows are plateaus of green, green and red, and red leaves, so wonderful that flowers are not needed. But roses and other flowers are there too." Elder Smith had made a veritable paradise of the surrounding grounds, with wonderful plants and flowers, transplanted from various gardens on the island.

The President and Mrs. McKay went fasting to the dedication services, on May 4, 1958. The Governor, Sir Ronald Gawey and Lady Gawey, with a party of four, the Mayor, Dr. A. D. Leys and Mrs. Leys, the Colonial Secretary, Mr. P. D. McDonald, and Mr. Maurice Scoot, attended, and were greeted by the congregation arising and standing until they were seated. This courtesy had already been extended to President McKay and his party when they entered. The little choir had been organized only recently but gave beautiful music for the service.

Talks were given by President Mendenhall and Elder Tingey, and then President McKay spoke to the subject, Men's Hearts Can Be Changed. The newspapers reported the address, which can be summarized very briefly. He said he had much pride in the building of this chapel, and in the devotion of the members here. The Mormon Church is dedicated, he said, to the changing of men's lives. Human nature does change, and it can be changed now as it has been in the past, and will be in the future, until the world is drowned in its own blood.

The world today has the power to whisper words through space. But what are they to whisper? The Church is answering that question by building chapels all over the world, except in Russia, and some day we will be there, because the Russian people will want to hear the word of God. That is why thousands of dollars are spent on this chapel, and on others like it throughout the world, President McKay said.

There was much interest manifested by the press in the dedication proceedings. Several reporters were present. One reporter was especially interested, since he and his wife, a teacher, had been having some talks with the missionaries. He asked about the missionary program, and the President related the story of a sailor as typical of the interest in missionary work. This young sailor had contacted the missionaries in the islands, and was impressed with their devotion to the extent that he wrote to his mother that he intended to send his checks to her, to be deposited to his credit, and to be used for a mission when his service was ended. In the event he did not return, the money was to be given to one who deserved to go on a mission, but who did not have the means to go. The boy did not return, and the mother used the money as the boy had advised. The man and wife were much impressed, and, with tears in their eyes, expressed their gratitude for the hour's talk the President had given them.

The long ride to Hawaii was tiring, but they had the usual enthusiastic welcome at Honolulu, and then motored to Laie to make a survey of the college, now nearing completion. The President then talked to two thousand students and their parents in the chapel. After an inspection of the college buildings and the temple, they returned to Honolulu.

The work now being completed, they left for Los Angeles and home, arriving without incident, and were welcomed by the usual devoted group of Church officials, family, and friends.
