Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 21

The London Temple

The second temple to be dedicated by President David O. McKay in 1958 was the imposing structure at Newchapel Farm, Lingfield, England, some 26 miles south of London. This marked the fourth temple to be dedicated by President McKay as President of the Church.

Dedicatory services were conducted on Sunday, September 7, 1958, and continued through Tuesday, September 9, with two sessions held each day. As always, the dedicatory services were inspirational to all in attendance, and faith-promoting to the entire membership of the Church.

While he was in London for the dedication, President McKay also observed his 85th birthday, this occurring on September 8, 1958.

The London Temple, the second such edifice to be erected by the Church in Europe, stands on historic ground. The site was purchased by the Church from the Pears family in 1953, and is a 32-acre estate known as Newchapel Farm. The land was listed in the Domesday Book of William the Conquerer. The oldest part of the large manor house on the property dates back to Elizabethan times.

Negotiations to purchase the site were begun under the direction of Elder Stayner Richards, president of the British Mission at the time. President McKay inspected the property in 1952 together with President A. Hamer Reiser, who had succeeded Elder Richards as mission president. President Reiser concluded the transaction for the Church in 1953.

After approving the purchase of the farm as a temple site, President McKay returned to the spot in 1953 to determine the exact location of the temple. As he arrived in England he confided to some of the brethren that he had some misgivings about the purchase of the land. But when he saw again the lovely, green landscape, the great manor house, and the beauty of the entire location, all doubt disappeared.

With Edward O. Anderson, temple architect, President McKay spent the greater part of a day walking about the grounds considering the most suitable spot for the sacred edifice. The location was finally decided, and a stake was driven to mark this new focal point of the ancient estate.

President McKay was particularly impressed with an ancient oak tree growing on the site. He was informed that the tree was at least 450 years old, and had been growing when Columbus discovered America. He gave specific instructions that the tree "be preserved."

Workmen at the site, following his instructions that the tree be retained, later named it the "David O. McKay Oak." A special plaque was inscribed and placed on the trunk of the tree as a tribute to the durability of the tree and comparing the life of President McKay to the strength of this oak.

At the time of the temple dedication, President McKay observed the plaque on the oak near the east walk of the temple, opposite the front door. He meditated over the beautiful inscription, and then modestly asked that his name be removed from the plaque, feeling that the inscription was a fitting tribute to the sturdy oak. The name of the tree, however, persists as an indication of esteem toward President McKay.

Several days after President McKay and Elder Anderson selected the exact location of the temple on the site, a meeting was scheduled to dedicate the site for its sacred purpose. President McKay presided at the open-air meeting held August 10, 1953. Some 100 members of the Church gathered to hear the address and prayer offered by President McKay.

From this beginning the preparations continued, and Elder Anderson and his staff began drawing plans, a task which required nearly two years. When plans were approved, the work on the structure was ready to begin.

While he was in England with the Tabernacle Choir prior to the Swiss Temple dedication, President McKay returned to the London Temple site and on August 27, 1955, officiated at the groundbreaking exercises. A crowd of 2,500, including choir members, stood in alternating showers and sunshine as President McKay spoke, and then turned the first spade full of earth marking the beginning of construction. Present with the President were Elder Richard L. Evans of the Council of the Twelve, Sir Thomas P. Bennett, head of the architectural firm in England selected by the Church to supervise the temple's construction, and President Reiser of the British Mission.

Elder Evans was selected by the First Presidency nearly two years later to preside at the cornerstone laying ceremonies held May 11, 1957. The walls of the temple had risen to the height of the first story, and the Portland limestone facing was in place. A cornerstone of the same material had been prepared, containing periodicals, clippings, the Standard Works of the Church, photographs, and other items of interest.

Over 1,000 persons braved the intermittent rains to witness Elder Evans place the cornerstone. Those in the congregation sang "God Save the Queen," "Praise To The Man," and "The Spirit of God Like A Fire Is Burning." A special duet, "Open The Gates of The Temple" was also performed.

During the ceremony, Sir Thomas Bennett, the architect, presented a special souvenir trowel to Elder Evans to deliver to President McKay. In an accompanying letter to Elder Evans he paid this tribute to President McKay:

Would you say that I have the most lively memories of his gracious presence when this project was inaugurated about two years ago and say that no one could work with the Church without being impressed with the high esteem in which he is held by everyone who comes in contact with him. . . . We are sure that the project of this Church which your President launched is a great project which cannot help but have a great future in the Church itself.

In his remarks at the cornerstone laying, Elder Evans traced the history of the British Mission since its beginning in 1837, and also explained the purpose and sacred nature of the temple.

Progress on the construction was rapid following the laying of the cornerstone. By the end of 1957 work was well past the halfway mark. A solid concrete roof slab was poured and then covered with copper sheet. The needle point of the spire reached 160 feet from the ground and was weather-proofed with a sheath of copper.

By July, 1958, the end was in sight and plans were already underway for the dedication. The announcement was made that President McKay would preside at the ceremonies scheduled for September 7 through 9. All work, including the landscaping of the grounds, was to be completed before that date. The announcement was also made that Elder Selvoy J. Boyer and his wife had been appointed by the First Presidency to serve as president and matron of the temple.

Final touches on the building and grounds were completed during the first part of August, and thousands of Britons were allowed to see the interior beginning August 16. Temple and mission officials had thought some 50,000 people might visit the temple grounds, but they were hardly prepared for the nearly 80,000 who did come. Because of the large crowds the viewing dates had to be extended from August 30 to September 3. Crowds streamed onto the grounds in ever increasing numbers during the last week, and the guides had to stay on duty until after 10 p.m. each evening to accommodate them.

This interest caused one of the London newspapers, the Daily Express, to comment in one of its issues:

"Other churches in Great Britain would do well to take note of the response by the public created during the public viewing of the new London temple." The paper then pointed out that only one person in seven regularly attended church on Sunday in England.

Visitors to the temple saw some of England's loveliest grounds, as well as a movie on the temples of the Church, and they heard a message from President McKay on the purpose and meaning of temple work. This program was repeated 80 times a day.

Those who viewed the building noted that it was unsurpassed for the quality of materials and workmanship. It is perhaps unmatched in England in some of its features. It is not an especially large building, being just 160 by 85 feet. But the 160 foot high spire can be seen for several miles. The woodwork was done by one of the few firms in England still capable of doing high quality finishing. The teak and agba woods from Burma were the finest to be found in England, according to some authorities. The mosaic tiling from Italy, the completely automatic heating system and the copper-lead roof were features seldom found in Britain.

As to color scheme, the building was dominated by brown, beige, greens and gold in the rooms and furnishings. Lady Reading, first woman member of the House of Lords, was among those who visited the temple. She expressed a special fondness for the restful, simple color scheme. Her comment expressed the feeling of many who had seen the temple. "I feel the spirit of God there as I've never felt it before," she wrote. "I feel at peace with myself and I can't understand why."

General contractor for the construction was the firm of Kirk and Kirk of London.

As President McKay made plans to attend the dedication it became apparent that Sister McKay would be unable to accompany him. Her doctors advised against the trip, and so, heeding their counsel, she remained at home. This was his first trip as President of the Church without Sister McKay at his side.

President McKay and his party left the Salt Lake airport at 8:30 a.m. on Tuesday, September 2, and after a brief stop-over in Chicago proceeded to New York City where they spent the night at the Plaza Hotel. Their departure from New York was Wednesday, September 3, at 4 p.m., and they arrived in London Thursday morning, September 4. They were taken by private car to Grosvenor House. As soon as he arrived at the hotel President McKay sent messages of their safe arrival to Sister McKay and to members of the First Presidency.

A special press conference had been arranged during the afternoon by Elder Richard L. Evans. The conference was attended by 20 newspaper reporters, as well as the motion picture crew of the British Broadcasting Company with their recorders. Elder Evans reported that the interviews were handled "skillfully and considerately" by President McKay.

A reporter in the London News-Chronicle factually described the temple, and then said of President McKay:

He has a leonine head, silver hair, and a broad, sunburned face that give him a certain resemblance to Mr. Ben-Gurion. This is perhaps appropriate, since his duties in Salt Lake City require him to fulfill the role of the post, established by Brigham Young, the man who led the great trek west.

The article was accompanied by a photograph of President McKay alighting from the plane upon his arrival in London and being greeted by members of the Church.

The Times of London used a one column picture of President McKay and stated that he would discuss many administrative matters of the Church while in Great Britain. They also published this comment:

President McKay said he is confident that eventually everybody will come to believe in Christianity; Communists, Fascists, and all others will be forced to see its truth.

On Friday, September 5, President McKay visited the temple site and reviewed final arrangements for the dedication. That evening he returned to London and enjoyed a birthday dinner with his sister, Mrs. Joseph R. Morrell, and her daughter, Jeannette Morrell, professor of English at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah.

On Saturday, September 6 President McKay held a special meeting with missionaries and mission presidents at 50 Prince's Gate in London. Other general authorities of the Church present for the dedicatory services also attended this meeting. The missionaries and mission presidents gave reports and bore testimonies in an inspirational session.

Saturday evening President McKay was the guest of Col. Harold Person, U. S. Air Force, manager of the Air Force offices in England. Following dinner they attended a performance of "My Fair Lady" at Drury Lane Theater. President McKay expressed his enjoyment of the performance, but said it would have been better if Sister McKay had been there to enjoy it with him.

The first of the dedicatory sessions was held Sunday morning, September 7. In attendance with President McKay were more general authorities of the Church than had been in England since 1840 when eight members of the Council of the Twelve came there as missionaries. With President McKay were President Joseph Fielding Smith of the Council of the Twelve, Elders Henry D. Moyle, Richard L. Evans, and Hugh B. Brown of the Council of the Twelve, Elders ElRay L. Christiansen and Gordon B. Hinckley, Assistants to the Council of the Twelve, and Bishop Thorpe B. Isaacson of the Presiding Bishopric.

General auxiliary officers present included President Belle S. Spafford, general president of the Relief Society, and Sister Emily H. Bennett, first counselor in the general presidency of the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association.

"This is a great day for members of the Church," President McKay declared in his remarks before offering the dedicatory prayer. He noted that it marked a new era of the Church's growth in Great Britain. Speaking of the temple itself, President McKay said "It is important not only to the members here, but also to tens of thousands of others who have left these islands and now recall in sacred memory their ancestry for whom work will now be done."

Other speakers at the first session Sunday morning included President Clifton G. M. Kerr, president of the British Mission; Edward O. Anderson, temple architect; President Joseph Fielding Smith; and A. Hamer Reiser, former British Mission president. Music was furnished by choirs from the Sheffield and Manchester districts. The solo number, "Bless This House," which has become traditional at temple dedications, was sung by Miss Ardyth Twitchell, a missionary in England.

At the services only 600 persons could be accommodated in the main temple auditorium where the speakers could be seen. An additional 1,400 were crowded into the other rooms of the building where they heard the proceedings over a public address system. In all, some 12,000 persons participated in the services during the six dedicatory services through Tuesday, September 9. The Sunday morning session was reserved for members of the British Mission, with those of other missions receiving special seating in the additional sessions.

In his inspirational dedicatory prayer, President McKay made a fervent appeal for peace. A portion of the prayer follows:

On the occasion of the dedication of this, the fourteenth Temple, may we first express overwhelming gratitude just to be alive in this great age of the world. We pause this morning to open our hearts to Thee for this special privilege. No other time in world history has been so wonderful—no other age wherein Thy secret powers have been more within human control; in no other era hast Thy purposes been nearer human comprehension. Help us, O Lord, truly to live!

Next to life we express gratitude for the gift of Free Agency. When Thou didst create man, Thou placed within him part of Thine Omnipotence and bade him choose for himself. Liberty and Conscience thus become a sacred part of human nature. Freedom not only to think, but to speak and to act is a God-given privilege.

Thou didst inspire thy servant President Brigham Young to say "Every man's independence is sacred to him—it is a portion of that same Deity that rules in the heavens. There is not a being made upon the face of the earth who is made in the image of God, who stands erect and is organized as God is, that should be deprived of the free exercise of his agency so far as he does not infringe upon others' rights save by good advice and a good example."

Personal liberty is the paramount essential to human dignity and human happiness.

Down through the ages men have been free to accept or to reject Thy Righteous plan. History records how many have yielded to the enticements of the flesh, and how few, comparatively speaking, have followed the path of Light and Truth that leads to happiness and Eternal Life.

But Thy Mercy, Thy Wisdom, Thy Love are infinite; and in dispensations past Thou hast pleaded, as Thou dost now plead, through chosen and authoritatively appointed servants, for Thy erring children to heed the Gospel message and come to Thee. Holy Temples are a means of extending Thy loving mercy to Thy children even beyond the grave.

When in the Middle Ages the Church departed from Christ's teachings Thou didst inspire honest, upright men here in Great Britain to raise their voices against corrupt practices. Mingling with the denunciatory messages of Luther and Melanchthon in Germany, and Zwingli in Switzerland, were the voices of George Wishart and later John Knox of Scotland. We thank Thee that before the scorching flames silenced his tongue and reduced his body to ashes that Thou didst permit George Wishart to glimpse that "This realm shall be illuminated with the light of Christ's Evangel, as clearly as ever was any Realm since the days of the apostles. The house of God shall be builded in it; yea, it shall not lack the very copestone."

Much clearer was the inspiration given President Wilford Woodruff and President Joseph F. Smith, and other more recent Apostles, who stated prophetically that "Temples of God . . . will be erected in the divers countries of the earth," and that "Temples will appear all over the land of Joseph—North and South America—and also in Europe and elsewhere; and all the descendants of Shem, Ham, and Japheth, who received not the Gospel in the flesh, must be officiated for in the temples of God, before the Savior can present the kingdom to the Father, saying, 'It is finished.'"

We are grateful that in 1840 authorized messengers were sent to Great Britain to announce to the people of the British Isles that God had again spoken from the Heavens and reestablished in its purity and fullness the Gospel of Jesus Christ; that thousands accepted the message and subsequently emigrated to the headquarters of the Church.

We thank Thee that Thou, Great Elohim, and Jehovah, Thy Beloved Son, answered the fervent appeal of the lad Joseph Smith, and through subsequent administrations of angels, enabled and authorized him to organize The Church of Jesus Christ in its completeness with Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers, Evangelists, etc., as it was established in the days of the Savior and the Apostles in the Meridian of Times.

In keeping with the unwavering Truth that Thy Church must be established by divine authority, Thou didst send Heavenly Messengers to confer upon the Prophet Joseph Smith and others the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthood, and subsequently all the keys of the Priesthood ever held by Thy Prophets from Adam, the Ancient of Days, through Abraham and Moses, Malachi and Elijah, with authority to "turn the hearts of the fathers to the children and the hearts of the children to their fathers down to the latest generation." For this consistency, and completeness of restoration of authority, we express gratitude on this occasion and praise Thy holy name.

We express gratitude to Thee for the leaders of Thy Church from the Prophet Joseph Smith through the years to the present General Authorities—the First Presidency, the Council of the Twelve Apostles, the Assistants to the Twelve, the Patriarch to the Church, the First Council of Seventy, the Presiding Bishopric.

With humility and deep gratitude we acknowledge Thy nearness, Thy divine guidance and inspiration. Help us, we pray Thee, to become even more susceptible in our spiritual response to Thee.

We express gratitude for the right of free peoples to resort to the ballot, and for freedom to meet in legislative halls to consider problems and settle difficulties without fear or coercion of dictators, of secret police, or of slave camps. O Father, help people everywhere more clearly to realize that government exists for the protection of the individual, not the individual for the government.

Bless, we beseech Thee, Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth the II, the Houses of Parliament, and all branches of government throughout her Majesty's Realm, that the high reputation of this great government for the proper and just enforcement of law may continue to be meritoriously maintained.

May the United States government with Great Britain, Her Dominions, and freedom-loving countries everywhere, including South American Republics, hold so sacredly the principles of self government, and give to their peoples such enjoyment of peace, tranquility, and opportunities for progress as will make communistic governments of dictatorship, of mock trials, of unjust imprisonment, of enforced tyranny, so universally reprehensible as to be discarded forever by liberty-loving peoples.

That peace may eventually prevail, Thou hast again restored in its fullness the Gospel, and established authoritatively The Church of Jesus Christ. Even so, there are millions who are being influenced by false ideologies which are disturbing the peace of mind, and distorting the thinking of honest men and women. O Lord, guide and protect thy Messengers in their efforts to convince honest people in all lands and climes that Jesus Christ is "the way, the Truth, and the Light," and that "there is none other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved."

Bless well-meaning men in all climes as they strive to hasten the day when men will renounce contention and strife, and desire to use the great nuclear discoveries of the present day not for war and destruction, but for peace and spiritual advancement.

To this end, we beseech Thee to influence leaders of nations that their minds may be averse to war, their hearts cleansed from prejudice, suspicion and hate, and filled with a desire for peace and good will.

While His body lay in the tomb Christ, Thy Beloved Son, preached to the spirits in prison who once were disobedient in the days of Noah, thus evidencing that those who have passed beyond the veil must also hear the word of God and obey the eternal principles of life and salvation.

Temples are built to Thy Holy Name as a means of uniting Thy people, living and dead, in bonds of faith, of peace, and of love throughout Eternity.

Help all, O Father, to realize more keenly and sincerely than ever before that only by obedience to eternal principles and ordinances of the Gospel of Jesus Christ may loved ones who died without baptism be permitted the glorious privilege of entrance into Thy Kingdom.

Increase our desire, therefore, to put forth even greater effort toward the consummation of Thy purposes.

On Monday, his 85th birthday, President McKay again delivered the dedicatory prayer at both sessions. He had requested that no special observance be made of the occasion, but the great love felt for him by members of the Church everywhere could not be withheld, and letters, telegrams, gifts, and other expressions of appreciation and gratitude poured in to London for him. That evening he was honored at a special birthday party at Claridge House, with a number of the general authorities and other dedication visitors present. His day was made complete when he talked later in the evening with Sister McKay in Salt Lake City by telephone and shared with her some of the spiritual experiences of the dedication.

On Tuesday President McKay again repeated the dedicatory services in the morning and afternoon, and then instructed the temple workers to prepare it for the sacred ordinances to be performed therein. The first two endowment sessions on Wednesday, September 10, were reserved for members of the British Mission, with other sessions conducted throughout the remainder of the week in accordance with the demand for them. The normal schedule of sessions resumed the following week after the many dedication visitors had returned home.

As the ordinance work began on Wednesday, President McKay expressed a desire to travel to Wales and visit the birthplace of his mother, Jennette Evans. Arrangements were made for his sister, Mrs. Morrell, and her daughter, Jeannette, to travel with the President, with President Reiser to drive the car.

The occasion proved to be an eventful one, and an account of the trip which President Reiser included in his diary is quoted here because of its interest.

"We're looking for Plas Helygen House, Clwyd Defgwr, Cefn Coed y Cimmer near Merthyr Tydfil, South Wales, can you help us?"

This is the question you will have to ask if you are ever in South Wales and want to see the birthplace of Jennette Evans, mother of President David O. McKay.

President McKay had been there five or six years before, and I had visited the home in 1952 with Boldwin Davies, a cousin to President McKay. Between the two of us we felt it would not be too difficult to find the old country place. But, it proved to be quite an adventure.

Enroute, President McKay asked me to point out Runnymede and Magna Carta Park. The fog lay so densely in the fields that these could only faintly be seen as we passed. Over the most direct route from London we went. At Hammersmith, what had been London's worst traffic bottleneck three years ago, is now an open, fast "dual carriage way" west to Staines. Hence we made Bagshot and Basingstoke and set off over Highway 30 and 303 for Andover.

However, just as we approached a pass under a railway bridge (1/4 of a mile) near the Georges Inn (three miles from Andover) the gas supply failed.

The men at the hotel garage . . . to get the car to start and stay running, had pulled out the choke and not returned it and I had not noticed it.

I walked to Georges Inn and said to the young proprietor:

"I am out of petrol just the other side of the bridge down the road. Have you a telephone I might use to call the Automobile Association and see if they can rescue me?" He looked me straight in the eye and said in his lovely English:

"Awkward, isn't it?"

"It is indeed," I said.

"I have not a tellyphone, but if you will not let me down, I have a small bit in a can which I shall give you. Will you please return the can and make good the petrol you use? That's all I ask."

Over the tavern counter he handed me an Army gasoline container—five gallon capacity in which was possibly a half gallon. Down the road I ambled to my patient companions.

I found that the neck of the car's petrol tank was in too far and the spout of the can too short . . . that I could not pour from one to the other without risking the loss of too much of the precious fuel. So I improvised a funnel of a daily newspaper. Though I lost something by absorption to the newspaper, I emptied most of it into the car and after vigorous priming we were off again.

To our good fortune about a mile and a half down the road we came upon a petrol station set up anew near a farm field, open and ready for business. I told the operator my plight and need.

"I set this station here for the benefit of just such people as you," he said.

He filled the tanks and then found the battery cells empty of water but the oil was all right. After paying him we were off back to the good Samaritan, keeper of George's Inn, to return his can filled with petrol, then about again and on our way to Andover.

In a few minutes we arrived at Amesbury where we heard unfolded the fascinating story of the Stonehenge. One of the interesting details of the story was that (according to one legend) one of the Prescilly stones was brought from the hills of Wales by raft down the Bristol Channel. The route was along the English Channel and it was accidentally dropped into the river and there it still remains.

From there we went up to Salisbury Plain and the mystery in the distance.

The time we spent there was filled with the wonder at the mystery of the Stonehenge and its clear detail. Such questions as these ran through our minds:

How had the stones been upended and the lintels put into place? How had they been tongue and grooved and mortised and tenoned together? What was the significance of the sun dial features, the cross Wren carving, the Minoan daggers and the incinerary burials in the circumference?

But we could not stay too long if we wanted to get to Wales.

We were in Cardiff by 5:30 and found a double room at the Angel Hotel for the ladies but "no place at the Inn for us." We were taken in at Mrs. Peas Guest House at 51 Dispenser St. President McKay had a comfortable clean bed in the front parlor bedroom and I had a third floor quiet back room.

After a good night's rest we were off at 8 a.m. for Merthyr and Cefn Coed in search of the beloved birthplace.

We arrived in about an hour and began making inquiry for the location of Plas Helygen House, Clwyd Defagwr. A young police officer was at a loss to help us.

A young mother living in Blodwin and Thomas Davies little house "Y Bythen Bach, Ponty Chapel" (under the bridge, near the chapel) thought she had seen such a name on a house up "among the villas" in a completely different section of town than my sense of orientation told me.

Nevertheless, we explored that section to no avail.

An older man, keeping a petrol station up the Cefn Road on the way to town said:

"No, Clwyd, Clywd Defagwr is on the southwest hillside there near that new housing estate." So we went back to explore.

I asked President McKay to let me take them over the route I remembered Blodwin had taken us when we were there in 1952 and he was willing. Up the steep, narrow, rough and rutted hillside road I drove in the direction of the old houses on the hillside.

We came out by a group clinging to the road which leads to the new housing estate. Up this road we went to Mile End House. There, off to the left led another road to another cluster and there a second led to a row of four or five terraced houses, each with its front yard enclosed by fence, and gate.

The President said:

"Let's inquire here." We were at No. 69.

I looked around the front yard and into a small shelter in the front corner of the lot.

Inside the fence came an old lady who looked friendly at me as I asked for directions.

By this time President McKay had come into the yard. She turned to him and said:

"Oh, I know you."

It was Ann Morgan, a spinster who had been born in the house 76 years ago.

She assured President McKay that "This is the place."

Then she showed President McKay and Mrs. Morrell into the small six by nine bedroom in which the bed completely occupied the narrow end of the room.

They stood with arms around each other weeping their emotions at being in this beloved place.

President McKay returned to London Thursday evening for meetings with mission and temple officials and remained until Sunday, attending Church services during the day. He boarded a plane for New York Sunday evening and arrived without incident in Salt Lake City Monday, September 15, at 3:40 p.m., less than 29 hours after he started the trip across the Atlantic.

He was met at the airport by many of the general authorities, members of his family, and most importantly by Sister McKay. Everyone present was touched by the warmness of their greeting after an absence of two weeks.

Immediately upon his return President McKay plunged into the details of preparing for the October general conference and the many other matters awaiting his attention, but with a sense of pride and humility in the great accomplishment of another temple in this dispensation.
