Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 22

A Testimonial Dinner

A community tribute of appreciation and high esteem, without parallel in the history of Salt Lake City, or Utah, was paid to President David O. McKay on Monday evening, December 10, 1962 at the Hotel Utah.

More than 460 prominent men of Utah, the majority of them not members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, gathered on that evening to pay verbal, as well as tangible, tribute to one whom they called "a great man."

A committee of twenty, whose names read like a "Who's Who" of Utah business and industry, planned the elaborate dinner and entertaining program in President McKay's honor. Those on the committee, and their positions at that time, included, J. P. O'Keefe, chairman, general manager of the Utah Division, Kennecott Copper Corp.; John M. Wallace, treasurer, chairman of the board, Walker Bank and Trust Company; Eric C. Aaberg, vice president and general manager, Mountain States Telephone Company; Gus B. Aydelott, President, Denver Rio Grande Railroad, Denver, Colorado; Gus P. Backman, secretary, Salt Lake Chamber of Commerce; Clarence Bamberger, Sr., chairman of the board, Bamberger Company; L. F. Black, division manager, Geneva Works, United States Steel Corp.; Frederick P. Champ, banker, Logan, Utah; Newell B. Dayton, chairman of the board, Tracy-Collins Bank Trust Co.; John W. Gallivan, publisher, The Salt Lake Tribune; Robert G. Hemingway, president, Commercial Security Bank, Ogden; James E. Hogle, chairman of the board, Hogle Investment Company; John C. Kinnear, Jr., general manager, western mining division of Kennecott Copper Corporation; William T. Nightingale, chairman of the board, Mountain Fuel Supply Company; Edward M. Naughton, president, Utah Power Light Company; Marion C. Nelson, president, Gillham Advertising Agency, Inc.; William J. O'Connor, president, Independent Coal Coke Company; Walter L. Roche, resident manager, Merrill, Lynch, Pierce, Fenner Smith; Joseph Rosenblatt, chairman of the board, Eimco Corporation; James M. Stacey; Kenneth J. Sullivan, president, Continental Bank Trust Company; and Scharf S. Sumner, president, Western Savings Loan Association.

The Lafayette Ballroom of the Hotel Utah was elaborately prepared for the occasion. The tables were decorated with a profusion of red roses and Scotch heather. Attractive souvenir programs prepared as a service by Gillham Advertising Agency were at each place setting. The significance of the occasion, and the appropriate tributes of the evening can best be understood by a study of this program which is reproduced in its entirety on the following pages. The cover and the frontispiece picture of President McKay were reproduced in full color, though they show here only in black and white. No further details of the program arrangements will be described here, since it can better be gained by reading the program itself.

THE McKAY COAT OF ARMS

(reproduced on front cover)

The clan Mackay derives from a branch of the Royal house of Moray, probably deriving its style Mac-ic-Moargainn from Morgund of Pluscarden, a prince of the house of Moray. The first historic Chief was Angus Du (1380-1429). He was assassinated, and the clan was ruled by his younger son, until the rightful heir obtained his release from captivity on the Bass Rock, 1437. The latter's son was Chief and led the clan in the cruel fight of Blair Tannic, Caithness. In 1628 Sir Donald Mackay of Strathnaver, Chief of the clan, was created Lord Reay, with the remainder of his heirs-male bearing the name and arms of Mackay.

The major portion of the estate was sold in the seventeenth century to pay the cost of maintaining and transporting 2000 men whom Lord Reay recruited for foreign service to assist the Protestant cause in the great 'Thirty Years' War. The earliest Gaelic charter extant was granted by Donald, Lord of the Isles, to Brian Vicar Mackay in 1408.

Chief: Lord Reay.

Patronymic: Morair Maghrath.

Clan Seat: House of Tongue, Sutherland.

Slogan: Bratach bhan mhic Aoidh.

Plant: Great Bulrush

Memorials: Kirk of Tongue.

Pipe Music: (1) Mackay's White Banner, (2) Mackay's March.

To Honor President David O. McKay

AS HE BEGINS THE NINETIETH YEAR OF HIS LIFE HIS COMMUNITY FRIENDS PRESENT THIS DINNER AND PROGRAM ON MONDAY EVENING, THE TENTH DAY OF DECEMBER NINETEEN HUNDRED AND SIXTY-TWO AT HALF AFTER SIX O'CLOCK IN THE LAFAYETTE ROOM OF THE HOTEL UTAH IN SALT LAKE CITY

General Committee

J. P. O'KEEFE

Chairman

JOHN M. WALLACE

Treasurer

ERIC C. AABERG JOHN C. KINNEAR, JR.

GUS B. AYDELOTT WILLIAM T. NIGHTINGALE

CLARENCE BAMBERGER, SR. EDWARD M. NAUGHTON

L. F. BLACK WILLIAM J. O'CONNOR

FREDERICK P. CHAMP WALTER L. ROCHE

NEWELL B. DAYTON JOSEPH ROSENBLATT

JOHN W. GALLIVAN JAMES M. STACEY

ROBERT G. HEMINGWAY KENNETH J. SULLIVAN

JAMES E. HOGLE SCHARF S. SUMNER

Menu

LOBSTER THERMIDOR EN COQUILLE

HEARTS UTAH CELERY MIXED QUEEN OLIVES

SALTED ALMONDS

CLEAR GREEN TURTLE SOUP AMONTILLADO

CHEESE STRAWS

CHARCOAL BROILED FILET MIGNON, MAITRE D'HOTEL

CROWN OF MUSHROOM

POTATOES MACAIRE

ITALIAN GREEN BROCCOLI, MORNAY

POMPADOUR SALAD

ORANGE SURPRISE

BEVERAGE

Musical Program

Entrance ceremony of President McKay and escorts, with selections by Salt Lake Scots, under direction of Dale J. Bain

National Anthem..............................Soloist: Roy Samuelson

Accompanied by Utah Symphony String Ensemble

Dinner Music...........Utah Symphony String Ensemble and Brass Choir

Conductor: Dr. David A. Shand, Assistant Conductor

Utah Symphony Orchestra

Formal Musical Program (following Dinner)

A. Male Quartet (Men of Music) "I Need Thee Every Hour"

Glenn Johnson, Loile Bailey, Robert Holbrook, Malcolm E. Pike

Accompanist: Anna Bailey

B. Harp Trio

Harpists: Camille Lamoreaux, Shru-De-Li Smith, Helen Hogan

C. Medley of Scotch Folk Songs..........................Jean Preston

Accompanist: Paul Banham Speaker's Program

Presiding............................................J. P. O'Keefe

President, Salt Lake City Chamber of Commerce

Invocation.........The Right Reverend Monsignor Patrick A. Maguire

Our Lady of Lourdes Catholic Church

Followed by Dinner, Dinner Music and Formal Musical Program

Tribute............................................John M. Wallace

Chairman of the Board, Walker Bank Trust Company

Presentation.....................................Joseph Rosenblatt

President, The Eimco Corporation

Response..................................President David O. McKay

Benediction....................................Rabbi Sidney Strome

Temple B'Nai Israel

Portrait of a Great Man

The life span of David O. McKay, now in his ninetieth year, bridges the important era of Mountain West development from the days of his pioneer parents to the present.

His birth in Huntsville, Utah on September 8, 1873, was the occasion of rejoicing for a staunch, saintly Welsh immigrant mother, Jennette Evans McKay, and a stalwart, devoted Scottish father, David McKay. They were tillers of the soil with the courage and industry and frugality of true pioneers.

Into the life of David O. McKay was instilled the true characteristics upon which the great western community of America was builded. They have been manifest in the almost magic touch and magnetic personality of one who has been a moving factor in the development of the West, spiritually, socially, educationally, and industrially.

His world travels began with a call as a missionary for his Church in the footsteps of his father. He went to the British Isles in 1897 and served with distinction as President of the Scottish Conference. In 1921 he made a world-wide tour of missions of the Church, traveling more than 62,000 miles by land and sea. Missionary service called again in 1922 when he became President of the European Missions with headquarters in Liverpool, England. Subsequent travels have taken him into almost all parts of the world. As one of the greatest missionaries of all time, he has traveled by land and sea approximately one million miles. The last trip abroad was in August of this year, when he traveled by jet plane to his father's native land of Scotland to organize a Stake of the Church.

Trained for a career in education, he began a teaching assignment in 1899 at the Weber Stake Academy, now Weber College, and in 1902, he became principal of this same institution. In educational circles, he has also been Church Commissioner of Education, 1919-1922; a member of the Church Board of Education, 1906-1919; and now is president of the Church Board of Education. In recognition of his distinctive contribution in the field of education, he is the recipient of four honorary doctorates from Utah's three major Universities, and from Temple University of Philadelphia, as well as awards from various educational institutions and civic organizations.

For his devotion to Scouting, and in consideration of his outstanding record of service to youth, he has been awarded the coveted Silver Buffalo and the Silver Beaver by the National Council of the Boy Scouts of America.

Governments of other nations have honored him, and buildings have been named to perpetuate his outstanding achievements.

The major service of David O. McKay has been as one of the General Authorities of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Called to the Apostleship in April, 1906, he has served well over half a century as a spiritual leader. In October, 1934, he was brought into the First Presidency as a counselor and continued in this position until he was sustained to the position of President and Prophet in April, 1951.

Members of his faith everywhere honor him as their great spiritual leader, and there are other thousands who join with them in our community and in Western America in honoring him for his service to the people. The sincerity of his character, and the masterful addresses given by him in many public meetings containing words of inspiring counsel, instruction, admonition and advice, applicable not only to members of his Church, but also to freedom-loving men and women everywhere, have won for him a place of esteem and respect. He is a spirited citizen, always alert to the welfare of our community. This civic consciousness has been often demonstrated, and is fittingly memorialized in the recently dedicated Pioneer Memorial Theatre, and in the preservation of the Pioneer City Hall. Neither project would have materialized without the energetic leadership and support of President McKay.

This great man has an honored place in the community as an exemplary family man—as a husband and father. At his side with her sustaining influence has been his companion and sweetheart, Mrs. Emma Ray Riggs McKay, whom he married in January, 1901. They are the parents of seven children, including one who is deceased, who are carrying on the family tradition of good citizenship.

No more fitting tribute has been given to President McKay than that given by his world-wide missionary companion, Hugh J. Cannon, who said of him:

"David O. McKay, a man every line of whose face denotes firmness and courage, intensely serious when serious matters are being considered, as immovable as Gibraltar when principle is involved, but withal a kindly man and one whose heart is full of sympathy and human tenderness and an unfailing love for all mankind.

"In no degree sanctimonious and with a highly developed sense of humor, he still has a deep appreciation of sacred things; refined and intellectual, he is yet one of the common people; a vital, dynamic power for good wherever he goes, he is still as humble as the little child whom we must all resemble in order to enter the kingdom of heaven."

Favorite Poems Opt-Quoted by David O. McKay

ADDRESS TO THE UNCO GUID

Then gentl, scan your brother Man,

Still gentler sister Woman;

Tho' they may gang a kennin wrang,

To step aside is human:

One point must still be greatly dark,

The moving Why they do it;

And just as lamely can ye mark,

How far perhaps they rue it.

Who made the heart, 'tis He alone

Decidedly can try us,

He knows each chord its various tone,

Each spring its various bias:

Then at the balance let's be mute,

We never can adjust it;

What's done we partly may compute,

But know not what's resisted.

—Robert Burns

Oh wad some power the giftie gie us,

To see oursel's as ithers see us.

It wad frae monie a blunder free us.

—Robert Burns

Then let us pray that come it may,

As come it will for a' that,

That sense and worth o'er a' the earth,

May bear the gree, and a' that:

For a' that, and a' that,

It's comin yet for a' that,

That man to man, the world o'er

Shall brithers be for a' that.

—Robert Burns

The mother, in her office, holds the key

Of the soul; and she it is who stamps the coin

Of character, and makes the being who would be a savage

But for her gentle cares, a Christian man.

Then crown her Queen o' the world.

—from on Old Play—taken from Forty Thousands quotations

To make a happy fireside clime

To weans and wife,

That's the true pathos and sublime

O' human life.

—Robert Burns (from Epistle to Dr. Blacklock, stanza 9)

O Brother Man! fold to thy heart thy brother;

Where pity dwells, the peace of God is there;

To worship rightly is to love each other,

Each smile a hymn, each kindly deed a prayer.

Follow with reverent steps the great example

Of Him whose holy work was 'doing good';

So shall the wide earth seem our Father's temple,

Each loving life a psalm of gratitude.

Then shall all shackles fall; the stormy clanger

Of wild music o'er the earth shall cease;

Love shall tread out the baleful fire of anger,

And in its ashes plant the tree of peace!

—John Greenleaf Whittier

Statements by David O. McKay

"Man's chief concern in life should not be the acquiring of gold, or of fame, or of material possessions. It should not be development of physical powers, nor of intellectual strength, but his aim, the highest in life, should be the development of a Christ-like character."

"The world needs men, men of character, God-fearing men."

"In the well-ordered home we may experience on earth a taste of heaven."

"The true purpose in life is perfection of humanity through individual effort, under the guidance of God's inspiration. Real life is response to the best about us."

"The Gospel brings peace; it is the one source of satisfaction in all the world."

"The finest thing for young people and everybody is to live the Gospel."

"Young people do not seem to realize that the religious life is the happy life. Doing for others, making others happy, and living the Gospel of Jesus Christ is the really happy life for everybody to live."

"I believe with others that government, institutions, and organizations exist primarily for the purpose of securing to the individual his rights, his happiness, and proper development of his character. When organizations fail to accomplish this purpose, their usefulness ends."

"The worth of man is a good measuring rod by which we may judge the rightfulness or the wrongfulness of a policy or principle, whether in government, in business, or in social activities."

"Our founding fathers, despite some natural fears, clearly regarded the promulgation of the Constitution of the United States as their greatest triumph."

"In these days of uncertainty and unrest, liberty-loving peoples' greatest responsibility and paramount duty is to preserve and proclaim the freedom of the individual, his relationship to Deity, and the necessity of obedience to the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ—only thus will mankind find peace and happiness."

"Our country's greatest asset is its manhood, upon which depends not only the survival of the individual freedom vouchsafed by the Constitution and Bill of Rights, and all other ideals for which the founders of the Republic fought and died, but the survival of the best that we cherish in present-day civilization."

"The noblest purpose of the public schools as a function of the government should be to teach loyalty and obedience to the laws of the country."

"The most potent influence in training youth to cherish life, to have increased Respect for human kind, to keep their Word of Honor, to love Justice, is the life and personality of the teacher."

"The real tragedy in America is not that we have permitted the Bible to slip out of our schools, but that we have so openly neglected to teach it in either the home or the Church."

"Never before was there such need of revitalizing the teaching of faith and repentance on the part of parents. Never before in the history of our country was the State in greater need of young men and young women who cherish the higher life in preference to the sordid, the selfish, and the obscene."

"Teach the boys that it is chastity during youth that gives vigor, strength, and virility of manhood. Teach the girls that chastity is the crown of beautiful womanhood."

"Force and compulsion will never establish the ideal society. This can come only by a transformation within the individual soul—A life redeemed from sin and brought in harmony with the divine will. Instead of selfishness, men must be willing to dedicate their ability, their possessions, their lives if necessary, their fortunes, and their sacred honor for the alleviation of the ills of mankind. Hate must be supplanted by sympathy and forbearance. Peace and true prosperity can come only by conforming our lives to the law of Love, the law of the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ."

A Favorite Quotation

"There is a destiny which makes us brothers,

None lives to self alone;

All that we send into the lives of others,

Comes back into our own."

—Edwin Markham

After those attending had assembled in the ballroom, President and Mrs. McKay were escorted into the dining room by the Salt Lake Bagpipe Band. The audience stood while the President and his wife were escorted to their places at the head table by Henry R. Aloia, manager of Hotel Utah.

Chairman O'Keefe, noting that many congratulatory messages and telegrams had been received by the committee for President McKay, said he chose to read only one, that being a telegram from President John F. Kennedy. The text of this message follows:

I am pleased to join the business and community leaders of Salt Lake City in extending sincere congratulations to President David O. McKay as you are honored this evening at the beginning of your ninetieth year. I am happy, too, to commend you for your long and devoted service to God, to your state, and your country. The bond of Christian brotherhood which has marked your religious pronouncements has helped to tie our people to those of other nations in a deeper spirit of Christian faith. May your influence for good continue to be felt by the members of your Church both here and in far off lands, and by others who admire and respect you. With all good wishes.

John F. Kennedy.

Following the dinner, special music and the formal program, Mr. Wallace was then introduced to pay a tribute to President McKay. He said:

Seldom in a lifetime does one have the privilege of publicly paying tribute to a universally beloved and admired leader as President David O. McKay, and I deeply appreciate the honor. To clasp his hand, to look into his eyes, to feel the warmth and inspiration of his presence, is an experience to be remembered. The unforgettableness of this man, his influence on people, his sincere love for all mankind, and his complete devotion to his church throughout his eighty-nine years, have endowed him with a remarkable capacity for leadership.

He is one of our greatest and most successful of missionaries. He has circled the earth, visited the farthest corners, traveling on foot, by horse and buggy, and by jet airliner covering over one million miles to present his convictions and the great strength of his personality to people everywhere on the globe. Through the magic of radio and television, his face and voice are known throughout the world. Millions have come to know the warmth, the strength, the humor, and the moving power of his presentations. Who among us can measure the contributions of this man, which fan out across the peoples of the earth like a geometrical progression from one generation to another? Who appropriately can evaluate for this individual who has amassed great fortune and statures in spiritual values, except perhaps to say that his life exemplifies the words of the Master, who, as he sat around the table with the Twelve for the last time, said to them:

'If any man desire to be first, the same shall be last of all, and servant of all; and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant even as the Son of Man came, not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.'

Notwithstanding his position of great responsibility and importance in his church, President McKay has always kept the common touch. Perfectly at home with the great and renowned, or with the lowliest, his deep sympathy for people, and his understanding heart, have opened channels of communication and influence to inspire and motivate thousands, especially the young people. These attributes have endeared him to everyone with whom he has come in contact.

The oldest son of a family of ten children, he followed the horse-drawn plow with his father in the fields when only a youngster. His roots were planted deep in the soil. His love for every growing thing has increased with the years, and still abides, typified by his love for his horse, Sonny Boy. His home in Huntsville is a citadel of courage and devotion to ideals. From example and precept of his Scottish father, Bishop David McKay, a convert to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and abiding faith of his Welsh mother, Jennette Evans McKay, he learned early in life to honor and respect his parents, and each member of the household. Performance of religious duties and daily life were carefully synchronized. Little wonder that he carried from that home the inspiration, the strength, and the devotion that have characterized his life.

In his heart he has a natural love for learning, which impelled him to study throughout his life. He attended Weber Stake Academy in Ogden, and later the University of Utah, where he was right tackle on the football team, was extremely popular with the student body, and was valedictorian of his class. About this time he became acquainted with Emma Ray Riggs, who later became his bonnie bride in the first marriage ceremony performed in the Salt Lake Temple in the twentieth century. They have enjoyed a wonderful life together for over 61 years, and have seven children, six of whom are living, which is refreshing to see in this day and age.

President McKay dearly would have loved to spend his life as a teacher, and a good one he would have been. He was offered a teaching position in Salt Lake County after graduation, but at the same time he received a call to go on a mission to Great Britain, which he accepted, and there he began his career as a dynamic, enthusiastic, and highly persuasive missionary. No assignment was too difficult, no other activity as important to him, and his great capacity for leadership soon was recognized as he moved through countless church positions, culminated in his being sustained unanimously by the membership as President on April 9, 1951. Under his leadership some of the most phenomenal growth and development in the history of the church has occurred. The church has adopted a so-called "international policy" which has been accompanied by great building programs for beautiful chapels, temples, and schools around the world. The widely published Welfare Program has been highly successful. Great energy and study have been given to a youth program in an effort to guide and encourage the youth in high ideals and sound endeavors.

In January, 1960, President McKay initiated a series of far-reaching fireside discussions, when he spoke by means of special radio hook-up to over 214,000 young people from the Atlantic to the Pacific, and from Canada to Mexico, on the subject of "Courtship and Marriage." Just recently plans have been put in operation to broadcast by short wave radio around the globe. President McKay called it more than a step forward—rather "a bound into space," to touch around the world.

In every way the church has been aggressive and resourceful under the leadership of President McKay. He has brought about a tremendous, ever increasing momentum, which portends great advancement over future decades. I can appreciate what joy and gratification that brings to his heart, for this is his life—this is his life's purpose. I quote from another Christian leader who lived about the year 1650:

"I abide lovingly united to God's will—and this is my whole business."

I wish it were possible, in some way, to convey to you the breadth of his experience, the extent to which he devotes all his amazing energy in service to his fellowmen. I have been privileged to review part of the biography of his life, prepared so meticulously by his secretary, Miss Clare Middlemiss. It is evident that no situation or location would be unusual for him. You might find him at the leper colony at Suva, talking to a woman he had met there on a visit 14 years previously; perhaps at the Hathaway Cottage in Stratford-on-Avon; maybe conducting a service at Johannesburg, South Africa. You might hear of his attending the King's Kava Ceremony at Apia, Samoa, or climbing the eighteen flights of steps at the great, inspiring statue of Christ at Corcovado—maybe laying the corner stone at the first Mormon Church edifice in South America at Montevideo, Uruguay—perhaps at the inspiring 12th century cathedral at Strasburg, France—or feeling the inspiration, but also the sorrow, of the landscape at the Holy Land.

You could hear of him at home enjoying the company of the employees at the Church Office Building at their Christmas party, speaking words of appreciation and encouragement. It is just possible you might find him riding his horse on the old home farm in Huntsville, where nostalgic memories warm his soul. This is the man we honor—well known and loved around the world by great scientists, civic leaders, religious leaders, and ordinary folks who work and struggle, as well as little children. To be so widely accepted and loved—to be so powerful and respected, and yet so humble and approachable—this would be achievement and honor for any man.

His name appears on the covers of books and numerous writings. It appears on testimonials and documents of high esteem—it appears on beautiful buildings around the world—it even appears on a masterpiece of nature, a magnificent 350 year old oak tree near London. But the record that will speak most for him is a changing, moving, cascading one, written in the hearts and deeds of thousands he has touched, and their posterity yet to be.

It is physically impossible, within the time limitations, to portray an adequate picture. Perhaps what we lack in completeness we can make up in simple, straightforward sincerity, when, unanimously, we say to him that he has our admiration and deep respect for all the richness and goodness that he has brought into the world. This charming Scottish-Welsh citizen of the world has earned and won our hearts completely. Appreciation from men of good will everywhere, regardless of creed, color, or race, goes out to you, President McKay, for the inspiration, the spiritual encouragement, and the messages of enduring faith and hope, which you so tirelessly proclaim to all people.

In summary, we have written these reflections of this great leadership, a part of which were expressed some years ago:

"I stood apart from a man of men

And beyond in timeless space

His works have fashioned a monument

That weathering years will not efface.

I stood apart from a servant of Him

Who sits on that Great White Throne

His monument is a spire of grace

Built from God's work alone.

I stood apart from a long life of toil

In the garden of peace sublime,

Through dark skies his faith spells the promise

Of God's peace on earth in our time."

Joseph Rosenblatt, president of the Eimco Corporation, then responded with the following tribute and presentation:

You know, I wish it had been possible for each of you to have had the view from my seat tonight. We are inclined in this day and age to be a little sophisticated and to think that the important emotions, which after all are so vital in controlling our character, should not be talked about. But I know that if you had sat with me, and you had been able to see this wonderful human being hold his wife's hand, if you had been able to see his sons, members of his family sitting there, and to have sensed that tremendous, wonderful flow of understanding, of affection that was there—I know that you would have felt with me that on this night God is indeed in his heaven, and there is peace in the land.

You know, I am particularly grateful to Mrs. McKay for having graced our meeting tonight, and this event, for I can go home now and tell my own wife that she need not be embarrassed if in all my ardor I reach over publicly to hold her hand, for I can say that it is now right and proper, and I do so by authority of the President's wife.

I am sure that all will recognize—President McKay and our head-table guests, and all of you who have listened—it is not an easy task to follow John Wallace. The only thing that can be said, President McKay, is that we will make it a well-rounded tribute, for as John quoted the New Testament, I promise to quote the Old.

I suppose in every man's life there comes a time when he is called upon for memorable action. Sometimes it is for the good, sometimes it is distasteful. And then the once in a lifetime epochal action when there is memorable challenge, and great responsibility, where really the effort is so beyond one's anticipated ability as to leave one impotent and overcome with such a deep sense of humility as to make the needed thoughts and words indeed hard to come by.

You know, gentlemen, as I have sat here participating in this memorable event, I could not help but wonder about my standing here and thinking about it with both much pride and much gratitude—You know my selection as the one privileged to make the presentation to President McKay was pure happen-stance. I deserted what I think is my usual conservative reticence and spoke up when I should have listened. The next thing I knew, the long arm of your committee said, "You will follow John Wallace, and you will make the presentation."

Permit me to say without egotism, and only with much humility and much gratitude, there is important significance that the one who is neither Gentile nor Mormon, should have been so selected, possibly significant for several reasons: One that it was prompted, I feel, by the inspiration of the all-encompassing and pervading humanitarianism of this beloved man whom we honor this evening, for it fosters and encourages the intuition of enlightened thought and action by free men in the environment and climate of our perfect democracy; and Second, that the one so selected traces his own lineage through the long generations to David of the Bible, and is thereby of the people of the Book.

Therefore, for these few words that I am privileged to speak to President McKay I pick two texts from the Bible, which I believe have full measure of meaning and understanding as one thinks of David O. McKay. The one text is from Job which you will recall reads: "The righteous also shall hold on his way, and he that hath clean hands shall be stronger and stronger." And second from the prophet Micah: "It has been told thee, Oh man, what is good and what the Lord doth require of thee, only to do justly, to love mercy, to walk humbly with thy God." Do you know of anyone who has listened to or lived this exhortation with greater faith or purpose than David O. McKay?

This is indeed an epochal and exciting occasion, gentlemen, for in our assemblage here, and in our action as we have gathered to pay honor and respect to this great leader, we are doing that which gives voice and action to the rights of free men under the blessed American way of life, that represents the most perfect democracy that God has permitted man to create.

We pay honor to David O. McKay, not that his theology is akin to ours, but really rather that it is not, for I think that we know him best as the ideal of what we look for in the great American. It is throughout the world that this has given inspiration to that which is America. In his every being and deed we see in him the genius for freedom under law, the conviction that democracy is the highest expression of a dignified social order. We see every day his talent for harmonizing diversities and the inspired leadership which brings and secures enrichment from varied cultural sources as he has brought them together as we have seen from every people, from every land, indeed to every generation.

And yet really, we have gathered not so much to pay honor to David O. McKay, for he has had honors heaped upon him greater than we can offer. We have gathered here that we might have opportunity to give full expression to the respect, to the affection, indeed the love and gratitude we have for him. We are here to loudly and clearly say that we as citizens of this community are the benefactors of the good that lies in this man's heart. We are the beneficiaries of his mind that sees more clearly, not that which divides men, but rather that which unites them.

I hope you will agree with me that the small gift which is but the symbol of our sincerity fits so well and simply in paying our tribute. Our gift to President McKay is an organ to be installed in the chapel which has been built in Merthyr Tydfil, Wales, to honor his mother, Jennette Evans McKay.

This is the plaque engraved for this occasion and reads:

"Presented to President David O. McKay by hundreds of his friends and business associates with their deepest respect and warmest affection, in recognition of his qualities of leadership and in appreciation of his outstanding community achievements, at a testimonial dinner and tribute, at the Hotel Utah, Salt Lake City, Monday evening, December 10th, 1962, and in memory of his beloved mother, Jennette Evans McKay, born in Plas Helygen, Merthyr-Tydfil, Glamorganshire, South Wales, wherein The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints chapel is now being erected, this plaque and organ are to be placed, with the compliments of those in attendance on this historic occasion."

In doing this, President McKay, we try to give our understanding and our support to the importance not only to your ancestry which has contributed so largely to your accomplishments, but as well to the leadership that you give to us all in guiding us in sympathy to other times, to other places, to other customs, to understand that they are part and parcel of what makes our life here today an inspired opportunity.

In presenting this gift we hereby give our understanding to the warmth and to the purity of your character, inspired as it has been from every sense of virtue and of truth and of right, knowing that it must come from each generation and each area, and knowing as you have taught us that it must be passed on with ever-increasing influence and effectiveness. Gentlemen, will you please arise, and President and Mrs. McKay will you please stand."

(Ovation.)

And will you join me all to say the prayer that we ask is that the sounds of this organ will always inspire those who will hear it to follow in the footsteps of Jennette Evans McKay and her son, to bring their influence for good to the peoples of the world, to spread constantly the understanding of the need of faith and the love of God in righteous peace and happiness for all time.

We ask that the Lord will let his countenance shine upon thee and be gracious unto thee.

May he lift up his countenance upon thee and give thee peace, and may the blessings always be with thee and with thy people.
