Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 23

A Dedication at Merthyr Tydfil

When August 25, 1963 was decided upon as the dedication date of the new chapel at Merthyr Tydfil, Wales, many doubted that the plan could be carried out. However, they underestimated the devotion of a united, dedicated people. Men, women, and younger people from the entire area joined in a supreme effort to have everything in readiness so that President David O. McKay could officiate at the dedication.

President McKay had visited the site on March 2, 1961 on the occasion of the groundbreaking. At that time a memorial plaque was placed on the nearby four-room cottage where his mother, Jennette Evans McKay had been born.

After the impressive groundbreaking services, with warm expressions of love and gratitude, a chorus of young people sang to the Prophet:

We'll keep a welcome on the hillsides,

We'll keep a welcome on the vales,

This land of song will still be surging,

When you come back to Wales.

This land of song will still be singing

With a love that never fails,

We'll kiss away each hour of herith,*

When you come back to Wales.

*(Longing)

President McKay was so touched by the sentiment of the song that he promised those present that he would return to Wales for the dedication of the chapel.

As the building neared completion in the summer of 1963, and assurance was given that President McKay would come for the dedication, the devoted building supervisors and Church builder missionaries exerted every effort to reach their objective.

Up to this time there had been four Church builders working on the chapel. This number was now increased to ten, and this gave an impetus to the work. Since the chapel would be used for district meetings and activities, as well as for the Merthyr Tydfil meetings, branch presidents of the Welsh District pledged full support toward completion of the building. Each member in the district soon learned that this full support meant a lot of hard work, but such was given by scores of businessmen, farmers, professional men, and those in all walks of life.

Of the 30,000 hours of donated labor on the building, 22,000 came from the Church builders, and 8,000 were given by local members. Probably the greatest record was set on Whitsin Monday when more than 220 men, women, and young people from the entire district put in over 1,600 hours of work on that one day. The donated hours for the week totaled 2,650.

Pride in the building, and enthusiasm for its completion, spread beyond the membership of the Church. The mayor of the city and other officials expressed their interest and good will. On one occasion the women of another church called and said, "When you are ready to clean the windows of your new chapel, let us know, because we should like to do that for you." And they did it!

Sir Thomas Bennett was the architect, and his devotion was evident throughout the entire construction of the building. It was with this kind of support, and the united efforts of the entire district that the chapel went from the footing stage to its completion in less than eight months. It is no wonder they termed it "the miracle at Merthyr Tydfil."

President McKay had asked that there be no announcement of his arrival in London on August 23, as the plane was due to land at night, and he was anxious to get as much rest as possible before the appointment of the following day. In spite of their desire to carry out his request, a crowd, including photographers and reporters, gathered at the airport. Each was given a gracious greeting, characteristic of the President under any circumstances. He was accompanied by his son, Dr. Edward R. McKay, and by the executive secretary of the Salt Lake Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Gus P. Backman and Mrs. Backman.

The following day, August 24, the President and his party were taken to the railroad station and placed in a private car, half lounge and half diner, to be taken to Cardiff, Wales. Upon their arrival, they were given comfortable rooms at the Royal Hotel. At 6:30 that evening, President Mark E. Petersen of the West European Mission and Mrs. Petersen were hosts at a delicious dinner for the London party, including President and Mrs. Marion D. Hanks, of the British Mission. The next morning at 8 o'clock cars called at the hotel for the drive to Merthyr Tydfil, where an inspection of the chapel was made before the service commenced.

The building covers an area of 15,660 square feet, and has fourteen teaching areas. The chapel seats 350, and the cultural hall 1,050. There is parking space for ninety-four cars. The foundation and floors are of concrete, the walls consist of facing brick and Norwegian white quartz spar rendering. The roof is made of green natural slate, and the tower of fiber glass with triangular pylon, gold-leafed, rising fifty-six feet above the ground. The site itself covers two and a half acres, and is situated on an eminence twenty feet above the road, overlooking the city of Merthyr Tydfil.

On Friday and Saturday preceding the dedication, the building had been open for public viewing and organ recitals had been given by Dr. Robert Cundick, organist for the London Hyde Park Chapel. Sunday morning every one of the fourteen hundred seats was occupied, with the first five reserved rows filled with city officials and special guests. Seated on the rostrum were two Lord Mayors of Merthyr Tydfil, the Honorable Charles Edward Webb, who attended the service of unveiling the memorial plaque on the cottage where President McKay's mother was born, and the groundbreaking ceremonies in 1961, and also the present Lord Mayor. Also on the rostrum were district presidents from Glasgow, Edinburgh, Ireland, and many other surrounding districts, and their wives.

Under the direction of President Petersen, a special edition of the Millennial Star, in honor of President McKay's ninetieth birthday, was published, and a copy was placed on each seat in the vast assembly hall.

At 9:45 on Sunday morning there was a short organ recital by Dr. Cundick, after which Mr. Backman, representing the more than six hundred business men who presented the organ and plaque to go with it to President McKay at a dinner given in his honor the previous December, now made the formal presentation to the President and the people of Merthyr Tydfil, in honor of Jennette Evans McKay. President McKay formally accepted the gift in honor of his mother, and asked Mr. Backman to convey to his friends his gratitude and the assurance that the installation of the beautiful organ and the plaque exceeded all expectations.

The dedicatory service commenced at 10:30, and was conducted by Branch President Ralph Pulman, a fourth-generation member of the Church, who remembered the growth of this branch from its small inception during his childhood. Though a wealthy property owner now, he was among the faithful members who, in rough clothing, worked early and late to complete the chapel.

After the playing of beautiful organ music, and two inspiring solos by Beti Jones and Annette Richardson Dinwoody, and a short address of thanksgiving by J. F. Dunyan, district president, an M. I. A. chorus sang a Welsh hymn, "Cal Lau." Then President McKay arose to give the dedicatory address and prayer. As he stood before that vast audience there was such an eloquent silence filled with love and respect that can best be described by the words of the poet Longfellow, in his Evangeline: "The whole air and the woods and the waves seemed silent to listen."

After expressing gratitude for the love and generosity expressed in gifts of certificates and pictures associated with his mother and her relatives here in Wales, he gave the following quotation from Carlyle: "How a thing grows in the human memory, when love worship and all that lies in the human heart is there to encourage it."

Then he drew from his own memory, the visit with Sir Thomas Bennett on March 2, 1961, for the unveiling of the plaque on his mother's birthplace, and for the groundbreaking ceremonies on the spot where this chapel now stands. He referred to the young people's singing of the song, "We'll keep a welcome on the hillsides . . ." He mentioned the concert given by the Tabernacle Choir in Cardiff in 1955, and one given by the International Chorus of the Relief Society Singing Mothers in Cardiff on March 2, 1961. He spoke with love of the group of friends who had presented the organ in honor of his mother. He expressed heartfelt gratitude for the services of the church building supervisors, and those in charge of the work throughout Europe who have assisted in this project in Merthyr Tydfil.

He explained that in the British Mission there are forty-six chapels under construction now, and thirty-six to be started before the end of this year, a total of eighty-five buildings for 1963. Sincere appreciation was expressed for members of the branch who had contributed twenty percent of the cost of this building; to the men, women, and children who have sacrificed time and means for its completion. Such sacrifice in this life is in contrast with the selfish, mean, and the sordid, which are prompting the nations to grapple with each other for selfish motives. "Let us preach the Gospel of peace, of self-control, love and harmony. God help us to attain the ideal of loving our neighbors as ourselves," he said.

At the close of the beautiful dedicatory prayer, there were few dry eyes in the audience of friends, members, and visitors. The Relief Society Singing Mothers sang "We Dedicate This House to Thee," and the benediction was offered by Lynn Davis.
