Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 24

Ninetieth Birthday Celebration

The ninetieth year of President David O. McKay's life was filled with a series of celebrations and tributes to a truly great man. It seemed that the observances were a culmination of all the birthday celebrations which he had enjoyed over the years, including the early ones in Huntsville with the traditional dime, button, and tiny ring between layers of a birthday cake.

The series of tributes began with the significant dinner and gift of an organ by businessmen described in Chapter 22, and continued with the dedication of the chapel and organ at Merthyr-Tydfil, Wales, as noted in Chapter 23. On that occasion a special tribute was the issue of The Millennial Star produced under the title, "President David O. McKay's 90th Birthday Issue."

Two other celebrations worthy of mention include a tribute by the general authorities of the Church, and a family and community observance in Huntsville on the date of the 90th anniversary, September 8, 1963, which was a Sunday.

The observance at the Church Office Building, held a few days prior to the birthday anniversary, began with the receipt of letters, cards, telegrams, cablegrams, beautiful flowers, gifts, and messages from many parts of the world. President McKay was overwhelmed with the many tributes offered, and realizing that he could not acknowledge them all personally, said in a statement in The Church News, "These messages of love have helped to make my 90th birthday a memorable occasion. I take this opportunity to extend sincere appreciation and blessing to hundreds of friends everywhere who sent them."

The entire force of Church office workers, and as many of the authorities as were on hand, assembled to express birthday wishes and to have refreshments prepared by the secretaries, under the capable direction of Miss Clare Middle-miss, the President's faithful secretary of many years.

That evening in the Empire Ballroom of Hotel Utah, the general authorities gave a banquet in the President's honor. There were nearly one hundred present, including thirty-one of the thirty-eight general authorities, their wives, members of President McKay's immediate family, his four sisters and their husbands, and widows of former general authorities.

There was a heart-warming sense of love, fellowship, and inspiration as President and Sister McKay entered the room and were escorted to the place of honor at the head table. There were many smiles of happiness and delight from the President as he enjoyed a program of vocal selections of some of his favorite music. An unexpected part of the program was an appearance by the Osmond Brothers singing group from Ogden.

Elder Harold B. Lee of the Council of the Twelve acted as master of ceremonies. He said in part that it was difficult to represent everyone present in doing honor to President McKay, and to try to give him and his family a glimpse of the exalted place he held in the affections of those associated with him in the councils of the Church. Elder Lee emphasized the example set by President McKay in rising above the ugliness of the world.

"If I were an artist," Elder Lee said, "and had to paint a picture of a prophet, I could find no better example to stand for all the prophets, past and present, than President David O. McKay."

Elder Lee then presented to President McKay a silver tray bearing a replica of the Salt Lake Temple, and including engraved signatures of each of the general authorities. Elder Lee explained that the engraving of the temple on the tray was indicative of the fact that more temples have been completed under President McKay's administration than any other president in this dispensation.

In his response, President McKay expressed appreciation for the lovely tray, and then said ". . . beautiful as it is, it will not be the reminder of your love and devotion that your presence at this testimonial has meant. That is engraved on our hearts forever."

The invocation at the special dinner was offered by President Joseph Fielding Smith of the Council of the Twelve, and Elder Spencer W. Kimball, also of the Council of the Twelve, gave the benediction to end the memorable day.

On Sunday, September 8, President and Sister McKay traveled to Huntsville, the place of his birth and boyhood years. The bishop of the Huntsville Ward sent a messenger early in the morning to the McKay home asking if it would be permissible for members of the Sunday School to come to the home and sing their birthday wishes to the Prophet.

President McKay sent back word that this would not be necessary since he planned to attend Sunday School at the Ward, and they could sing for him there if they desired.

To the delight of everyone assembled at the Huntsville Ward chapel, President McKay was there to greet them and express his love for them. Among other counsel he gave to them, he said, "You may travel the world over, but you will never find real happiness and contentment until you lose yourself in the service of mankind."

These few words certainly reveal the key to his own happiness and contentment, for truly he is a man who has lost himself in such rewarding service. He is a man among men, a leader among leaders, a prophet among prophets, a true servant of God.

After enjoying the sweet spirit of the services in Huntsville, President and Sister McKay, along with their son and daughter-in-law, Mr. and Mrs. David Lawrence McKay, enjoyed a quiet, restful day at the "Old Home," and returned to Salt Lake on Monday.
