Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 25

A Visit with President Johnson

On Saturday, January 25, 1964, at about 1:30 p.m., President David O. McKay received a long distance telephone call in his Hotel Utah apartment from the President of the United States, Lyndon Baines Johnson, who began the conversation with:

"President McKay, you will not remember me, but I visited you twice in Salt Lake City." President McKay quickly replied that he remembered him very well. Then President Johnson said: "President McKay, I need some strength and advice from you. Could you come to Washington for an hour's consultation with me—any time next week? Come at your convenience; I shall meet your time, President McKay."

During the fifteen minute conversation President McKay explained to President Johnson that he had been ill, but that he felt he would be well enough the next week to make such a trip, and would be honored to meet with him. President McKay then set the time of the meeting for Friday, January 31, 1964, at 1:30 p.m. President Johnson indicated this would be fine, and asked President McKay to confirm this appointment with his secretary, and also let her know who would be accompanying him.

On Monday, January 27, David Lawrence McKay, at the request of his father, called the White House and told President Johnson's secretary that President McKay would leave Salt Lake City on Thursday morning, January 30. He said that he would accompany his father, along with President Nathan Eldon Tanner of the First Presidency. The secretary said that President Johnson had arranged for the meeting on Friday, but that the time had been set for 1:00 p.m.

In describing the trip President McKay later said:

"It was blustery as we arrived at the White House at about 1:00 p.m., January 31. We were received at the north west gate of the White House grounds, and after showing our identification, were taken into the annex offices, and from there into the Cabinet Room. Soon thereafter President Johnson came into the offices and said, 'Hello young men,' and he shook hands with us. He ushered us into his office where several pictures were taken, including Miss Connie Gerard from Evanston, Wyoming, and Miss Nancy Lou Larson of Salt Lake City, secretaries at the White House and both members of the Church."

After the pictures were taken and the secretaries had left, President Johnson explained to President McKay that he had called him on an impulse, and that he wanted his advice. He stated that President McKay had received him so kindly twice in Salt Lake City, and each time he had come away inspired. He said he would have come to visit President McKay if he could have done so, and greatly appreciated President McKay making the effort to come to Washington.

In answer to a comment from one of the party that he was surprised that the President knew enough about his secretaries to know their religion, President Johnson stated that both of these girls came early and worked late. He said they were devoted and industrious, and had high ideals. In fact, they acted like members of the Church. The President said he thought highly of members of the Church, and added, in fact, that he had never known a "mean" Mormon.

President Johnson then led President McKay and his party to the elevator leading to the second floor and to a circular room which he described as the former bedroom of Margaret Truman, and which Mrs. Kennedy had remodeled into a private dining room. Before that change it had been necessary for the White House family to take their meals down stairs in the formal dining room. The room was decorated with a large painting of Valley Forge.

The oval table was set, with place mats, for four. President Johnson sat at the head with President McKay at his right, President Tanner at his left, and David Lawrence McKay at the foot. President Johnson bowed his head, and offered the blessing of thanks for the food, and for the opportunity of their being together. Waiters served soup, which President Johnson described as "flavored water," but which was delicious vegetable soup. The next course consisted of crab thermidor over rice, with tomato aspic salad. The dessert was a banana pudding which he called "home made."

He told President McKay that events were crowding in on him: Cyprus, Viet Nam, the shooting of Americans over Berlin, Panama, etc. He felt that he needed help. When he was a boy he could rest his head on his mother's shoulder; now he needed another shoulder to rest on. He felt that we needed to strengthen the moral and spiritual fiber of the nation. He wanted advice from President McKay as to how this could be done. President McKay replied that he had read President Johnson's creed, that first of all he was a free man, second an American, third a President, and fourth a Democrat, in that order; that he knew that the President was a man of honor. Then President McKay said: "Let your conscience be your guide. Let the people know that you are sincere, and they will follow you." President Johnson seemed impressed with this advice.

President Johnson said that his first contact with a prominent member of the L. D. S. Church was with Senator Reed Smoot, for whom he had a high regard. He became acquainted with him through Truman Young, who was the President's roommate about 1929. He went with Truman to hear Senator Smoot's address to the Senate, and noticed with what interest and deference the other senators listened to him. He spoke of Truman Young and of his work in the maritime offices in San Francisco at the present time. He expressed his pride in the Tabernacle Choir and hoped it would have an occasion to sing for him in Washington.

President McKay told of his experience at a luncheon with President Eisenhower. Being unaccustomed to White House protocol, he said he thought he had the responsibility, after being with President Eisenhower and others for three hours, to terminate the meeting. So, he suggested that they had been imposing long enough on the President. President Eisenhower said: "Now President McKay, this is my party. I will tell you when we will dismiss." He talked to them for another half hour and then said: "Now President McKay, we will arise."

During the meal President Johnson was interrupted several times by telephone calls. He had a telephone conveniently placed on the leg of the table nearest him. After they were through eating, President Johnson left to get Mrs. Johnson. She came into the room, and was beautiful and charming. She shook hands and visited with President McKay and the others. When President Johnson returned she told him there would be a White House tour of students on scholarships from the Hearst newspaper syndicate, and that she would handle the tour so it would not be necessary for him to speak. He said, however, he would try and speak to them.

The President then said he had requested Utah's senators to come and have their pictures taken with the group, and he was also trying to locate the Utah Congressmen. He said he thought very highly of Senator Wallace F. Bennett, who was a wizard in his work on the finance committee. He also expressed appreciation for Senator Frank E. Moss.

The two senators arrived and were served dessert. As they were finishing, Congressmen Sherman Lloyd and Laurence Burton arrived with Esther Peterson and Congressman Ralph Harding from Idaho. The President kissed Mrs. Peterson on the cheek, and when President McKay expressed marked surprise, Mrs. Peterson said, "President McKay, you have already kissed me; you kissed me when I was a little girl. Do you remember picking me up when I was nursing a broken arm, and carrying me into your living room in Ogden?" Mrs. Peterson was formerly Esther Eggertsen, a neighbor of President McKay.

Representative Lloyd told the President that he approved what he had done in economy measures, but his wife disapproved of his darkening of the White House. The President retorted that his mother had been very careful with money. She had always insisted on going around the house turning out the lights, and he got the habit from her. He noticed that she was the one who always had money under her pillow. He said he had inquired as to what the electric light bill was at the White House and found out that it was $4,800 per month. He had reduced this to $3,600 the first month, and would reduce it further, perhaps to $2,600. He saw no need for keeping lights burning all night in an empty office, lights burning in halls which were not used, and in all closets. He had insisted that the automatic switches be replaced by switches that can be pulled manually, and he insisted that they be pulled. He said that while $4,800 is nothing compared with fifteen billion dollars, still, unless people go around turning off lights they won't become economy conscious, and they are less likely to stress economy in other matters. He said when he became President there were thirty-six Cadillacs there. He cut this down to six, and gave the drivers of the others cheaper cars. This was not a great savings but it would make the drivers cost conscious.

Then he went into one of the larger fields. Secretary McNamara had shown him that there had been an increase in the national budget of five billion dollars annually. Mr. McNamara showed him how that could be stopped, and how there could be a saving in the defense effort. The President showed this to every member of his cabinet, and in a few days later each came back to him and stated that it would not be necessary to raise the budget as he had originally contemplated.

President Johnson then said laughingly, "Now I think we had better break up before President McKay dismisses us. I will take you around and show you the rooms on this floor." He took President McKay's arm and showed the group first where President Kennedy and President Lincoln had slept. In this room Mrs. Johnson was seated at a table writing. Further down the hall was the room in which Lincoln's bed and other furniture were placed. Still further on was the room in which statesmen slept while they were staying at the White House. He mentioned that there had been no one staying in that room since he had been President. He said he had a pair of pajamas that he would be glad to lend to President McKay if he wished to stay there. Across the hall was a room with a canopy bed in which Queen Elizabeth had slept.

President Johnson then guided the group down to the first floor and to the swimming pool, which had been donated for President Roosevelt by children's dimes without expense to the government. It had since been redecorated by Ambassador Joseph Kennedy. One side of the room was covered by a mirror, so that the pool looks twice its regular size. The President stated that when he was not behind schedule, as he was today, he takes fifteen minutes before luncheon, and fifteen minutes before dinner and swims up and down the pool six times in water at ninety degrees.

The president then escorted the group out of the White House along an arcade from which he pointed out the rose gardens planted by Mrs. Kennedy. They then returned to the offices of the Annex, where he introduced them to Secretary McNamara who had been waiting for forty-five minutes. The President then shook hands and said goodbye.

President McKay then went through a battery of reporters who wanted to know what the conversation had been about. President McKay told them that they must get all that information from President Johnson. He did deny that a temple was about to be built in Washington.

President McKay, President Tanner, and David McKay, caught the 5 o'clock plane, but because of a delay in Chicago, they arrived in Salt Lake City at 11:45 p.m., which meant that President McKay had gone twenty-one hours without sleep.

The trip was strenuous but very successful. It was an historic event in the progress of the Church.
