Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 26

The Oakland Temple

Some called it a "miracle," and others proclaimed it an example of pure faith. But whatever, there he was for all to marvel at. President David O. McKay, in his 92nd year, having suffered a severe illness only recently, was presiding at the dedicatory rites for the newest of the Church's temples at Oakland, California.

Even with all the beauty of the temple and the sacredness of the rites, the most often expressed feeling of the thousands in attendance was appreciation that the health and determination of President McKay permitted him to preside, offer the dedicatory prayer at all sessions, and give inspiring messages to those assembled.

President McKay had an ardent desire to be part of this occasion, since it was he some two decades ago who had inspected the site and had recommended purchase of the property as a future temple site.

The building now being dedicated would stand as a further monument to him as a builder of temples. Its dedication brought to five the temples which had been started and completed during his years as President. This represented more than one third of the 13 temples in use by the Church.

President McKay's interest in the Oakland Temple dated back to 1934 when he visited the site as one of the general authorities. It was on the basis of his original recommendation that the Church purchased the site in 1942. His next visit to the spot was in September, 1960, when he dedicated the East Bay Interstake Center on a portion of the property. At that time he was impressed by the urgency to proceed with the building of a temple on the site now known in the area as "temple hill."

Thus, on Monday, January 23, 1961, he made a dramatic visit to a special assembly of stake presidencies in the area who had met on call of the President. He flew from Salt Lake City that morning and in the meeting announced to the enthusiastic group that a decision had been made to erect a temple on the site. He presented a tentative design of the temple for approval.

In the meeting he recalled the prophecy of President Brigham Young cited earlier in connection with the Los Angeles Temple. He read to the group the following:

On August 7, 1847, President Brigham Young made a prophecy contained in an epistle which he and Dr. Willard Richards had written to the Saints in California who had come around the Horn under the presidency of Samuel Brannan. This prediction was given toward the end of the letter—

"And in the process of time, the shores of the Pacific may yet be overlooked from the Temple of the Lord."

President McKay also referred to the prophecy attributed to President George Albert Smith who had predicted in 1924, while looking eastward from his hotel in San Francisco, that a temple would one day surmount the East Bay Hills—one that would be visible as a beacon to ships as they entered the Golden Gate from the far-flung nations of the earth.

After making these references, President McKay said: "So, we feel that the time has come when these prophecies should be fulfilled."

Following the meeting, President McKay returned to Salt Lake City that afternoon, leaving behind an organization of dedicated leaders to raise a minimum of $500,000 in contributions toward construction of the new temple.

A revised design for the temple was prepared by Harold W. Burton, Church architect, and detailed drawings were completed and ready for the site dedication and groundbreaking on Saturday, May 26, 1962. President McKay again participated in these services, which saw some 7,000 persons in attendance. This was the largest group of Latter-day Saints yet to assemble in Northern California. President McKay offered the dedicatory prayer for the site, and also turned the first shovel of soil to signal the beginning of construction.

On Saturday, May 25, 1963, just a year after the ground was broken, the cornerstone was placed in appropriate ceremonies. President Joseph Fielding Smith of the Council of the Twelve officiated at these special services. Music was furnished by the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir which had made special concert appearances during the week at Los Angeles and San Francisco. Elder Richard L. Evans of the Council of the Twelve, commentator with the choir, also assisted President Smith at the cornerstone rites.

From this point the majestic temple structure began to take shape and the work was pushed ahead as those in the area successfully raised more than $650,000 toward the construction.

As the work neared completion the First Presidency announced the appointment in January, 1964 of President Delbert F. Wright to be president of the new temple, with his wife as matron. Later the counselors in the presidency were added, these being Bernhard Herman Schettler of San Francisco, and Robert Lee Kenner of Berkeley.

Much of the success of the work was attributed to the temple district committee under the leadership of President O. Leslie Stone, president of the Oakland-Berkeley Stake. Those appointed in 1961 to serve with him on the temple committee were President David O. Haight, Palo Alto Stake, vice chairman; Pres. Carrol Smith, Klamath Stake, and President Dallas Tueller, Fresno Stake. Paul E. Warnick was named executive secretary.

Some changes occurred in the committee with the calls of President Haight to serve as president of the Scottish Mission, and President Smith as mission president in Canada. President James Price Ronnow of Reno Stake was added to the committee, and also President Wright after the announcement of his appointment as temple president.

Another appointment announced prior to the dedication was that of Paul Summerhays, counselor in the Oakland-Berkeley stake presidency, as director of the Oakland Temple Bureau of Information, with Sister Summerhays also assisting in this work.

During August of 1964 President McKay made a surprise visit to the area to inspect the work on the temple. He announced that dedicatory services would be held on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, November 17, 18 and 19, 1964. As he met with the temple district leaders and assembled stake presidencies on this occasion, he said: "I am thrilled to be here. My soul was uplifted last night as I gazed on this beautiful temple with its magnificent lighting. It bears testimony to your fine endeavors, and I say God bless you for it."

Before the dedication date arrived President McKay became ill and many felt it would be impossible for him to participate in the services. But his faith and determination made it possible, through the blessings of the Lord, for him to attend and participate actively in all of the sessions.

In attendance with him at the dedication were all of the general authorities and their wives who were available to attend, along with many of the general auxiliary officers of the Church. These officials flew to Oakland on Monday, November 16, and returned Thursday afternoon following the final dedicatory session.

As the first session began, President McKay, the general authorities and their wives, and stake presidents and other Church officials of the area were seated in the beautiful gold-hued Celestial Room of the temple. From here the services were carried by closed circuit television to other rooms of the temple and to the adjacent East Bay Interstake Center. A congregation in excess of 6,000 witnessed the ceremonies.

President Stone conducted the first services, under the direction of President McKay, and also spoke briefly. Other speakers at the first session included President Joseph Fielding Smith, and President Wright, the temple president. Sister Jessie Evans Smith, wife of President Smith and a long-time member of the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir, sang as a solo "Bless This House," with special words for the occasion. This song was repeated by other soloists in the other sessions. During the six sessions, special choirs were formed from the 40 stakes in the temple district to provide the dedicatory music. The sacred "Hosanna Shout" was a feature of each service following the dedicatory prayer, as well as the singing of the "Hosanna Anthem."

During the six sessions, President McKay spoke and offered the dedicatory prayer at each of the sessions. He was assisted in the direction of the services by his two counselors, President Hugh B. Brown and President N. Eldon Tanner. They also addressed the various services during the three days, as did others of the general authorities present.

In his remarks prior to the first session of the dedicatory services, President McKay spoke feelingly of his appreciation for the temple and of the responsibilities of those who enter therein. Rising to supreme spiritual heights, the beloved Church leader pleaded for love and kindness on the part of those who enter the temple. A portion of his remarks follows:

One great purpose carried out by those who come into the Temple is the sealing of man and wife in the sacred bonds of matrimony. That purpose is based upon the fact that man and woman truly love each other. That means that a couple coming to the altar should be sure that there is love in each heart. It would be a terrible thing to be bound for eternity to one whom you do not love, but it is a glorious thing to be sealed for Time and Eternity to one whom you do love.

Let us ever remember that love is the divinest attribute of the human soul. God himself is love. Our hearts are really one with Him in that eternal home, and so when a couple kneels at the altar and receives the privilege and blessing of that eternal sealing, one should be sure that love is binding those two hearts that will now be bound by the Holy Power of the Priesthood for time and all Eternity. Associated with that should be the realization that love must be fed; otherwise that binding, that sealing power, that covenant which is made, may not last forever. Love must be nourished; love can be starved to death just as literally as the body can be starved without daily sustenance. There is no one great protestation that anybody can make that will be sufficient to keep that love alive always. There are certain obligations taken by those who make covenants at the altar and those obligations must be manifest after they go out of the Temple. One is Kindness. There should be no unkindness manifest in the homes occupied by couples who leave the House of God.

In one of the epistles that Paul wrote, there are some statements now known throughout the Christian world as the Psalm of Love, the first of which is: "Love suffereth long and is kind." The word "suffereth" includes patience, tolerance, and consideration. We can visualize homes in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the great majority of which there is kindness on both parts because there is love there—a binding love which will not be separated by death. Love suffereth long and is always kind and gentle.

Men of the Church should remember, and women of the Church should realize that kindness will foster love, and that it should be a reciprocal act. There are men of courtesy, men who think of and give special thought to their wives, and wives who consider their husbands. Paul, in that same epistle, says, "Love seeketh not her own," but the welfare and happiness of others. And another line in that same epistle says, "Love believeth all things." If that love is fed daily and monthly and yearly throughout a lifetime, the husband's attention will not be drawn to somebody else, because there is trust in that binding power of the Priesthood, neither will there be attraction or indulgence in any other way, because love trusts, "believeth all things," and there must be foundation and cause for that trust the husband has in the wife, and the trust which the wife has in her husband.

Mormonism, the principal element of it, is the application of religion to daily life. That is what you members have done in participating in the erecting of this edifice; what the Church has done, bringing into the homes of the membership of the Church those elements which will make for happiness and peace here and now, and that is just what it will do. Our young people should be taught to choose mates who will feed, nourish, perpetuate that bond which brings them to the altar here in this Temple—Love. If your spirit lives after death, as it does, then that attribute of love will persist also, just as sympathy, just as reverence, and every other virtue that you have will persist.

In his remarks President McKay also spoke convincingly of the immortality of the soul, and the importance of the temple in opening the door of salvation and exaltation to the millions who have died without baptism. "I should think then," President McKay said, "that these people should have an opportunity to hear that same gospel and come through the door of baptism as you and I had to come through that door. It is not an impossible mission to our Father in Heaven, and this Temple ordinance work is one means of accomplishing it—one means of opening the door."

In concluding his impressive address, President McKay stated:

What a glorious work the members in this Oakland Temple District have done in participating in the erection of this Holy House! They have accomplished it by giving of themselves, by living above the animal plane; by rising to that spiritual plane in which we can lose ourselves for the good of others. With all my soul, I say, God bless you for what you have done!

Let me leave this thought with you this morning. Those who now take advantage of the House of God take upon themselves obligations when they kneel at the altar and each couple becomes man and wife. Furthermore, this obligation reaches out telling the world that there is no death. We do live after death strikes us; it is but a passing from one of Father's houses into another—into other rooms more glorious.

God bless you! God help us to comprehend the significance and breadth, the expansiveness, the eternal nature of the Restored Gospel of Jesus Christ, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ, Amen.

His dedicatory prayer was a powerful appeal for the influence of the gospel to extend into the lives of men everywhere. He also prayed for the growth and advancement of genealogical and temple work.

In an especially spiritual part of the prayer he prayed for strength in his position as President of the Church.

"Bless with health and wisdom Thy servant whom Thou has called to lead Thy Church in this day," President McKay said. "Continue to reveal to him Thy mind and will as it pertains to the growth and advancement of Thy work among the children of men. Bless abundantly his counselors. May the First Presidency be united by the Spirit and Power of God in all their labors, and in every thought, word, and act may they glorify Thy Name. Here in this Holy House, with humility and deep gratitude, we acknowledge Thy divine guidance and inspiration. Help us to magnify our callings, and to preach to all the world the freedom which the Gospel gives. For Truth is Freedom, and gives the right to worship, to work, the right to serve. Help us never to lose sight of these blessings."

The dedicatory services seemed to infuse new vitality into President McKay and the spiritual experiences of the three days at Oakland were felt long afterwards as he continued to improve in health and continue his strong leadership of the Church.
