Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 27

The David O. McKay Hospital

On Friday, April 22, 1966, President David O. McKay met with hundreds of Weber County business, civic, and Church leaders on a twenty-eight-acre site at 3950 Harrison Boulevard, Ogden, where groundbreaking services were held for an eight-level, 350-bed hospital which would bear his name.

President Albert L. Bott, chairman of the Hospital Development Committee, conducted the impressive service marking the beginning of construction. Special music was furnished by the Weber State College L.D.S. Institute male chorus and choir, singing "Your Land and My Land," "Thanks Be To God," and "The Prophet," a song written especially for President McKay.

The welcoming address was delivered by President Bott, who is also president of the Mt. Ogden Stake. He expressed gratitude for the presence of President McKay on this important occasion for Weber County. He was followed by Bart Wolthuis, mayor of Ogden, who said: "This will be not only a building of steel and stone, but it will have also character and personality because it bears the name of David O. McKay. We extend our appreciation to him and to the other general authorities for presenting to us the realization of a dream."

It was noted that of the estimated $10,000,000 cost of the hospital, some $8,000,000 was to be financed by the Church, and the remaining $2,000,000 was to be raised by the communities to be served by the hospital, including the counties of Weber, Davis, Morgan, and Box Elder.

Another speaker was Elder William J. Critchlow, Jr., Assistant to the Council of the Twelve, and a former stake president in Ogden, as well as a member of the Thomas D. Dee L.D.S. Hospital board of trustees. He said, in part: "This hospital facility is another milestone in the cultural development of the community under the leadership of President McKay, and may it serve as a monument to him."

Bishop John H. Vandenberg, Presiding Bishop of the Church and president of the Dee L.D.S. Hospital board of trustees, related how President McKay had urged them to go forward with construction of the new hospital. Then, turning to President McKay, he said, "Your life so exemplifies the teachings of the Lord—love, kindness, compassion, and leadership—that I know of no other man whom this hospital could be named for but you."

During the hour-long groundbreaking ceremonies the sun shone through the clouds as if to cast a spotlight on the occasion.

At the groundbreaking, President McKay pulled a switch that signaled the start of construction. He said, laughingly, "That was the easiest hole I ever dug." He also thanked the people of Weber and surrounding counties for beginning the hospital, which was to become a part of the L.D.S. Hospital System, and for thinking enough of him to so perpetuate his name. In answer to previous speakers who had voiced the hope that he would be with them for the hospital's dedication, he smiled broadly and said, "Don't worry. I'll be with you."

President McKay fulfilled his promise July 9, 1969, when he attended the dedicatory services of the $11.5 million hospital which bears his name. Accompanied by Sister McKay, their daughter, Emma Rae Ashton, and their son, David Lawrence, he sat in his car near the front entrance of the hospital and listened to the opening ceremonies, which concluded with Administrator Kenneth E. Knapp presenting the key to the hospital's front door to him and a sheaf of red roses to Sister McKay.

Lawrence read a message from his father, in which President McKay stated:

I am grateful to the Lord that he has granted me the great privilege of being present with you this afternoon. A few weeks ago, I was thrilled to go through this building to be shown what is not only one of the most beautiful hospitals existing, but also one designed to be the latest word in efficiency in the care of the physically ill.

My emotions are deeply stirred, as I share with you a feeling of humility and pride for our membership in a church that so magnificently supports an institution such as this, which will relieve suffering and pain, and restore new life and hope to the many thousands who will pass through these doors in the years to come.

I know the Lord has blessed the people so that they were able to contribute to this worthy cause, and that he will continue to bless them for their generosity and love of mankind. I am also mindful and grateful for the tithing from the people of the Church that is always sacredly and carefully used to build such buildings as these to help and bless the people.

We express our gratitude to the Great Healer above who has enlightened men so that we are able to provide the most up-to-date facilities known to modern medicine, so that we are able, with the help of skilled medical men, to carry on his work among the children of men.

Presiding Bishop Vandenberg, in his brief remarks, declared, "Through persistence and cooperation we now have this beautiful new hospital. It stands as a monument for man's willingness to serve mankind." He said that President McKay epitomizes service to God and man, and it is fitting that the structure has been named for him. "Your efforts have elevated you. Service always lifts. You may be proud of this hospital."

Other speakers at the service included Mayor Wolthuis and Dr. Joe Amano, president of the McKay-Dee Hospital staff. Prayers were offered by the Rev. Donald R. Steiner, president of the Ogden Ministerial Association, and President Bott. The Ogden L.D.S. Institute Chorale, directed by Ladd R. Cropper, sang several numbers.

The new hospital is truly, as Bishop Vandenberg stated, "a monument for man's willingness to serve mankind." Built of white facing, the imposing eight-story structure looks out over the valley to the west and faces the mountains to the east. The finest and most modern features are incorporated in the operating rooms, patient areas, outpatient clinics, and services facilities.

The interior decor is enhanced with beautiful works of art, including a large portrait of President McKay, painted by prominent Utah artist Ev Thorpe. The painting was shown to the Prophet when he toured the hospital on May 16, some seven weeks before the dedicatory services. At that time, one of the family members accompanying him commented, "I have never seen a portrait that so typically captures father's expression as this one does."

As they were about to leave the hospital, one of the family members suggested that President McKay again look at the picture, and she pointed out that the small boy and the man standing in the foreground were President McKay and his father. Tears of appreciation came to the eyes of the Prophet as he viewed the work and beauty of this painting and the beautiful new edifice built and named in his honor.
