Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 28

Love for Little Children

As thousands of children and young people can attest, President McKay was never too busy or in too great a hurry to stop and clasp an outstretched hand and to say a word of greeting. What this contact has meant in their lives is cherished as one of their finest experiences.

On a visit to his own ward in Salt Lake City he said: "I love to attend Sunday School and to be in the presence of children; to listen to their singing and speaking in praise of the Redeemer. It is music to hear little children speak the name of Jesus. There come to me the words of the Savior, 'Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not; for of such is the Kingdom of God.'" (Mark 10:14) On another occason he made this remark:

"The Gospel teaches that each individual is a child of our Father in Heaven. Each one is precious in his sight. You are baptized as individuals, not as a group, and the Father is interested in your salvation and in the happiness of each boy and girl in the whole world."

When students in a humanities class at Brigham Young University were asked to prepare a theme on someone who had influenced their appreciation of the arts, Kent Goodliffe chose to prepare this sketch of President McKay as the one who had most influenced him. The young artist seems to have captured the smile so typical of President McKay, and of which a Deseret News editorial said ". . . has stirred thousands into better lives and firmer characters."

His own grandchildren and great-grandchildren adored him and looked forward to every opportunity afforded them to be in his presence. Individual stories of their experiences, and those of other children, will probably never be written, but they are inscribed indelibly in their lives and characters.

During the summer of 1963, at the old home in Huntsville, President McKay was in the garden with other members of his family, when a young couple with two small daughters came through the garden gate and apologized for intruding, but explained that the children refused to pass without seeing the President. The father had the smaller one in his arms, and as President McKay put out his hand to her, she fairly leaped into his arms, and threw her own little arms around his neck as she confided, "I pray for you every night."

An interesting story is told by Mrs. Helen Spencer Williams, a granddaughter of President Brigham Young, and with her permission, the following is given as she wrote it:

Robin Williams, aged 13, had been asking to attend a general conference since she was nine. She wanted to actually see and hear President McKay. Her parents kept assuring her that she would have a much better view of him on television. Nevertheless she kept insisting that she wanted to see him in person and that she might even get a chance to shake his hand if she were there. "I live right here in the same city with him, but I've never really seen him or spoken to him, and if I don't go to conference maybe I never will."

As the fall conference of 1962 drew near she again importuned her father to take her to the Tabernacle on Sunday morning. He consented. She wanted to be there early enough to see President McKay arrive and to be assured of a seat near enough to the front so she could watch him and hear him.

Robin and her father arrived at the Temple Grounds before 6 a.m. The grounds and doorways of the Tabernacle were crowded with people all endeavoring to go inside. It was an exciting and wonderful moment for Robin—one she had long awaited. Now the time had come for her to see President McKay and attend her first general conference.

Soon a gentleman's voice was heard. "All those who are from foreign lands and who are attending conference for the first time may enter." Then, "All who are over 80, next all stake presidencies, all bishops—any who are in wheelchairs may go in, and you will find places reserved for you." Hundreds of people filed past Robin into the Tabernacle. At last he announced that there were no more seats available and those who remained would find places in the overflow meetings.

Disappointedly, Robin and her father went back to their car. As they drove toward home, Robin spoke, "Daddy, don't be upset, it was just as it should be—I'll have other chances to see President McKay and maybe those who were allowed in the Tabernacle ahead of us never will." So once again Robin watched President McKay on television, but it did not satisfy her longing and desire to see him in person or to be near him when he spoke.

Then there was little Dale Buehner, aged 7. From the time he was old enough to pray aloud, he had been asking his Heavenly Father to please let him meet President McKay. Dale was one of five children but the one who seemed to be deeply serious and spiritual. Again and again his expressed desires to his mother were answered by, "Dale, dear, President McKay is so busy he can't meet every little boy, but I'm sure that some day your chance will come—just be patient."

Then one night after he had said his prayers, he looked at his mother and said, "Mother, you know you are going to wait too long to take me to see President McKay, either he will die or I will, and we will never get to know each other. Please take me!"

She knew then that she must endeavor to have her little boy meet the prophet if it meant so much to him.

The stories about Robin and Dale were told to Miss Clare Middlemiss, President McKay's devoted secretary. When she told President McKay about the two children, he told her to make arrangements to have the children meet him at his office the following Monday morning at 7 a.m. Then the very day before the appointment there appeared in the paper a notice that Sister McKay had been seriously injured and that President McKay had not left her bedside. Of course it would be impossible for him to keep the early appointment with Robin and Dale—so it seemed.

But, at 6:00 a.m. Miss Middlemiss called to say that President McKay had just telephoned her to say he would not disappoint the children, but would meet them at the appointed hour, 7:00 a.m. as he had promised.

Dale and his mother, Robin and her father were waiting with Miss Middlemiss when the President came into the office.

It was a dramatic and wonderful moment when the beloved, white-haired, handsome President appeared and greeted them with his sweet smile and friendly handshake.

They all went into his private office, where he had them sit while he talked with them. Then he showed them some of the precious gifts, documents, letters and pictures from persons all over the world. Articles from leaders of countries and industries, as well as remembrances from members of the Church from the far corners of the earth. He offered them candy and shared with them his laughter, his humor and his beautiful spirit. He had them sit in his chair. Then he took them by the hand and as he did so, he touched their hearts and their lives. He had taken time from the sick bed of his wife, from his magnitude of responsibilities to let little children come to him. Their dreams and hopes had been realized.

As Robin and her father rode home, they were very quiet. The father's eyes were filled with tears. Just as they neared home Robin said, "I've always thought of the men in the Bible and the Book of Mormon as Prophets—but not until today when President McKay took my hand in his did I realize that he, too, is a Prophet of God."

Dale and his mother rode home in silence. Then his mother asked, "Dale, what are you thinking about?" And he answered, "I'm just thinking how good I feel inside."

These two children cherish this experience. In talking with them they both express the feeling that this experience on that early Monday morning will never be forgotten and that they were privileged and blessed by being in the presence of the Prophet and the President of the Church.

President McKay kept his appointment with two little children under difficult circumstances. His sweetness, interest and spirit during their meeting brings understanding to the Savior's admonition: "Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven."

They will ever be grateful to President McKay and to Clare Middlemiss for making their visit possible.
