Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 29

Kindness to Animals

One of the characteristics that marked the life of President David O. McKay was his love of animals. From his early youth he loved and cared for a variety of pets, and throughout his life he maintained a particular fondness for horses.

One of his earliest pets was a large, black Newfoundland dog named "Toss." The dog was a favorite of all the family, and would trot along side any family member who invited him for a walk. For several years a trusted and loved housekeeper worked for the McKays. Her home was some distance away, and when she would go there in the evenings she would call Toss and the two would go side by side until she reached her mother's cottage. As she entered the home the faithful dog would lie down outside until she appeared for the return journey. Then, no matter how dark the night, she felt as safe as though she were accompanied by a police escort.

One evening young David O. went to the old rock schoolhouse for a rehearsal, and when it was over and the crowd came out, Toss appeared out of the darkness and was at his master's side for the trip home. One of the boys said tauntingly, "I suppose you think that dog would protect you if anyone attacked you!" To this he replied, "Do you want to test him?" There was a chorus of "Sure, let's see if he is any good!" The boy was told to attack as though he meant real harm, and as he did so, David O. called, "Toss!" and the dog jumped upon the intruder, instantly ready to protect his master. No one in the crowd ever doubted Toss again.

There was a soft mat on the south porch, in front of the dining room door, which was claimed by Toss as his particular resting place, and members of the family, instead of disturbing him, merely stepped over him when entering that room. One day a friend came to call and was being ushered in by some of the children who knew him well. As he neared the door he gave Toss a kick, which was resented by the dog as well as by the children. Toss expressed his resentment by showing his teeth and growling, and the man entered the house with one bound, and without the courtesy of knocking.

Almost a year later the same man returned, and as he turned the corner of the house, Toss jumped toward him, and if one of the boys had not been there, the friend would have fared badly. After the visit was over, mother said, "I wonder why Toss growled so at that man when he came; it is so unlike him to greet anyone in that way!"

David replied, "He had a perfect right to growl at him, because he was kicked by that man once."

Toss, the faithful watch-dog, lived as a beloved member of the family for many years, and there was deep mourning when he died of "causes incident to age."

The boys always had ponies, and they were expected to care for them personally, so they would never become the responsibility of the one whose duty it was to attend the work horses and the carriage team. It was sometimes a temptation to shirk this responsibility, especially when there was a swimming party or a baseball game on.

The boys knew, however, that unless "Mingo" and the "little gray mare" were kept clean, and properly fed and watered, there would be no riding when they were ready to join their friends in that sport. Their personal care and kindness won for them the love of their ponies.

When David and his brother, Thomas, asked if they might have pigeons, their request was granted, providing they would make houses for them, attach them to the gable of the large barn, and then take proper care of them. The boys of the neighborhood were interested in the preparations, and everyone was delighted when the first pair of pigeons was purchased and placed in the new house, which was made so attractive, with a well filled food box at the door that there was never a question about their remaining.

As the pigeons increased in numbers, new houses were made until the boys boasted of quite a large flock. Each one was an individual pet, and many of them were named. There were "Sandy," "Whitey," "Spot," "Brownie," and many others, all loved and counted daily as they came down to be fed with the chickens gathered on the grass in front of the granary.

One day a hawk flew over and caught one of the pets in his claws and flew off toward the meadow below the barn yard. David immediately jumped on his pony, and brandishing a long stick, soon overtook the hawk with the pigeon which was a heavy load for the attacker. Believing that if he kept the thief from settling in the willows which surrounded the open field, he could rescue his pet. He circled the meadow, shouting from the running pony, until the hawk finally dropped his prey. Unfortunately the pigeon was dead. He was brought back and given a proper burial, complete with headstone and flowers, with the children of the neighborhood as mourners.

When the boys asked if they might add rabbits to their growing number of pets, the same requirements were made by the parents, and acceded to by the children. This time, however, Father McKay added his skill to the building of the hutches, and when the first one was completed, a pair of pink-eyed bunnies was purchased. As the rabbits multiplied, more hutches were built, until there seemed to be white bunnies everywhere around the barn yard. When someone suggested that rabbits made delicious stew and pie, David was horrified. These pets were always well cared for, and the number was depleted only occasionally when a pair was given as a present to some of their friends.

One rainy day Bishop McKay returned from the Dry Hollow farm bringing a wet baby magpie that had fallen from its nest high up in a cottonwood tree. The tiny bird was wrapped in a flannel cloth and placed near the stove until it was perfectly dry, when it was fed and soon became quite at home with the children.

David made a cage out of a crate, tacking wire netting across the front, and making a slide door on the side through which food and water could be placed inside. He named this pet Jack, and became devoted to him.

One day a friend suggested, "You will have to split his tongue if you want to teach him to talk." David was shocked and replied, "I wouldn't think of hurting Jack that way if he never learned to talk."

Through kindness and much repetition, the bird learned to speak quite plainly, and became the wonder of the neighborhood. He was allowed out of the cage and felt free to go in and out of the house. He even ventured as far as the barnyard, always coming back to his cage in the evening.

On one of these excursions he was following David, when the wind closed the barn door on his leg, fracturing it. David immediately became surgeon, binding the limb with splints, and the bird hopped on one foot until the other healed. The leg was not quite straight, however, and later became a means of identification.

A number of wild magpies often lighted among the chickens and pigeons at feeding time and claimed their share of the grain that was scattered generously by the boys. At first Jack remained on the high board fence and watched these strangers, but his curiosity led him closer to their chattering, and soon he became quite friendly with them. David realized that his pet was making new friends, but felt secure in the thought that Jack always returned to his cage in the evening. As winter approached, the birds prepared to leave and to his chagrin, Jack left with them.

Early in the spring the magpies returned to share the food of their domestic friends, and David recognized his pet by the crooked leg. Excitedly he called, "Hello Jack," and the bird cocked his little head and replied, "Hello Jack." He flew away, however, when there was an attempt to catch him.

Jack was replaced by another baby bird, and the lonely cage became again the center of interest and love. The second Jack was allowed the freedom of the large lot surrounding the house, but was not encouraged to join the pigeons and chickens at the barn yard. He lived to be much older than his predecessor, and was a constant source of joy.

President McKay's love for horses was proverbial. The gray team, Kate and Puss, the spanking sorrels, Prince and Charlie, were more than farm animals—they were friends and were treated as such. He was always known as a fast rider and driver, but when the horses were returned to their stalls, they were always rubbed down, blanketed and fed properly, and in return for this consideration, they gave their best in responsive service.

During his entire life President McKay was never without horses. One of the most beloved was his horse "Sonny Boy," who gave many years of pleasure and delight to the President. He was often pictured with or on "Sonny Boy" and took excellent care of him, as he did with all his horses.

Typical of this care is an example related by the family. When it became difficult for President McKay to see that the colts were trained and broken, arrangements were made to take them to the best trainer available. When a young horse was being sent some distance, one of the President's sons asked, "Why send him so far when there is a good man this side of Centerville?"

President McKay replied promptly, "He uses the whip too freely and I don't want my horses mistreated. They can be trained with kindness much more effectively."

When his horses were in the large pasture and he entered the gate and called, they all came trotting up to him and stood perfectly still to be bridled or saddled. When his grandchildren were there they waited eagerly for their turns to ride on "Papa Dade's" prize horses.

Several years ago someone broke into the farm and stole the President's best saddles from the saddle house. One of these was a hand-carved Mexican saddle, and was prized very highly by President McKay. When the unfortunate incident became known, a group of stake presidents in Weber and Davis counties presented him with the best saddle available, so that he could still enjoy riding his horses while in Huntsville. Care was taken that this new saddle was kept in a safe place. Other saddles were later purchased to replace the ones that were stolen, and these were kept in the saddle house, but under lock and key. One day, during hot weather when members of the family were at the home in Huntsville, two of President McKay's sisters were out for a drive and decided to check on things at the farm. They found the door to the saddle house locked, but one of the windows open. They immediately corrected what they felt was a bit of carelessness, and went on their way with a feeling of satisfaction that another theft had been averted.

That afternoon President McKay drove up to keep an appointment at Huntsville, with barely enough time to return to Salt Lake City for a later engagement. Upon being told of the open window, he said, "I left that window open purposely because there is a bird's nest inside, and that is the only entrance the parent birds have to carry food to their babies. I think I shall just have time to run over."

When the sisters said they would correct the mistake, he insisted on doing it, saying, "I must pick up a halter that needs repairing, anyway." When he returned to the house after the two-mile drive, he said in his gracious way, "It was just as I expected—one little bird was outside trying to get in, and the mother was inside attempting to get out."

His kindness to everyone and to everything gave him a benign demeanor that was one of his great characteristics. It made him more like the One who "marks the sparrow's fall."
