Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay ( 1966)

Chapter 31

The Death of a Prophet

If ever a man of modern history left his world better for having lived in it, that man was David Oman McKay.

"Wherever he passed, men lifted their heads with more hope and courage. Wherever his voice was heard, there followed greater kindness among men, greater tolerance, greater love. Wherever his influence was felt, man and God became closer in purpose and action."

Thus did the Deseret News pay tribute to President David O. McKay in a special edition on January 19, 1970, the day following his death.

On January 18, 1970, the beloved prophet, seer, and revelator died peacefully at his Hotel Utah apartment of congestive heart failure. At his bedside were his sweetheart of 69 years, Emma Ray, and five of their six children.

As news spread around the world, hundreds of letters, telegrams, and other expressions of love and sympathy began arriving. Heads of nations and average citizens, Latter-day Saints and nonmembers alike, mourned the passing of a widely loved and respected leader. Special resolutions were passed in the Senate of the United States, as well as state legislature and other governmental bodies. All united in expressing their deepest feelings of sorrow at his passing, as well as in gratitude for the example, inspiration, strength, and influence of his life.

Beginning Tuesday afternoon, January 20, and continuing through Thursday morning, January 22, President McKay's body lay in state in the foyer of the Church Office Building. The bronze casket was surrounded by huge banks of beautiful floral tributes. Tens of thousands of mourners who included small children as well as elderly persons, civic leaders, and members of other faiths, came to pay their respects to the President of the Church. At times the line of mourners stretched three-deep completely around the block, despite occasional rain. Often, as the mourners reached the steps of the Church Office Building, the strains of "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet" were heard, sung by young people who had, in many cases, never known another prophet in the Church.

On Thursday morning, January 22, the doors to the Church Office Building were closed while family members and general authorities paid their last respects. Then, at 11:30 a.m., the funeral procession, led by a police escort, moved slowly to Temple Square. The pallbearers—grandsons and great-grandsons of President McKay—followed the hearse. Behind them were members of the Council of the Twelve, who were honorary pallbearers.

In the Tabernacle, the funeral service at noon was conducted by Elder Hugh B. Brown, first counselor to President McKay. The invocation was offered by Elder Alvin R. Dyer, a counselor to President McKay. The Tabernacle Choir provided the music, which included three favorite hymns of the Prophet: "I Need Thee Every Hour," "Crossing the Bar," and "I Know That My Redeemer Lives."

President Joseph Fielding Smith, who had served in the First Presidency with President McKay and was to succeed him as tenth President of the Church, paid the following tribute to the man with whom he had associated in the presiding councils of the Church for 60 years:

He was a true servant of our Lord—one who walked uprightly before his Maker; one who loved his fellowmen; one who loved life and rejoiced in the privilege of service that was his; one who served with an eye single to the glory of God. . . .

I thank God for the life and ministry of this great man. He was a soul set apart, a great spirit who came here to preside in Israel. He did his work well and has just returned clean and perfected to the realms of light and joyous reunion.

If ever there was a man to whom these words of scriptural benediction might well be said, it was President McKay:

"Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world" (Matt. 25:34), for ye did all things well that were entrusted unto thy care.

President Brown, in addition to conducting the services, paid tribute to President McKay. He stated:

"Here and there, and now and then, God makes a giant among men." President McKay was a symbol of moral strength to the people of many nations. His life was an inspiration, his memory a benediction.

He was a man who was tall in character as well as physically. He stood out, head and shoulders, above the crowd—a measuring standard for manhood. He was known for his largeness of spirit and the grace with which he lived. . . .

When a great man dies, for years the light he leaves behind him lies on the paths of men. The love, the teachings, the life of President McKay have been an inspiration and a proud influence for good in the world.

President N. Eldon Tanner, second counselor in the First Presidency, told of personal experiences he had had with President McKay that had lifted his spirit and given him renewed faith. He summarized his feelings in these words:

He has spent his whole life in the service of his Lord and Savior and of his fellowmen. It has been a signal honor, privilege, and blessing and a most rewarding experience for me to have been called by the prophet as one of his counselors, and for six glorious years to sit in council with him, to feel his great spirit, and to have been taught and inspired by the Lord's anointed. I have continually prayed and shall continue to pray and strive to be worthy of this rare and wonderful opportunity and blessing, which is beyond compare.

The concluding speaker was Elder Harold B. Lee, of the Council of the Twelve, who said:

To you, his beloved family: You bear one of the greatest family names that has ever been among all the children of men on this earth. Teach your children and your children's children to the last generation to honor that name and never defile it, that the name of the McKay family might be perpetuated through all time.

And to the Church: Cherish his memory, you Church members, by living in your youth, in your marriage, in your homes, as nearly to the perfection that he has demonstrated. He has been called home. New leadership will carry on, not to take his place—no one can take his place—but merely to fill the vacancy caused by his passing. If we look to the leadership that God will place and will follow thereafter as we have followed President McKay, all will be right with the world; and in the words of some, "stick with the old ship," the kingdom of God, and trust in Almighty God, and he will bring us safely through.

Following the benediction by Elder Ezra Taft Benson of the Council of the Twelve, the funeral cortege formed again and proceeded slowly up South Temple to the Salt Lake City Cemetery. There, in a peaceful hillside setting overlooking the Salt Lake Valley, Elder Richard L. Evans of the Council of the Twelve offered the prayer, and a double quartet from the Tabernacle Choir sang "Abide with Me." Then the body of President David O. McKay was laid to rest beside the grave of a son, Royle, who died in infancy.

How does one summarize the life of David O. McKay? Perhaps the words of the Deseret News editorial express the feelings of those who knew him well as well as those of the millions who did not know him personally but who felt his influence and radiance:

Like the end of a beautiful day or the close of a great symphony, the passing of President McKay leaves a quiet sadness. Not to see again his quick, boyish grin as he tells an anecdote straight from his Scottish ancestry; not to hear his warm, compelling counsel for love at home and integrity in dealing with one's fellowmen; not to hear his stirring testimony of the Lord Jesus Christ; not to feel with a burning surety that here is a living prophet of the living God—this loss is hard to bear.

President McKay spent his life in the aura of an inspiring influence. That influence was the word of God.

It shaped the lives of his ancestors. It filled his childhood home where goodly parents presided under its influence. It rested upon and sanctified his marriage. It helped him build and bless his own family. It ennobled his service during more than six decades as a General Authority. . . .

President McKay is gone in body, and we will feel the loss. But his influence remains; it will always remain, spreading constantly outward in both space and time, blessing and uplifting men whenever they seek the truth.

Postscript:
