QUESTIONS OF ETERNAL IMPORT

The Lord God, the Father of us all, in his infinite goodness and grace, ordained and established an eternal plan of salvation for all hi children. This plan, the work of the Eternal Elohim, is called the gospel of God. It consists of the creation, the fall, and the atonement.

These three things—the creation, the fall and the atonement—are the very pillars of eternity. They are the greatest events that ever have or ever will occur. Without any of them, and without all of them inseparably woven together, there would be no salvation, no purpose in life, and no reason for being.

In the very nature of things—it could not be otherwise and fulfill the purposes of the Lord —he has revealed to man what must be known about these three great and eternal pillars in order for us to gain salvation. From an eternal standpoint we know very little about any of them; and, indeed, in our present finite status we could not comprehend all that appertains to them even if such were revealed. In fact the Lord has only told us enough about each of them to enable us to understand the plan of salvation and do what we must do to return to his everlasting presence.

If there had been no creation, there neither would nor could have been any salvation for the spirit children of the Father. There would have been no earth, no appointed place to undergo a mortal probation, and no temporal sphere for life as we know it. The creation of the earth, of man, and of all forms of life, as part of the Father’s eternal plan, was and is essential to the salvation of man. And, further, in his eternal providences, the Lord God has revealed enough about the creation of the earth and all forms of life to enable us to know the true doctrine of the fall.

Again: If there had been no fall, man could not have gone forward along the course leading to eternal life. There would have been no mortality, no procreation, no death. The fall, with all that pertains to it and all that grows out of it, as part of the Father’s eternal plan, is essential to salvation. And, also in his infinite wisdom the God of all flesh has revealed enough about the fall of the earth, of man, and of all things, to enable us to understand the basic realities relative to the atoning sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ.

And yet again: If there had been no atonement of Christ, the whole purpose of the Father’s plan would have come to naught. There would have been no redemption from temporal and spiritual death, no resurrection from the grave, no eternal life in celestial glory. All things are made operative because of the atonement, and without it there would be no salvation of any kind, sort, or nature. Thus it is that salvation is in Christ, the Atoning One. Thus it is that his atonement is the rock foundation upon which true religion rests. And this it is that Lord has revealed enough about the infinite and eternal atonement to enable us, building on that foundation, to work out our salvation with fear and trembling before him.

In this work we shall consider the doctrine of the creation, the doctrine of the fall, and the doctrine of the atonement. This is a book about doctrine, about the doctrines of the gospel truths and nothing else. It deals with gospel as they have been revealed by the Lord and as they are recorded in the scriptures. It assumes the Lord knows what he is talking about and how to express himself in such a way as to be understood by men. It also assumes that the things of God are and can be understood only by the power of the Spirit; that they are foolishness to the carnal mind; and that they will be rejected by those who are wise in their own conceits and who, trusting in the arm of flesh, think they know more than God.

This is a work about the things of the Spirit, about revealed religion, and about celestial truths. It is concerned with the gentle rains from heaven which water our souls with life-giving revelation. It deals with God and his gospel, with the reveled accounts of the creation of this earth, of the sidereal heavens, and of all forms of life, both here and in all worlds. It speaks of spirit men and spirit beasts, of mortal men and mortal beasts, of immortal men and immortal beasts. It tells part, at least, of what has been revealed about the earth and death and procreation and resurrection of man and of all forms of life. The subject matter falls naturally into four fields:

These are the four cornerstones upon which we shall build our house of faith and doctrine. These are theological matters, and I shall approach them as a theologian. If some of the scientific disciplines intrude their views into the realm of religion, and strike thereby discordant tone, that is their problem, not mine. I did not create the doctrines of the gospel and I cannot change them, though the theological sciences can and do change with each new generation of postulators.

This is not a book about geology, biology, archaeology, or anthropology. These are sciences, so-called, that have little to do with the salvation of the souls of mankind. It is certainly not a book about organic evolution, or any of the theological postulates relative to the creation of the earth of the origin of man. This is a book about gospel doctrines, and the sole reason for so much as mentioning these scholastic disciplines is that some of their theories encroach upon the field of religion. In them are found alternative views about the creation of the earth and of man and of all forms of life. This is no secret to any well informed person. But it should be of no particular concern to us one way or the other. Our concern is to understand the revealed truths which chart the course leading to eternal life.

It will be our objective to stay in our own field, to expound revealed truth, and to set forth those concepts which will enable us to understand the great and eternal plan of salvation. We will not attempt to answer any questions except those for which answers are found in holy writ. We shall let the sciences speak for themselves, with the hope that the wondrous truths learned by man’s research may always be used for the blessing and betterment of mankind. Such passing allusions to the theories of men as shall hereafter appear in this work will be made simply because a fair overview of the whole subject calls for a statement that other voices have other views.

Have this perspective, then, may we, introductorily, propound such questions of eternal import as these:

Who is man and which he came? What of the creation of this earth and the sidereal heavens? Wherein and why and in what way did Adam fall? And, mystery of mysteries, that is the great plan of redemption and of mediation and of atonement?

Is man the end product (as of now) of a long course of evolutionary development? Or, was he transported from celestial spheres to dwell for a moment on planet earth? Whence came the body of clay which houses the life within? And what of the life—of the spirit of the believing, knowing, sentiment part of the human family personality—what it its origin?

Whence came the earth whereon man dwells? How and in what way was it made? Is it the end result (as of now) of some great galactic forces that grind endlessly through infinite space? Or was it created by God the Father? Or by the Son? Or by a great host of noble and great ones, a host so numerous that no man can number them?

Does this earth stand alone as an abiding place for mortal men? Or, perchance, are there other orbs whereon sentiment beings sojourn? Do we have friends, kinsmen, other members of some great, eternal family who dwell far from us on other earths that revolve around other suns?

And what plant and animal life and of all created things? Did the elephant and the lion, the eagle and the sparrow, the whale the octopus all live as spirits before they became the creatures they now are? How came they to dwell on earth? Was it evolution or a divine creation in accord with fixed and eternal laws that are scarcely known even by the saints?

What is the destiny of man? Of the earth? Of the ant and the dinosaur, the tadpole and the ape, the seal and the cod—will they all come forth in the resurrection to dwell forever in an immortal state? And will they in turn have spirit offspring who and which will one day, in some distant eternity, come down to dwell on a mortal earth yet be created?

And then there is Adam—what of him? Is he, like Christ, a spirit son of the great Elohim? Or, as some sat, us he the end product of long ages of evolution in which, by natural selection and the survival of the fittest, he finally became a man? And if so, and man continues to evolve, what will he be like ten billion years from now? Will he still be in the image of God? Or, by then, will God have evolved into something different that he now is? Or, in the case of Adam, did the Lord use the changing, shifting sands of chance as his way of creating a body from the dust of the earth into which he could send the spirit destined to live on earth as the first man?

What is meant by the fall of man? Was there death in the world before the fall, either for man or for any form [of] life? Was there procreation before the fall, either for man or for animals or for any form of life? Has there been a fall on all the earths which have been created by Divine Providence? Does the same plan of salvation, of progression, of advancement, and of eventual eternal glory for the righteous—does this same plan operate on all inhabited worlds?

What part does the atoning sacrifice of Christ play in God’s eternal plan? What is meant by ransoming man from the temporal and spiritual death brought into the world through the fall of Adam? Does the atonement bring to pass the resurrection of plants and animals as well as of man? Will the earth itself become an immortal and eternal sphere through the infinite atoning sacrifice of our Lord? Does the atonement redeem men and all forms of life on this earth only, or on all the earth’s of Christ creating?

If the earth was created in a state of Edenic excellence, how was it changed to its present lowly state? Will it be renewed and receive again its paradisiacal glory? Is its ultimate destiny to be a celestial sphere, shining like the sun in the firmament?

And what of the element in all this? Did it take billions of years to create the earth? Or, for man and the various forms of life evolve? Are the days of creation mentioned in the scriptures just twenty-four hours in length? Or, perchance, are they a thousand years each? Or, again perchance, are they periods of time of indefinite and unknown duration? Did various species evolve into what they now are over an astronomically long period of time? Or did the Omnipotent One, following the pattern he had used in billions of prior earths, place man and all forms of life here through birth processes?

Can man devise true concepts about the creation when he assumes, falsely, that conditions on earth always have been and always will be the same? Can he even know about the fall, the redemption, and the eternal destiny of all forms of life, except by revelation?

Whence? Why? Whither? And how? What is the purpose of it all? Whence came man and the earth and all forms of life? Why have they been created and what purpose do they serve? Why are we here and why were plants and fowls and fishes and animals and insects and creeping things created? And how shall our destiny and the destiny of all forms of life be brought to pass? All these are but a few of the eternal questions which arise in the minds of those whose souls are alive with the light of heaven. Surely there are true and inspired answers to them all. But they are not answers which will be found in a test tube; they will not be discovered on a genealogical field trip or to be found recorded in a Darwinian text book. Either the answers will come to us by revelation or they will remain forever unknown.

All of the great truths involved gave been revealed in plainness in ages past. They were known in Enoch’s city and among the Nephites during their Golden Era. Righteous Jaredites had the same knowledge. Surely Adam and his sons, the great patriarchs who communed with God, before the flood, were similarly endowed with divine light. Abraham and Moses and many of the ancient propjets and saints were do perfectly in tune with the Holy Spirit of God that they too know and believed and were saved.

Are the answers had in our day? They are. The holy scriptures, the temple ordinances, the inspired utterances of our prophetic leaders all combine to shed light and intelligence and truth in al of the mentioned fields. Granted that in our day, we do not have long scriptural sermons on many of the points. Granted that we do not have the full account of the creation as found in the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon. Granted that our scriptural stature does not enable us to feel what some of the ancient prophets and theologians knew and felt. Yet we do have a sliver here, and a verse there, and a longer passage somewhere else, which taken together paint a picture that is beautiful to behold. We do have certain basic concepts revealed in plainness and perfection. We do have an understanding of the overall concepts set forth in the great and eternal plan of salvation, and we do have some measure of revelation from the Holy Spirit. We are also able to reason and apply known concepts to like situations in related fields and thereby to come up with a sound and intelligent overall view of the great truths relative to the creation, the fall, and the redemption of man and of all things.

We are expected to ponder in our hearts what has been revealed and to come up with sound and true conclusions where all of the basic verities are concerned. We are expected to expand our minds, to seek new knowledge and understanding, and to come to a knowledge of ultimate truth. New views and broader concepts burst upon us when we ponder and pray about that which has already been given in plainness. And as we do this, from it all, we seem to feel a confirming witness of the Holy Spirit that our general concepts accord with the mind and will of Him with whose plan and arrangements we are dealing.
