CREATION: MYSTERIOUS AND UNKNOWN

Creation—man, this earth, the universe, all forms of life—how came it and they all into being? Whence came matter, the elements, the organized arrangement that prevails in the sidereal heavens? And whence came life itself in all its varieties?

In our present finite state—bounded by time and space, restricted in mental capacity, and limited in spiritual insight—we have not and cannot solve the mystery of life and creation. No man who has ever lived on earth, or who does now live, or yet shall live in mortality, no man through research and reason can discover how all things came to be. It has not been done; it is not in process of being done; and it will never be done. From a finite standpoint creation was and is and shall remain a mystery.

The human mind is not capable of understanding the great beginning of all things. We do not know and cannot tell how the God of all Gods first came into being. It is not within our province to learn nor are we capable of comprehending how the First Great Cause of all First Great Causes first gained form and power and intelligence. It cannot be—period.

Let scientists, philosophers, and theologians speculate through the length and breadth and height of all universities; let them delve into the depths of the earth and send mechanized agents of inquiry from one planet to another; let them spawn theories that seem ever so credible. So be it. It is all of no avail. The origins of man, and life, and matter shall remain unknown, as far as anything that mortal man, alone and of himself, can do.

God alone is the source of knowledge on all these things, and he reveals only that portion of his mind and will that men are prepared to receive. He does not pour out upon his children more knowledge than they are capable of comprehending. No one but a god can understand all things, but as men go toward that state of eternal exaltation which he now possesses, they gain clearer insights into the mysteries of the universe. Gradually, degree by degree and step by step, they do and will come to know what the eternal verities are relative to life and creation. When they attain exalted glory and become like Him whose they are, then comprehending all things and having all power, they will themselves become creators. They will do what all gods have done before, and the eternal purposes of the Eternal God of all Gods will roll on everlastingly.

Thus it is that the Lord has revealed to men today such portions of truth relative to life and creation as they are able to comprehend. His words are found in the Holy Scriptures. Much—perhaps most of what he has given is figurative, as for instance the story of the creation of Eve from the rib of Adam. This figurative approach lets all men, however spiritually illiterate learn as much as they are capable of receiving, while at the same time setting forth clues and allusions which enable those with grander spiritual endowments to gain a greater and more glorious vision of that which really is.

There are of course revealed accounts of the creation which we do not have today. For one thing the full account is in the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon, which the Lord is deliberately withholding from us because our weak faith and low spiritual stature does not enable us to comprehend it. When men again exercise faith like unto the Brother of Jared—which means during the Millennial era—they will again have these full accounts. This more expanded knowledge was had by some of the Jaredites and by the Nephites during the Golden Era. It was also known in the City of Holiness founded by Enoch and among the ancient patriarchs and the saints assembled with them from Adam to Noah. Abraham, Moses, Joseph Smith and a few of the spiritual giants among the true believers have also had clear and spirit-born views about all that is involved.

In the dispensation of the fulness of times all things pertaining to life and creation will be revealed in due course. Along with the world we now have accounts and various statements found in the Bible. We also have the greatly improved and expanded revealed account in the Book of Moses, the one in the Book of Abraham, and this above all—the inspired account portrayed in our temples, an account which all the faithful can ponder and comprehend. Other latter-day revelations which set forth the overall concepts relative to the plan of salvation often enable us to know more about the creation itself than do the very accounts which speak of the creation themselves.

At this late date—knowing what we know and having what we have—we ought to envision more and believe more than most of us do. It is recognized that many among us are contaminated by the theories of men. These speculative views are everywhere trumpeted before us, often as though they were the ultimate ipse dixit of the universe. Even faithful saints—short on gospel knowledge and lacking real spiritual depth—are swept along by the tide of the world and suppose in their minds that the theories of men and the revealed word are somehow capable of being harmonized. Without knowing all that is involved, for instance, they assume, falsely, that the so-called evolutionary processes were and are used by Deity as the means of creating the various forms of life. It will be our purpose to analyze what the Lord has said about life and creation in the hope that the saints in increasing numbers will be led to see beyond the figurative illusions and comments in the scriptures, and thus come to anchor their faith more firmly in the Lord Jesus, whose atoning sacrifice ransoms men from the temporal and spiritual death brought into the world by the fall of Adam.

It will also be our purpose to show that the creation of all things—man, this earth, the universe, all forms of life—does not stand alone. Everything connected with creation in all its parts, and with reference to everything that has been created, is all part of a great and eternal plan. This earth and all that in it is did not come into being by the whimsy of happenstance, or even by the operation of what may be called the laws and forces and powers of nature. Life did not chance to begin here with a one celled amoeba life entity that evolved through astronomically long periods of time so that a body could be made ready to house the eternal spirit of Adam.

The creation of all things is simply a part of the gospel of God, a part of the eternal plan of salvation, a part of what we call the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. It is something that prepared the way for the atonement of Christ and the redemption of man: Man could not be redeemed, and there could be no immortality and no eternal life unless there was first a creation and then a fall and a mortal probation, and finally a resurrection.

The creation and the fall and the redemption are eternal companions; they are the three pillars of eternity; they walk hand in hand forever; they are inseparably connected and intertwined. No scientist in his wildest dreams pretends to devise a theory explaining the fall of man and the ransoming power of the Son of God: The fact of resurrection for man and all forms of life is not one of the postulates of any theoretical science. And when ultimate truth is found in the field of creation it will be seen that what applies to redemption applies equally to creation. Both are part of the Lord’s eternal plan and both are and can be known only be revelation.

Come now and let us reason together. Can man of himself—by the power of his intellect; or through reason or research; or in a laboratory or in layers of sediment rock—can man standing alone discover God? Is the Father of us all found in test tube by adding a little sulphuric acid to whatever unknown solution we have on hand? Is man of himself able to create a plan of salvation that will raise all men in immortality and bring eternal life to a chosen few? Do we have the power to take the mounds of dust from the tombs of the centuries and make them again into bones and flesh and sinews? Can man resurrect himself? Can he create his own body? His own spirit? Or an earth whereon life dwells?

How can scientific research ever show that all things existed in the spirit before they were naturally upon the face of the earth? Or that the earth and all things on its face were created in a paradisiacal state in which there was no death? And the fall of man—will it be discovered along with some dinosaur bones in the Uintah basin? Or, is it something that was buried with the Piltdown man and was never recognized when that fragment of an unknown skull came to light?

It is time for those of us who have the revelation of the Lord, in all their beauty and perfection, to build an enduring house of faith and truth. We are not the only mortals in the universe. We do not just happen to dwell on one small planet in a corner of immensity. Our orb—a mere dot in a universe that reaches outward in all directions for distances measured in terms of billions of light years—our orb is but one of the worlds without number of an Infinite God. Life here and on all worlds of his creating is living and progressing according to his eternal plan and purposes.

God stands revealed or he remains forever unknown. Creation and redemption are his children—twins that cane forth out of the same womb. Man and all that lives was created that he and it might be redeemed. God and God alone is the source of our knowledge of all things. Let us now turn to him and his holy word as we seek for answers that are true. Truth and truth alone will prevail. All the uninspired theories of men will one day sink into an abysmal abyss more dark and forbidding than the primordial swamp in which the first amoeba is supposed to been born and his holy word or we shall remain forever in darkness.

Let this be our prayer: O God, give us wisdom as we seek truth, and enlighten our minds by thy Holy Spirit as we seek truth—eternal, everlasting, and unchanging truth.
