GOD THE CREATOR

Before the creation of all things; before the earth, and man, and all forms of life came into being; before the sidereal heavens shed their silvery rays upon a billion planets; before the very universe of which we are a part began its eternal journey through an endless immensity—before all things standeth God. The Creator comes before the creation. Matter and element must exist before they are organized into worlds and lives. They must come into being so as to exist. Without a Creator there neither is nor can be anything, and the existence of all things proves the prior existence of a Creator.

Whence cam all things? How was matter organized into planets and stars and galaxies? Philosophers postulate the presence of some First Cause; they speak of the Laws of Nature of the Laws of the Universe as though these laws were God; and they reach the marvelous conclusion that Something or Some Power (call it Deity if you will) brought all things into being and organized them as they now are. Theorists wrestle with the problem of whether creation came by happenstance or whether some directing power had governance and control. And, they wonder what purpose there is in the creation and peopling of an earth, and of galaxies unnumbered, and of one universe piled upon another until there is no end to them.

Let us lay aside the cold pragmatism of intellectuality alone, of reason standing by itself without more, of the supposition that finite wisdom can solve problems that are infinite. God is and can be known only by revelation; he stands revealed or he remains forever unknown. God is not a congeries of laws floating like a fog in the universe. He is not some First Great Cause. He is no the laws of nature or of the universe. He is not some undefined power by which all things were made. He is not power per se, or wisdom, or truth, or anything like unto these.

God is a Holy Man. “In the language of Adam, Man of Holiness is his name.” (Moses 6:57.) He is a person, an individual, an entity. He has “a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man’s.” (D&C 130:22.) it is a resurrected, glorified, and exalted body, the same kind of a body possessed by the Risen Christ. It is a body that can eat and digest food as Jesus did after his resurrection. It is a body that can be felt and handled and that occupies space and lives and moves and has being. It is a body that can be in only one place at one time.

God is an Exalted Man. This means (we say it respectfully) that God is of the same race as man; or, expressing the concept in the more reverential manner, man is of the same race as God. The meaning is the same; God and man are members of the same family. Thus, the Prophet Joseph Smith said, “God himself was once as we are now, and is an exalted man, and sits enthroned in yonder heavens!” Also: “He was once man like us.” And further: “God himself, the Father of us all, dwelt on an earth, the same as Jesus Christ himself did.” (Teachings, pp. 345-46.) As it was with the Lord Jesus, so it was with his Father; both on an appointed earth; each died and each rose from the dead in glorious immortality.

Paul said there are “gods many, and lords many, But to us there is but one God, the Father, . . . and one Lord Jesus Christ.” (1 Cor. 8:5-6.) Joseph Smith said: “Every man who reigns in celestial glory is a god to his dominions.” (Teachings, pp. 374.) Also: “I am going to tell you how God came to be god . . . You have got to learn to be Gods yourselves, and to be kings and priests to God, the same as all Gods have done before you, namely, by going from one small degree to another, and from a small capacity to a great one; from grace to grace, from exaltation to exaltation, until you attain to the resurrection of the dead, and are able to dwell in everlasting burnings, and to sit in glory, as do those who sit enthroned in everlasting power.” (Teachings, pp. 345-47.)

The formal, official, revealed testimony of the saints of latter days is set forth in these words: “We know that there is a God in heaven, who is infinite and eternal, from everlasting to everlasting the same unchangeable God, the framer of heaven and earth, and all things which are in them.” (D&C 20:17.) It is also the testimony of those who understand the revealed word and whose minds are enlightened by the power of the Holy Spirit that this Eternal Being—the great God in heaven—is omnipotent, omniscient, and omnipresent. Joseph Smith so taught in the Lectures on Faith, and it is these very characteristics that have and do enable him to create all things.

God’s omnipotence consists in having all power, all might, and all dominion. He is totally unlimited in his creative capacity, and there is no power which he does not possess. His omniscience consists in knowing all things, in possessing all truth, in having unlimited and infinite knowledge and wisdom. He is not progressing in knowledge and truth; he knows all things and there is no truth beyond his understanding; his knowledge is infinite and knows no bounds. His omnipresence consists in the fact that he is everywhere present by the power of his Spirit. That spirit—proceeding forth from the presence of Deity to fill the immensity of space—is the agency of his power; it is the law by which all things are governed; it is the light that gives life to created things. And thus God himself, who sitteth upon his throne is an immanent being, an indwelling presence in all immensity. And thus, “He is above all things, and in all things, and is through all things, and is round about all things; and all things are by him, and of him, even God, forever and ever.” (D&C 88:41.)

This Almighty God—this one Supreme Being, above all, whom we worship in all the majesty of his Godhood and in the name of his Son—is the Eternal Creator in the full and absolute and ultimate sense. However many Gods there may be, to us there is but one God, the Father, in the full and final and ultimate manner of expression. And as he is “from everlasting to everlasting,” so also shall it be with all mortals who rise in a like glorious resurrection, all who rise unto that eternal life which it is his to give. (D&C 132:20.)

All of these things relative to God and his nature and powers are the foundation upon which the reality of creation rests. God the Creator has and does operate his creative enterprises because of two great and eternal verities. These are:

We have spoken of God the Creator—our Eternal Father, the Almighty Elohim—as having a body of flesh and bones; we have said plainly that he was once a mortal man and that he now has a resurrected body. All this is known, accepted, and understood by enlightened members of the true Church. We know that the Father is our Pattern and Prototype and that as he gained his glory exaltation and Godhood, so shall it be with faithful members if his earthly kingdom. They too shall be exalted and shall become eternal beings, exalted beings, personages of tabernacle who are Gods in their own right. But what is not as well known among us as it should be is the corollary verity that there were also resurrected beings of all kinds and natures before the foundations of this earth were laid. There were resurrected animals, fowls, and fishes, dwelling in the same realm with the Resurrected Creator. They too has immortal and eternal bodies; they too dwelt in a realm of eternal glory; they too had immortal and eternal bodies; they too dwelt in a realm of eternal glory; they too were destined to live forever and perform their assigned functions in the eternal scheme of things.

John the Revelator saw in vision four resurrected beasts in heaven. These immortal animals had little or no resemblance to any animals that have or do live on this earth. (Rev. 4:6-8.) Speaking of them our latter day revelations say they were “individuals beasts . . . in their destined order or sphere of creation, in the enjoyment of their eternal felicity.” (D&C 77:3.) That is to say, they had lived and died and been resurrected; they were glorified and immortal; they lived and moved and had a being. These beasts—and now let us expand out views and open our understandings relative to the glorious concept here involved—these beasts worshipped the Lord. They gave “glory and honour and thanks to him that sat on the throne, who liveth for ever and ever.” They spoke and their words of adoration and praise included this paean of praise: “Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.” (Rev. 4:8-9.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught the doctrine of resurrection, salvation, and exaltation of all forms of life. “John saw the actual beast in heaven,” he said. “. . . John saw beings there if a thousand forms, that had been saved from ten thousand times ten thousand earths like this—strange beasts of which we have no conception: all might be seen in heaven. The grand secret was to show John what there was in heaven. John learned that God glorified himself by saving all that his hands had made, whether beasts, fowls, fishes or men; and he will glorify himself with them “Says one, ‘I cannot believe in the salvation of beasts.’ Any man who would tell you that this could not be, would tell you that the revelations are not true. John heard the words of the beasts giving glory to God, and understood them. God who made the beasts could understand every language spoken by them. The four beasts were four of the most noble animals that had filled the measure of their creation, and had been saved from other worlds, because they were perfect: they were like angels in their sphere. We are not told where they came from, and I do not know; but they were seen and heard by John praising and glorifying God.” (Teachings, pp. 291-292.)

We have now laid the foundation for the creation of spirits—the creation of spirit men and spirit beasts, fowls, fishes, and all forms of life. That foundation is two fold. It is:

And, the foundation having thus been laid, it is now within our power to go forward, to build thereon, and to come to a knowledge of those divine truths that govern the creation, the fall, and the redemption of all things.
