SPIRITS: THEIR CREATION

Our point of beginning in studying the creative enterprises of God the Creator is to consider the creation of spirits—the spirit earth, the spirits of men, and the spirits of all forms of life. No earth or planet or star or sun or heavenly orb of any sort was ever created physically or temporally until it was first created spiritually. No man or animal or fowl or fowl or fish or insect or plant or tree or any form of life was ever created and placed on this or any sphere until it had first been created as a spirit. Unless and until this concept is known, understood, and accepted, it is not possible to comprehend the creation either of the earth or any form of life on its face. Life on earth had its beginning long after the creation of all living things as spirit entities. The life of all created thins is in the spirit, not in the temporal body that houses the eternal spirit.

All mortal or temporal life, all life as it now exists on earth, is dual in nature. It is composed of a body and a spirit. Mortal man is a dual being. His natural body is made from the elements of this earth; the spirit within his body came from elsewhere and is of a different nature. And so it is with animals, fowls, fishes, insects, plants, trees, and vegetation of all kind—all are composed of body and spirit. When the spirit is present, when it is properly housed in its tenement made of clay, the natural body lives. That is, it is alive from our viewpoint. When the spirit departs, the natural body dies and the elements from which it was created decay and become again as the dust of the earth.

Spirits are personages, entities, living beings; they are separate souls. Their bodies are made of a more pure and refined substance than the temporal elements with which we are familiar. “There is no such thing as immaterial matter. All spirit is matter, but it is more fine or pure, and can only be discerned by pure eyes; We cannot see it; but when our bodies are purified we shall see that it is all matter.” (D&C 131:7-8.)

There are spirit men and spirit women, and spirit beings of every sort. There are spirit cows and crocodiles, spirit tadpoles and apes, spirit elephants and dinosaurs. The beetle and the bee, the leopard and the lion, the kangaroo and the koala—life in all its forms and varieties—existed as spirit entities, as spirit beings, long ages before any of it ever came to earth to dwell in a mortal state.

We know in detail, with a specific and absolute certainty, what spirits are like. The resurrected Lord, having risen in immortal glory, entered the locked and barred upper room where a small congregation of his saints were testifying of the resurrected appearances of that first Easter day. Seeing him they were terrified and affrighted and supposed that they had seen a spirit. How could he be other than a spirit, they reasoned, for his body had just passed through a barred door or a wall of stone or a ceiling of cedar. He calmed their fears with the hallowed invitation, “Handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.” Thereupon they felt the nail marks in his hands and in his feet, and they thrust their hands into the gaping wound in his risen side. After this, to bear further witness to them of the difference between a spirit body and a resurrected body, he called for meat. “And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb. And he took it, and did eat before them.” (Luke 24:36-43.)

More than two thousand years before the resurrected Lord Jesus was born of Mary in Bethlehem of Judea, the man Moriancumer saw the spirit body of this same Lord. First, the holy account acclaims, he “saw the finger of the Lord.” That finger appeared so much like a mortal finger that the ancient seer supposed “that the Lord had flesh and blood.” This view was immediately corrected when the Lord said: “I shall take upon me flesh and blood.” And then the Spirit Lord, the Firstborn of the Father, withdrew the veil and let his prophet, Jared’s brother, see his whole spirit body. “Seest thou that ye are created after mine own image?” he asked. The mortal body of the man Moriancumer was in the image of the spirit body of the Lord Jesus. And further: “All men were created in the beginning,” the Lord continued, “after mine own image.” The spirit bodies of all men were created in the image and likeness of the spirit body of the Firstborn.

Then from the lips of him who would yet be born of woman came these words of infinite import: “This body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit.” Spirits have bodies. A spirit is not an ethereal wisp of nothingness that floats with ghostly mien through foggy space. It is an organized body, a structured entity, a living being.

And mortal man, the Spirit Lord continued, was “created” in the image of “the body” of his “spirit.” The spirit body and the mortal body are one in appearance. “And even a I appear unto thee to be in the spirit will I appear unto my people in the flesh,” Jesus said.

And Moroni, writing after the Lord’s resurrection, said, “that Jesus showed himself unto this man in the spirit, even after the manner and in the likeness of the same body even as he showed himself unto the Nephites.” (Ether 3:8-17.) Thus the spirit man, the mortal man, and the immortal man all are the same in appearance; they gave the same image and likeness; they look alike and are alike and are indeed the same person. We know perfectly well that mortal man is like because we are mortal. We have eyes and ears, hands and feet, tongues and toes, and all the parts and organs which make up the body of a man. And as it is with a mortal man so it is with an immortal man and a spirit man.

Man is the prototype and pattern for all forms of life. What we say with reference to his spirit body applies also to the spirit bodies of all forms of life. Our revelations speak of “the happiness of man, and of beasts, and of creeping things, and of the fowls of the air” in their immortal and eternal state. Then they speak of “that which is spiritual being in the likeness of that which is temporal.” They say “that which is temporal [is] in the likeness of that which is spiritual,” and they conclude that “the spirit of man [is] in the likeness of his person, as also [is] the spirit of the beast, and every other creature which God has created.” (D&C 77:2.) Thus every living thing on earth whether animal, fish, fowl, or plant, everything which now lives, has a spirit and is in the form and image of that spirit.

There is no revealed account of the details of the spiritual creation, nor need there be. The scriptures simply announce that it was done and that it preceded the temporal creation. After setting forth the events of the six creative days, then, by way of interpolative explanation, so that all that appertains to the creative process would be in perspective, the Lord speaks of the prior spiritual creation. He tells of the creation of “every plant of the field before it was on the earth and [of] every herb of the field before it grew.” Plants and herbs have spirits.

After telling of the creation of every form of like that has or does exist on earth, the revealed account explains: “I, the Lord God, created all things, of which I have spoken, spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth.” All things means all things; t includes the earth itself, the herbs, plants, vegetation, and trees, the insects and creeping things, and all life that has flesh and bones and blood. “And I, the Lord God, had created all the children of men; and not yet a man to till the ground; for in heaven created I them; and there was not yet flesh upon the earth, neither in water, neither in the air.” Next he speaks of the temporal creation and then he returns again to the spiritual creation by saying: “Nevertheless, all things were before created but spiritually were they created and made according to my word.” (Moses 3:5-7.)

How did all things come into being spiritually? How are spirit entities created and made? As to the creation of the spirit earth, we do not know; we express no opinion as to how it was made, nor does it matter to us in our present state of knowledge and experience. As to all forms of life, it seems perfectly clear that each spirit creation sprang from the prior immortal and eternal life of the same kind and nature. This includes man, animals, fowls, fishes, and insects and creeping things.

We know that spirit men are the offspring of Celestial Parents; that they are born as the spirit children of God the Eternal Father; and that the creative process is the birth process. There is no question about this. The spirit children of God are conceived; they gestate and grow; they come forth and of a womb; they have a beginning as conscious identities; they are born; they are members of the family of the Father who dwells in heaven and who is a resurrected person having a body of flesh and bones.

Why should we suppose the creative process is any different for other forms of life? We know, for instance, that animals exists as spirits; we know they live on earth in a mortal state; we know they die when the spirit leaves the body; we know they will be resurrected and have an eternal existence with bodies of flesh and bones. We know they will be in a state of “happiness” and will enjoy “eternal felicity.” (D&C 77:2-3.) What purpose will they serve in that eternal world? Will they not be the eternal parents of spirit offspring, even as it is with men? And if this mode of spiritual creation applies to man and animals, is it not obvious that it applies to all forms of life? Why did the Lord lay such stress upon the spiritual creation if we are not expected to take man as a pattern and learn that the same creative processes apply in all spheres and to all forms of life?

In the case of spirit men, the Eternal Father endowed them with agency and gave them laws of obedience to which they had power to advance and progress and become like him. These laws are the plan of salvation. They provide for a mortal probation followed by an immortal existence. In this immortal state those who are exalted shall have spirit children of their own and the eternal cycle will go forward anew. This system has been going on from all eternity and will continue to roll on forever as one eternity grows into another worlds without end. And why should we suppose the system is any different in principle, where all forms of life are concerned, than we know it is with reference to man the crowning creation of the great Creator?

There is one great unanswered question about the spiritual creation. It is: Whence came the spirit element from which the bodies of spirits were made? To this question there is no answer. It is something mortals are not capable of understanding. Suffice it to say that such spirit element—such unorganized spirit matter—always has and always will exist. The same things applies to the temporal elements from which the physical earth and all life on its face is made. There are some things which, in our present finite state, we are incapable of understanding. Where they are concerned we ought to have the good sense to lay them aside and center our faculties upon those things which are within our ken.

There is, unfortunately, a speculative theory about the creation of spirit men which continues to rear its ugly head in our literature and in our class discussions. It is that there have existed from all eternity certain intelligences (some have called them intelligencies, thus creating a new word to describe what does not exist anyway) which intelligences are assumed to be endowed with agency which enables them to elect to be born as spirit children of the Father. This concept is sort of a pre-existence to pre-existence. The fact is there is not one shred of scriptural warrant for any such view; it has been devised in the minds of some speculators for reasons that are not clear; and it seems to serve no purpose other than to confuse the unwary and muddy the minds of those who love to speculate in fields beyond finite comprehension.

Our revelations teach that there is something which may be called spirit matter, or spirit element, or spirit substance, or intelligence, or light and truth, or simply spirit. This is the self existent element or substance out of which spirit bodies are created. It is organized into or born as spirits in the same general way that temporal elements are organized into or born as mortal bodies. With this in mind let us analyze three passages from holy writ.

Christ our Lord said: “I was in the beginning with the Father, and am the Firstborn.” That is, he lived in the pre-mortal life—which for all spirits was a day of beginning—he lived in that day with the Father, and he was the Firstborn among all the billions of our Father’s progeny. “Ye were also in the beginning with the Father,” he continued, meaning that all men lived in the preexistent sphere, as we are wont to call it, as the spirit children of the same Father. “Man was also in the beginning with God,” the revelation says, meaning that men lived in the pre-mortal life with the Father as his spirit children offspring. Then the account says: “Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be.” This has reference to the fact that intelligence or spirit element has always existed. Thus the spirit elements from which spirit bodies were created existed before it was originated into bodies. All of this seems clear; the next verse in the revelation, however, has not always been understood correctly and has given rise to some grave misunderstandings.

“All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it,” the divine word continues, “to act for itself, as all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence.” (D&C 93:21-30.) This does not mean, as might superficially be supposed, that truth as an abstract attribute has agency, or that intelligence (spirit element) has power to choose or elect to bring to pass the “existence” of man. It does not mean that intelligences or intelligencies or spirit matter under any name or in any form had agency or existed as an entity before the spirit birth, or chose to become a spirit being. Rather it is a digest and summation of a glorious argument advanced by Lehi in a discourse on agency. Father Lehi, in a profound passage of almost infinite spiritual depth, sets forth the need for “an opposition in all things.” He shows that if there were no opposites—righteousness as contrasted with wickedness, holiness on the one hand and misery on the other, good in opposition to bad, and so forth—if there were no opposites, there would be nothing. “And if ye shall say there is no law, ye shall also say there is no sin. If ye shall say there is no sin, ye shall also say there is no righteousness. And if there be no righteousness there be no happiness. And if there be no righteousness nor happiness there be no punishment nor misery. And if these things are not there is no God. And if there is no God we are not, neither the earth; for there could have been no creation of things, neither to act nor to be acted upon; wherefore, all things must have vanished away.” (2 Nephi 2:11-13.) This is the sense in which there would be no existence if truth and intelligence were not independent in their spheres; it does not mean that a mass of spirit element had power to choose to be born as a spirit being; it does not mean that spirit element has agency or that it existed as an entity before it became an entity. A handful of dust has no agency, it cannot elect to be born as a man or an elephant and so it with a handful of spirit element. It is not, in its primal state, an entity, and it does not choose to become spirit life of some particular form.

Indeed, the whole concept of the creation of spirit children is set forth by Father Abraham who said: “Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was.” That is intelligence, which is spirit element, was organized into intelligences who are spirit beings. “And among all these there were many of the noble and great ones,” Abraham continues, “And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits.” (Abr. 3:22-23.) That is to say: Intelligence which is self existent and cannot be created or made was organized by God into intelligences; or in other words, spirits were created out of self existent spirit element; or in yet other words, through the birth process some of that spirit matter which has existed with God from all eternity was born as spirits. It follows that the spirit matter now exists from which future spirits will be formed. And it seems inescapable that what we have said with reference to God and man applies in principle to animals, “in the enjoyment of their eternal felicity” (D&C 77:3) and to life and created things in all their varieties.
