INFINITE WORLDS: THEIR CREATION

Here stands a spirit earth, awaiting a mortal body. Here stands a spirit earth, the future home for billions of the sons of men. Here stands an earth, unclothed with element, awaiting the day of its temporal creation, awaiting the day when it will become the abiding place for man and for all forms of life.

Also awaiting that glorious day are the spirits of men, a great host which no man can number. With them are the spirits of animals, fowls, and fishes, of insects and creeping things, and of plants and herbs and trees and vegetation, and life in all its infinite varieties.

And yonder is matter unorganized; yonder is the element from which the earth shall be formed; yonder is the dust from which life shall spring. When will the blessed day dawn? How will the Great Creator go about creating another earth, peopling it with his children, and placing thereon the herbs and plants and trees and vegetation needed to serve and bless his mortal children? How will he go about providing temporal bodies for the spirits that now dwell in his presence as fishes and fowls and animals, and as insects and creeping things in all their varieties? And man himself—born as a spirit in the image and likeness of the Eternal Father—how will he make the transition from celestial realms to a temporal sphere? Will he be fashioned and formed as are adobe bricks? Or will an Infinite Power but say the word that will cause mortals to materialize out of nothing? Or will the first man be born by the regular birth processes? How, and in what way and by whom and within what time span, shall the creation in all its parts and phases come to pass?

It is written: “In six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea and all that in them is.” (Ex. 20:11.) When this was done; when the earth and life and all things first came into being; when this sphere and all that on it is first burst forth from the womb of eternity— in that primeval day—how was it done, and what was the then status and condition of all things?

It was all done in the same way that the same creator had always acted in all the endless creations of his hands. It was the same as it had been on a billion times a billion earths that preceded out won in the eternal creative scheme of things. And it was the same as it will be on the billion times a billion future earths that shall yet come rolling into existence at the command of the Creators of the future. The creative enterprises which transpired with reference to this earth, and to all things that unto it do appertain, were the same as had been shown forth on all the worlds of the past ands will be unfolded on all the worlds of the future. Our creation is not unique; it does not stand alone; ours is not the only orb on which mortal men live and love and labor. This earth is one of an infinitely great host whose numbers are totally beyond finite comprehension.

In conversing with the Lord God himself, and speaking words placed in his mind by the power of the Holy Ghost, Enoch said: “Were it possible that man could number the particles of the earth, yea millions of earths like this, it would not be a beginning of the number of thy creations.” (Moses 7:30.) God our Eternal Father lives in the family unit and has eternal increase. The union of out Celestial Parents produces eternal lives. Our Eternal Parents have a continuation of the seeds forever and ever. And all these spirit children, multiplying endlessly and being as the dust of millions of earths in number, all these children of the Father must have dwelling places. Endless posterity presupposes the creation of an endless number of earths. And so it is.

As a prelude to learning how this earth was created, Moses was permitted to glimpse the grand perspective and see the eternal tapestry into which the Almighty has woven all the worlds of his creating. While the Spirit of God rested upon him so that he could comprehend the things of God and of eternity, “Moses cast his eyes and beheld the earth”—this earth—”yea, even all of it; and there was not a particle of it which he did not behold, discerning it by the Spirit of God.” This is beyond comprehension to us; our finite minds cannot even imagine how one man in one place could see the whole earth at once and even discern every particle of it. From our standpoint this is something that cannot be done; it just simply cannot be; and yet Moses did it, because the Spirit of God quickened his whole being and the power of God himself rested upon him. We must have this reality firmly fixed in our minds; it sets the pattern for all that Moses saw and learned about the creation; all things pertaining to the creation of this and all earths were made know by the Lord to a man whose minds was enlightened by the power of the Holy Ghost. And if we are to understand those same truths our minds must be similarly enlightened. No scripture is ever of any private interpretation; and what God has revealed by the power of the Holy Ghost to one prophet he will reveal to all others who attune their souls to the broadcasts of eternal truth sent forth by the Holy Spirit of God.

And so, Moses, while the spirit of God rested upon him, “beheld also the inhabitants thereof”—the inhabitants of this earth: all who had been, all who then were, and all who would be until the end thereof—”and there was not a soul which he beheld not; and he discerned them by the Spirit of God; and their numbers were great, even numberless as the sand upon the sea shore.” As far as man is concerned, this is impossible; to the carnal mind it is foolishness to suppose any such thing; but, with God, all things are possible, and nothing is too hard for the Lord, or for his Spirit.

Having thus seen this earth in its entirety; having seen every living soul destined to undergo a mortal probation here; having seen “the world and the ends thereof, and all the children of men which are and were created,” Moses was in a position to see how the same system of salvation operated on other earths. “And he beheld many lands,” the holy account continues, “and each land was called earth, and there were inhabitants on the face thereof.” These are other lands whereon men dwell, other earths whose inhabitants are children of our Father, other worlds whereon the purposes of God are accomplished.

While Moses was this in the Spirit, he “called upon God, saying: Tell me, I pray thee, why these things are so, and by what thou madest them?” Why are there many inhabited earths, and who were they made? At this time, while the heavens were rent and the wonders of eternity rolled before the eyes of the ancient seer, the scriptures say, “the glory of the Lord was upon Moses, so that Moses stood in the presence of God, and talked with him face to face.” The Lord Jehovah the Lord Omnipotent, the Creator under the Father, conversed with his servant and friend face to face! They spoke as friends; the veil between them was withdrawn completely; they were on intimate terms. The Lord Jehovah, speaking by divine investiture of authority, speaking in the first person as though he were the Father, answered Moses’ plea in these words: “For mine own purposes have I made these things. Here is wisdom and it remaineth in me.” Even Moses, enwrapped in the power of the Spirit and having spiritual insight beyond that of almost any man, was not prepared to receive the full account of the creation of an endless retinue of earths.

This much, however, was then revealed. Jehovah, speaking for and as the Father said of his infinite creations: “And by the word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, Who is full of grace and truth.” Christ did it by the power of the Father. How many worlds are involved? The words of the Father give answer: “And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them which is mine Only Begotten.” The Father is the Creator in the ultimate sense; the Son is the agent arid instrument through who he worked.

The voice of God continues to speak: “But only an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof give I unto you.” This account we shall consider hereafter, but first we must have before us the Lord’s eternal perspective of his creative labors. “For behold there are many worlds that by the word of my power,” he continues. This means there are many worlds which were created first spiritually and then temporally, many worlds which have passed through a temporal state, have enjoyed a period of Millennial transfiguration, and have finally gone on to that state of eternal glory prepared for them in their instances. Our earth is of course destined to become a celestial orb. “And there are many that now, stand, and innumerable are they unto man; but all things are numbered unto me, for they are mine and I know them.”

Overawed by the grandeur and eternal magnitude of it all, and subdued in spirit by what he had seen and learned Moses said to the Lord: “Be merciful unto thy servant O God, and tell me concerning this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, and also the heavens and then thy servant will be content.” It appears that Moses is speaking, not of the sidereal heavens, but of the atmospheric heavens which surround the earth, for the reply of the Lord God affirms: “The heavens, they are many, and they cannot be numbered unto man”—each earth has its own heavens—”but they are numbered unto me, for they are mine. And as one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof even so shall another come: and there is no end to my works, neither to my words.”

In this setting, a setting that speaks of worlds without number, all inhabited by the children of the Eternal Father, the Great God, with reference to all the creations which his hands have made, with reference to those who live on worlds which are innumerable to man, the Great God declared: “For behold., this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man” Nothing in all the revelations ever given to man ties all things together into one perfect whole better than does this single sentence of divine truth. The very work of the Lord God is to bring immortality to all the inhabitants of all the earths, that roll in the infinite expanse that has no end. And the very glory of that same Lord God is to bring eternal life to all the obedient on all the worlds which his hands have made. Creation and redemption are inseparably tied together. Worlds are created so that men may be redeemed. And unless we understand the creation we cannot come to know the full meaning of the redemption. We shall speak more particularly of our Lord’s infinite and eternal atonement hereafter.

Having set forth the eternal perspective here summarized, Moses is prepared to receive the word of truth relative to the creation of this earth. “And now, Moses, my son, I will speak unto thee concerning this earth upon which thou standest; and thou shalt write the things which I shall speak.” (Moses 1:8, 27-40.)

And, hopefully, we, like Moses, are now prepared to consider the paradisiacal creation and the mortal creation which grew out of it. Hopefully we are prepared to see what changed our spirit earth into a temporal or physical planet, and to learn how .all forms of life gained temporal bodies. As the great transitions unfold before us, we must have it fixed in our minds with unshakable certainty, that what transpired with reference to our earth and all that on it is, exactly the same thing that has taken place on a billion times a billion earths in the endless eternities of the past. God Almighty has done and is doing with reference to our earth what he has done with reference like earths for endless ages. He is not experimenting; he is not allowing forms of life to evolve in one way or another as happenstance permits; lie is not spending astronomically long periods of time to do one of his day’s work. And he will not justify us or any men in theorizing that life first came into being on this benighted planet and then evolved into its various forms either by chance or divine governance. Rather, the Lord our God, in creation as in all things, is following the patterns of the past and establishing the pattern for the future. And thanks be to his holy name for giving us enough of his holy word to guide us in paths of truth and verity.
