THE PARADISIACAL CREATION

After all things had been created spiritually; after the earth and man and all forms of life had been formed as spirit entities; after the creation of all things in heaven before they were naturally upon the face of the earth; after all this, then came the temporal or physical or paradisiacal creation.

A paradisiacal earth is an Edenic earth; it is an earth like the new heaven and the new earth that will be created when the Millennium is ushered in; it is a Millennial earth. It is an earth on which there is no death for any kind of life, and one on which there is no procreation either for man or for other forms of life. All things on its face have tangible bodies made from the dust of the earth. Trees and vegetation exist and appear as they do now, but they do not reproduce after their kind. Man and animals have bodies of flesh and bones, but there is no procreation; they do not provide other bodies for their counterparts in the heavenly realm. And death as we know it, meaning the separation of body and spirit and the consequent decaying of the tangible body, such simply does not exist. It has not been introduced into the scheme of things.

Our Tenth Article of Faith affirms: “We believe that Christ will reign personally upon the earth; and that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory.” That is to say, when the Lord comes and brings the promised new heavens and new earth, it will once again have the glory and status that prevailed when it first rolled forth from is Creator’s hand. It will become again like it was in the Edenic day before the fall. During the Millennium, however, procreation will continue, but death will be regulated. Men, for instance, will live until they are one hundred years of age and then be changed from mortality to immortality in the twinkling of an eye.

Worlds have been created and worlds have passed away. Worlds without number have come into existence in a paradisiacal state, have fallen to a telestial state, have been renewed to their terrestrial or paradisiacal state, and have eventually become celestial spheres. It is all part of the eternal plan and purpose of the Great God of all other Gods who reigns supreme in the eternal heavens. Knowing this it will not seem strange to those who are spiritually enlightened to recount what transpired in the creation of our earth as such is found in the Mosaic and Abrahamic accounts. Abraham saw all the spirit hosts of heaven; he saw billions and billions, of spirit children of the Eternal Father, all those who were destined to come to this earth; he saw all those who should come here to gain bodies made of the dust of this earth., all who would be tried and tested on this planet. “And among all these there were many of the noble and great ones, all of whom were chosen and foreordained by the Lord to be his rulers in mortality.

How many of the pre-mortal spirits: were numbered among and considered to be noble and great? The Lord told Abraham that he was one of them. Jeremiah speaks of his own foreordination. Clearly all the prophets and apostles of all dispensations were there. Joseph Smith says that “Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world”—which includes each person who holds the Holy Priesthood, “was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was.” (Teachings, pg. 365.) By far the greater number of the noble and great spirits will be born during the Millennium. It seems reasonable to believe that the noble and great ones may have numbered in the millions or in the billions. “And there stood one among them that was like unto God”—meaning that the Lord Jehovah was like unto the Father in power and intelligence—”and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we all take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell.” (Abraham 3:22-24).

Who went down to create the earth? The Lord Jesus Christ and all that might host of noble and great ones all of them were involved in the creative enterprise. They all went down, a mighty and glorious host, all laboring and working in their assigned spheres. This is dramatized by showing that Jehovah and Michael created the earth and all that on it is, which dramatization is intended to depict, the labors of an enormous host of faithful souls. In the ultimate sense the Father is the Creator. Christ stands at his side and in fact becomes the creator. Michael aids Christ, who is Jehovah, and with them are the numerous creators whom Abraham calls the noble and great ones.

What was used to create the temporal, the physical, the paradisiacal earth? It was made from “these materials,” from primal element, from matter unorganized, from something that already existed. To create is to organize, not to originate in the sense of making something out of nothing. Nothing produces nothing—nothing more. Spirit element was organized into a spirit earth, and temporal element into a temporal earth. “The elements are eternal” (D&C 93:33), and, “All spirit is matter.” (D&C 131:7.) Intelligence was organized into intelligences, and temporal element is organized into a tabernacle of clay to house these intelligences these spirits, these souls, these children of the Father. Spirit element is born as spirits and temporal element is born as mortals.

Thus the creation of this earth and all that on it is was a divine undertaking involving a myriad host of the eternal children of the Eternal Father. At the appointed time, at an hour of his own choosing, at the very moment when another earth was needed to fulfil the eternal purposes of the Eternal One, just at that time, neither a moment before nor a second later, the eternal decree went forth. Let there be another earth with its own heavens. Let all forms of life live on its face. Let man go forth and there abide so as to gain that experience which can be gained in no other way; let mortal man, while he dwells on earth work out his own salvation with fear and trembling before the Lord.

We have three revealed accounts of the creation. Each account stands by itself and each one supplements the other two. Taken together they contain what the Lord in his wisdom knows we are capable of receiving. Each account uses the language of man to describe the doings of God. The events depicted having infinite implications, are beyond the full comprehension of finite man. In the very nature of things the Revealer of these account uses finite, words to describe infinite acts. The Lord’s purpose is to enable each person to gain as great an understanding as his mental faculties and spiritual capacities permit.

The three accounts are not wholly chronological, and they contain numerous symbolical and figurative expressions. Those persons having meager spiritual capacities, and limited knowledge of the plan of salvation and the hand dealings of God with man, will find little enlightenment in the revealed account of the creation. Those, on the other hand, who understand the great and eternal plan of salvation, who know how and why the Lord deals with men in the way he does, and whose souls are afire with the Holy Spirit, they will find truths of glorious import in these accounts. This same thing is true to some extent with all scriptures, but nowhere does the principle operate so fully as with reference to the creative acts of the Creators. The revealed accounts of the creation divide the sheep from the goats. Those who understand and believe the revealed word about the creation of all things are well on their ways to salvation. Others need to open their hearts, accept the revealed word according to the divine intent, and grow into that same state of knowledge and understanding possessed by their more enlightened brethren.

Our three accounts came to Abraham:, Moses, and Joseph Smith. The Abrahamic account is in Abraham 3, 4, and 5; such of the Mosaic account as has been preserved in the Bible is in Genesis 1 and 2; Moses l, 2, and 3 contain the Mosaic account as revealed anew to the Prophet Joseph Smith in an amplified and plainer way. Our temple ceremonies, also revealed to Joseph Smith, contain our third account of the creation. The Mosaic account, as revealed anew in this dispensation sets forth in great plainness a number of concepts without which no man can ever come to a true knowledge and understanding of the creation. The Abrahamic account is both a blue print that sets forth the decisions of Deity when the plans were made for the creation and also a recitation of how those plans became a living reality. It expands and enlarges upon the Mosaic rendition in many remarkable ways. The temple account, known only to those who are prepared to receive such of the mysteries of Godliness as are contained in it, adds many concepts with the Lord has not seen fit to proclaim to the world.

The sealed portion of the Book of Mormon contains a full account of the creation, which also is deliberately withheld from the world at this time, but which will be known again during the Millennium. There is no question that if it were revealed to the world, or even to the generality of church members, at this time, it would do more harm than good. Obviously it contains so much that is diametrically opposed to the accepted theories of the day, so much that those who are weak in the faith would not accept, so much meat for people who drink only milk, that it would drive the evolutionists in the Church even farther from the standard of truth than is now the case: The Lord in his infinite wisdom grants unto the children of men only that portion of truth which they are prepared to receive.

Jehovah, Michael, and the other noble and great spirits created the earth. Some scriptures name the Father as the Creator because all others who participated acted under his direction and with an endowment of his power. Other passages name Christ as the one by whom all things are without specifying who else assisted in so great an enterprise “By him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created:” (D&C 76:24.) When the account of creation dramatized, Jehovah and Michael, acting at the behest, of Elohim, are portrayed as the Creators, again with no mention of the parts played by the other noble and great ones. Some passages dealing with the creation speak of one God as the Creator and others of a plurality of Gods performing the creative labors the Mosaic account in Genesis says: “In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth” (Genesis 1:1), and the whole account continues in this vein. This same account as revealed to Joseph Smith says: “I am the Beginning and the End, the Almighty God; by mine Only Begotten I created these things; yea, in the beginning I created the heaven, and the earth upon which thou standest.” (Moses 2:1.) This perfected version of the Mosaic account continues to lodge the ultimate power in the Father but to have the work done by the Son. In the Abrahamic account, following Jehovah’s invitation to the noble and great spirits to join with him in the creative work, the Lord says: “Let us go down. And they went down at the beginning, and they, that is the Gods, organized and formed the heavens and the earth.” And from then on this account identifies the Creators, whoever they may be, simply as “the Gods.”

“And the earth, after it was formed, was empty and desolate, because they had not formed anything but the earth; and darkness reigned upon the face of the deep, and the Spirit of the Gods was brooding upon the face of the waters.” (Abraham 4:1-2.) The empty and desolate earth is described in Moses as being “without form, and void.” (Moses 3:2). Such is the account of the creation itself. The explanations thereafter set forth in the scriptural accounts, simply enlarge our understanding of what took place. And the recitation of added events show how an empty and desolate earth—one without its perfected form and which was void in that as yet it served no useful purpose—was perfected and organized in all its Edenic beauty and glory. There is no intimation as to how or in what way this void, formless, empty, and desolate orb came into being, although there is as we shall hereafter see, a clear indication of how much time was involved in the creative ache. Certainly the Gods, using their divine power were acting by what we may term natural law. Elements that existed in one form were organized or reorganized into another. What preparation—as for instance in the creation of a solar system, a galaxy, or a universe—what preparation had preceded the organizing of the elements into a desolate and empty earth we do not know, nor does it matter. How the elements in the sidereal heavens are controlled and governed is beyond our comprehension. Suffice it to say, from our standpoint, the earth was created by divine power as part of the eternal program of Him whose all things are.

When first formed, the desolate and empty earth was drenched in darkness which of necessity means that it did not enjoy its present relationship to the sun from whence its light comes. And so the decree went forth from the Gods: “Let there be light; and there was light. And they (the Gods) comprehended the light, for it was bright.” (Abraham 4:3-4.) the comprehension of the bright light is described in Moses by saying that God “saw the light and that light was good.” After the creation of light, meaning after the orbs involved were so organized and aligned that the light of the sun shown forth upon the earth, the Gods “divided the light, or caused it to be divided, from the darkness. And the Gods called the light Day, and the darkness they called Night.”(Abraham 4:5) This must be taken to mean that the earth began to rotate on its axis as it orbited the sun. As to the creation of light, its division from the darkness, and the naming of Day and Night, God said to, Moses: “This I did by the word of my power, and it was done as I spoke” (Moses 2:5), clearly inferring that no long period of time was involved in bringing light to the earth and causing the recurring periods of darkness and light.

Thus the earth was created in its empty, desolate, and formless state, and, it began rotating on its axis and revolving around the sun in what is called the first day of creation. On what is called the second day the Gods decreed: “Let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters, and it shall divide the waters from the waters.” In the Mosaic account the expanse is called the firmament. “And the Gods ordered the expanse, so that it divided the waters which were under the expanse from the waters which were above the expanse; and it was so, even as they ordered. And the Gods called the expanse, Heaven.” (Abraham 4:6-8.) In the Book of Moses the waters under the firmament are called “the great waters,” while those “above the firmament” are designated simply as “waters,” indicating there was more water on the earth than in the atmospheric heavens. (Moses 2:6-8.)

On the third day of creation, “the Gods ordered, saying: Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the earth come up dry; and it was so even as they ordered; and the Gods pronounced the dry land, earth; and the gathering together of the waters, pronounced they great waters; and the Gods saw that they were obeyed.” (Abraham 4:9-10.) According to the Mosaic word the waters on the earth were gathered into, “the Sea,” and God, when, heaven and earth and sea were all made saw that they “were good.” (Moses 2:10.)

Thus the heavens and the earth were created in two days and part of a third. Thus all things were in readiness and the time had arrived for placing living things—life in all its forms and varieties—upon the new earth with its new heavens.
