CREATING PARADISIACAL LIFE

Once this earth was created in its tangible or physical or paradisiacal state; once the rocks and soil and dry ground had been separated from the waters once planet earth had been prepared as an abiding place for tangible or physical or paradisiacal life—then came the creation of all forms of life. Then the great Creator began the process of sending to earth the spirit entities in all their forms and varieties. Then he set into operation the laws and the ways whereby spirit plants and herbs and trees, spirit fishes and fowls and animals, and finally spirit men might be housed in tangible or physical or paradisiacal bodies. It is of this creation that we shall now speak as we continue to recount the events of the successive days of creation.

On the third day, after the dry land and the waters had been separated both the Abrahamic and the Mosaic accounts of the creation tell of the coming forth of grass, herbs, and trees. And both accounts—categorically, emphatically, and with repetitive emphasis—set forth an eternal principle which precludes forever any possible evolutionary development for any of the vegetation so created. It is as though the Creator, foreseeing the theories and vagaries of the last days, was taking occasion in advance to deny their validity and to point the minds of faithful men into channels of truth and light.

Abraham speaks of the first life on earth in these words: “And the Gods said: Let us prepare the earth to bring forth grass; the herb yielding seed; the fruit tree yielding fruit, after his kind, whose seed in itself yieldeth its own likeness upon the earth; and it was so, even as they ordered.” The Mosaic account agrees. Abraham continues: “And the Gods organized the earth to bring forth grass from its own seed, and the herb to bring forth herb from its own seed, yielding seed after his kind; and the earth to bring forth the tree from its own seed yielding fruit, whose seed could only bring forth the same in itself, after his kind; and the gods saw that they were obeyed.” (Abr. 4:11-12.) Again the Mosaic account concurs, adding that all things which God had made “were good.” (Moses 2:11-12.) To those with spiritual insight, these accounts are perfectly clear. Grass, herbs and trees, and therefore vegetation of every sort—each living thing that grows out of the ground—grew in the first instance “from its own seed.” Each living plant and every form of vegetation then brought forth seed “after his kind.” And God the Creator decreed that each form of

life so created “could only bring forth the same kind of life in itself, after his kind.”

Another revealed account of the creation is even more express. It teaches

that those involved in the creative processes, and we have seen that their number was

legion, took seeds of every sort and planted them in the earth. That these seeds came from

another world almost goes without saying:

To envision what was and is involved in the creation of all that grows out of the ground, we must understand certain basic verities, these include:

During what is called the fourth day of creation the relationship between the earth and the heavenly luminaries was established Abraham tells us: “And the Gods organized the lights in the expanse of the heaven, and caused them to divide the day from the night; and organized them to be for signs and for seasons, and for days and for years; and organized them to be for lights in the expanse of the heaven to give light upon the earth; and it was so.” Creation is organization and the heavenly bodies that existed from before the foundation of the earth—and in fact were created by the same creator who brought the earth into being—are now being given their relationship to the earth, which means they are being created as far as this earth is concerned.

“And the Gods organized the two great lights, the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night; and the lesser light they set the stars also; And the Gods set them in the expanse of the heavens, to give light upon the earth, and to rule over the day and over the night., and to cause to divide the light from the darkness. And the Gods watched those things which they had ordered until they obeyed.” (Abr. 4:14-18.)

To this the Mosaic account adds that the lights so formed were “in the firmament of the heaven;” that “the greater light was the sun, and the lesser light was the moon”; and that “all things” which came from the Creator’s hand “were good.” (Moses 2:14-18.) There is, of course, no pretense at chronology in these accounts. The stars in the firmament— themselves also the handiwork of Elohim and Jehovah—were created astronomically long ages before our earth was given its relationship to them. They were created as far as this earth is concerned when the organizational arrangements were made which gave them their relationship to this planet.

At this point we must pause and consider the order of events of the first four days of the creation. On the first day God created the earth which was then empty and desolate (without form and void) and darkness reigned; light was created and separated from the darkness, with the

resultant days and nights. On the second day the waters in the expanse or firmament, of heaven were divided from those on the earth. On the third day the waters on the earth: were gathered into one place; dry land came forth; and grass, herbs, trees, and all forms of plant life were created. Then on the fourth day came the lights in the firmament, the sun shone during the day and the moon at night, and times and seasons came into being.

Now, according to mortal standards, and judging on the basis of things as we know them, this revealed order of creative events does not make sense. As beasts breathe air, so grass and herbs and trees and plants must have sunlight. Seasons themselves regulate the growing period. Vegetation as we know it neither does or can grow until the light of the sun shines, until there is day and night, until there are seasons. Why then do the revealed accounts set forth the growth of plant life before the life giving rays of the sun shine forth? There can be only one answer. It is part of the basic foundation upon which the facts of creation rest. The reality is that we are not dealing with created things-as we know them. This is not a creation of mortal grass, mortal herbs, and mortal trees. This is a paradisiacal creation. There is as yet no death in the world; mortality still lies in the future; it will not enter the scene until after the fall of Adam. All that is being created is starting life in a state of immortality. And we are left to conclude—it is inherent in the whole scheme and system of things—that life as it was first manifest on our planet did not need the same life giving elements as is the case with life as it now exists.

Knowing what the revealed accounts set forth as to the creation of plant life, we are ready to learn what is involved in the creation of fishes and fowls, and then of beasts, and finally of man himself. At this point in his account Abraham records the planning and preparation of the gods in the creation of that life which has flesh and bones. He tells how “the Gods said: Let us prepare the waters to bring forth abundantly the moving creatures that have life,” and so forth. He tells that “the Gods saw that they would be obeyed and that their plan was good.” He records their promise: “We will bless them, and cause them to be fruitful and multiply,” and so forth, all on the fifth day.

Abraham’s record tells us that “the Gods prepared the earth to bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle and creeping things, and beasts of the earth after their kind, and it was so as they had said.” Then Abraham interweaves into the planning account the fact of creation itself. “And the Gods organized the earth to bring forth the beasts after their kind, and cattle after their kind and everything that creeped upon the earth after his kind; and the Gods saw they would obey.” (Abr 4:20-25.)

But it is to Moses that we turn for the actual account of the creation of the fishes, fowls, beast, and man in their paradisiacal state. As to the fifth day, the holy word recounts: “And I, God, said: Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life, and fowl which may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven.” The planning set forth by Abraham is now going forward. Fishes and fowls and moving creatures, having bodies of flesh and bones (not flesh and blood!) are now to find place on earth. “And I, God, created great whales and every living creature that moveth, which the waters brought fort: abundantly, after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind: and I, God, saw that all things which I had created were good.”

After the creation of fishes and fowls and moving creatures; after they were present on earth in abundant numbers; after the seas teamed with life and the atmospheric heavens found place for feathered life—then the Creator issued a decree which no form of life, as then constituted, could obey “And I, God, blessed them, saying: ‘Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the sea; and let fowl multiply in the earth.’” As we shall see hereafter, neither man, who received a similar commandment, nor any form of life, could procreate and reproduce its kind until after the fall, until after living things became mortal, until after death entered the world) And thus ended the fifth day.

As to the sixth day, the Mosaic account affirms: “And I, God, said: Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle, and creeping things, and beast of the earth after their kind, and it was so. And I, God, made the beasts of the earth after their kind, and cattle after their kind. everything which creepeth upon the earth after his kind; and I, God, saw that ail these things were good.” (Moses 2:20-25.)

Such is the revealed word as to the facts of creation. God did it; or, better, it was done by the Gods; or, still better, the Gods and the noble and great ones who were with Christ in the preexistence, all of these, were the ones who performed the creative acts. The question that confronts us, however, is not who but how. And, providentially, we have every reason to believe that we do in fact know how the Creator placed all forms of life on earth. We have already shown that the revealed word itself says seeds were planted to bring forth grass and herbs and trees and plants. But what of insects and fishes and fowls and beasts and creeping things? What process was used to provide bodies—physical, tangible, paradisiacal bodies—for the spirit creatures in preexistence?

We know exactly how Adam was placed in the Garden of Eden. He began his earth life as the offspring of Celestial Parents Who provided by the birth process a body of flesh and bones to house his eternal spirit. We shall show this from the revelations and the official doctrinal pronouncements of the First Presidency in due course. We do not in our present state of spiritual progression, have like documentation as the to the creation of other bodily creatures. But we do know enough about the plan of salvation and the dealings of God with men to draw some conclusions with virtual certainty.

We know every living thing existed as a spirit entity before it gained a mortal life. We know all forms of life are resurrected. We know resurrected men beget spirit children in the realms of exaltation. We know that man is the crowning head of creation and that, in principle, he is the pattern for other forms of life. We have heretofore suggested, with a surety bordering on certainty, that spirit creatures are the offspring of resurrected creatures, even as it is with men. And we now suggest, with the same degree of assurance, that living things, having bodies of flesh and bones, began life on this earth in the same way man did. That is they were born to their resurrected progenitors; with those perfected creatures thus creating bodies of flesh and bones to house the spirit creatures who dwell in preexistence. It is just that simple. There is no evolution at all about it. God created animals the same way he created man. Both came into being by normal birth processes—with like begetting like which system has been in operation from all eternity in all the worlds ever created and peopled with creatures and with men.

As to the beings thus created—and we here include insects, fishes, fowls, beasts, creeping things, man, and all forms of life having bodies of flesh and bones—as to all of these, they were first created with paradisiacal bodies. There was no death in the world at that time, a fact we shall deal with at some length in due course. But as we conclude these brief expressions about the creation of the various forms of life we are bound to state, as we did with reference to plant, life, that all things were first created in a paradisiacal state; that there was no death in the world at that time; that there was no procreation by any form of life; that all forms of life existed as spirits before the physical creation; that the life of all things is in the spirit, and that every form of life has power to bring forth seed after its own kind and only after its own kind.

This last point—that of life bringing forth only after its own kind—is so plainly and emphatically and repetitiously set fort:: in the revealed word that to question or reject it is to reject the scripture and the Lord. Of course there are changes and improvements within the “kind”, within the species, within the bounds set by the Almighty. Horses and asses can produce sterile mules; types of cattle or of dogs can be altered within the species, but one kind of life can never—not as long as eternity lasts—pass from one kind to another. Every form of life is restricted and limited to provide bodies for the spirits awaiting those bodies, which spirits have a form and a shape and a design that is fixed and set. A spirit elephant can only enter the body of a mortal elephant. The spirit of the beast is always in the likeness of the spirit that comes from preexistence.

Those with faith and understanding, who ponder and pray about the truths set forth in the revelations as these holy records unfold the facts of creation, will receive a marvelous flood of light and knowledge which will never come to the ungodly—all of which brings us to the point of considering the creation of man, God’s crowning creature.
