MAN: HIS PARADISIACAL CREATION

We know more about the creation of man and how he became what he is than we do with reference to any other form of life. And, as heretofore set forth, we combine this knowledge with our overall understanding of the plan of salvation to determine how bodies were made for all those other forms of life which have bodies of flesh and bones. It is now our privilege to consider the creation of the man Adam himself and to fix everlastingly in our minds the glorious things that actually took place in that primeval day.

We shall take our basic data from Abraham and Moses, but in this instance, because of the transcendent import of all that is recorded in each account, we shall quote virtually everything that is in both versions. Abraham’s account deals with the decisions and plans of the Gods when they counseled among themselves to create man in their image, and Moses’s writings record the creative acts themselves. The accounts are in Abraham 4:26-31; 5:1-3 and Moses 2:26-31; 3:1.

Abraham: “And the Gods took counsel among themselves and said: Let us go down and form man in our image, after our likeness.” Moses: “And I, God, said unto mine Only Begotten, which was with me from the beginning: Let us make man in our image, after our likeness and it was so.”

The Gods are Elohim and Jehovah. That is perfectly clear from the Mosaic account. But, as we shall soon see, the Gods are also the Celestial Parents of Adam and Eve. Parents are not single in eternity. There is an Eternal Father and an Eternal Mother. The Gods are both male and female. Speaking of mortals who enter the new and everlasting covenant of marriage who abide in the covenant and receive the promise—that they “shall inherit thrones, kingdoms, principalities, and powers, dominions, all heights and depths;” who “pass by the angels, and the gods, which are set there, to their exaltation and glory in all things, as hath been sealed upon their heads;” and who are glorified by receiving “a fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever”—speaking of such mortals, the Lord says: “Then shall they be gods . . . because they have all power, and the angels are subject unto them.” (D&C 132:19-20) They—both men and women—are Gods because they live everlastingly in the family unit as Celestial Parents, having spirit children forever. They are gods because they receive, inherit, and possess the fulness of the glory of the Father. They are Gods because they are like their own Celestial Parents, whose spirit children they are, and with whom they dwelt in the courts of glory before the foundations of this earth were laid. They are Gods like the Gods who came down to create man in their own image and likeness.

An image is an incarnation; it is a reproduction or imitation of the form of another person; it is an exact likeness. It is a tangible and visible representation of another person “it is one person who is strikingly like another person. Paul says Christ is in “the express image of his [Father’s] person.” (Hebrews 1:3). Likeness is the quality or state of being like another; it is resemblance; it is the same appearance; it is having the same semblance. Man is made in the likeness of God physically and has power to become like him in respect to all the attributes of godliness.

Thus God made man in his own image physically and spiritually, and God is a holy man. “In the language of Adam, Man of Holiness is his name.” (Moses 6:57). The name-title, Ahman or Ah Man is a translation or a transliteration that has come down to us from the ancient tongues. And thus, when “The book of the generations of Adam” was written it said: “In the day that God created; man, in the likeness of God made he him: In the image of his own body, male and female created he them, and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the day when they were created and became living souls in the land upon the foot stool of God.” (Moses 6:8-9) The creation of Adam on this earth, with a tangible body of flesh and bones was the creation of a human soul in the image and likeness of the tangible body of his Eternal Parent.

Abraham: “And we will give them dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over ever creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.” Such was the plan. Moses: “And I, God, said: Let them have dominion over the fishes of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.” Such was the eventuality. And thus man—meaning them (the man and the woman or mankind in general)—was given dominion over all things. He was and is the governor of the earth and all that thereon is.

Abraham: “So the Gods went down to organize man in their own image, in the image of the Gods to form they him, male and female to form they them.” Moses: “And I, God, created man in mine own image, in the image of mine Only Begotten created I him; male and female created I them.”

God the Creator delegated to the noble and great ones of preexistence much that appertained to the creation of the earth and the placing of life thereon. But the creation of his crowning creature, the bringing forth of man in the divine image, the perpetuation of his own race, this he did not delegate. Man was created by the Father personally. God or the Gods made man in their image and they made him male (Adam) and female (Eve) because the Celestial Parents also were male and female. Hence the wording on the accounts in Abraham and in Moses. Man was made in the singular, but they were made in the plural, and as man was in the image of the Eternal Father so the woman was in the image of the Eternal Mother, and these two were in “their own image.” The progeny of the Gods can only be born in the race of the Gods, and there can be no birth without a Father and a Mother.

Abraham: “And the Gods said: We will bless them. And the Gods said: we will cause them to be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and to have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.” These were their plans. Moses: “And I, God blessed them and said unto them: Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon tie earth.” These were their act.

Be it noted that Adam and Eve were commanded to do something beyond their power to perform. They were told to multiply and replenish the earth; they were commanded to provide bodies for the spirit men and women in the preexistence; they were told to have children. This they could not do unless and until they became mortal. Their creation up to this point was a paradisiacal creation. They had immortal bodies of flesh and bones, not mortal bodies of flesh and blood. Both procreation and death appertain only to the mortal state. If they were to comply with the divine decree and bear children, they must become mortal through tie fall. Both death and procreation must be introduced into the scheme of things. As Adam and Eve and all forms of life then existed, including both plant and animal life, there was neither birth nor death. Neither man nor beast could as yet reproduce themselves; nor could they, as yet, pass through death. These things awaited the coming of mortality.

Be it also noted that to replenish the earth: does not mean, as some have falsely supposed, to refill the earth with another race; it does not mean to replace previous people; it does not mean to fill the earth again. To replenish simply means to stock the earth with men; it means to fill it with persons. Such is the dictionary definition of the word. And in addition to this the Hebrew verb mole means fill, to fill, or make full. This was translated as fill in the command given to the beasts but as replenish in the command to man. The meaning in each instance is to provide bodies for spirits from preexistence and to fill the earth in the first instance and not to refill or to fill again.

At this point in the account of the great creative enterprise Abraham sets forth the relationship destined to exist between man and plant life and between animals and plant, life. He records: “And the Gods said: Behold, we will give them [the man and the woman] every herb bearing seed that shall come upon the face of all the earth, and every tree which shall have fruit upon it; yea, the fruit of the tree yielding seed to them we will give it ; it shall be for their meat.” In substance and thought content the same decree will be .forthcoming as to other creatures having bodies. “And to every beast of the earth,” the account continues, “and to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, behold we will give them life, and also we will give to them every green herb for meat, and all these things shall be thus organized.” Thus Abraham tells what the Gods planned to do. The Mosaic account records that they performed the planned labors except that the beasts, fowl, and creeping things were given “every clean herb for meat,” rather than every green herb.

It is worthy of note that the food provided for man and for all bodily forms of life was vegetarian. They were to be sustained from plant life. There is no indication that man or any form of life was authorized to eat the flesh of any living thing. This-dietary restriction accords with the fact that in one day of this paradisiacal creation there was no death. Animals, thus, could not be slain to provide food for each other or for man as is now the case. The Lord did not authorize man or animals to eat flesh until after the fall; until after the earth and all that on it is became mortal; until there was blood in the veins of man and beast, which blood, when spilt, would cause the creature to die.

This same paradisiacal condition will prevail again during the Millennium, and once again the eating of flesh will cease. It is of that Millennial day that Isaiah says: “And the cow and the bear shall feed”—that is together in the same stall or den or field, eating from the same manger and consuming the same kind of food—”their young ones shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.” (Isa. 11:7.)

The Lord’s law as to eating the flesh of other forms of life in this mortal world is set fort:: in the ancient word in this way: “And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth.” The peopling of the earth is beginning anew in this day; it is once again like it was when Adam was cast out of Eden; except, for Noah and his family all men have been drowned in the universal flood that covered the earth. “And the fear of you, and the dread of you, shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your hands are they delivered.” Again it is with Noah and his seed as it was with man m the beginning. Mortal men are to be the governors and controllers of all created things. Having so affirmed, the Lord gives a decree that changes the one issued in the day of the paradisiacal earth. Now he says: “Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the green herb have I given you all things.” No longer are the dietary laws restricted to plant life. On the mortal earth the flesh of animals may be eaten. One basic reason for the change is that their blood can be spilt and they can now die. The presence of blood in the body is what distinguishes paradisiacal life from mortal life.

And so, the Lord says to Noah: “But., the blood of all flesh which I have given you for meat shall be shed upon the ground, which taketh life thereof, and the blood ye shall not eat .” This restriction on the eating of blood, which prevailed in the days when men offered blood sacrifices, had the effect of reminding them that their sins would be remitted because of the spilt blood of Christ. They were expected to know that as mortals gained mortal life through their own blood, so they have power to gain eternal life through the atoning blood of Christ. “And surely, blood shall not be shed, only for meat, to save your lives; and the blood of every beast will I require at your hand. And whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall his blood be shed; for man shall not shed the blood of man. For a commandment I give that every man’s brother shall preserve the life of man, for in mine own image have I made man.” (JST, Genesis 9:8-13.) Blood is the symbol of mortality, and mortality is essential to salvation. Only mortal man, in whose veins flows the blood of life, can come forth in immortality and gain eternal life. Hence, paradisiacal man must become mortal man, as we shall show hereafter.

But first we must complete our account of the paradisiacal creation. Abraham’s account of the planning of the creation attests: “And the Gods said: We will do everything that we have said, and organize them; and behold, they shall be very obedient . . . And thus we will finish the heavens and the earth and all the host of them . . . And thus were their decisions at the time that they counseled among themselves to form the heavens and the earth.” The parallel passage in Moses says simply that God saw everything that he had made and that all things so made were “very good.” Then the account with a tone of finality says: “Thus the heaven and the earth were finished, and all the host of them.”

Such is the account of the paradisiacal creation so states the holy word with reference to the creation of the earth, of man, and of all forms of life; such is the revealed word; such is the sole and only source from which sure and certain and true knowledge of the creation has or can come. But the earth had not yet become as it now is; there was life on its face, but not mortal life; mortal flesh, mortality, the kind of existence now enjoyed by man and all forms of life did not as yet exist. There was no birth, no procreation no provision whereby bodies might be prepared for the spirits of all form of life which were in heaven. Without this the purposes of God could not be accomplished. And there was no death, no separation of body and spirit, no arrangement for life to return to the dust from whence it came. And without this there could be no immortality in the endless sense, no eternal life, no future spirit reproduction by every form of life, each bringing forth after its kind.

Something else must happen. The fall of man must bring in the new order of things. This fall will be in effect the mortal creation or at least will bring into existence mortality as we know it. And something else must be revealed to put the account of creation into focus. This added light and knowledge is what the Lord now pours forth and which we shall consider under the heading, What Is The Mortal Creation.
