WHAT IS THE MORTAL CREATION?

This earth, including the atmospheric heavens which surround it, together with all forms of life found on the earth, in the sea, or in the air, all these things, as they now exist, constitute the mortal creation. When all these things first came into being as tangible and corporeal object; they constituted the paradisiacal creation. In the not distant future there is to be a new heaven and a new earth, a new creation or organization of all things. At that time “the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory.” (Tenth Article of Faith.) It will become again a paradisiacal creation.

We have recounted the revealed circumstances surrounding the paradisiacal creation as it was in the beginning. The Abrahamic and Mosaic accounts are both express and specific in announcing that the creation of the earth and all forms of life was finished and yet there was not a man to till the ground; there was no flesh upon the earth; conditions had not yet been arranged where under the spirit children of the Father could undergo their mortal probation. There was as yet no procreation and no death for man or for any form of life.

Creation, as we are aware, is organization. The spirit earth, and all spirit forms of life, came into being from spirit element. The tangible or corporeal or paradisiacal earth, and all forms of life, were created out of element as we know it. These forms of life, first made in a paradisiacal state, later became mortal. And in order for us to understand what is involved in this change, the revealed account, s comment about the creative process. The explanations made are not chronological recitations of successive events, but explanations that tie into and explain the creation as already set forth and the plan of salvation for all forms of life as it has been established by the great Creator. These commentaries and explanations are in Abraham 5:4-21, and Moses 3:4-25.

Abraham begins his interpolative commentary, that is his explanation of what he has already recounted, by saying: “And the Gods came down and formed these the generations of the heavens and the earth, when they were formed in the day that the Gods formed the earth and the heavens, According to all that which they had said concerning every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the earth before it grew.” All things were before created, first, as spirit entities, and then paradisiacally, and yet the plant life was not yet growing naturally upon the earth. Why? The account, answers: “For the Gods had not caused it to rain upon the earth when they counseled to do them, and had not formed a man to till the ground.” It appears that some change was needed in the paradisiacal earth if it was to bring forth mortal vegetation, that is vegetation that reproduces itself and then dies. Hence, “there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.”

In the Mosaic record the Divine Voice says: “And now, behold, I say unto you, that these are the generations of the heaven and the earth, when they were created, in the day that I the Lord God, made the heaven and the earth.” He is here affirming that the account we have already considered, meaning the account of the paradisiacal creation, the account set forth in Moses 2 and in Genesis 1, is true and correct. But some further explanations must be made if we are to understand how this original, tangible, and corporeal creation attained its present mortal state. And so the Lord makes some interpolative comments about the spirit creation and relates them to the paradisiacal and the mortal creations. He says he made “every plant of the field before it was in the earth: and every herb of the field before it grew.” He made them as spirits and he made them in their paradisiacal state before they obtained the natural or mortal state that is now theirs. “For I, the Lord God, created all things of which I have spoken spiritually, before they naturally upon the face of the earth.” There is nothing amiss in reading into this statement a dual meaning so that it has reference to both the spirit creation and the paradisiacal creation, which paradisiacal state may be said to be a spiritual creation when contrasted with the natural or mort,—l state in which all things now are. The next sentence bears this out: “For I, the Lord God, had not caused it to rain upon the face of the earth.”

Next comes an explanation that brings in preexistence and the spirit creation. “And I, the Lord God, had created all the children of men; and not yet a man to till the ground; for in heaven created I them; and there was not yet flesh upon the earth, neither in the water, neither in the air.” Note two things first, that all things were first created as spirits in heaven, and, next that although all things had been created tangibly upon the earth there was as yet no flesh on the earth, in the water, nor in the air. Man, animals, fish and fowl had bodies of flesh and bones and yet there was no flesh upon the earth. And so some added preparation occurred to get the earth ready for mort, al flesh. “But I, the Lord God, spoke, and there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.”

The presence of mist and dew and rain and all that these entailed was essential to the existence of the mortal life of both plants and animals.

At this point in the inspired word, Abraham explains how man was created in his paradisiacal or immortal state before the fall. This was his creation as a man on earth as distinguished from his birth as a spirit being in preexistence. Of this creation of man on this earth, here to abide during a destined mortal probation, Abraham says: “And the Gods informed man from the dust of the ground, and took his spirit (that is, the man’s spirit), and put it into him; and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul.” Thus Adam was formed in the same way all men are made. We are all created from the dust of the earth; our earthly bodies are made of physical elements; these are organized through the birth process. A home is thus provided for a spirit that dwells in preexistence. The spirit enters the body; the body comes forth from the womb; the breath of life enters the nostrils; and the new creation becomes a living soul. The forming of Adam is a pattern; he is the prototype; all his descendants follow the course he first pursued.

Moses, also, speaks of these same things and adds to them the fact that paradisiacal Adam becomes mortal Adam. A paradisiacal being is immortal and has a body of flesh and bones; after the fall man becomes mortal and has a body of flesh and blood. “And I, the Lord God, formed man from the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life.” Once again it is an account of the birth of the first man. Then in successive phrases the Mosaic account speaks of both the paradisiacal creation of man, of his fall to a mortal status, and of his prior spiritual status. “And man became a living soul,’” the Lord says, and in addition man became “the first flesh upon the earth, the first man also; nevertheless, all things were before created; but spiritually were they created and made according to my word.”

“Man became . . . the first flesh upon the earth.” Were not fishes and fowls and animals all created with tangible bodies of flesh and bones before man was created? They surely were. But they were created in an immortal or paradisiacal state, a state wherein there was neither procreation nor death. Adam had to be created before he could fall; and the fall brought death into the world for him and for all created things. Thus: “Men (through the fall) became the first [mortal] flesh upon the earth.” After he fell the effects of his fall passed upon all created, things and they also became mortal and had bodies of flesh and blood.

As to the creation of Eve the Abrahamic account says: “And the Gods said: Let us make an help meet for the man, for it is not good that man should be alone therefore we will form an help meet for him. And the Gods caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam; and he slept, and they tock one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh in the stead thereof; And of the rib which the Gods had taken from man, formed they a woman, and brought her unto the man.” The Lord has revealed elsewhere that this account is simply figurative, that it is intended to teach certain truths, and is not to be taken literally. Eve was not made from Adam’s rib anymore that any wife is made from her husband’s rib.

The Abrahamic account continues: “and Adam said: This was bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh; now she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of man; Therefore shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall cleave unto his wife, and they shall be one flesh.” Again this is figurative and symbolical. It is intended to teach the perfect unity that should exist in the Lord’s system of marriage. The Mosaic account, phrase by phrase, preserves the same account and the same similitudes. Then both accounts say: “And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.” We repeat—it cannot be emphasized too strongly if we are to understand the creation— they were created in an immortal state. The shame of mortal nakedness did not, therefore, exist, because the appetites and feelings of mortality had not yet been loosed in their bodies.

Who, then, was the man Adam, and who was the woman Eve? Who were their parents and how came they to dwell as mortals on this earth? What does it mean to be formed from the dust of the ground: How is such a creation brought to pass? If the story of the rib is figurative—which it is—how did Eve take upon herself a body made of the dust of the ground? None of these things are hidden from us, and there need be no misunderstanding or uncertainty as to the ultimate reality. As far as the world is concerned the creative events can remain shrouded in symbolism. The Latter-day Saints at this late date, however, ought to be prepared to receive such truth in plainness as has been revealed, knowing the while that all things relative to the creation of all things will not be revealed until the Second Coming. “In that day when the Lord shall come, he shall reveal all things—Things which have passed, and hidden things which no man knew, things of the earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereof—Things most precious, things that are above, and things that are beneath, things that are in the earth, and upon the earth, and in heaven.” (D&C 101:32-34.) Such things as we now know pertaining to the creation of man and of all things we are of course duty bound to accept.

In tracing the genealogy of the Lord Jesus back to the beginning, Luke comes to “Seth, which was the son of Adam, which was the son of God.”(Luke 3:38.) The inspired version changes this to read: “Adam, who was formed of God, and the first man upon the earth.” (JST, Luke 3:45.) As Luke wrote the account, this apparently was as much as it was deemed appropriate to say. However, those to whom the Book of Moses was directed were prepared to receive a plainer statement. The Mosaic account speaks “of Adam, who was the son of God, with whom God, himself, conversed.” (Moses 6:22.) This concept that Adam and Eve were born, in the literal sense of the word, with bodies of flesh and bones, has been taught by all our leading brethren from the beginning of the dispensation. They have said that Celestial Parents, whose normal course it is to beget spirit children only, did in these instances, by obedience to eternal law, provide tangible bodies for the primal parents of the human race.

These expressions relative to the birth of Adam and Eve on this earth as personages of tabernacle are the formal and official doctrine of the Church. They are set forth, among other places, in a formal pronouncement of the First Presidency (Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, and Anthon H. Lund) entitled, “The Origin of Man.” This proclamation was published in the Improvement Era. vol. 13, pp. 75-81, and from it we shall now quote.

“Adam, our great progenitor, ‘the first man’, was, like Christ, a preexistent spirit; and like Christ he took upon him an appropriate body, the body of a man, and so became a ‘living soul.’” Our concern is to learn how Adam gained his earthly body, and what was involved in his becoming a living soul. “The doctrine of the preexistence—revealed so plainly, particularly in latter-days, pours a wonderful flood of light upon the otherwise mysterious problem of man’s origin. It shows that man as a spirit, was begotten and born of heavenly parents, and reared to maturity in the eternal mansions of the Father, prior to coming upon the earth in a temporal body to undergo an experience in mortality. It teaches that all men existed in the spirit before any man existed in the flesh, and that ALL WHO HAVE INHABITED THE EARTH SINCE ADAM HAVE TAKEN BODIES AND BECOME SOULS IN LIKE MANNER.” We shall have more to say shortly on what it means for Adam to take a body and become a living soul in the same manner as all other men have done.

“It is held by some that Adam was not the first man upon this earth, and the original human being was a development from lower orders of the animal creation. These, however, are the theories of men. The word of the Lord declares that Adam was ‘the first man of all men’ (Moses 1:34), and we are therefore in duty bound to regard him as the primal parent of our race . . . MAN BEGAN LIFE AS A HUMAN BEING, IN THE LIKENESS OF OUR HEAVENLY FATHER.” Like begets like, and if Adam is a son of God, there is no way he could have began life except in the image and likeness of his Heavenly Parent.

“True it is that the body of man enters upon its career as a tiny germ or embryo, which becomes an infant, quickened at a certain stage by the spirit whose tabernacle it is, and the child, after being born develops into a man. There is nothing in this, however, to indicate that THE ORIGINAL MAN, THE FIRST OF OUR RACE, BEGAN LIFE AS anything less than a man, or less than THE HUMAN GERM OR EMBRYO THAT BECOMES A MAN.” It is difficult to envision how the First Presidency could have chosen language that is more express, pointed, and clear. Their expressions are delicately and discreetly phrased and yet they cannot be misunderstood by any except those who willfully choose to do so. Their statements are the official “position held by the Church.” Reasonable men cannot differ as to their meaning or as to whether they constitute the approved and formal and official doctrine of the kingdom. Thus, we believe that when Adam (and Eve) passed from preexistence to mortal life they were born. They had parents; they had a father and a mother; and their parents were celestial beings who have bodies of flesh and bones and who also are the parents of spirit children. We believe that all men were begotten as spirits in a pre-mortal life, that they were born of heavenly parents and reared to maturity as spirit beings; and that this was prior to any birth of men or life of men on earth. We believe that when Adam (and Eve) gained temporal bodies to house their eternal spirits they gained them in the same way that all men have gained bodies since Adam. They were born—”in like manner”—as all men have been born.

We believe that Adam was the first man; that he was not a development from a lower order of the animal creation; that he was the primal parent of the human race; and that he be began life as a human being in the likeness of his Celestial parents. On to be more precise and explicit, we believe that Adam and Eve each began their temporal life on earth as the human germ or embryo that becomes a mortal. They were begotten; they were conceived in a womb; their bodies were quickened at a certain stage by their eternal spirits. They came forth out of the womb; they were born; and then they grew to maturity. There is no question as to what happened, and there is no question as to the doctrine of the Church.

“Man, by searching, cannot find out God. Never, unaided, will he discover the truth about the beginning of human life. The Lord must reveal himself, or remain unrevealed; and the same is true of the facts relating to the origin of Adam’s race—God alone can reveal them. Some of these facts, however, are already known, and what has been made know it is our duty to receive and retain. “THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS, basing its belief on divine revelation, ancient and modern, PROCLAIMS MAN TO BE THE DIRECT AND LINEAL OFFSPRING OF DEITY.” That is to say, man in this life, man on this earth, man as he is now constituted, man as he is composed of body and spirit, mortal man, is a direct lineal descendant and offspring of Deity indeed, “God himself is an exalted man, perfected, enthroned, and supreme.” Man is of the same race as the Gods; like begets like; fathers sire sons and mothers bear daughters. All men are the spirit children of God. Thoughtful people who ponder the verities involved come to realize how man was formed. In their minds it strains credulity to believe anything except that God himself perpetuated his own race on the earth by using the normal birth processed by which life always is organized, formed, made, created, or born.

“By his almighty power he organized the earth, and all that it contains, from spirit and element, which exist co-eternally with himself. He formed every plant that grows, and every animal, that breathes, each after its own kind, SPIRITUALLY AND TEMPORALLY—that which is spiritual being in the likeness of that which is temporal, and that which is temporal in the likeness of that which is spiritual. He made the tadpole and the ape, the lion and the elephant; but he did not make them in his own image, nor endow them with godlike reason and intelligence. Nevertheless, the whole animal creation will be perfected and perpetuated in the hereafter, each class in its ‘distinct order or sphere,’ and will enjoy ‘eternal felicity.’ That fact has been made plain in this dispensation. (D&C 77:3.)

“Man is the child of God, formed in the divine image and endowed with divine attributes, and even as the infant son of an earthly father and mother is capable in due time of becoming a man, so the undeveloped offspring of celestial parentage is capable, by experience through ages and eons, of evolving, into a God.” Our conclusion is and must be that man on earth—mortal man as we now know him—is the “offspring of celestial parentage.” Thoughtful people who understand the plan of salvation know that it could not be otherwise. God be praised for the knowledge that has come to us by revelation in these the latter days! And would God that we knew all that some of the ancients knew about these things!

There is one truth that must be interjected at this point into our account of the creation. It is: Christ is the Only Begotten. He is the Only Begotten in the flesh. He alone had God for his Father and a mortal woman for his mother. Adam was born of celestial parents; both his Father and his Mother had exalted bodies; they were immortal beings. Christ had an immortal Father and a mortal mother. He was born into mortality and had the power in his then mortal state to die. Adam was born into immortality; there was then no death in the world. He began life with a paradisiacal body, and only after the fall did he become mortal and thus subject to death. Christ came as the Only Begotten in the flesh. No one should be confused on this issue. And we might well ask: Is it anymore difficult to believe that Adam and Eve in the literal sense, are the temporal offspring of Celestial Parents, and that they were born as immortal beings, than it is to believe that Christ is the literal offspring of the Eternal Father, and that he was born as the Only Begotten in the flesh? Both of these great and eternal verities must be accepted on faith.

As we have heretofore set forth, herbs and plants and trees and vegetation of all varieties had their beginning on earth when the Gods planted seeds in the ground. As to their creation the word of scripture says: “And out of the ground made I, the Lord God, to grow every tree, naturally, that is pleasant to the sight of man; and man could behold it.” Each seed sprouted, grew, and matured. “And it became a living soul.’” Plant life has a soul; the body and the spirit comprise the soul. “For it was spiritual in the day that I created it; for it remaineth in the sphere in which I God, created it, yea, even all things which I have prepared for the use of man; and man saw that it was good for food.”

Then with reference to creatures having bodies, the holy word affirms: “And out of the ground I the Lord God, formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air.” That is to say, the Lord formed them out of the ground in the same way in which this same scriptural account says he formed man out of the same ground. In other words they were made from the dust, meaning the elements of the earth. And the Lord “Commanded that they should come unto Adam, to see what he would call them.” The command was to the fowls and the beasts; they came to Adam. They were not yet roaming wild in a so-called pristine state. They were immortal or paradisiacal fowls and beasts who were obedient to the divine voice “and they were also living souls; for I, God, breathed into them the breath of life.” It was with the fowls and the beasts as it was with man. Their spirits entered their bodies and they became living souls, and the breath of life was breathed in their nostrils. The same scriptural language is being used to tell what happened to man and to other creatures. And the reason is that the same thing, in principle, happened in each instance. That is to say, as man on earth was born of celestial parents so all forms of life on earth are the offspring of resurrected beings of their own kind?

Man is born as a spirit being in preexistence; so are other forms of life. Man, as a spirit being, has parents who have resurrected bodies of flesh and bones; so it is with other forms of life. Man is born on earth as the paradisiacal offspring of celestial parentage; the same is true of all forms of bodily life. Man falls and becomes mortal; so is it also with all forms of life. Man can then have mortal children and is subject to the natural death; it is no different with fishes and fowls and beasts, and creeping things. Man is resurrected and goes on living forever; and such also is the case with every living thing. Man is the pattern; all things conform, in principle, to the same course he pursues. Why should there be anything hard or mysterious or difficult to believe about such a system?

And the Lord “commanded that whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that should be the name thereof. And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast of the field.” We cannot escape the conclusion that Adam acted in some intelligent and organized way in this respect, and that the names of all forms of life came to him by the spirit of inspiration.

It was a knowledge of all these things which caused President John Taylor, the third President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to write: “The animal and vegetable creations are governed by certain laws, and are composed of certain elements peculiar to themselves. This applies to man, to the beast, fowls, fishes and creeping things, to the insects and to all animated nature; each one possessing it; own distinctive features, each requiring a specific sustenance, each having an organism and faculties governed by prescribed laws to perpetuate its own kind. So accurate is the formation of the various living creatures that an intelligent student of nature can tell by any particular bone of the skeleton of an animal to what class or order it belongs.

“THESE PRINCIPLES DO NOT CHANGE, AS REPRESENTED BY EVOLUTIONISTS OF THE DARWINIAN SCHOOL, BUT THE PRIMITIVE ORGANISMS OF ALL LIVING BEINGS EXIST IN THE SAME FORM AS WHEN THEY FIRST RECEIVED THEIR IMPRESS FROM THEIR MAKER . . . If we take man., he is said to have been made in the image of God, for the simple reason that HE IS A SON OF GOD; AND BEING HIS SON, HE IS OF COURSE, HIS OFFSPRING, AN EMANATION FROM GOD, IN WHOSE LIKENESS, WE ARE TOLD, HE IS MADE. HE DID NOT ORIGINATE FROM A CHAOTIC MASS OF MATTER, MOVING OR INERT, BUT CAME FORTH POSSESSING. IN AN EMBRYOTIC STATE ALL THE FACULTIES AND POWER OF A GOD. And when he shall be perfected, and have progressed to maturity, he will be like his father—a God; being indeed his own offspring. AS THE HORSE, THE OX, THE SHEEP, AND EVERY LIVING CREATURE, INCLUDING MAN. PROPAGATES ITS OWN SPECIES AND PERPETUATES ITS OWN KIND, SO DOES GOD PERPETUATE HIS . . .

“Paul, in speaking on the resurrection, refers to the different, qualities of flesh as follows: ‘But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, and to, every seed his own body. All flesh is not the same flesh: but there is one kind of flesh of men, another flesh of beasts, and another of fishes, and another of birds.’ (1 Cor. 15:38-39.)

“These different qualities seem to be inherent in several species, as much so as the properties of silver, gold, copper, iron., and other minerals are inherent in the matter in which they are contained, whilst herbs, according to their kind, possess their specific properties, or as the leading, properties of earth, air, and water; are distinct from one another; and hence, on physiological grounds, this principle being admitted, it cannot be controverted, it would be impossible to take the tissues of the lower, or, indeed, any order of fishes, and make of them an ox, a bird, or a man; as impossible as it would be to bake iron and make it into gold, silver, copper, or to produce other changes in the laws which govern any kind of matter. And when the resurrection and exaltation of man shall be consummated although more pure, refined and glorious, yet will he still be in the same image, and have the same likeness, without variation or change in any his parts or faculties, except the substitution of spirit for blood.” (Mediation and Atonement, pp. 160- 161)
