CREATED THINGS: THEIR FALL

The true doctrine of the fall demolishes, destroys, and obliterates forever every vestige of the theory of organic evolution. If there was a fall, of the kind and type set forth in the holy scriptures, there was not and could not have been any type or kind of evolutionary development whatever. Such becomes an absolute impossibility; the sole problem becomes one of the determining whether the fall of which the revelations speak did in fact occur. If it did, every believing person thereby knows the instinct, without more, that the theories of organic evolution are fantastic nonsense and are false. The real problem facing truth seekers simply one of learning that the doctrine of the fall is and whether it is true. In order to believe the revealed word as to this doctrine men must first believe in God who has revealed to men a true and everlasting plan of salvation. The doctrine of the fall is as important a part of the plan of salvation as the very atonement of the Lord Jesus himself.

In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, “We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam’s transgression.” This is our second Article of Faith. It follows our profession of faith in the Godhead and precedes our affirmation as to the atonement of Christ. We believe in Adam; we believe he was the first man; and we believe his fall brought temporal and spiritual death into the world. We believe that Adam was in a higher state before the fall than he was thereafter—one does not fall upward— and that death did not exist in this sphere until after the fall.

We shall begin our study of the doctrine of the fall by recounting what happened in the lives of Adam and Eve after their temporal birth on earth. These events are the text used by all the prophets in propounding the doctrine of the fall and in showing the part it plays in the plan of salvation. In the Mosaic commentary about the creation it is written: “And I, the Lord God, planted a garden in Eden and there I put the man whom I had formed.” Be it remembered that the whole earth was a garden in that day; we are speaking if the paradisiacal earth into which sorrow and disease and death and wretched had not yet come. The Lord is here naming the particular garden spot chosen for the dwelling place of Adam and Eve. “And I, the Lord God, planted the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and also, the tree of knowledge, of good and evil.” These are not literal trees. They are figures or types or shadows of something else. The Lord is going to use eating of fruit from these trees as a similitude to teach the doctrine of the fall and to show the part it plays in the great and eternal plan of salvation. “And I the Lord God, commanded the man saying: ‘Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat, but of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou should not of it, nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee; but, remember that I—forbid it, for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.” (Moses 3:8-17.)

Some of the most glorious and profound truths known to man are revealed in signs and symbols and similitudes. The fashioning of Eve from the rib of Adam is one of these figurative accounts. These who understand how the Lord presences his truths to men would never take it literally. Men are commanded to feast upon the words of Christ and to drink of the fountain of living waters, meaning to study the gospel and to get the spirit of revelation into their lives. Jesus told the Jews that he was “the living bread which came down from heaven,” He said: “If any man eat of this bread, he shall live forever: and the bread I will give is my flesh, which I will give the life of the world.” And while they contented among themselves and asked each other: “How can this man give us his flesh to eat?” Jesus said: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, ye have no life in you. Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him. As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father; so he that eateth me, even he shall live by me.” (John 6:51-57.) None of this is literal, nor is it intended so to be. It has reference to accepting Christ as God’s Son, to keeping the commandments, and to gaining eternal life through his infinite and eternal atoning sacrifice. This is discussed at length in chapter 58 Book 2, of The Mortal Messiah. For our purposes here suffice it to say that Jesus’ teaching on that occasion were figurative in the same sense as the statements relative to eating the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil and the fruit of the tree of life.

Both Lehi and Nephi saw in vision the tree of life and were taught what men must do to eat of its fruit. They saw “a tree, whose fruit was desirable to make one happy.” Lehi said: “I did go forth and partake of the fruit thereof; and I beheld that it was most sweet, above all that I ever before tasted. Yea, and I beheld that the fruit thereof was white, to exceed all the whiteness that I had ever seen. And as I partook of the fruit thereof it filled my soul with exceeding great joy.” (1 Nephi 8: 10-12): Whether Lehi and Nephi in their visions thought they were eating fruit from a tree or not is of no great moment. What was important to them was the revealed interpretation that the tree was the tree of life and that it “was a representation of the love of God,” which is shed “abroad in the hearts of the children of men,” and that therefore it was “most desirable above all things.” (1 Nephi 11:21-25.) Truly, eternal life is the greatest of all the gifts of God because it is to be like him and receive, inherit, and possess the fulness of his kingdom. To pluck the fruit from the tree of life is to gain eternal life.

Having before us, then, the figurative nature of the command given to Adam and Eve relative to the tree of life and to the tree of knowledge of good and evil, we are able to understand what it means to partake of their respective fruits. To partake of the tree of life is to gain eternal life and to live forever; in a pure and clean state, in glorious exaltation in the presence of God. To eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil is to become mortal; it is to enter a probationary estate in which choices must be made between good and evil; it is to become fallen man and live in a world of carnality and evil. It is to know good and evil by experience in a moral probation. If our first parents partake of the fruit of this tree, they shall surely die; that is to say. Death goes with mortality. In the garden of Eden they were immortal and there was no death, but by changing their status from one of immortality to mortality, death commenced. Indeed, mortal life is life in which body and spirit can separate, which separation is the natural death.

But let us go back to the scriptural account of the fall, which is more a commentary that a history. “And now the serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field which I, the Lord God had made.” This too is figurative; the serpent is the creature chosen to symbolize Satan. And so the account says: “Satan put it into the heart of the serpent; (for he [Satan] had drawn many after him [meaning in the pre-mortal war in heaven]) and he sought also to beguile Eve, for he knew not the mind of God, wherefore he sought to destroy the world.” Satan’s mind was so darkened that he no longer knew that the immortal couple in Eden must fall and become mortal to further the purposes of the Almighty. He assumed falsely, that mortality and death would destroy the plan of salvation.

“And he said unto the woman: Yea, hath God said—Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? (and he spake by the mouth of the serpent.)” This is figurative. “And the woman said unto the serpent: we may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden; But of the fruit of the tree which thou beholdest in the midst of the garden, God hath said—Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, least ye die.” Ye shall not become mortal least ye die, ye cannot undergo a mortal probation without being subject to all the ills of the flesh; there is no mortality without death. The great issue is: Shall there be death; shall mortality commence; shall all living things change from an immortal to a mortal state? “And the serpent said unto the woman: ye shall not surely die;”—Lucifer is a liar and was so from the beginning—”For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods; knowing good and evil.” They would not be as gods by becoming mortal, but through mortality they would gain an increased knowledge of good and evil. They would experience these influences in their lives.

“And when the woman saw the tree was good for food, and that it became pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make her wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and also gave unto her husband with her, and he did eat.” This seems to say that Eve had some measurable knowledge of what lay ahead and the great blessings that would grow out of a mortal probation. That her knowledge was not complete and her understanding not as great as that enjoyed by her husband is evident from Paul’s statement, “and Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in transgression.” (1 Tim. 2:14.) Adam, as we suppose, had a clear vision of the need and purpose of mortality and acted wittingly in stepping from one state of existence to another. But when the change had occurred, “the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they had been naked. And they sewed fig-leaves together and made themselves aprons.” (Moses 4:5-13.)

Such is the divine word which is designed to depict know and in what manner Adam and Eve became mortal. As with the story of Adam’s rib, it is figurative. It reveals as much or as little to each person as his spiritual capacity enables to receive. We do not know the actual process by which an immortal becomes mortal anymore than we know how the sleeping dust in the tombs of the dead takes up again a body that has seen corruption and has become a blob of unorganized clay. Suffice it to say that both have events are realities; both are part of the eternal plan; and we must know that both have and will occur, if we are to understand the plan itself. How, indeed, could the Lord reveal to finite man the way and the means of his infinite acts? But this, at least, we do know. Pursuant to and in harmony with divine law blood came into the veins of man and beast. With respect to mortal life the holy word teaches: “The life of the flesh is in the blood. . . . It is the life of all flesh; the blood of it is for the life thereof.” (Lev. 17:11-14.) When blood courses in the veins of mortal creatures they live and move and have a being. Shed that blood and death destroys the creature. The fall was thus the process whereby blood became the life giving element in the bodies of fish and fowl and beast and man.

Discovering their nakedness, Adam and Eve hid themselves from the Lord “amongst the trees of the garden.” Being called forth Adam was asked: “Who told thee thou wast naked?” Then he was asked: “Hast thou eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldst not eat, if so thou shouldst surely die?” Throughout the whole account the emphasis is on death, a death that is to be, a death that that will come upon man if and when he becomes mortal. It. is difficult, to conceive what more could be said to establish the historical verity that there was no death in the world until the fall of man.

After mortality and death had entered the matter of procreation was an eventuality of great and grave concern. “Unto the woman, I, the Lord God, said: I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception. In sorrow (with pain and suffering attending) thou shalt bring forth children, and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.” Death and procreation—they are the distinguishing characteristics of mortality. Adam and Eve in the day of their paradisiacal creation—as was the case also with all forms of life— had been commanded to multiply and bring forth seed after their own kind. This they could not do until after the fall, and the consequent change their bodies. This change from immortality to mortality which enabled them to comply with the original command to multiply and replenish the earth, was in fact the chief reason for the fall itself.

“And unto Adam, I, the Lord God, said: Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the fruit of the tree of which I commanded thee saying—thou shalt not eat of it., cursed shall be the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life. Thorns also, and thistles shall it bring forth to thee, and thou shalt eat the herb of the field.” Adam fell and the earth fell. The ground which when paradisiacally created had been pronounced, “very good,” was now cursed. It could now bring forth: thorns and thistles. It fell from its paradisiacal state to a mortal state, and it will remain in this state until it is renewed and receives again its paradisiacal glory as our Tenth Article of Faith promises.

On this earth, as now constituted, man’s life is one of toil and sorrow. “By the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread,” the Lord told Adam, “Until thou shalt return unto the ground—for thou shalt surely die—for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou wast, and unto dust thou shalt return.” Death is now assured because man is mortal. The dust that became Adam can return to its original unorganized state. “And Adam called his wife’s name Eve because she was the mother of all living; for thus have I, the Lord God, called the first of all women, which are many.” Every living soul on earth is a lineal, blood descendent of Mother Eve; she is the first of all women, even as Adam is the first of all men. There were no pre-Adamites, no members of Adam’s race who preceded him in life on earth.

After the fall, which brought death into the world for all forms of life, so that animals could be slain, the Lord made “coats of skins” for Adam and Eve “and clothed them.” Them, as the holy word attests, “I, the Lord God, said unto mine Only Begotten: Behold, the man is become as one of us to know good and evil; and now lest he put forth his hand and partake also of the tree of life, and eat and live forever, therefore I, the Lord God, will send him forth from the Garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken.” We shall learn the prophetic interpretation of these words shortly. “So I drove out the man, and I placed at the east of the Garden of Eden, cherubim and a flaming sword, which turned every way to keep the way of the tree of life.” (Moses 4:14-31.) This also is figurative. It is intended to teach that man could not gain eternal life while he remained in his sins; that a mortal man could not inherit immortal glory; that, as Paul phrased it: “flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God; neither doth corruption inherit incorruption.” (1 Cor. 15:50) Mortal man, until he qualifies for eternal life, is restrained from entering the eternal realms; he is restrained with a finality that is as though angelic ministrants wielded swords of fire to block his way!

The fall, having thus come to pass, and Adam having been driven out of Eden’s garden, he “began to till the earth, and to have dominion over all the beasts of the field, and to eat his bread by the sweat of his brow . . . And Eve, also, his wife did labor with him.” Death and procreation having thus entered the world, the divine process of creating bodies from the dust of the earth, for all the spirit hosts, could get under way. “And Adam knew his wife, and she beat unto him sons and daughters, and they began to multiply and replenish the earth.” Thus the first children were born to man, and in like manner the first offspring began to drop from the wombs of every creature. “And from that time forth, the sons and daughters of Adam began to divide two and two in the land, and to till the land, and to tend flocks, and they also begat sons and daughters.”

After the fall, man in his newly acquired mortal state received revelation telling him what he must do to return to the presence of the Lord and there partake of the fruits of the tree of life. “And Adam and Eve, his wife called upon the name of the Lord, and they heard the voice of the Lord from the way toward the Garden of Eden, speaking unto them, and they saw him not; for they were shut out from his presence.” Thereupon they received commandments “that they should worship the Lord their God”; that they should offer sacrifices in “similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father,” that they should do all that they did “‘in the name of the Son”; and that they should “repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore.” Adam offered sacrifices, he was visited by an angel and the Holy Ghost fell upon him. Then from the Eternal Presence he received this divine word: “I am the Only Begotten of the Father from the beginning henceforth and forever”—there is only one Son of God who shall be born in mortality —”that as thou hast fallen though mayest be redeemed, and all mankind, even as many will.” The infinite and eternal atonement, the great and eternal plan of redemption, the whole system for the salvation of man—all these available because of the fall.

“And in that day Adam blessed God and was filled [with the Holy Ghost], and [Adam] began to prophesy concerning all the families of the earth, saying: Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God.” The probationary experiences of mortality come because of the fall. In his fallen state man—his eyes being open—is put in a position to choose between good and evil. “And Eve, his wife, heard all these things and was glad, saying: Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient.” (Moses 5:1-11.)

What we have set forth herein is the scriptural account of the fall, and there neither is nor can be any other account. It is the basis of the doctrine of the fall which we shall consider in chapter 11. As a foundation for thus considering the relationship of the fall to salvation we draw from the historical circumstances certain conclusions. These are:

If Adam had not transgressed, there would have been no fall. The fall came by reason of transgression.

If there had been no fall, the gospel of God, which is tile great and eternal plan of salvation, would not have become operative. The spirit children of the Father would have remained in preexistence, and no arrangement would have come into being whereby they could receive mortal bodies.

If there had been no fall, Adam and Eve never would have had children, mortal men would not exist, and morality, as way of life, would be unknown.

If there had been no fall, death would not have entered the world. Both temporal and spiritual death would be non existent. Adam and Eve would not have died, nor would any created things. We shall examine this verity more fully in the next chapter.

If there had been no fall, neither Adam nor his descendants would have known good or evil as these are manifest in this sphere. That is, they would not have been subjected to the testing processes of this probationary estate. They would have been placed in a position to work out their salvation by overcoming the world.

If these had been no fall, neither the man Adam nor the Adamic race would have known the joy of their redemption nor the eternal life reserved for the faithful. They would not have received joy in this world nor eternal life in the world to come.

If there had been no fall there would be no need for the atonement of Christ, the purposes of God would have been frustrated, and all things would have been created for naught.

God be praised and Adam be thanked that there was a fall, the doctrine relative to which we are now ready to study.
