CREATED THINGS: SAVED BY THE FALL

Adam’s fall brought glorious blessings to all mankind, to all created things, and to the earth itself. Men live as mortals on earth because of the fall. Immortality and eternal life are available only to fallen beings. Plants and animals and fowls and fishes and creeping things are present in their temporal state because of the fall. And, after their death, they will live again temporal state in immortality, which never would be the case except for the fall. The earth itself will be ransomed from its fallen state through the Lord’s infinite atonement. The whole purpose of life and creation is tied into the fall. Without the fall the plan of salvation could not operate. Hence the scriptures devote as much attention to the story of the fall as they do to the creation itself. And hence the prophets use the accounts of the fall—much of which are in figurative language—to teach the plan of salvation to men. We have recounted the story of the fall, and we shall now refer to some of the prophetic pronouncements which explain its purpose and effect and the blessings that flow from it.

Enoch, one of the greatest preachers of righteousness ever to dwell on earth, was a friend and contemporary of Father Adam. From Adam’s own lips and by direct revelation Enoch learned the doctrine of the fall. In one of the greatest doctrinal sermons in all holy writ— delivered in a day when the earth was new and all men were aware of their beginnings— Enoch spoke of the creation and how the Lord had brought an host of men forth upon the face of the earth. “And death hath passed upon our fathers,” Enoch said. Death, blessed death, death that comes because of the fall, death without which there is no salvation, death, out of which immortality and eternal life are born—death hath passed upon all men because of the fall. “Nevertheless we know them [the fathers], and cannot deny, and even the first of all we know, even Adam.” Men who then lived knew by personal knowledge who the first man was; they knew Adam and Eve had no living ancestors on earth.

Then from Enoch came the great declaration: “Because that Adam fell, we are.” There was no procreation before the fall; if there had been no fall, man would not be. “And by his fall came death; and we are made partakers of misery and woe.” Again we hear the word: if there had been no fall, there would be no death. Again the message comes: through the fall men gain a. knowledge of good and evil; they are on probation; they are subject to all the woes and trials of mortality. “Behold Satan hath come among the children of men, and tempted then: to worship him, Enoch continues, “and men have become carnal, sensual, and devilish, and are shut out from the presence of God.” Spiritual death consists of life out of the presence of God in which carnal and fallen men are dead as pertaining to the things of the Spirit.

“But God hath made known unto our fathers that all men must repent.” They must believe and obey. They must be baptized and keep the commandments. They must learn that they “will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam’s transgression,” as our Second Article of Faith attests. They must learn that “the Lord said unto Adam: Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden’s; and that “Hence came the saying abroad among the people, That the Son of God hath atoned for original guilt.” They must know that When children arrive at the age of account-ability, “sin conceiveth in their hearts, and they taste the bitter, that they may know to prize the good.” This is the probationary nature of man’s second estate. “And it is given unto them to know good and evil; wherefore they are agents unto themselves.” They must know “no unclean thing” can dwell in the presence of God or inherit a place m his eternal kingdom.

Such being the doctrine the Lord commanded Adam to teach his children: “That by reason of. transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death”; that to be saved men “must be born again”; that they may be cleansed from their sins “by blood, even the blood” of the Only Begotten; and that “This is the plan of salvation unto all men.”(Moses 6:44-62.) Thus salvation comes because of the fall. It comes through mortality, child bearing, and death. It results from a probationary estate which is made possible because of a knowledge of good and evil. It is available only to those Who taste the bitter that they may “know to prize the good. It comes through being born. again, through the cleansing power of the blood of Christ, and through the redemption wrought by the Son of God. All of these things are tied together into one unified whole. Take any one away and with its loss goes the hope of salvation. And if there had been no fall, none of them could operate, and there would be no salvation.

These concepts—all in reality part of the doctrine of the fall—have been known to and were and are taught by all the prophets in all ages. But it is to the Book of Mormon prophets that we now turn to gain the plainest and purest expositions of the doctrine of the fall. Lehi sets forth in great clarity in 2 Nephi 2 the relationship between salvation and the fall. “The way” whereby man may be saved, he said, “is prepared from the fall of man, and salvation is free.” Except for the fall there neither is nor could be any salvation. It is the fall that prepares the way. “And men are instructed sufficiently that they may know good from evil.” They obtain a knowledge of good and evil and are permitted to choose between them. As the Lord said to Enoch: “I gave unto them their knowledge, in the day I created them; and in the Garden of Eden, gave I unto man his agency.” (Moses 7:32).

The Lord’s law is good; Lucifer’s enticements are evil. the law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul.” (Ps. 19:7). “And the law is given unto men,” Lehi says. That is, God “created man, male and female, after his own image, and in his likeness, created he them; and gave unto them commandments that they should love and serve him, the only living and true God, and that should be the only being Whom they should worship.” God gave unto man holy gospel; they received laws from heaven. “But by the transgression of these holy laws men became sensual and devilish, and became fallen man.” (D&C 20:18-20.)

“And by the law no flesh is justified,” Lehi continues. That is, by obedience alone without more man could not be saved. There must needs be a fall, with the consequent temporal and spiritual death, and with the consequent probationary experiences of mortality. And, also, there must needs be an atonement to ransom men from the effects of the fall Without this atonement, (which comes because of the fall) man would not be justified (saved) even though his works were good, because by the law alone no flesh is justified. Many of Paul’s hard sayings about the law and justification are dealing with this very doctrine. And so, “by the law men are cut off,” Lehi says. “Yea, by the temporal law they were cut off; and also, by the spiritual law they perish from that which is good, and become miserable forever.”

Temporal and spiritual death entered the world through the fall. Before the fall man was alive spiritually and was not subject to temporal death. Temporal death (the natural death) is the separation of body and spirit, the body returning to the dust from whence it came and the spirit going to a world of waiting spirits to await the day of resurrection. Spiritual death is to be cast out of the presence of the Lord and to die as pertaining to the things of righteousness or the things of the Spirit. Those who die spiritually and are never born again to any degree “become miserable forever.”

Having so taught, Lehi speaks of the redemption wrought by the Holy Messiah; of the intercession he makes for all men; and of the eternal law of agency. He reasons that if it were not for agency—for “an opposition in all things”—nothing could exist and the eternal purposes of God would be frustrated. Indeed, except for agency, for opposites, both God himself and “all things must have vanished away.” Then he comes back to his original theme, the creation and the fall. “For there is a God,” he says, “and he hath created all things, both the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are, both things to act and to be acted upon.” The glory and wonder of the creation is everywhere set forth for insightful eyes to see. Some of its mysteries we have heretofore set forth; many more of them remain to be revealed in the coming Millennial day.

“And to bring about his eternal purposes in the end of man, after he had created our first parents, and the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and in fine, all things which are created, it must needs be that there was and opposition; even the forbidden fruit in opposition to the tree of life; the one being sweet and the other bitter.” Man must have his agency. Unless he has a knowledge of good and evil and chooses the good, while on probation, he cannot be saved, “Wherefore, the Lord God gave unto man that he should act for himself. Agency is a gift from God. Wherefore, man could not act for himself save it should be that he was enticed by the one or the other.”

Lucifer, our common enemy, “having sought that which was evil before God,” and having “fallen from heaven,” “became a devil.” Being himself “miserable forever, he

sought also the misery of all mankind.” This is that same fallen angel, “even that old serpent, who is the devil, who is the father of all lies,” who said unto Eve: “Partake of the

forbidden fruit, and ye shall not die,, but ye shall be as the God, knowing good and evil.”

Thus, as we have seen, Satan sought to destroy the purposes and plan of the Lord, though

in fact what he proposed was essential to the salvation of our first parents and of all who

should then gain a like mortality because of their fall.

“And after Adam and Eve had partaken of the forbidden fruit they were driven out of the garden of Eden, to till the ground. And they have brought forth children: yea, even the family of all the earth.” As we have already seen they could not have children until they fell, until they became mortal, until they had blood in. their veins and were subjected to death. And their children, their seed, their descendants, constitute all men on earth. Every living soul is a descendent from Eve, the mother of all living, and Adam the first man of all men. Truly, God hath made of one blood all nations of men to dwell on all the face of the earth.” (Acts 17:26.) There are no men of any race or nation who are not the literal, blood descendants of Adam, who was the son of God.

“And the days of the children of men were prolonged, according to the will of God”—in that day they lived ten times as long as they now do—”that they might repent while in the flesh.” Now men can live a few years in the flesh and then go to the spirit world and hear the gospel and repent. But the gospel was not preached among the wicked in hell until after Christ opened the prison doors: “Until that day, God’s eternal decree was: “They shall be in torment.” (Moses 7: 38-39.) Hence a merciful God permitted them a longer life on earth in the early days so they might have a full opportunity to hear the word of truth and conform to its standards. “Wherefore, their state became a state of probation, and their time was lengthened, according to the commandments which the Lord God gave unto the children of men. For he gave commandment that all men must repent; for he showed unto all men that they were lost because of transgression of their parents.” All men being mortal and subject thus to death were lost unless by an atonement they could become inheritors of immortality and eternal life.

“And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden.” If Adam had not transgressed he would never have become mortal; there would have no death the and no procreation; there would have been no probationary estate. Rather, Adam and Eve would have continued as immortal beings, without blood in their veins, abiding forever m the garden of Eden.

“And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed . . . all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were. after they were created; an d they must have remained forever, and had no end.” All things which were created—what is involved, in this category of things? Lehi has already defined his terms, he did it before he used them; and there must be no misunderstanding of his meaning. Before making the glorious pronouncement here being considered, he said: “God . . . hath created all things, both the heavens and the earth, and all things that in then are.” Also: “The had created our first parents, and the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and in fine, all things which are created.”

All things means all things. The earth, the plants, herbs, trees, and vegetation, the fish of the sea, the fowls of the heaven, the beast of the field, the animal kingdom, insects and creeping things, every form of life, all that exists whether animate or inanimate—God created all things, and all things would have remained in their primeval and paradisiacal state if Adam had not fallen.

Let us understand what the revealed word is here announcing. Of course most passages of scripture confine themselves to a discussion of Adam and Eve. It is the salvation of man with which we ordinarily deal. Of course the prophets speak of temporal and spiritual death as these apply to Adam and his seed. The earth and all forms of life were made for man; it is man that has power to become like God and to duplicate his endless creations in due course. Man comes first and other forms of life second. But man is the pattern and prototype. If man becomes mortal and is able to beget children, so it is with all created forms of life. They too become mortal and have offspring. If man dies, if his body, and spirit separate in the natural death, so it is with all else. The natural dearth comes to all created things when body and spirit separate. If man comes forth in the resurrection to live forever in an immortal state, so it is with every form of life. Hence, the profound proclamation here set forth that without the fall all forms of life would have remained in its paradisiacal state forever. There would have been no mortality, no procreation, no death, no resurrection for man or any form of life, if Adam had not fallen.

“And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed they would have had no children.” Adam and Eve would have had no children; mortal plants would not have grown on earth; fish and birds and animals would have been without offspring. And as to our first parents, “they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin.” There would have been no probationary estate and hence no eternal life and exaltation. “But behold, all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things.” There is no chance, no happenstance, no evolution, no survival of the fittest, no natural selection, no lower form of life developing to a higher form. All things were before planned and before prepared by the Almighty and Omnipotent One, and they are proceeding on schedule and according to plan.

Having so expounded, Lehi is prepared to tie the fall and the atonement together, and to make them the central things of import in the whole eternal scheme of things. “Adam fell that men might be: and men are that they might have joy. And the Messiah cometh in the fullness of time, that he may redeem the children of men from the fall.” Those two sentences summarize perfectly the whole tenor and purpose and meaning of the plan of salvation. Men exist because of the fall. and such is part of a merciful plan. God is his wisdom ordained and established a plan of salvation whereby his spirit children could advance and progress and become like him. Mortal bodies, a mortal probation, the experiences of mortality—all these are essential to salvation. We are gaining experiences here that could be gained in no other way, and without them we never could be raised in immortality nor unto eternal life. The fall is part of a merciful plan, and God be praised for his mercy and grace.

“And the resurrection must needs come unto man by reason of the fall,” Jacob continues. That is to say, if there had been no fall, there would be no resurrection; and, we hasten to add, without a resurrection there would be no salvation and no eternal life. “And the fall came by reason of transgression.” If Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen. “And because man became fallen they were cut off from the presence of the Lord.” (2 Ne. 9:6) It is with these words that Jacob lays the foundation for his great pronouncements about the atonement of Christ which we shall consider hereafter.

Antionah asked Alma: “What does the scripture mean, which saith that God placed cherubim and a flaming sword on the east of the garden of. Eden, lest our first parents should enter and partake of the fruit of the tree of life, and live forever?” We have already seen that the statements about being cast out of Eden are intended to teach us that Adam

and Eve became mortal and were placed in a probationary estate.

Alma replied: “Now we see that Adam did fall by partaking of the forbidden fruit, according to the word of God.” Our first father became mortal, he fell from his mortal state. “And thus we see, that by his fall, all mankind became a lost and fallen people.” They fell temporally and they fell spiritually; and they were thus lost temporally and lost spiritually; they would die temporally and they were dead spiritually; and they would remain so forever, if it were not for the atonement of Christ.

“And now behold, I say unto you that if it had been possible for Adam to have partaken of the tree of life at that time, there would have been no death, and the word would have been void; making God a liar, for. he said: If thou eat thou shalt surely die.” Adam would have lived forever in his sins, and being subject to sin he would have lived in sorrow. That is to say, he would have been damned. Only the saved are free from the sorrow of sin.

“And we see that death comes upon mankind yea, the death spoken of by Amulek, which is the temporal death.” This death is the natural death; it is the separation if body and spirit; it returns the body to the dust and places the spirit in the world of the spirits. It is the natural inheritance of all men; all shall die. “Nevertheless there was a space granted unto man in which he might repent; therefore this life became a probationary state; a time to prepare to meet God; a time to prepare for that endless state which has been spoken of by us, which is afar the resurrection of the dead.” We are here to be tried and tested, to see if we will keep the commandments, of God; this is the system and way whereby we work out our salvation. And if there had been no fall, we would not be in a probationary state where we can work out our salvation.

The fall and the atonement are so inextricably woven together that Alma explains at this point: “Now, if it had not-been for the plan of redemption, which was laid from the foundation of the world, there could have been no resurrection of the dead.” Christ’s atonement brings to pass the resurrection. “But there was a plan of redemption laid, which shall bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, of which has been spoken.” Because of the atonement all men are redeemed from death. “As in Adam all die even so in Christ shall all be made alive.” (1 Cor. 15:22) The fall brought death to all; Christ brings life to all.

“And now behold, if it were possible that our first parents could have gone forth and

partaken of the tree of life they would have been forever miserable, having no

preparatory state.” They would have been damned forever because they were subject to sin from which they could not be freed. “And thus the plan of redemption would have

been frustrated, and the word of God would have been void, taking none effect.” Without

the fall and without a probationary state there would be no salvation.

“But behold, it was not so; but it was appointed unto men that they should die.” Death is as much a part of the plan as life. Without death there can be no immortality. God has appointed death. It is mandatory. “And after death, they must come to judgment, even that same judgment of which hath been spoken, which is the end.” (Alma 12:21-27) Having so spoken relative to the fall, Alma then launches into a discourse on how the atonement ransoms men from the effects of the fall.

As part, of an extended exposition about the state of the souls between death and the resurrection; about the resurrection itself, about mercy, and. justice, and eternal judgment; and about the atoning sacrifice of the Lord Jesus—in the midst of all these, Alma speaks again of the fall, and the part it plays in the eternal scheme of things. He speaks of “the Lord God” sending “our first parents forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence they were taken.” He tells how “cherubim and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the tree of life,” was “placed at the east end of the garden of Eden.” He recounts how “the man had become as God, knowing good and evil,” and, he explains that “lest he should put forth his hand., and take also of the tree of life, and eat and live forever, the Lord God placed cherubim and a flaming sword, that he should not partake of the fruit.” Alma is simply reciting the Mosaic account as a basis for teaching the doctrine of the fall.

“And thus we see,” he continues, “that, there was a time granted unto man to repent, yea, a probationary time, a time to repent and serve God.” The fall was the system, devised in omnipotent wisdom, whereby man was placed in a situation where he could work out his salvation. “For behold, if Adam had put forth his hand immediately, and partaken of the tree of life, he would have lived forever [in his sins!], according to the word of God, having no space for repentance; yea, and also the word of God would have been void, and the great plan of salvation would have been frustrated.” All this we have heretofore set forth in some plainness.

“But behold, it was appointed unto man to die—therefore, as they were cut off from the tree of life they should be cut off from the face of the earth—and man became lost forever, yea, they became fallen man..” Death, blessed death, death which did not exist before the fall, this death came as an appointment from the Almighty. And because man had fallen and was subject to death, and because he .had been cast out of the presence, of God, he was lost forever. That is, he was lost without the redeeming and ransoming power of the atonement.

“And now, ye see by this that our first parents were cut off both temporally and spiritually from the presence of the Lord, and thus we see they became subjects to follow after their own will.” The temporal death is the natural death. Spiritual death is to die as. pertaining, to the things of the spirit; it is to be cast out of the presence of God; it is to dead as pertaining to things of righteousness.

“Now behold, it was not expedient that man should be reclaimed from this temporal death, for that would destroy the great plan of happiness.” If man lived forever in his sins, he would live forever in a damned state.. “Therefore, as the soul could never die, and the fall had brought upon. all mankind a spiritual death as well as a temporal death; that is, they were cut off from the presence of the Lord, it was expedient that mankind should be reclaimed from this spiritual death.” If man had lived forever after the fall, without a space for repentance, he would have been spiritually dead forever and. would never have lived again in the presence of God.

“Therefore, as they had become carnal, sensual, and devilish, by nature, this probationary state became a state for them to prepare; it became a preparatory state.” This present life is the state in which men by their good works, by being born again, by keeping the commandments, have power to reclaim themselves from spiritual death.

“And now remember, my son [Alma is speaking to Corianton], if it were not for the plan of redemption, (laying. it aside) as soon as they were dead their souls were miserable, being cut off from the presence of the Lord.” If there were no atonement,, the spirits of men, after death, would dwell in hell forever. They would be miserable eternally for they would remain in their devilish state. Lest this state should befall man, however, an atonement is provided and also a “plan of redemption,” which operates “on conditions of repentance of men in this probationary state, yea, this probationary state.” And also, Alma says, “God himself atoneth for the sins of the world, to bring about the plan of mercy, to appease the demands of justice, that God might be a perfect, just God, and a merciful God also.” (Alma 42.:2-15.)

Thus salvation comes because of the fall. If there were no fall, there would be no mortality, no procreation, no .death, no resurrection, no eternal life. And if none of these things exist the purposes of God are frustrated, the plan of salvation is void, and there, is no purpose in creation. The creation, the fall, and the atonement—these three, they comprise the plan of salvation and are the most transcendent, events and the most important doctrines of the gospel. And—let us say it plainly—if there was a fall, of the kind set forth in the revelations, there neither, is nor can be a true theory of evolution.
