THE ATONEMENT: BORN OF THE FALL

From creation’s dawn to this present hour, in the onrushing events of eternal existence, three things stand out above all others. Each of them is of such transcendent import that if it had not taken place the purposes of God would be frustrated and the whole plan of Salvation would be void. Taken together these three constitute the plans and purposes and designs of the Lord where his children and all created things are concerned. They interlock into one great program; together they comprise the plan of salvation.; they unite, to form the gospel of God Which is the plan and system whereby the spirit children of God have power to advance and progress and become like their great progenitor. They are:

death for animals or fowls or fishes or plants. There would be no probationary estate and

no reward of eternal life for those who believe and obey the fulness of eternal law.

These three—the creation, the fall, and the atonement—form the great and eternal foundation upon which all things rest. All things were created; this we know for they exist. All things fell; this we know because mortality reigns in every department of creation. And all things will be redeemed from their fallen state so as to live forever in immortality; this we know because Christ hath wrought out the infinite and eternal atonement.

The creation itself is the greatest miracle ever performed in all eternity. No one ever questions the fact of creation. Is it any more difficult to believe in the fall and the atonement than it is to believe in the creation? If the Creator created all things, surely the Redeemer can redeem all things. If the First Adam made all things mortal through the fall, surely the Second Adam can make all things immortal through the atonement. Thanks be to God for the creation, the fall, and the atonement—these three—which, taken together, comprise the great and eternal plan of the Father.

From our standpoint, the creation being an accomplished fact, the most transcendent event that ever has or ever will occur is the atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ. It is the heart and core and center of revealed religion and of all things. From creation’s dawn as long as an endless eternity endures there neither has been nor will be an event like unto it. It gives life and purpose to the creation. Without it there would be no reason for the creation, no plan of salvation, no immortality, no eternal life. If there had been no atonement the plans and purposes and designs of the Almighty would have been frustrated, the eternal plan of salvation would come to aught, and God would be a failure. And this infinite act of an Eternal Being rests upon a dual foundation and upon two great and eternal verities, upon two glorious doctrines than which there are no greater these are:

The doctrine of the divine Sonship is that the Lord Jesus was born into mortality with God as his Father and Mary as his mother. It is that he is the Only Begotten in the flesh. It is that he inherited from his Father—who is a glorified and perfected being, a Holy Man, a personage of tabernacle, having a body of flesh and bones—it is that he inherited, from this holy being the power of immortally, which is the power to live forever. It is that he inherited from his mother—who was herself mortal, in the full and complete sense of the word—that he inherited from her the power of mortality, which is the power to die. Thus the Only Begotten is the sole and only person ever born into the world with a dual power —the power to live forever and the power to die at will, and the power (having chosen to die) to take up his body and live forever in immortal glory.

Thus Adam; having fallen through transgression, was denied access to the tree of life lest he eat and live forever in his sins. But Christ, having taken upon himself the fallen state of man, yet living a perfect life, was privileged to eat of the tree of life for he was without sin. And thus the Atoning One was able to say of himself: “I am the good shepherd”— that is, ‘I am the Lord Jehovah,’ for Jehovah was their shepherd—”the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep . . . As the Father knoweth me even so know I the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep . . .As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep . . . Therefore doth my Father love me because I lay down my life, that I might take it up again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father.” (John 10:11-18.)

Our Blessed Lord, the Son of an immortal Father and of a mortal mother, inheriting from them the powers of immortality and of mortality could live or die at will. He could live forever as none of us can, because God was his Father; he could die, as we all can and must, because Mary was his mother; and he could then live again in his corporeal body because his Immortal Father had given him the power of immortality. Thus our Blessed Lord, he, and he alone could work out the infinite and eternal, atonement. He, and he alone could ransom man from Adam’s fall. He and he alone could abolish death and bring “life and immortality to light through the gospel.” (2 Tim l:10) The atonement, standing preeminent above all things, was accomplished because Jesus Christ was the Son of the living God in the full and true and literal sense of the word.

But there would have been no seed for an atonement unless there had been a fall. The atonement ransoms man and all things from the effects of the fall. The fall brought temporal and spiritual death into the world, and the atonement brings Immortality and eternal life into being. The fall and the atonement are inseparably connected, never to be parted.

Thus it is written: “The devil, tempted Adam, and he partook of the forbidden fruit and transgressed the commandment.” Adam was disobedient. If he had not transgressed, he would not have become “subject to the will of the devil.” No man is ever the servant of sin unless he yields to sin; but when he sins he thereby subjects himself to the Author of Sin who is Satan. Thus if Adam had not transgressed, he would not have entered his destined probationary estate. He would not have placed, himself in a position to choose between good and evil, virtue and vice, righteousness and wickedness. He would never have entered the probationary estate in which he must choose between God and Lucifer. Thus mortality, with its trials and tests, had its beginning because he yielded unto temptation.

“Wherefore I, the Lord God, caused that he should be cast out from the Garden of Eden, from my presence, bemuse of his transgression, wherein he became spiritually dead.” He died thus as to the things of righteousness and of the spirit. “But behold, I say that I, the Lord God, gave unto Adam and unto his seed, that they should not die as to the temporal death, until I, the Lord God, should send forth angels to declare unto them repentance and redemption; through faith on the name of mine Only Begotten Son.” Temporal death is the natural death, the death that occurs when the spirit leaves the body and the tabernacle made of clay returns to the dust from whence it came.

“And thus”—that is, because Adam yielded to temptation; because he transgressed and became subject to the will of the devil; because he died spiritually; because temporal death entered the world—”And thus did I, the Lord God, appoint unto man the days of his probation—that by his natural, death he might be raised in immortality unto eternal life, even, as many as would believe.” (D&C 29:40-43) The fall and the atonement unite to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.

“Now is Christ risen from the dead,” Paul said as he testified of the atonement.. “For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.” Adam brought death, and if he had not fallen there would be no death; and Christ brought the resurrection.; and if there had been no atonement there would be no resurrection. “For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.” (1 Cor. 15:20-22)

Moroni linked the fall and the atonement together in this way. God, he said, “created Adam, and by Adam came the fall of man. And because of the fall of man came Jesus Christ.” It is just that simple; the fall is the source, and cause, and reason for the atonement. “And because of Jesus Christ came the redemption of man.” Salvation is in Christ!

“And because of the redemption of man, which came by Jesus Christ,” men “are brought back into the presence of the Lord; yea, this is wherein all men are redeemed, because the death of Christ bringeth to pass the resurrection, which bringeth to pass a redemption from an endless sleep, from which sleep all men shall be awakened by the power of God when the trump shall sound; and they shall come forth, both small and great, and all shall stand before his bar, being redeemed and loosed from this eternal band of death which death is a temporal death.” (Mormon 9:12-13) Men are redeemed—redeemed from the fall!—in and through the atonement of Christ which redemption brings to pass the resurrection. Thus, if there had been no fall of Adam, there would be no resurrection and no eternal life for all the obedient.

Our Blessed Lord’s redeeming sacrifice came to redeem men from the fall. His infinite and eternal atonement came to make amends for the laws which Adam transgressed when mortality came into being. The great and eternal plan of redemption—ordained and established by the Father for the salvation of man and all forms of life—this eternal plan presupposes a redemption from a fallen state. Twelve plan of salvation itself becomes operative because of the fall.

Thus an holy angel, sent from God in heaven to preach to mortal man on earth, said that “the Lord Omnipotent,” who is “Jesus Christ, the Son of God,” would bring “salvation...unto the children of men even through faith on his name.” By faith men are redeemed from the spiritual fall.

Then our angelic fellow laborer speaks of the redemption of those, who do not have opportunity to gain faith while in this life says: “For behold, and also his blood atoneth for the sins of those who have fallen by the transgression of Adam, who have died not knowing the will of God concerning them, or who have ignorantly sinned.” From other revelations we know that all those who would have believed the word of truth in this life, had opportunity afforded, will accept the gospel in the spirit world and become heirs of salvation. “But wo, wo unto, him who knoweth that he rebelleth against God! For salvation cometh to none such except it be through repentance and faith on the Lord Jesus Christ.” Those who have opportunity, to believe and obey in this life must do do if they are to be redeemed from their spiritual fall

And further, all children who die before they arrive at the age of accountability are redeemed from the fall by the shedding of the blood of Christ, and they shall go to the celestial kingdom. “And even if it were possible that little children could sin, which they cannot, “they could not be saved,” except through the atonement of Christ. “But I say unto you they are blessed,” the angel said to King Benjamin, “for behold, as in Adam, or by nature, they fall, even so the blood of Christ atoneth for their sins.” The effects of the fall—temporal and spiritual death—pass upon all men; children are born as mortals and inescapably become inheritors of temporal death; but they are alive in Christ because of the atonement; no taint of sin can corrupt their souls; they are redeemed from the spiritual fall by the blood, of Christ.

“And moreover, I say unto you, that there shall be no other name given nor any other way nor means whereby salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the name of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent.” Christ alone is the Redeemer. He alone, because God was his Father, because his Paternal Sire bequeathed to him the power of immortality, he alone is the one who could bring salvation. “For behold he judgeth, and his judgment is just; and the infant perisheth not that dieth in his infancy.” Little children are alive in Christ. “But men drink damnation to their own souls except they humble themselves and become as little children, and believe that salvation was, and is, and is to come, in and through the atoning blood of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent.” Christ’s blood atones! Atones for what? For the transgression of Adam!

“For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord.” The natural man is carnal, sensual, and devilish by nature. He is dead spiritually and is not fit to dwell in the Divine Presence.

But the redeemed man “becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father.” (Mosiah 3:5-20) He is born again; he lives spiritually; he is a fit person to dwell in the presence of God. He died spiritually because of Adam; he lives spiritually because of Christ. The fall is as essential a part of the plan of salvation as is the atonement.

Lehi, in speaking of the temporal and spiritual death that came by reason of the fall, says of men: “By the temporal law they were cut off,” meaning that the temporal or natural death passed upon all men; “and also, by the spiritual law they perish from that which is good, and become miserable forever.” That is, they die spiritually and would remain as lost souls, subject everlastingly to Lucifer, if there were no redeeming power. “Wherefore,” meaning because of the spiritual and temporal death: which came because of the fall, “redemption cometh in and through the Holy Messiah; for he is full of grace and truth.” The Messiah redeems men from the fall.

All men are ransomed from temporary death through the universal resurrection, immortality is a free gift that comes by the grace of God without any act on man’s part. But the ransom from the spiritual death is another thing, it results from obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. And so Lehi says: “The Holy Messiah . . . offereth himself a sacrifice for sin”—he pays the penalty for our sins—”to answer” the ends of the law, unto all those who have a broken heart and a contrite spirit.” Those who believe and obey are ransomed from spiritual death; “and unto none else can the ends of the law be answered.” Men must work out their own salvation with fear and trembling before the Lord. Salvation is freely available, but it must be earned. Men must pay the price.

True it is “that there is no flesh that can dwell in the presence of God [which is salvation], save it be through the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah.” Men are saved by grace after all that they can do. And the Messiah, who is Christ, “layeth down his life according to the flesh, and taketh it again by the power of the Spirit, that he may bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, being the first that should rise. Wherefore, he is the firstfruits unto God, inasmuch as he shall make intercession for all the children of men; and they that believe in him shall be saved.” (2 Ne 2:5-9) Men are ransomed from spiritual death by the grace of God coupled with their own works of righteousness.

How infinite in power is the atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ! Through it all created things are redeemed from their temporal fall so that in due course they will dwell everlastingly in immortal glory. Through it all who abide the law are ransomed from their spiritual fall and given an inheritance of eternal glory in the Celestial Presence.

How eternal in nature is the ransoming power of the Great creator! From eternity to eternity it is the same. Through all the endless expanse of immensity, on all the worlds of his creating, everywhere, the mystery of redemption operates.

How glorious in concept is the infinite plan; how wondrous beyond mortal comprehension is the atonement, of the Lord Jesus Christ! How grateful we are that “it behooveth the great, Creator that he suffereth himself to become subject unto man in the flesh, and to die for all men, that all men might become subject unto him. “None are exempt from the effects of the fall; none can withstand the power of the atonement.

“For as death hath passed upon all men [because of the fall], to fulfil the merciful plan of the great Creator, there must needs be a power of resurrection.” Adam had power to bring death, and Christ had power to bring life. Thus, even “the resurrection must needs come unto man,” not by reason of the atonement only, but “by reason of the fall.” Without the atonement there, would be no resurrection; and without the fall there would be no resurrection. “And the fall came by reason of transgression; and because men became fallen they were cut off from the presence of the Lord.”

“Wherefore”—meaning because Adam fell, because all men die temporally, because all are cut off spiritually, because all need to be resurrected and become immortal, because all are entitled to be ransomed from their spiritual fall because of these things—”it must needs be an infinite atonement—save it should be an infinite atonement this corruption could not put on incorruption.” That is, there would be no immortality. “Wherefore, the first judgment “which came upon man”—a judgment that made him subject to temporal and spiritual death—”must needs have remained to an endless duration. And if so, this flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more.” Were it not for the infinite and eternal atonement no graves would ever open; no dust of the earth would live again in bodily form; and the bodies of all man and all created things would be without form end void.

How awful it would be if there never again would be houses for the spirit children of the Father. But, if there were no atonement, an even worse fate would await the spirits of men? “O the wisdom of God, his mercy and grace!” Jacob exclaims. “For behold, if the flesh should rise no more our spirits must become subject to that devil, to rise no more.” The fallen angel is that old serpent the devil or Satan who was cast like lightning from the realms above. “And our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devils., angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself.”

Devils, angels to a devil—such would have been the destiny of all men if there had been no atonement of Christ. Why? Because there would be no remission of sins and redemption from spiritual death. All men in such an eventuality would be subject everlastingly to him who is the Master of Sin. And being evil as he is evil, they would be his angels; and being eternal sinners as he is an eternal sinner, they would be devils as he is a devil.

Jacob then speaks of being saved from death and hell; of temporal death, which is the grave, delivering up its captive spirits; and of men being delivered “from that awful monster the devil, and death, and hell, and that lake of fire and brimstone, which is endless torment”—all because of the atonement. “The Holy One of Israel,” he says, “cometh into the world that he may save all men if they will hearken unto his voice; for behold; he suffereth the pains of all men, yea, the pains of every living creature, both men, women, and children, who belong to the family of Adam” Men who hearken to the Lord are redeemed from their spiritual fall.

But there is more. “He suffereth this”—the pains of all men, “that the resurrection might pass upon all men, that all might stand before him at the great and judgment day.” (2 Ne. 9:5-22) All men are redeemed from their temporal fall.

Samuel the Lamanite, as guided by the spirit, summarized these same truths with this same language: “Jesus Christ . . . surely must die that salvation may come; yea, it behooveth him and becometh expedient that he dieth, to bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, that thereby men may be brought back rote the presence of the Lord.” It is through the resurrection that men have-power to return to the presence: of the Lord and gain eternal life.

“Yea, behold, this death [of Christ] bringeth to pass the resurrection, and [also] redeemeth all mankind from the first death—that spiritual death; for all mankind, by the fall of Adam being cut off from the presence of the Lord, are considered as dead, both as to things temporal and to things spiritual. But behold the resurrection of Christ redeemeth mankind, yea, even all mankind [from temporal death], and [also] bringeth them back into the presence of the Lord [if they believe and obey].” How clearly, it is stated; how plainly it is expounded; how sure and certain is the divine testimony! The atonement redeems men from the fall.

“Yea, and it [the redemption] bringeth to pass the condition of repentance, that whosoever repenteth the same is not hewn down and cast into the fire; but whosoever repenteth not is hewn down and cast into the fire; and there cometh upon them again a spiritual death, yea, a second death, for they are cut off again as to things pertaining to righteousness.” (Hel. 14:12-18) Those who are cast out eternally after the resurrection are the only ones who suffer this second, death in-full measure.

As we ponder these glorious, truths we may well ask:

How could there be an atonement unless there was a fall? Does not the atonement consist of ransoming men from the effects of the fall?

How could there be a resurrection from the dead unless there was death in the world? Did not death come because of the fall?

How could men be raised from mortality to immortality unless they were created as mortal beings? Did not mortality begin when Adam fell?

How can the children of God be ransomed from spiritual death unless they first die spiritually? Does not eternal life consist of being alive to the things of righteousness and of the Spirit and of dwelling in the presence of God?

Can there be any question in the minds of those who believe in Christ and in the salvation he offers to men that the fall and the atonement are not two doctrines but one?
