THE THREE PILLARS OF ETERNITY

We have now laid the foundation upon which every man may build his own house of salvation. Stone by stone, brick by brick, with one beam secured to another, we have

prepared the way for each person to build a holy house, a house of salvation, a house in which he will be safe from the storms and perils that cover the earth. In our foundation

we have placed the stones of a spirit creation and laid the bricks of a temporal or

paradisiacal creation. On it, above all, stand the three great pillars of eternity—the three

greatest events that ever have or ever will occur in all eternity. These are the creation, the

fall, and the atonement. Together they comprise the great and eternal plan of salvation,

which is the gospel of God who is the Father.

“I have laid the foundation,” as Paul said. “But let every man take heed how he buildeth thereon.” And then, speaking from our perspective and having in mind the whole eternal, system by which salvation comes, the ancient apostle said: “For other foundation can no man lay that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.” Nor other any man lay any foundation except the fall of Adam because of which Christ came. Nor can he lay any foundation except that of the creation which made possible the fall. “Now if any man build upon” another foundation, such as one of “gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble,” and, we might add, one of the philosophies of men or the wisdom of the world, his foundation shall surely crumble and his house fall in the day of burning and of judgment “Let no man deceive himself. If any man among you seemeth to be wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise. For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God.” (1 Cor. 3:10-19) What men know about the creation of the earth is so miniscule and inconsequential that is has no relevance or importance when weighed against what the Lord has revealed. The seeming foolishness of the world combined ten thousand times over.

Lest there be any sliver of misunderstanding about the three eternal verities which comprise the plan of salvation; about the three great events which prepare men for immortality and eternal life; about the creation, the fall, and atonement upon which all things rest—lest any should choose the wisdom of the world in preference to the foolishness of God, let us summarize and recapitulate our message. The true doctrine is that all things center in, and revolve around, are anchored to, and are built upon the atoning sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ. There is no language given to men or angels to proclaim these truths with the power and verity and dignity that should attend them. Let it be blazoned in burning fire though all the sidereal heavens that salvation is in Christ and comes because of his atoning sacrifice.

The true doctrine is that this atoning sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ—grand and infinite, glorious and eternal as it is—does not stand alone. It is not simply a sudden blaze of light in. a universe of darkness and despair. It is not by itself alone a great sun rising in celestial splendor to dispel the gloom of endless night. It is not merely a manifestation of the grace of an infinite God toward his fallen children. However much the atonement may be and is all these things—and more!—yet it does not stand alone. It is not a child born without parents. It has roots; it has a reason for being; it came because other events called it forth.

The atonement is part of the eternal plan of the Father. It came at the appointed time, according to the will of the Father to do for man that which could not have been done in any other way. The atonement is the child of the fall, and the fall id the father of the atonement. Neither of them, without the other, could have brought to pass the eternal purposes of the Father. The fall of Adam and the atonement of Christ are linked together —inseparably, everlastingly, never to be parted. They are as much a part of the same body as are the head and the heart, and each plays in part in the eternal scheme of things.

The fall of Adam brought temporal and spiritual death into the world, and the atonement of Christ ransomed men from these two deaths by bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. This makes the fall as essential a part of the plan of salvation as the very atonement itself. There are in fact five things that came into being and continue to exist because of the fall. None of these things would have existed if there had been no fall, and all of them are essential parts of the divine plan of salvation. They are:

Even as the atonement grows out of the fall, so the fall grows out of the creation. If all things had not been created, there would have been no fall. If created things were to fall, they must be created in a higher state than the state they would be in after the fall. To fall is to go downward, or forward, but not upward. And so it is that the revealed accounts of the creation of this earth and all things on the face thereof are accounts of the creation of this earth and all things on the face thereof are accounts of the paradisiacal creation. They speak of the immortal state in which all things were first made; they tell of created things in the day before death entered the world.

Our Tenth Article of Faith says: “We believe . . . that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory.” When the Lord comes and the Millennial era commences, there will be new heavens and a new earth, the earth will be renewed; it will become new again; and it will return to its paradisiacal state; it will become like it was in the Edenic day. And once again death as we know it will cease. The accounts of the creation in Genesis 1 and Moses 2 are accounts of the paradisiacal or Edenic creation. They are descriptive of a creation that antedated death and mortality and the fall.

Let us keep all things in perspective, and let us realize how there are all interwoven to form one grand tapestry. We are speaking of the creation of all things—of the sidereal heavens, of worlds without number, and of this earth and its atmospheric heavens; of man who was made in the image and likeness of the great Creator; and of every living thing, whether plant or animal or fish or fowl or creeping thing. We are centering our attention on this earth, this orb, this planet, this dot of dust in the storms of an eternal Sahara, and we are saying that it and all things on its face were created in a higher and more glorious state than the one which now prevails. Let there be no mistake and no misunderstanding.

And we are speaking not only of the creation of this earth and all things thereon are, but we are proclaiming the fall of all things. We are saying that the earth fell; men fell; plants and trees fell; every form of life, be it whatsoever it may be—all things fell. All things changed from a higher to a lower state; all things became mortal; all living things gained procreative powers; all became subject to death.

And as we speak of the creation of all things and of the fall of all things, we testify also of the redemption of all things. Men and animals and fowls and fishes and creeping things and plants and trees and vegetation and the very earth itself will all come forth in the resurrection. All will become immortal; all will live forever; all will play their part in the eternal plan of the Eternal God. Thus it is and thus it shall be, and thus the creation, the fall, and the atonement are one. They are one doctrine and one concept, they are parts of the same eternal plan of salvation. We repeat—how can we say it too strongly—they are the gospel of God by which salvation comes.

Many of the saints of the Most High have no do difficulty envisioning that the atonement is infinite and eternal, and applies to all forms of life. They know that the revelations say in so many words that all forms of life lived as spirit entities and will be resurrected and that animals, fowls, fishes, and all things are eternal in nature. But some have not yet had it dawn upon them that all things fell and became moral so they could be resurrected; and that if they had not fallen they could not be redeemed and resurrected. The formal pronouncement of the early Brethren of our dispensation acclaims: “The atonement signifies deliverance, through the offering of a ransom, from the penalty of a broken law . . . As effected. by Jesus Christ, it signifies the deliverance, through his death and resurrection, of the earth, and every thing pertaining to it, from the power which death has obtained over them through the transgression of Adam . . . Redemption from death, through the sufferings of Christ, is for all men, both the righteous and the wicked; for this earth, and for all things created upon it.” (Compendium, pp. 8-9, cited Mormon Doctrine, pp. 64-65.)

Truly, salvation comes because of the atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ, and if there were no atonement there would be no salvation.

Truly, the atonement comes because of the fall, and if there were no fall there would be no atonement. Hence, salvation also comes because of the fall.
