Frank B. Salisbury, Creation ( 1976)

Prologue

I love this old world! Its beauty is sublime. I thrill when I contemplate its hills and vales, its oceans, lakes, and streams, or its rolling grassy plains, wooded hills, blazing deserts, stark and frozen tundras—even its farm-lands, towns, and cities—but most of all, I love its soaring alpine peaks. I marvel at the plants that cover its face and fill its waters, and I stand in awe of the role they play in its operations, trapping the rays from the sun to make food for themselves and for us and to purify our air. I feel a kinship to the creatures that crawl and run and swim and fly on my planet's surface. Their intricate activities fascinate, amuse, and astound me. And the stars in the heavens enchant my soul and fill it with wondering.

Sometimes when I contemplate this marvelous planet, I am overwhelmed with deep gratitude to God for providing this gift for all of us to love and enjoy and to use as the stage upon which we can work out our eternal salvation. This is his world, his creation! It declares his glory.

I have felt that way about as long as I can remember. I think of riding as a small boy in the back of the Chevrolet sedan as my parents went to see springtime at Fish Lake or the summer on Wolf Creek Pass or the fall in Provo or Hobble Creek canyons. On those outings, I could sense their love of the beauty of this earth and of the God who created it. Not long after, I discovered that one could earn a living by learning about creation—by being a scientist, that is. Although I had to settle on one field of science (botany, actually plant physiology), I enjoyed all my science classes almost equally. I seemed to be learning about God's creation in all of them.

But I didn't learn much about God in those classes. Because of the (certainly proper) separation of church and state in our public schools, it is against the rules to discuss purely religious matters. In Sunday School, priesthood, seminary, and institute of religion, I learned much about God but not much about how he creates or about his creation. This is not surprising, because few of my teachers were trained in the sciences. Unfortunately, I have had the impression that some religious teachers actually resist scientific knowledge.

The questions that forced themselves upon me during those school years often demanded coordinated answers from the fields of both science and religion. At first it bothered me that the bishop or high councilor, to whom I would put the question, would be unable to provide a satisfying scientific-religious answer. Many of these marvelous men did contribute much by clarifying important points of doctrine, but they could seldom come up with the specifics that I wanted. (It amazes and amuses me to remember my high expectations for those men—and how close they came to meeting them.)

I haven't been bothered much for the last three decades about the inability of many people in the Church to tell me about creation. Perhaps in late high school or early college I discovered the scriptures. It was apparent to me, upon examining the Pearl of Great Price, that compared to science, God hadn't given us many words about creation, but what he did say was profound, significant, true, and terribly exciting. It was quite obvious that the messages of creation given by him, though brief, were worthy of a lifetime's study. I am still trying to fathom those few words.

So, that's what this book is about. I would like, between one set of covers, to do what is seldom done in any science class or in any religion class: to consider the creation from both standpoints. First, we will examine how man discovers truth by reason and by revelation. Then we will search the scriptures to discover their testimony of creation and the Creator and to seek from this testimony the understanding that can help us to gain eternal life. The discussions of God and revelation, as well as those of creation, are based mostly on the restored scriptures of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. Hence the book is written for my fellow Mormons.

Then we will examine what science has learned about creation. Section Three is a sort of minicourse in the sciences. Within the rather severe space limitations, I have tried to summarize some of the exciting discoveries in astronomy, geology, and biology, especially those that relate to the creation. It was enjoyable preparing these discussions for the nonscientist, being able to diverge now and again to consider how some scientific point might relate to God and his creative activities. Incidentally, if I have failed in my attempt to communicate science to someone not in this field (perhaps this is an impossible task for me), don't hesitate to pick and choose and skip around a bit in the third section. I would rather have you do that than not read the book at all!

Finally, in Section Four, the goal is to reconcile a bit when that is possible, and at least to outline the present state of the problems when it is not. The idea is to think of revealed and scientific knowledge simultaneously in an effort to better understand and appreciate the creation.

There is another compelling reason for writing the book: Clearly the world—civilization as we know it—is in deep trouble. There must be many reasons for the headlong decay in moral values, but certainly one of the most important of these reasons, and perhaps the central one, is the conflict between science and religion. Beginning with the Renaissance, science began to conflict with the teachings of religion (an apostate Christianity, we recognize). The earth wasn't the center of the universe after all. Then Charles Darwin, in 1858, provided mankind with a proposed mechanism that seemed to account for creation without a Creator. Not long after this, Sigmund Freud convinced most of the intelligentsia that man has no soul. The arguments of Darwin and Freud were embellished by a myriad of others who followed in their footsteps. These arguments have become intricate and involved, and relatively few people really understand them. But their implications are easy to understand: There is no God, and man has no immortal soul! And since they are presented by scientists and others who seem to be extremely intelligent, it is not difficult for many people to simply accept them on faith—and then to adjust their lives and their morality to match them.

Thus an important purpose of this book is to present the arguments for intelligence in creation as best I can. Hopefully, it will become apparent that faith is involved on both sides; that is, that the atheistic scientist-philosopher can no more prove the things he advocates than the religious person can objectively and conclusively prove the existence of God. Having looked at these matters myself for many years, it remains my fervent testimony that faith in Christ as the Son of God and the Creator and the Redeemer of the earth is not really incompatible with the study of science nor with its attempts to study truth about the universe. There are conflicts all right, plenty of them. Much faith is still required to live one's religion, and as long as the earth in this phase of its creation is fulfilling its ordained purposes, faith will be required. But it is my testimony that the discoveries of science (especially biology) can contribute far more to an understanding of creation than they can detract from it. Thus part of this book deals with controversy. This can't be helped, and indeed I must admit that I relish it a bit. But I truly hope that the book is mostly about the sublime beauty of creation.
