Frank B. Salisbury, Creation ( 1976)

Section 1:

The Ground Rules

"And I, God, called the dry land Earth; and the gathering together of the waters, called I the Sea; and I, God, saw that all things which I had made were good."

Moses 2:10

1

Revelation

As the Apollo 8 spacecraft was approaching the moon before that most memorable Christmas of 1968, astronaut James Lovell looked back at the earth and described it as "a grand oasis in the big vastness of space." There it was, our mother planet. By careful deductive studies extended over three centuries, we knew what it would look like from space. But there it was, shining with an almost incomprehensible glory that was accentuated by the bleak and dead satellite that human beings were about to approach for the first time in recorded history.

Where did this sparkling blue and white oasis in the vast void of space originate? How did it come into being? Why? Can the mind of man find answers to these questions? The human brain had dreamed dreams and schemed schemes until a spacecraft had taken form and was now drifting in its accurately calculated lunar trajectory. But could that brain discover its own origin and the origin of the earth that was its home?

Conceivably, there are two ways to gain answers to the questions of creation. First, if the earth was the product of another creatively intelligent mind or minds, a God or gods, we might find out from the Creator himself how and why it was done. A mind that could create an earth could certainly communicate with other minds dwelling on that earth. Such communication is called revelation; it is one logical way for us to find out about this creation—if God exists.

Second, we might use our brains to find out about the earth's origin and our place on the planet. Indeed, by processes not unlike those that built the lunar spaceships, men and women have learned much about their planet. The scientist looks, describes, formulates ideas, and then tests these ideas in many ways. They broaden finally into concepts about how nature works. This is science. Is it not reasonable for man to take this approach in trying to find out about the creation of his earth?

THE BELIEVER AND THE SCIENTIST

Both approaches are accepted and applied in this book. The discussions are based on the beliefs that God lives and has spoken and does speak to man, and that man can discover truth by the application of his own intelligence.

There are many who reject one or the other of these ideas. Some do not believe that there is a God nor that such a Being has spoken to man. Others are highly suspicious of science, accepting the technological achievements that speak for themselves, but believing that scientific philosophers tend to be unrealistic, wishful thinkers whose theories have blinded them to the commonsense truths so evident to a reasonable person. This book can have little meaning for the atheist or for the antiscience fundamentalist.

The man who rejects God can't understand when we are discussing God's word. He shouldn't even try to understand until he has pursued the question of God's existence and communication to man. Paul said: "But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned." (1 Corinthians 2:14.)

On the other hand, this book will have little meaning for the fundamentalist who rejects science, believing that all scientists (especially evolutionists) are Satan's henchmen. Scientists certainly do not have a clear monopoly on all truth. They have been wrong, and sometimes they have been disastrously wrong. But few are willfully bad. Most have developed an attribute that is one of God's prime characteristics: a love of truth. A true scientist is a person consumed by a desire to understand things as they are. All else in life may be secondary to this goal. But knowing truth is not easy, so this same scientist may be steeped in untruth, even falsehood that could lead one away from God. Yet his motives cannot be impugned. If he could be shown the truth to his complete satisfaction, he would embrace it.

The believer must realize that he also peers through a glass darkly. He, too, knows only in part. He may use gospel words confidently and even smugly, without really knowing what they mean. What is meant by celestial or intelligence or spirit or paradise or Urim and Thummim or a God of flesh and bone? Who among us could explain these terms with scientific precision?

FAITH

Belief in a God who created the universe is an act of faith. But what is faith? Is it a bit of magic by which, if one just thinks hard enough that something is so, it becomes so? Not according to Alma: ". . . faith is not to have a perfect knowledge of things; therefore if ye have faith ye hope for things which are not seen, which are true." (Alma 32:21.)

Here is the paradox and the beauty—and the clue to understanding. If something is not seen, how can we know that it is true? We don't, but we hope! That is, we hope for truth. It is not a matter of believing strongly because one hopes, and then expecting God to make something true to satisfy that hope. We hope that what we believe is true, but since we aren't positive, we continue to seek.

But isn't this still a blind faith? And isn't blind faith something abhorrent to science, a matter of accepting an idea without evidence? Not if we are only hoping for things that are true. This kind of hope means that we must base our faith upon something. It is a matter of believing in something we cannot know or understand based upon something we do know and understand. Accepting the principles of the gospel does not require blind faith. One studies the principles and is impressed by their logic. One investigates in ways not unlike those applied by the scientist in his search for truth. Eventually one concludes that certain gospel principles simply must be true—all the evidence supports this idea. Then one is able to make the intellectual leap of accepting on faith something else that he cannot thoroughly know and understand, something that goes beyond.

We should note that faith is ultimately a gift of God, given to those who seek and who obey. (See John 7:17; Romans 12:3; 1 Corinthians 12:9; D&C 46:12-13.) Surely God would not give the gift of blind faith. He would bestow faith in things that are true.

To me the evidence is clear (does not require the application of blind faith) that God lives and speaks to prophets. This forms the foundation for my faith in what I cannot always comprehend. I do not completely understand God's story of creation. Nevertheless, since I am convinced that the story is God's word, I can accept it as being fundamentally true whether I understand it or not. Furthermore, I accept God's promise that I will understand it at some future date, here or in eternity.

THE WORD OF GOD

The logic of revelation is crystal clear: If God exists, it is reasonable to accept that he could tell us about creation. Furthermore, it is reasonable to expect that he might want to tell us. Indeed, it is difficult for some to understand why, if he exists, he does not tell each and every one of us. Of course, he could have his reasons—perhaps our ultimate progression depends upon our working out our own salvation as we walk by faith. But if God exists, he could tell at least some of us (the prophets) about creation. If God exists. That is the primary consideration.

Numerous evidences have been cited for the existence of God. Philosophers have examined the question for centuries. The arguments of father Lehi provide an excellent example:

"For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things. . . .

"And if ye shall say there is no law, ye shall also say there is no sin. If ye shall say there is no sin, ye shall also say there is no righteousness. And if there be no righteousness there be no happiness. And if there be no righteousness nor happiness there be no punishment nor misery. And if these things are not there is no God. And if there is no God we are not, neither the earth; for there could have been no creation of things, neither to act nor to be acted upon; wherefore, all things must have vanished away.

"And now, my sons, I speak unto you these things for your profit and learning; for there is a God, and he hath created all things, both the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are, both things to act and things to be acted upon." (2 Nephi 2:11, 13-14.)

Lehi seems to be saying that the existence of good and evil, happiness and misery, argues for purpose in man's existence, which in turn argues for the existence of God. Indeed, the earth itself argues for God's existence: without God there could have been no earth, Lehi says. Alma stated this even more clearly: ". . . all things denote there is a God; yea, even the earth, and all things that are upon the face of it, yea, and its motion, yea, and also all the planets which move in their regular form do witness that there is a Supreme Creator." (Alma 30:44; see also Psalm 139:14-16; D&C 88:46-47; Moses 6:63.) Much of this book is devoted to an examination of the argument for God based upon order and design in nature. It is a powerful argument, but it is being challenged by many in the world today who believe that order and design can be accounted for without God.

Other evidences include some of the sublime attributes of man himself, such as the love he can feel toward another human being, the existence of hope in moments of despair, the welling up of joy within him as he reacts to beauty, the mercy and compassion he can feel toward one less fortunate than himself, and even the humor that often makes his existence seem more worthwhile. Could man possess such divine attributes if he were not the creative product, the very offspring, of a divine Father in heaven?

Surely my intuitive conviction that such human attributes have a divine origin contributes to my testimony that God lives. As I try to analyze this testimony, however, these arguments seem somewhat less important, perhaps, than four others. The "arguments" discussed below are more a matter of personal experience than logical polemics, but each has some logical validity.

When we are dealing with witnesses instead of the objective data upon which much of science is based, we could be dealing with liars. Thus conclusions based upon the testimonies of witnesses have this limitation, but science has often made vast strides in spite of it, simply because men do not tend to be liars when they are bearing solemn testimony.

There are and have been men who have borne and do bear personal testimonies of experiences with God. Some claim to have communicated directly with God, to have heard his actual voice, to have witnessed his form and substance, and to have felt the influence of his Spirit upon their own. Some have claimed that they have received a commission from God to communicate the knowledge they receive to the rest of the human race. These are the prophets.

Their claims are worth investigating. If they are not true, if the men are liars, we might at least learn something about the operation of human nature and be able to protect ourselves in the future from such deceivers. On the other hand, if they are telling the truth, the information they might be able to communicate to us could be more important than any other knowledge.

But how can we discern whether a man is lying or telling the truth? Particularly if the man lived in a completely different culture some 2,000 to 6,000 years ago? Probably the task is impossible if the conclusion must be absolute and scientifically valid. It is possible, however, to apply a host of scholastic and scientific criteria. If all who testify claim to have spoken with the same God, for example, we can investigate the content of the reported messages to see if it is internally consistent. Occasionally (rarely) it is possible to compare what these prophets claim to be truth with information gained through application of the scientific method. It is nearly always possible to examine a prophet's testimony in the light of the life he led. The motives of known liars (often a simple desire to obtain worldly goods or renown) have sometimes become apparent when their lives have been examined.

In my personal evaluation of the prophets of the Bible, the Book of Mormon, and the restored church, I see the marks of honest men and not the motives of the hoaxer. The detailed examination of this statement would be a worthy way to fill one or more volumes. Yet the final conclusions would still remain personal, because formal proof is probably not to be had. Consider the extent of the record available for study:

There are the several ancient prophets, including Abraham and Moses. They lived so long ago that we cannot evaluate them as witnesses in much detail, and secondary sources such as the writings of Josephus are limited. Other Old Testament records are somewhat more extensive. Consider the majestic testimony of Isaiah (e.g., Isaiah 6), the miracles of Elijah (e.g., 1 Kings 18:17-40), the marvelous story of Ezekiel about the strange vehicle that brought the "likeness of the glory of the Lord" to call Ezekiel to be a prophet to the Israelites in their captivity (Ezekiel 1 to 3), or all the minor prophets with their major messages. These are men telling the world that God himself has spoken to them. If only we knew more of their lives and could better understand their times!

The New Testament prophets are closer to our time, and their writings strike a more responsive chord. [^1] A number of them write as personal witnesses of divine manifestations, while a few are secondary witnesses. Of the authors of the four Gospels, Matthew and John personally witnessed the miraculous events they record, including particularly the resurrection of Jesus Christ, while Mark and Luke were friends of the apostles but not firsthand witnesses. Much of what Mark writes is similar to Matthew's account, although it may have been written first. Luke was a physician, and his account bears the marks of the inquiring scientific mind. He may have interviewed a number of the witnesses, including perhaps Mary, the mother of Jesus.

Luke tells us of the conversion of Paul, and Paul makes specific reference in his own writings to the miraculous events described by Luke. (See Acts 9:1-21; 22:6-21; 26:12-23; 1 Corinthians 15:8.) Peter's story is also told by the Gospel writers, and Peter then bears personal testimony. Consider his reference to the events that took place with the Savior on the Mount of Transfiguration (Matthew 17:1-6):

"For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty.

"For he received from God the Father honour and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

"And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy mount.

"We have also a more sure word of prophecy. . . ." (2 Peter 1:16-19.)

John's personal witness is also impressive. (1 John 1:3, 5; Rev. 1:9-19.)

Much of the discussion in this book is based upon revelations received by Joseph Smith, especially the restored writings of Moses and Abraham. Joseph Smith is a modern prophet by whom we have volumes of personal written testimony and whose life can be examined in intricate detail. No better possibility exists to examine the prophetic claims. Sometimes the liberal atheist condescendingly tells us that a prophet, though personally sincere, was nevertheless mentally deluded in some way. He may have thought that he had a communication with God, but really it was just a dream or hallucination. It is difficult to apply this interpretation to the writings of any of the prophets, but it is especially difficult with Joseph Smith. Either he is telling the truth or he has fabricated an elaborate and intricate set of lies, which he maintained in a consistent form throughout his lifetime, finally sealing his testimony with his life. The following statement of Joseph Smith does not sound like that of a self-deluded man: "I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!" (Joseph Smith 2:17.)

With Oliver Cowdery he declared: "The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened. We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us." (D&C 110:1-2.)

And with Sidney Rigdon he wrote: "And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives! For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God." (D&C 76:22-24.)

Here were witnessed events that occurred in the presence of others. Was it all some evil conspiracy designed to achieve a secret diabolical end? The record tells of a movement, a church, having righteous goals and being pushed forward by good and righteous men. The movement is still growing, and some of the literal and spiritual descendants of these men are my personal friends. I cannot believe that the basic goodness of those now leading The Church of Jesus Christ of Latterday Saints could be the result of a scheme that was originally a fraud. Furthermore, the president, apostles, and patriarch leading the Church today are sustained as prophets to receive revelations for the Church. They are our contemporaries, and their teachings and their lives can be evaluated. My evaluation has led to a personal acceptance of their divine callings. For these and other reasons, I can accept as prophets of God Joseph Smith and the men who have since occupied his position.

A scholarly approach to a study of the communications purported to have come from God might serve two purposes: If the communications collected together under the claimed inspiration of God and accepted by a people as scripture prove to be internally consistent, then we will have a more or less objective argument in favor of their divinity. In my studies, I have found this consistency.

On the other hand, when purported communications do not agree with this body of scriptural doctrine, we might be suspicious that they are either fraudulent or from some supernatural source other than God. Indeed, the Lord declared to Moses and the Israelites that the test of consistency was more important than that of miraculous works: "If there arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and giveth thee a sign or a wonder, And the sign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spake unto thee, saying, Let us go after other gods, which thou hast not known, and let us serve them; Thou shalt not hearken unto the words of that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams. . . ." (Deuteronomy 13:1-3.)

As I thumbed through the scriptures, making a list of my favorites that illustrate this point, it soon became apparent that there are far too many excellent examples for any kind of detailed analysis here. Let us consider just one example from the Doctrine and Covenants. This was the scripture that first deeply impressed me with such an approach to testimony. I was staying for a few days in a distant town in the home of a former bishop under whom I had served in a bishopric. He and his family had just left, and I was alone for an hour or so before driving to the airport. I felt slightly depressed for reasons that were difficult to pinpoint or understand. I had been traveling some and had thus been exposed to some of the materialistic, technological aspects of our world. Furthermore, I had been studying the almost surrealistic advances being made in modern biology, and I was troubled by their possible effects upon our society. All this had led to some vague uneasiness—not exactly a weakening of testimony, but a nebulous feeling of insecurity.

In this mood, I remembered a scripture I had heard in a sacrament meeting talk a few weeks before. I went to my friend's bedroom and found the Doctrine and Covenants on his nightstand. I found the last two verses of section 121 and was immediately overcome by their beauty and by the manner in which they summarized, in so few words, the gospel requirements and the divine promises. My entire being was suffused with the conviction that these words were simply too sublime to be the creation of the mind of Joseph Smith. For centuries men had discussed these things, but never before (as the Spirit bore witness to me at that moment) had they done it so well. These had to be the words of God. I read the two verses four times, the tears welling up in my eyes in response to their beauty. Then I had them memorized, and I repeated them several times on my way to the airport.

Of course, the skeptic could not react to these verses as I did. This was a moment of truth, a special communion between God and me. But let me try to recall my feelings, as I read from those words (D&C 121:45-46):

"Let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household of faith." Here is the supreme commandment. This is what a life patterned after that of Christ is all about. This is the divine love called charity that Christ was able to feel toward all his fellow beings and that we, if we are to become perfect, must also experience. (See Ether 12:34 and Moroni 7:45-48.) Yes, we must feel this charity deeply within us toward all men, but we are nevertheless justified in loving our brothers and sisters in the gospel, "the household of faith," with a little extra measure of this divine Christian love.

". . . and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly." Here is the other part of the formula that will lead to exaltation: thinking proper thoughts. Yet we are not admonished to cloister ourselves in some monastery, forcing ourselves to speak the word virtue for hours on end. Rather, as we go about our business, anxiously engaged in good causes, virtue is to garnish our thoughts as the vegetables garnish a fine meal. Here, then, in just a few words is the way to a successful life in Christ: charity or love, and controlled virtuous thinking.

Then come the marvelous promises of the rewards developing out of such a life. First the immediate rewards: "then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven. The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion." No greater blessings could be promised to mankind. More than anything at that moment, I needed a renewal of my confidence in the presence of God—and it came as I was immersed in the beauty of this scripture. Who could ask for anything more than a reception of God's priestly doctrines by revelation? And how could one's joy be more full than in companionship with the Holy Ghost?

But the ultimate promises were even more marvelous to contemplate: ". . . and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever." Here are allusions to the ultimate state of a perfected man or woman. Charity and virtue can make us kings and priests, queens and priestesses, even gods. (D&C 76:56-58; 132:20.) Yet if we reach this perfected state we shall rule only on the basis of truth and righteousness. On such a basis, we shall not need to obtain our dominion by force; rather, it shall flow unto us throughout all eternity as a natural consequence of righteous actions. Surely only God himself could express such a simple yet perfect formula for eternal progression and such supreme rewards.

James tells us that we must "ask in faith, nothing wavering" (James 1:6), but the most complete explanation of what this means is given by Moroni near the end of the Book of Mormon. This is appropriate, since the reader of the book must either reject its truth or accept it on faith. If the book is really true, then rejection means giving up blessings for all eternity; acceptance could mean returning to the Father's presence. So the stakes are high. But how can one know of its truth? Moroni explains:

". . . when ye shall read these things . . . remember how merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men . . . and ponder it in your hearts.

"And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost.

"And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things. . . .

"And ye may know that he is, by the power of the Holy Ghost. . . ." (Moroni 10:3-5, 7.)

This marvelous scripture deserves careful reading and analysis. First we must receive the word of the Lord, read it, and ponder it in our hearts, along with a realization of God's other manifestations (mercy) to the children of men. It is not enough just to be casually curious. We must pay the price of study and deep thought. We must be obedient to the principles in which we are gaining faith. Then, when we are prepared, we are admonished to ask in prayer if the words are true, according to the form set by Christ: addressing the Eternal Father, God, in the name of his Son, Jesus Christ. But this is not to be a cavalier prayer, one motivated only by curiosity; it must be totally sincere and guided by real intent. A man once said: "I prayed to see if the Book of Mormon were true, just like it said to do. I didn't get an answer. But I wasn't surprised; I knew I wouldn't!" Furthermore, when one asks God, one must have faith in Christ. That is, one must already have examined the evidence and decided that the case is a good one. The study and the pondering have led to a faith in Christ, if not the Book of Mormon. Then, if all the conditions have been properly met, God will manifest the truth unto the seeker by the power of the Holy Ghost. That is, God will show the seeker that the book is true. Thousands testify that this promise has been fulfilled in their behalf.

But that isn't all. The procedure is a general one. One may know the truth of all things, including the very existence of God, by the power of the Holy Ghost. Presumably the formula of study, meditation, proper prayer, sincerity, real intent, and faith in Christ must also be followed when one wants to know the truth of things besides the Book of Mormon.

Yet experiences in which one's testimony has been confirmed by the Holy Ghost are not easy for a person to tell. He knows of their reality, but he also knows that one who has not had such an experience will never really be able to understand. He knows that the skeptic will think he understands—think that the one who bears the testimony was simply gullible or a dreamer. Thus such experiences are passed mostly by word of mouth between good friends, brothers and sisters in the gospel.

I have presented such a story in telling of my reactions to the last two verses of section 121 in the Doctrine and Covenants. It is easy to see how a skeptic might reject my account; for example, he could speak of my subconscious wish fulfillment. But let it be clear that, while he would be theorizing, it was, after all, my experience. Should I be expected to let someone who may not have known the presence of the Holy Ghost explain my experience to me?

TESTING RELIGIOUS TRUTHS

How can one test for himself the validity of statements purported to have been received by revelation? One can and one should approach such statements in the same manner that he might approach any scientific statement. This will be discussed in Chapter 3. He should see if the statement agrees with other knowledge, including scientific fact and theory. It is foolish, however, to depend upon this approach exclusively. Many religious statements simply cannot be tested in this way—suitable facts and data are not available.

Sometimes the approach can be applied to prophecies. If a prophecy does not come to pass, then it was not a statement from God, as was explained to us long ago by Moses. (Deuteronomy 18:21-22.) Moses also implied that what the prophet says must be in agreement with what other prophets have said. (Deuteronomy 13:1-3.) A fulfilled prophecy could be luck or insight into developing trends. This test is especially easy to apply in our day when we have so much scripture. When a man claims to be speaking in the name of God but tells us something contrary to existing scripture (telling us to "go after other gods"), we should be extremely wary.

Ultimately the only valid test is to ask God himself in the manner prescribed by the prophets. This includes pondering the problem, prayer, faith in Christ, sincerity and real intent, and obedience to principles. Sometimes these are the only approaches—objective science just won't work. As we seek to know the word of God about the broad, general things constituting testimony, so we seek to know the truth of his word in all applicable cases, regardless of how minor. As Peter told us, scriptures came through the inspiration of the Holy Ghost and must be interpreted and understood in the same way. (2 Peter 1:20-21.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Man created God in his mind as an explanation for the universe, especially for events that he could not otherwise comprehend, including various natural phenomena (e.g., the creation), injustices in society, and death. This interesting argument is mentioned in one form or another by virtually all philosopher-agnostics or atheists. It is easy to marshal evidence for the idea, since men have from time immemorial created in their minds a god or gods with many and varied attributes. Volumes have been written to document this process. Yet because there are false gods, we cannot logically conclude that all gods are false—that there is no true and living God. If one does not want to believe in God (or in witches, hobgoblins, ESP, or flying saucers), one can always cite the negative cases. But these become meaningless if there is a single positive case. Charles Darwin, The Voyage of the Beagle, second ed. (London: John Murray, 1845). (Reprinted in several editions, including paperback.)
