Frank B. Salisbury, Creation ( 1976)

2

Counter Arguments

In the spring of 1969, Student Life, the student newspaper at Utah State University, ran a series of articles entitled "Are Religious Systems Necessary?" These were written mostly by faculty members, and while a few defended religious systems, most concluded that such systems were unnecessary. Many of these negative articles were written by persons who claimed to be atheists or who were presently inactive Latter-day Saints. Many of these writers were also outstanding scholars and scientists, for whom I had a great deal of respect.

I waited eagerly for the appearance of each article, because here was a chance to see the foundations of belief of persons who rejected the existence of God. What compelling logical arguments would cause one to give up his church or to deny the testimonies of the prophets? What glaring weaknesses were there in the foundations of my own faith? The articles should provide answers.

No really new ideas were forthcoming. The reasons these writers didn't believe in God were familiar arguments that I had heard and considered most of my life. When all the articles had been published, it was apparent that belief or disbelief in God was a highly personal matter; those persons were not convinced by my arguments nor I by theirs. There were no totally persuasive reasons for their disbelief—which is not to say that their arguments were obviously foolish. Indeed, they can be highly instructive. I have combined and condensed them into five principal ideas.

MAN CREATED GOD

I believe in God not in spite of the negative cases but because God has revealed himself. Numerous men, the prophets, claim to have communicated directly with God. The scriptures don't argue philosophically, saying: "There must be a God because—." Rather, they say: "Thus saith the Lord . . .," "I am the Lord, and there is none else . . .," "The word of the Lord came unto me, saying . . .," or "The words of the Lord, which he spake . . . ." Let it be clear that we believe in God not because he provides explanations for otherwise inexplicable phenomena. Often (as we shall see in relation to the creation) the phenomena remain inexplicable in spite of God's word—he reveals nothing about them. Rather, we believe in God because he has revealed himself—to witnesses, by the beauty of his word, and to many of us personally. What could be simpler?

SCIENCE TRIUMPHS OVER RELIGION

But has science won an argument about how to lead a life that will return one to God's presence? In general, science knows enough not to become involved in the great arguments of religion relating to the salvation of men's souls. Science does not have the data to consider such problems and is well aware of this.

Actually, science hasn't even done a very outstanding job of telling us how we can best live with one another. This might well be a valid area for scientific inquiry. One assembles objective data about the interactions of human society, and then one draws conclusions about how we might best act. But this is an extremely complex process, and it has yet to be very successful. One problem is that social scientists often assume that what is average or normal (indulged in by the most people) is also desirable. God, speaking through prophets, has never taken this approach. Often the true way of life leading to happiness and salvation, as revealed by God, may be ignored by an entire people, and the prophets' admonitions are directed against all of them. It remains to be seen who will win this argument, but following God's word is certainly a logical approach.

We shall see that God has told us little about how the universe functions, the domain of science, but much about the nature of mankind. Yet when God does speak of physical things (e.g., the Word of Wisdom, the creation), his word is far ahead of science.

GOD'S OMNIPOTENCE AND AN IMPERFECT WORLD

The argument appears to be foolproof, and much of mankind is presently so evil that one can only sympathize with today's youth or anyone else whose atheistic convictions are based upon it. Yet the argument is not logically conclusive, and since there are positive evidences for God's existence, we are entitled to be skeptical of it. The argument has the following form: A certain set of God's attributes is stated. But a God having such attributes is incompatible with the facts of contemporary life. Consequently, such a God cannot exist—does not exist. The logic is infallible. But what about a God having attributes other than those stated in the initial set?

The scriptures tell us about the purposes of creation: "Satan . . . came before me, saying—Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor." (Moses 4:1.) Lucifer apparently proposed to do the very thing that those who present this argument assume that God would do: create a perfect world and redeem everyone. "But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me—Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever." (Moses 4:2.) The Son apparently recognized that Satan's idea might not be a feasible one. He did not suggest an alternate plan but merely said: "Father, thy will be done."

"Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down." (Moses 1:3.) One issue, then, hinged upon agency. God had provided the preexistent spirits of mankind with agency, an ability to choose for themselves. Satan thought that he could create a perfect earth for all the spirits of mankind, allowing them finally to be redeemed in the presence of God, but, in the process, destroying the very agency that God their Father had given them.

Probably we can deduce from this record that Satan's idea was rejected because it was an impossible idea. God is omnipotent in the sense that he can do all things that are possible, anything that he wants to do—but in his own omniscience, his perfect knowledge, he will only want to do what is possible. (Abraham 3:17.) We can apparently conclude that it was not possible for the spirits of men to be saved in the presence of God without the agency that he had given them.

In speaking of these same events in the preexistence, the Lord told Abraham: "And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down . . . and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell; And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them. . . ." (Abraham 3:24-25.) Obviously, if man is to keep commandments, he must have the agency to accept or to reject these commandments.

This is the real world in which we live. It is not a world where there can be no evil, as Lucifer apparently proposed. Rather, it is a world where men progress toward godhood by exercising their agency. According to the eternal scheme of things (not arbitrary laws established by God but natural laws that have always existed), man can become godlike in no other way. He must be tested or proven if his soul is to develop. This being the law of development, then individuals will make mistakes. Unfortunately, some make terrible mistakes, committing the atrocities mentioned above. Others build one small mistake upon another until virtually all their values have been warped; they are no longer in the way that leads back to their Father's presence.

Yet God is just and merciful. Some souls, as many as possible, will use his plan to become like he is. He has established patterns of repentance and the atoning sacrifice of his Son, so that all who really desire may become like him in spite of their mistakes. In his mercy and wisdom, he has even provided that the very worst of us (except those who deny the Holy Ghost) may achieve a glory that "surpasses all understanding." (D&C 76:89.) But in this mortal phase of eternal progression, we can expect evil in the world, and indeed, today, in the dispensation of the fulness of times, we can expect the world to be mostly evil. (See Joseph Smith 1:30, 41-42; Moses 7:60.) The parable of the wheat and the tares tells us clearly that the wicked shall coexist with the righteous until the end of this world. (Matthew 13:24-43.)

There are several arguments against God that have the same logical format as this one. The pattern is to assume certain attributes about God, compare them with the observed facts, and, when the two prove to be incompatible, conclude that there is no God. Again, let us be perfectly clear about the logic. The god described by the assumptions surely does not exist. He is a dead god. But what about the real God not so described?

Charles Darwin apparently began to lose faith in God as a creator by such an argument. He, in common with many other naturalists of his time, assumed that God would create all species individually and immutably, each one perfectly adapted for its location. On the voyage of the Beagle, Darwin compared the flora and fauna of two similar but widely separated volcanic islands: "It is possible that the islands of the Cape de Verd group resemble, in all their physical conditions, far more closely the Galapagos Islands, than these latter physically resemble the coast of [nearby South] America, yet the aboriginal inhabitants of the two groups are totally unlike; those of the Cape de Verd Islands bearing the impress of [nearby] Africa, as the inhabitants of the Galapagos Archipelago are stamped with that of America." He asks why the Galapagos organisms were "created on American types of organization." [^1] Instead of revising his assumptions about God's means of creation, Darwin questioned the existence of God as a creator, although it would be many years before he would say: "I gradually came to disbelieve in Christianity as a divine revelation." [^2]

Today the biochemical evolutionist points to a close similarity in molecular structures of the proteins of apes and men. He asks, "If God had created men and apes, why should these similarities exist?" He is assuming that he knows how God would create things without similarities, and he is implying that since things are not this way, there must be no creator God.

What foolishness! What conceit! The arguer is brash enough to believe that he can discern the motives and the methods of God! A more logical approach would be to investigate God's existence by studying the direct evidences: revelation and the prophets. Becoming convinced that God exists, one might then study biology, not to discover the trivial apparent discrepancies, but to behold the manifestations of nature that testify of God's creative attributes.

Obviously, God did not create the species as rigidly as was assumed by eighteenth and nineteenth century naturalists. Nor, as we shall see, do the scriptural accounts of creation ever say that he did. We have been learning about some of the adaptibility and flexibility in God's organic creations and thereby gaining a little more insight into his attributes as creator. Why shouldn't we learn about God this way?

NATURALISM

It should be apparent to nearly anyone familiar with science that this is an argument based upon faith. What the argument really should say is: "Science has done a good job of explaining natural phenomena, and probably it will do such a good job in the future, that the concept of God will not be necessary." The one who expresses this argument is expressing his faith in the future of science. Surely science has not explained all phenomena at the moment. The revelations and personal experiences referred to in Chapter 1 are examples. Miracles of healing provide other examples. We shall see in later chapters that even creation, thought to be so well explained, certainly is not.

Besides, when one argues by alternative explanations, one must show that the facts fit one alternative better than the other. If both fit equally well, no decision can be made. It is not enough to show that the universe can be explained without God. It would be necessary to show that the universe cannot be explained with God.

EVIL CHRISTIANS

Such an argument apparently implies that, if Christ were the Son of God and perfect, anyone who professes to believe this should be perfect also. This is an illogical and unfair argument. The Christian doesn't expect the scientist to be a perfect scientist just because he believes in science. Nor is there anything in the Christian's religion, in the revelations claimed to be from God, that says that mere profession of belief makes one perfect. As we have seen above, revelation teaches that man has his agency but is far from perfect in his use of it. The Christian is hoping for perfection. He is working toward it. But often he is far from it—and sometimes he may even lose sight of it as a goal, although others still think he is a Christian.

Actually, the argument, if softened a bit, is a valid one. If God has revealed a way of life that will make men happier, leading them toward perfection, then we might expect that those who accept this way of life will, on the average at least, be happier and more perfect: "Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them." (Matthew 7:20.) ". . . that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou has sent me." (John 17:21. See also Matthew 5:14-16.) There have been periods during the earth's history when "Christians" were among the most evil of all people. Rather than implying that Christ was not the Son of God, this only implies that they were not living his teachings. On the other hand, there have been periods when groups of people have truly applied the revealed teachings of God and, as a result, have become far happier and more perfect than mankind as a whole. (For example, the City of Enoch or the early Christians: Moses 7:16-21; 4 Nephi; Acts 2:44-47.) Of course, this is a rather subjective statement, but let me add another one: Really converted Christians are good people. Indeed, they are the best that I have ever known. Those who live according to gospel principles are known by their fruits. Frequently, investigators join the Church because of what they have seen in the lives of some of its members.

The arguments against God are, then, all inconclusive. We can predict that this would have to be so by realizing that there could be a God in the universe who could create a universe that appeared not to need him, and who might be powerful enough to control the minds of his children so that they could never find him. Perhaps such a pernicious God would not be worth seeking in the first place, but the point is that attempts to disprove God's existence must always be doomed to failure. On the other hand, God is proven for us if he reveals himself to us.

It is frightening to think of the importance such negative arguments could have in the minds of those who accept them. They could keep a person from searching for God or from trying to live according to his precepts as part of the search. Indeed, they might keep one out of the celestial kingdom. Could it be that they are presented sometimes less as sincere philosophical arguments against God than as excuses, offered so that one can avoid following God's laws? (See Matthew 13:15.)

After study and prayer and based upon the ideas discussed in these first two chapters, I can accept God's existence and his word. Hence, in attempting to understand the universe, God's word must come first. This is the first premise or ground rule of this book. How could it logically be otherwise if God lives and speaks through prophets? If God and science conflict, I will have to wait for more knowledge in science. After all, if God created the earth—which I fully believe—then he is the one who should know.

Yet his word on creation is extremely limited. As we shall see, there is much that he has not told us, particularly in relation to the mechanisms of creation. That is, there are limitations from the source of knowledge. Furthermore, much of what he has told us is difficult to comprehend, requiring much expenditure of effort, much seeking for the Holy Ghost. That is, there are limitations of interpretation. These statements of limitation may be thought of as the second and third ground rules.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The equipment of science: making measurements. Much of the appearance of science is concerned with the paraphernalia that have been devised to obtain objective data. The pieces of equipment in our biochemist's laboratory are examples. Their purpose is to make measurements, producing the objective data to which logical processes may then be applied. With a ruler, anyone should be able to measure the length of an object within a certain range of error determined by his ability to resolve the markings on the ruler. If this range of error is too great for the logical processes to be applied to the measurements, then more refined methods must be devised. Magnifying devices may be employed, temperatures must be controlled (to account for expansion and contraction), and ultimately the object may be measured in relation to a specific wavelength of light (e.g., from a sodium vapor lamp). All bodies in the universe having mass obey the law of gravity. The earth and moon are bodies in the universe having mass. A green alga, a moss, a fern, an elm, a pine, a geranium, and a host of other plants have chloroplasts containing chlorophyll. The Articles of Faith, pp. 164-65.
[^2] The logic of science. Though science in the popular mind may often be equivalent to the paraphernalia devised to make measurements, the logic of science is at least equally important. Neither phase can get along by itself. The logic of science was well worked out by the ancient Greeks, particularly by Aristotle, who lived from 384 to 322 B.C. Yet emphasis was not on making measurements, so it was not possible to take full advantage of the logic. Now measurements may be emphasized, leading sometimes to sterile data. For science to amount to much, it must combine objective data obtained by the most advanced techniques of measurement with valid and truly creative logic. The earth and moon are bodies having mass in the universe. The earth and moon obey the law of gravity. These same plants photosynthesize. John R. Platt, "Strong Inference," Science, vol. 164 (1964): 347-52.
