Frank B. Salisbury, Creation ( 1976)

3

Science

We are exploring on the campus of a great university. We cautiously enter a door labeled "Laboratory of Biochemistry." A man in a white jacket is busy at the dials and knobs of a complex piece of machinery, a spectrophotometer. As he adjusts the knobs and inserts and removes small square vials of colored liquid, he reads figures from a meter, and an assistant records them. The laboratory is crammed with glassware and expensive equipment. By a rack of test tubes placed on a towel, we see several pipettes plus reagent bottles and flasks. A unit about the size of a washing machine is humming loudly in one corner; it is marked "refrigerated centrifuge." In a small attached room, colored lights are flashing in sequence on a shiny big box labeled "scintillation counter." There are balances, vacuum pumps, chromatography cabinets, a gel electrophoresis apparatus, and on one bench an apparatus that is recognizable to us all: a food blender.

What is going on? Is the man in the white jacket some modern wizard who is developing a diabolical new terror to be loosed on mankind? Are his black arts and secret rites incomprehensible to ordinary mortals? Or is he a super brain with a mind full of complex equations that will save mankind from its ills?

The essence of what our biochemist is doing is much simpler: he is asking questions. The questions are addressed to nature, and they arise from the answers obtained from previous questions. The process is experimentation, and while it is part of science and specialized in many ways, in principle it is identical to the way in which we all go about learning things; it is the method of experience and logic.

You and I may wonder if a certain adjustment will improve the color on our TV screen; we try it to see what happens. Our biochemist wonders how a certain chemical known to be present in smoked meat, say, will affect a certain enzyme, a protein, that interests him; he tries it to find out. The enzyme is purified and prepared, the substrate (substance acted upon by the enzyme) is added at time zero, and the reaction controlled by the enzyme is stopped with a protein denaturant after five minutes.

The preparation is then centrifuged to get rid of the precipitated enzyme, chemicals are added that combine with the product of the reaction to form a colored substance, and the intensity of this color is measured in the spectrophotometer. All this is done with and without the compound from the smoked meat. Logic tells us that if the color is less intense in the reaction tubes containing the meat compound, the chemical must inhibit the action of the enzyme. A question has been asked and an answer obtained.

Perhaps this sounds complicated. In a way it is. It often takes some doing to ask nature sophisticated questions. Yet in principle it is as simple as our own learning by experience and logic. And it is clearly not magic, nor only for super brains. Any normal person willing to spend the time and effort could understand exactly what is going on. Anyone.

Much of our biochemist's preparation for his experiment involved being taught, as when one person is taught by another, or when a prophet is taught by God through revelation. That is how the biochemist learned about the enzyme in the first place. We don't learn everything by experience. In science, the answers to the questions are published so the work of one scientist can build upon that of another.

KNOWLEDGE BY EXPERIENCE AND LOGIC

Teaching and revelation both come from the outside: Another intelligence, the teacher or God, communicates with the mind of the learner. Our experiences also come from the outside through our senses, but the logic is from within. This is where the individual has an opportunity to exercise his own mental talents.

James E. Talmage says that "not a truth has ever been made the property of humankind except through the power of that great Spirit [the Holy Ghost] who exists to do the bidding of the Father and the Son." The Book of Mormon emphasizes that all good things, including the good actions of men, come ultimately from God. (See Omni 25; Alma 5:40; Ether 4:12; Moroni 7:12-13; 10:6.) For our purposes, however, we can think of experience and logic as an internally complete approach to truth. Insofar as the experiences and the steps of reason are complete and lead to a consistent picture, they become independent. It is not necessary for us to take anyone's word, even God's, for the idea that two objects added to two others make a total of four. We are, as the scriptures tell us (e.g., D&C 88:11-13), dependent upon God for our ability to think in the first place; for our abilities to conceive of twoness and fourness. Granted these abilities, however, the conclusion is independent and internally complete. Much faith must be applied in scientific endeavors (faith in one's abilities, in the scientific method, etc.), but in the sense that a logical conclusion based upon valid experience is internally complete and consistent, it is the opposite of faith. Once the conclusion has been clearly demonstrated, there is no longer a need for faith; belief has become knowledge.

WHAT IS SCIENCE?

Science is an especially refined and formalized application of learning by experience and reason, just as in daily life data are accumulated by experience and then logic is applied to these data to arrive at conclusions. There are many pitfalls, so science has formalized the approach to restrict or at least to minimize or account for its limitations. To begin with, the data obtained by experience must be objective. That is, the data must not be colored in any way by the thought processes of the one who obtains them. It follows that if the data are truly objective, they will be the same regardless of who obtains them. Science is, then, first of all impersonal and based upon objective data.

To obtain more detailed objective data, the scientist has devised the telescope, light and electron microscopes, infrared camera, gas chromatograph, pH meter, electronic recorders, cathode ray tube, and an almost infinite array of other special devices. Equally important are his special techniques. The science of statistics is primarily concerned with mathematical statements about the extent to which data are objective. Mathematics is a highly formalized way of applying logic to objective data. Indeed, the everyday steps of logic used by us all can be stated precisely with mathematical symbolism.

Syllogisms of logic can be valid or invalid, and the truth of a conclusion is in a sense independent of the validity of the logic. For example, a conclusion may be valid but not true if the premises are not true. On the other hand, a conclusion may be true but not valid if it is not implied by the premises. Consider, for example, a valid deduction:

This is a valid conclusion, because the minor (second) premise is included in the major premise. Since we feel confident that the major premise is true and we know by our definitions that the minor premise is true, we believe that the conclusion is also true. Since we have not tested all bodies in the universe as to their obeying the law of gravity, however, we cannot be certain about the truth of the major premise; hence the syllogism does not prove the truth of the conclusion, although direct tests do. In any case, this is a good example of an Aristotlean syllogism, illustrating the process of deductive logic in which specific conclusions are deduced from general statements.

A more common procedure in scientific work is that of induction. Actually, when the inductive process is set up as a syllogism, it is seen to be an invalid one. Nevertheless, it is an extremely important tool in science. Consider the following:

By our definitions, the earth and the moon are bodies in the universe. By observation, both are seen to obey the law of gravity. Thus both premises are true. Yet the conclusion is clearly not valid, since all bodies in the universe were not observed. We have only taken a sample of the bodies in the universe and induced from this sample a generalization about all bodies. We may intuitively feel that the conclusion must be true, but we have certainly not demonstrated it. In induction, we derive general conclusions from particular premises. Consider another example:

Obviously this is invalid for the same reason that the first example was. Not all plants were examined. Furthermore, the major premise is not always true. Chloroplasts do not develop in plants grown in total darkness, for example. And, in addition, no real relationship was shown between the chloroplasts and photosynthesis; only a correlation is indicated. Perhaps plants use their nuclei to photosynthesize, and it was only a coincidence that all plants examined had chloroplasts. Actually, we know, based on much other information, that photosynthesis occurs in the chloroplasts. Hence, the conclusion is essentially true—but we do know of a few plants that have nonfunctional chloroplasts and that therefore do not photosynthesize.

All this illustrates the complexities and the pitfalls encountered in the application of logic to objective data. We must be especially careful to avoid drawing positive conclusions based upon correlations that do not really indicate cause and effect. We shall encounter examples in subsequent chapters.

Unfortunately, many so-called scientists are preoccupied with the techniques required to obtain the data, tending perhaps to overlook the importance of the logic. Only a small minority of scientists at the doctoral level have ever had a course in logic. In spite of its importance, they learn most of it by on-the-job training rather than formal classroom exposure.

As it turns out, some branches of science, such as nuclear physics and molecular biology, have been much more successful at applying logical principles than others; hence they have been much more productive. Their workers may not have had a class in logic, but a strong tradition has developed among them so that they are able to concentrate intently upon the business of recognizing significant questions and devising powerful and elegant ways to ask them of nature (set-up experiments). A useful approach is to devise hypotheses (suggested explanations for some phenomenon) that can be conclusively eliminated by a suitable experiment. Often it is much easier to disprove a hypothesis than it is to prove one. The hypothesis that is not disproven gains in probability of being true. Such a powerful and highly successful approach in science has been called strong inference. [^1]

In one way, the scientific process differs rather markedly from learning in everyday life: The results are published. Science would not be science if it were not for publication. The circular steps of the scientific method must be allowed to continue over intervals of time exceeding the lifetime of an individual scientist, and the process must expand from one scientist to another. Without publication, science might be fun for the individual, but it would not be profitable for mankind. The statement "publish or perish" might imply a lack of appreciation by university administrators for good teachers, but a person cannot truly be a scientist unless his or her experimental results are published. Without publishing, a person perishes as a scientist.

CREATIVITY IN SCIENCE

Perhaps the above discussion implies that science is a cut-and-dried mechanical process. One simply plays the game according to the rules (collects data, applies logic, etc.), and the results automatically appear. Measurements are poured into the scientific machine, the crank is turned, and great discoveries emerge.

This is not the case at all. At several points in the scientific process, creativity is essential to real progress. This is true for recognition of the problem in the first place. Often data have been available for decades or longer before anyone manages to formulate a suitable question from them. In some ways, this is even encouraged in our schools by the manner in which they train scientists. It is easy to teach specific facts but extremely difficult to teach creativity. The student may get the idea that the field of science he is studying is complete, with nothing more to learn.

Creativity is also essential to the formulation of hypotheses. Often this becomes an intuitive thing in which the scientist, utilizing processes closely similar to those used by artists, writers, and other creative members of our society, formulates an explanation or hypothesis or accomplishes some other creative scientific act without the slightest understanding of the logical thought processes involved. There are numerous examples, such as Kekule's discovery while dozing on a streetcar and dreaming of snakes grabbing their tails in their mouths of the molecular structure of benzene as a ring of carbon atoms. This, of course, is where the Spirit of God or the Holy Ghost might well "quickeneth your understandings." (D&C 88:11.) Nevertheless, once the creative acts have been accomplished and the scientific method carried through to completion, it is usually possible to outline the procedures and logic in a manner that is quite internally consistent and not dependent upon intuitive insights.

There are other steps in the scientific method where creativity can be extremely important. Devising the technical procedures to make certain measurements may require considerable inventive creativity. Often this is where the breakthrough comes. Knowing what tests to perform may also be a highly creative accomplishment. Even publication may involve considerable creativity. If the results are presented poorly, they may not gain attention until someone comes along who is simply a better writer. Sometimes the discovery must be made anew by the second worker.

The importance of publication and presentation of results is well illustrated by Leonardo da Vinci. His diaries show that he was centuries ahead of his colleagues in many of his insights, inventions, and scientific discoveries, yet the information never got beyond the diary and consequently was worthless to the rest of the world.

MODELS AND ABSOLUTE TRUTH

Fundamentally, science is model-building. The scientist seldom hopes to discover absolute reality. He builds mental models that describe the objective data, and these models hopefully will be increasingly accurate descriptions of reality. He has discovered that measurements can always be made to a higher level of exactness, so in that sense, his models may never be absolute truth—or he may at least be unable to know for certain that they represent absolute truth.

There are two kinds of models. In one case, an actual model could be built, or some physical situation can at least be imagined. For example, we can think of matter as consisting of atoms combined to form molecules, each having several described features. This is itself a model, but we can think of the molecules as being like perfectly elastic balls, and on this basis we can better understand such phenomena as temperature, diffusion, pressure of gas, evaporation, etc. The more sophisticated models consist of only mathematical equations. There are equations that describe the characteristics of perfectly elastic balls, for example, and these equations help us to better understand matter (temperature, etc.). Sir Isaac Newton's equations for gravitational forces were developed into a mathematical model of the solar system. Albert Einstein's equations for relativity formed another model that in some highly detailed ways accounted somewhat better for our observations of the solar system. So it goes.

Revelation, unlike our models, may present absolute truth. If God says man can be saved only by baptism in water by one having suitable authority, then that is a law of God and is absolute reality. Science never claims this kind of absolute truth. Nevertheless, since God has been silent about most of the natural universe, science is the only way we can even approach an understanding of reality in those areas.

WHAT SCIENCE IS NOT

We should be quite clear about what science isn't. Science is never an attempt to explain the universe subjectively (without objective data), nor is it ever an attempt to explain the universe by illogical procedures. Even though the logically invalid procedure of induction must be used, its limitations are carefully defined in a logical way. Attempts to explain the universe subjectively are mysticism, superstition, a belief in magic—and often the efforts of religions not based upon revelation. Philosophy in general is an attempt to explain the universe by subjective means and thus fits in this category.

The statement that the only road to truth is through true science (objective data and logic) is the basic doctrine of logical positivism. Interestingly enough, logical positivism is itself a philosophy based upon a statement of faith (that only science works), and therefore there is no way to know that it is true. Furthermore, logical positivism usually rejects all religions as well as all philosophies besides itself. Obviously, to do so, it must show that the religion does not come from God. This it does not formally do, although it also accepts this conclusion on faith.

In modern scholarship, one may encounter invention and mysticism based upon subjective explanations of the universe. Premises are drawn subjectively (that is, by assumption), and then logical procedures are applied to these premises. The higher criticism of the Bible provides an excellent example. It is assumed that prophecy is not possible; who could know the future? It is assumed that the writing style of a prophet will be the same throughout his life regardless of circumstances or the topic about which he is writing. Other assumptions are also made. It is then concluded, for example, that several authors wrote the books of Genesis or Isaiah. The conclusions may seem highly reasonable, depending, of course, upon how reasonable the initial assumptions seem. It should be clear, however, that this is not an objective scientific procedure, but one more closely akin to that of the ancient Greek philosophers who tried to derive an understanding of the universe from "self-evident" principles. In studying creation, we shall encounter examples of subjective explanations.

Incidentally, Dr. L. Lamar Adams, an Old Testament scholar at the Brigham Young University, directed a computer study of the book of Isaiah. "Several hundred language variables were analyzed by more than 35 researchers, consultants, and their assistants, using 300 computer programs and more than 100 computer tapes." Literary styles were compared for the complete book of Isaiah and portions of eleven other Old Testament books. The computer analysis was completely objective, although it is conceivable that some subjectivity entered into the programming. "The parts of Isaiah most often claimed to have been written by different authors [chapters 1-39 and 40-66] were found in the computerized studies to be more similar in style than those of any other Old Testament books examined." For example, key phrases are repeated frequently in all sections of Isaiah. The study tends to confirm the single authorship of Isaiah.

There are two excellent examples of subjective scholarship in modern theological literature. Rudolph Bultmann of Marburg, Germany, would "demythologize" the scriptures. That is, he would remove from them anything that is miraculous or unscientific—specifically, anything that does not happen to agree with his theologian's understanding of early twentieth century science. Hugh J. Schonfield has written two books, The Passover Plot [^2] and Those Incredible Christians. [^3] The thesis is that the resurrection was a carefully planned plot. These books provide marvelous examples of how extensive and involved conclusions can be drawn from a few subjective assumptions. That is what science is not!

TESTING BY THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD

Having examined the scientific process, let us now look at a question comparable to the one considered at the end of Chapter 2: How can one test the truth of a statement made about the operation of the universe? One could ask God, as admonished by Moroni, but God wants us to expend our own efforts first. (See D&C 9:7-9.) Besides, if a man learns by inspiration that a statement is true or false, the information is valid for him, but he could never publish it in a scientific journal.

One begins testing the validity of a newly encountered scientific statement by examining it in the context of other scientific information: the facts, theories, and hypotheses already at hand. Much scientific information has been tested and proven so many times and in so many ways that we can hardly doubt its validity. If a new statement tends, for example, to contradict the principle of universal gravitation, then we are certainly entitled to be wary of it. Of course, we can only be much less confident about many other scientific statements.

If this approach is inadequate, then the scientific method must be applied—and indeed, this is what is happening in working scientific laboratories all over the world. Questions are formulated, and inductions and deductions are made that suggest ways of testing by searching for more objective data and by applying logic to these data. Here we are talking about research projects that can occupy months, years, or a lifetime. In this book, it will be necessary to restrict ourselves in our testing of scientific ideas to comparison of these ideas with other concepts, either religious or scientific, that have a high probability of being true. Sometimes this approach is necessarily tentative and limited, but it is nearly always rewarding.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Science tries to account for all things without God. It should be clear from our discussions that science per se does no such thing. Science collects objective data and applies logic to these data. And truly objective data relating to God are difficult (impossible?) to obtain, so science can seldom if ever deal with the question. Human errors are always important. The ability to read instruments or to perform some other necessary technique might be an important limitation, but the really important boundaries set by human nature are in the area of human creativity. We have already discussed this in some detail. The scientist must know what to look for, think of the suitable hypothesis, or recognize the important relationship. God's word must come first. Compare the new doctrine, idea, or data with other available knowledge: scripture, prophecy, history, theory, etc. Such an approach may not be conclusive, but it is nearly always an appropriate first step. It is not always easy (who can know everything?), but it can be applied to revealed or scientific information, and it is virtually the only approach that can be taken in a book such as this. Joseph F. Smith, Conference Report, April 1911, pp. 7-8.
[^2] Science disagrees with God's revealed word. Science makes no claim whatsoever to being in possession of ultimate truth; it is only striving to construct models that continually approach reality more closely. On the other hand, while science is trying to find out how the universe works, God already knows. Anything he might reveal to us that proves to be in conflict with the statements of science will thus have to take precedence over these statements. This is our first ground rule. There are inherent statistical variabilities that often limit scientific studies. The biologist speaks of "biological variability," implying frustrating differences between individuals within a species. And sometimes the objective data essential to certain conclusions simply aren't available. It may be that we can never know the history of the earth by applying science, since the relevant data may by now have been obliterated. At the moment, we cannot study the nature of man's spirit or the nature of God because suitable objective data cannot be obtained. Sometimes these limitations of method may be permanent (as when the data are gone forever), or in other cases they may be only temporary (as in the construction of electron microscopes). There are limitations from the source of knowledge; i.e., many things have not been revealed. Ask God in the prescribed manner: ponder the problem, pray with faith in Christ and with real intent, and obey the principles of righteousness that one has already accepted and in which one has faith. Moroni tells us that this test can be applied to any purported truth; yet we will be most inclined to use it with religious concepts. This is a highly personal approach that each of us must take on our own. Joseph F. Smith, "Theory and Divine Revelation," Improvement Era 14 (April 1911): 549, 551.
[^3] Science is inhuman. Some say that science is bad because it is not concerned with our deep emotions: love, hate, fear, longing, etc. Certainly it is true that science as a method cannot be concerned with these things except as natural phenomena worthy of scientific investigation. This is simply according to the rules: only objective data can be used in science. This should hardly be surprising or disturbing. Science is only a tool to seek truth. The argument is like saying that a power saw is fundamentally evil because it has no compassion for its operator and may slice off his finger. Likewise, science has no compassion and could destroy man with its atomic bombs or pollutants, but the evil is neither in science nor the power saw. The evil arises within those who make use of scientific findings—or of power saws. There are logical errors that also occur in the application of scientific method. We have mentioned that induction proper (reasoning from a few facts to a general conclusion) is a logically invalid procedure. Sometimes this can be overcome by invoking the principle of the uniformity of nature. If we have reason to believe that the sample is truly representative of the whole, then our inductions may be valid, but it is not always clear when we can safely extrapolate from a few facts to a general conclusion. There are times when the theory is, by its very nature, extremely difficult to prove or to disprove. The theory of evolution is an excellent example. Many of the fossil data required to test it may have long since been destroyed. Furthermore, it is an intrinsically difficult theory to test. Almost every feature of any plant or animal can be interpreted as adapting that plant or animal to its environment, just as the theory predicts. But this is exactly what we would also expect if plants and animals had been carefully designed by a supremely intelligent Creator. So how does one devise tests to distinguish between the theories? A theory that can't be tested is not a good theory. We are limited by our abilities to interpret God's word. Apply the scientific method: formulate lucid questions, make valid deductions and appropriate inductions to establish hypotheses and to find ways to test these, and share the results through publication. In principle, anyone can take this approach, but in today's world, scientific research has reached a level of high sophistication, requiring much training and many capital resources.
