Frank B. Salisbury, Creation ( 1976)

4

Counter Arguments to Science

At first glance it might appear ludicrous for anyone to argue with science in this day and age. After all, science has given us longer lives, rapid transportation, and exciting insight into the nature of things. One can't argue with success—or can one? Some people believe that science has been too successful, believe that it has transformed our world from one of ancient, down-to-earth values to one with such mushrooming materialism that we are likely to suffocate in our own garbage. Furthermore, as I look at the anti-religion arguments of chapter 2, I can see parallel arguments that have been raised, often in an opposite sense, against science. Some of these have been suggested by the philosophers, but most frequently they appear in the statements of religious writers. The first five presented below parallel those against God and religion in chapter 2, and the sixth touches upon some valid limitations of the scientific approach.

SCIENCE DESTROYS CONCEPTS OF GOD

Many scientists acting as individuals and extending their philosophies beyond valid application of the scientific method do think the universe can be accounted for atheistically. In doing so, they are no longer functioning as scientists but are exercising faith in their own religion. As we have seen, this religion is a philosophy called logical positivism. It has as its basic tenet that all philosophies and all religions are incapable of arriving at truth and that only scientific truth has any logical validity. All arguments for God are rejected as part of the basic tenet of faith. Again, as we have seen, since this philosophy rejects all religions and philosophies, it thereby rejects itself. Its basic assumption cannot be demonstrated any more convincingly (many of us think far less so) than can the belief that God exists and speaks to prophets. Atheism is an assumption and no more. It must be accepted on faith. There is no other way.

Unfortunately, many scientist-professors not only accept this religion but teach it as though it were "gospel truth." Indeed, many of them accept the philosophy without even understanding that it is a philosophy. They absorbed and assimilated it when they were students, never doubting (or even wondering) that it was genuine scientific information. This is certainly one of the tragedies of our modern educational system. It subtly robs students of their freedom. As long as there are no truly objective data about God—data completely independent of all observers and all theories—science, in the truest sense of the word, can only be neutral about God. These are the rules of the game. The scientist can personally accept subjective data as I accept the testimony of God's witnesses, the prophets. He can have faith in logical positivism. It is tragic when he fails to realize that his beliefs are based only upon faith.

RELIGION AND SCIENCE

As we shall have much occasion to see, however, when dealing with the kinds of things that science can study, it is seldom easy to know exactly what God's word is. He has revealed much about how we can return to his presence but little about physical creation, and what he has revealed is difficult to comprehend in the terms used by science. Thus we are seldom called upon to make such a harsh decision between science and revelation. Of course, if a scientist says that creation happened by chance, while revelation says it was the product of divine intelligence, then we might have a real conflict—but does science really say that? Or is this only an interpretation of the logical positivists?

SCIENCE'S LACK OF COMPASSION CAUSES AN IMPERFECT WORLD

Perhaps many scientists give little thought to compassion; they are working on problems that may have little obvious relationship to man's well-being. But other scientists have more than their share of human compassion. Many of the great men of medicine have amply demonstrated their dedication to mankind, sometimes by giving their own lives for others. Many agricultural scientists are equally dedicated to the compassionate goal of producing food for mankind. Scientists from various fields have banded together to protest the inhumane application of scientific developments such as the atomic bomb or polluting technologies. These are individuals, however, not the tool-for-seeking-truth called science. That mechanism quite logically has no feelings of its own.

THEISM

EVIL SCIENTISTS

As a matter of fact, it is conceivable that a scientist might even have strong religious convictions and live a most exemplary, God-directed life, and, in spite of all this, still be a good scientist. There are outstanding scientists in the Church who are accepted by their fellow scientists in spite of their religious convictions.

Incidentally, of the dozens and perhaps hundreds of scientists with whom I am personally acquainted throughout the world, I don't know a single one whom I would consider an evil person. Most of these people know nothing about the restored gospel, nor do they live its tenets in every respect. Most do not live the Word of Wisdom, and only a few attend church or take part in any of the rituals connected with religion. Of those whom I know personally, however, all seem to be fundamentally good persons. Typically, they exhibit an exemplary love for their families, and they are clearly on the side of human justice and world brotherhood. Often, after a few hours spent working or communicating socially with these persons, I have felt a thrill of brotherhood quite comparable to that experienced with my fellow members of the Church. Certainly most scientists are not evil. There is something uplifting about the pursuit of truth.

IMPERFECT SCIENCE

"Scarcely a century has passed but they have introduced new theories of science and of philosophy that supersede the old traditions and the old faith and the old doctrines entertained by philosophers and scientists." [^1]

"The Church . . . holds to the definite authority of divine revelation which must be the standard; and that, as so-called "science" has changed from age to age in its deductions, and as divine revelation is truth, and must abide forever, views as to the lesser should conform to the positive statements of the greater. . . .

"A good motto for young people to adopt, who are determined to delve into philosophic theories, is to search all things, but be careful to hold on only to that which is true. The truth persists, but the theories of philosophers change and are overthrown. What men use today as a scaffolding for scientific purposes from which to reach out into the unknown for truth, may be torn down tomorrow, having served its purpose; but faith is an eternal principle through which the humble believer may secure everlasting solace." [^2]

Certainly the statements are true. Science has changed many times. That is how science works. That is its secret of success. In its attempt to approach reality ever more closely, science sometimes may come very close, as in our understanding of the mechanics of the solar system, for example. In other cases, science may presently be as far from the mark as it was a thousand years ago when it said the earth stood still. If this is an argument that good Latter-day Saints should avoid science, then somebody is missing the boat. The important thing is that science now understands the solar system, and that much more will be learned as we continue to disprove hypotheses and improve our models. To repeat a refrain: There are many things about the universe that science can teach us but that have never been mentioned by the Lord.

On the other hand, if the statements are made (as above) to warn the youth and other Church members not to put too much faith in science at the expense of faith in revelation, then the arguments are well taken. It is extremely important for us to understand the nature of the scientific method and not to make irreversible decisions contrary to God's word based upon scientific models that may well prove to be poor representations of reality. If I were not totally convinced of this, I would not be writing this book.

Science recognizes in a scientific way that science makes mistakes. An important phase of science is the study of its own inherent errors. The subscience of statistics is devoted largely to this problem, and philosophers of scientific method are quite taken with it. Let's summarize the limitations on obtaining relevant objective data and applying relevant and valid logic to these data.

Errors of method are also important. Instruments may limit the search for truth. Due to the length of light waves, a light microscope cannot resolve objects smaller than about 2,500 Angstroms in diameter. This limitation arises from the nature of light rather than the ability of technicians to build microscopes. The electron microscope, on the other hand, is presently limited by the ability of technicians to construct magnetic lenses for focusing the electron beam. It can now resolve objects about as small as two to eight Angstroms in diameter. In the future, it or its technological descendants may resolve even smaller objects.

THE GROUND RULES

To recapitulate, then, the ground rules presented at the end of the second chapter are:

The ground rules for our use of science are:

Let's also recapitulate the three ways in which one may test religious and scientific truths:

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Science tries to account for all things without God. It should be clear from our discussions that science per se does no such thing. Science collects objective data and applies logic to these data. And truly objective data relating to God are difficult (impossible?) to obtain, so science can seldom if ever deal with the question. Human errors are always important. The ability to read instruments or to perform some other necessary technique might be an important limitation, but the really important boundaries set by human nature are in the area of human creativity. We have already discussed this in some detail. The scientist must know what to look for, think of the suitable hypothesis, or recognize the important relationship. God's word must come first. Compare the new doctrine, idea, or data with other available knowledge: scripture, prophecy, history, theory, etc. Such an approach may not be conclusive, but it is nearly always an appropriate first step. It is not always easy (who can know everything?), but it can be applied to revealed or scientific information, and it is virtually the only approach that can be taken in a book such as this. Joseph F. Smith, Conference Report, April 1911, pp. 7-8.
[^2] Science disagrees with God's revealed word. Science makes no claim whatsoever to being in possession of ultimate truth; it is only striving to construct models that continually approach reality more closely. On the other hand, while science is trying to find out how the universe works, God already knows. Anything he might reveal to us that proves to be in conflict with the statements of science will thus have to take precedence over these statements. This is our first ground rule. There are inherent statistical variabilities that often limit scientific studies. The biologist speaks of "biological variability," implying frustrating differences between individuals within a species. And sometimes the objective data essential to certain conclusions simply aren't available. It may be that we can never know the history of the earth by applying science, since the relevant data may by now have been obliterated. At the moment, we cannot study the nature of man's spirit or the nature of God because suitable objective data cannot be obtained. Sometimes these limitations of method may be permanent (as when the data are gone forever), or in other cases they may be only temporary (as in the construction of electron microscopes). There are limitations from the source of knowledge; i.e., many things have not been revealed. Ask God in the prescribed manner: ponder the problem, pray with faith in Christ and with real intent, and obey the principles of righteousness that one has already accepted and in which one has faith. Moroni tells us that this test can be applied to any purported truth; yet we will be most inclined to use it with religious concepts. This is a highly personal approach that each of us must take on our own. Joseph F. Smith, "Theory and Divine Revelation," Improvement Era 14 (April 1911): 549, 551.
