Frank B. Salisbury, Creation ( 1976)

Section 2:

The Scriptural Accounts of Creation

"And out of the ground made I, the Lord God, to grow every tree, naturally, that is pleasant to the sight of man; and man could behold it. And it became also a living soul" Moses 3:9

5

The Book of Moses

For many centuries, the first five books of the Old Testament were accepted by Jewish and Christian peoples as accounts written by Moses. The creation narrative of the first two chapters of Genesis was accepted as a factual though brief account of how our world came into being. Beginning a little over a century ago, the Genesis stories began to be questioned, not only by scholars, but also by Christian ministers and by a significant number of laymen. Even Joseph Smith wrote in the Articles of Faith: "We believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly." Soon after organization of the Church, he was directed by the Lord to prepare an inspired translation (revision) of the biblical scriptures. One of his first targets was the creation narrative in Genesis.

By now, the "higher criticism" has questioned and finally rejected Moses as the author of Genesis, and scientists have developed theories of the earth's origin sharply contrasting to the Genesis story. The developing Genesis problems must have contributed much to the growing lack of faith in the scriptures as the word of God and consequently must share a certain responsibility for the problems of our disturbed generation.

THE PROBLEMS OF GENESIS

To be more specific: scholars have decided that the five books of Moses (the Pentateuch) were a construction from four other basic documents written by four separate authors. Two writers are said to have written two creation stories in Genesis, stories that differ in highly significant ways. The first account is recorded in Genesis 1:1-31 and 2:1-3, and the second is in Genesis 2:4-25. The first account is ascribed to an author designated P, signifying the priestly code; the second to an author designated J for the Judean narratives. The two accounts differ most obviously in the order of creation. The first narrates the seven days of creation, but the second has man created first, and no days are mentioned. They also differ in the names used for Deity. In the first account, the Creator is referred to as Elohim, translated in English Bibles as God. The second account uses the word Jehovah or Yahweh, translated as Lord God or Lord. (Only the consonants were written, and the word was almost never spoken by ancient Jews; hence its exact pronunciation has been lost.)

The two accounts of creation have caused considerable trouble. For example, Mary Baker Eddy, the founder of Christian Science, commented that the first account was dictated by God, whereas the second had to be a product of the devil. William Jennings Bryan at the famous Scopes monkey trial was trapped by his opponent Clarence Darrow on this point. Bryan, who was prosecuting Scopes for teaching evolution in a Tennessee school, was himself placed on the witness stand by Darrow. He replied in the affirmative when asked if he accepted every word in the Bible as the word of God. Darrow then asked him how he could reconcile the two accounts of creation. He had no answer.

During the first part of the nineteenth century, several individuals independently arrived at a theory for the origin of the earth's living organisms based upon a process of evolution. In 1859 Charles Darwin published his detailed theory of natural selection. Especially in its modern form, the theory attempts to account for the earth's living organisms in terms of chance-directed, purely atheistic events. The Creator God of Genesis was no longer needed.

Once thinkers began to doubt that the Genesis stories were irrefutable words of God, many specific questions appeared: Just how old is the earth and its creations? Scientific methods of dating seem to imply an age of about 4.5 billion years. So what was a day in the creation story of the first chapter of Genesis? What about the fossils of plants and animals found embedded in rocks "obviously" of ancient age? As to specific details of the creation stories, how could it be possible for plants to exist on the earth before the days, months, and years were established? Or how could whales be placed in the sea before mammals were placed on the land, if (as the evolutionist was deciding) whales and other marine mammals evolved from land mammals?

Even if the Genesis accounts were accepted as divinely inspired, a number of thorny problems remained. Was creation an act of God singular or Gods plural? Most of the account speaks of God or the Lord God in the singular, but Genesis 1:26 says: "And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness. . . ." (Actually, the Hebrew word Elohim is a plural noun.) Whence came man's spirit? In Genesis 2:7, it is implied that God placed a spirit in man, but nothing is said of its origin. What is the significance of the curious story of the creation of Eve from Adam's rib? What is the significance of Adam's assignment to name the animals? And what about those two accounts of creation? In the first, man is the crowning and final product of creation; in the second, man was formed and became a living soul before other living organisms were placed on earth. Why should God give us two conflicting accounts?

And some troubling philosophical questions are not answered by the narratives: Just how did creation come about? Did God speak, and the very elements obeyed by some kind of magic? Or did God create as a modern engineer creates—by applying natural principles? Did God create or place each species on earth individually (special creation), or did God control an organic evolution similar to that postulated by Darwin? Whether creation was by magic or by the application of natural law, did it have any purpose or reason behind it?

We search the first two chapters of Genesis in vain for satisfying answers to these questions. Oh, it is possible to find supporting evidence for one viewpoint or another, but real answers are not to be found. If they were, neither the scientific nor the religious questions would still bother people today as they do.

If God chose to restore the gospel through Joseph Smith, then it seems reasonable that he might provide at least a few answers to the questions of creation brought up by Genesis 1 and 2. Here is a test, one of many, that we can apply in an evaluation of the restoration. We have no reason to believe that Joseph Smith was even aware of the scholarly problems of Genesis. Surely he was not aware of the scientific ones, since his contributions predated Darwin by twenty to thirty years. Did he answer the problems of Genesis?

MOSES AND ABRAHAM

The restoration of the gospel did indeed produce information about the questions of creation. In June and December of 1830, Joseph Smith received from the Lord by revelation an account of dealings between Moses and God, followed by a creation narrative that closely parallels Genesis 1 and 2 and that continues to the time of the flood. Sometime later a number of ancient Egyptian papyri fell into the hands of the Prophet and the young church. One of these, Joseph translated by the power of God. It purports to be an account written by the hand of Abraham and includes a narrative of creation paralleling Genesis 1 and 2 but differing in significant ways from the account revealed to Moses. These I accept as the words of God.

No real effort will be made at this point to reconcile the creation accounts with scientific findings, although I am unable to avoid the temptation to interject a few comments. First, we shall consider the origin of the book of Moses. Then in chapter 6, the first three chapters of that book will be presented with my comments interjected. It is the scriptures themselves that really count. Yet reading them always gives rise to independent thoughts and interpretations. My commentary will sometimes be a simple restatement of something in the scriptures, or it might be a summary of opinion: someone else's (with suitable reference) or my own. My opinions are, naturally, what I consider at this moment most likely to be true. I believe these things after careful study, much thought, and prayer. Yet they are opinions. Perhaps if I were absolutely convinced that they were the last word, I would give up studying, thinking, and praying! In chapters 7 and 8, the same approach will be taken with the book of Abraham, and some attempt will be made to summarize and relate the two newly revealed accounts of creation. Yet I will continue to refrain from attempting scientific reconciliations. This is saved for the final chapters.

THE ORIGINS OF THE BOOK OF MOSES

In 1830 the Church had just been organized and the Book of Mormon published in its first edition. There is much talk in the revelations received during that period (D&C 3 to 37) of ancient scriptures, including the Book of Mormon, that were to be revealed anew at the beginning of this last dispensation. In Doctrine and Covenants 6:27-28, Oliver Cowdery is given power to translate, as Joseph Smith had been given this power, and told that he should "assist in bringing to light, with your gift, those parts of my scriptures which have been hidden because of iniquity. And now, behold, I give unto you, and also unto my servant Joseph, the keys of this gift, which shall bring to light this ministry; and in the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established." This gift of translation of ancient scriptures is referred to in several later revelations (e.g., D&C 35:18; 64:5) as the "keys of the mysteries of the kingdom."

Joseph was commanded to make a new "translation" of the Bible. (See D&C 93:53.) As far as we know, this was not a translation in the usual sense that Joseph had ancient documents in Hebrew, Greek, Latin, etc., from which he made a scholarly translation. Rather, he studied the King James Version and revised it by inspiration. Apparently, he was not given complete sentences to replace those already in the scriptures. Rather, he was to "study it out in [his] mind," as he had studied the inscriptions on the gold plates, and when the translation came into his mind, he would know it was correct by experiencing a burning sensation in his bosom; if it was incorrect, he would "have a stupor of thought that shall cause [him] to forget the thing which is wrong." (D&C 9:8-9: instructions given to Oliver Cowdrey as he attempted to translate the Book of Mormon.)

The Lord was anxious to have Joseph Smith continue this revision of the holy scriptures and often admonished him to do so, as in the following case: "And, verily I say unto you, that it is my will that you should hasten to translate my scriptures, and to obtain a knowledge of history, and of countries, and of kingdoms, of laws of God and man, and all this for the salvation of Zion." (D&C 93:53.)

The book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price is one of the most important results of Joseph Smith's inspired revisions of the Bible. Joseph never completed the revisions of the Old and New Testaments, although what he did accomplish has been published by the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. The only parts of this inspired biblical revision presently accepted as scripture by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are the book of Moses and Joseph Smith, chapter one, which is an inspired revision of chapter 24 of Matthew. Both are found in the Pearl of Great Price.

Unfortunately, little information is available concerning the circumstances surrounding the writing of the book of Moses. The first chapter was received by Joseph Smith as direct revelation from God sometime in June 1830. The Church had only been organized a little over two months, and the Book of Mormon had just been published. Joseph's comments preceeding the revelation as recorded in the History of the Church (volume 1, page 98) tell us almost nothing about the circumstances that led to it:

"I will say, however, that amid all the trials and tribulations we had to wade through, the Lord, who well knew our infantile and delicate situation, vouchsafed for us a supply of strength, and granted us line upon line of knowledge—here a little and there a little, of which the following was a precious morsel."

The remainder of the book of Moses was received by revelation some six months later, in December 1830. Again, however, the Prophet doesn't tell us much about the circumstances. What he does tell us indicates that the revelation was part of the restoration of lost records coming through the "translations" of the scriptures, which had begun:

"It may be well to observe here, that the Lord greatly encouraged and strengthened the faith of His little flock, which had embraced the fulness of the everlasting Gospel, as revealed to them in the Book of Mormon, by giving some more extended information upon the Scriptures, a translation of which had already commenced. Much conjecture and conversation frequently occurred among the Saints, concerning the books mentioned, and referred to, in various places in the Old and New Testaments, which were now nowhere to be found. The common remark was, 'They are lost books;' but it seems the Apostolic Church had some of these writings, as Jude mentions or quotes the Prophecy of Enoch, the seventh from Adam. To the joy of the little flock, which in all, from Colesville to Canandaigua, New York, numbered about seventy members, did the Lord reveal the following doings of olden times, from the prophecy of Enoch." (History of the Church, 1:131-33.)

Then follows what is now Moses 6:43 to the end of Moses 7. Chapters 2 to 5, most of chapter 6, and chapter 8 do not appear. They were published in the Times and Seasons and the Evening and Morning Star at intervals from 1832 until 1844, and then in 1851 in England, when Franklin D. Richards compiled the Pearl of Great Price. Yet there is good evidence that they were also received in December 1830. For one thing, an article appeared on January 18, 1831, in the Painesville Telegraph of Ohio, in which it is mentioned that a young gentleman by the name of Whitmer had a number of new revelations from God to Joseph Smith in which there was "a more particular description of the creation of the world, and a history of Adam and his family, and other sketches of the antediluvian world, which Moses neglected to record. [^1]

THE BOOK OF MOSES

Chapter 1 of the book of Moses is clearly a new revelation rather than a revision of existing scriptures, since it has no counterpart in any other writing available to us. It consists of "The words of God, which he spake unto Moses at a time when Moses was caught up into an exeedingly high mountain." (Moses 1:1.) It closes with the parenthetical statement that "these words were spoken unto Moses in the mount. . . . And now they are spoken unto you. Show them not unto any except them that believe. Even so. Amen." (Moses 1:42.) Chapters 2 and 3 correspond to chapters 1 and 2 of Genesis in the Old Testament (the creation story).

It is quite possible and even seems apparent that chapters 2 and 3, as well as the remaining chapters of Moses, were received by revelation as Joseph Smith carefully studied their Genesis counterparts. This was part of his early attempts to translate the Bible, as the Lord had commanded. It has been suggested that the revision was not complete to Joseph's satisfaction at the time of his death. Indeed, the words "without form, and void" in Moses 2:2 run contrary to other statements made by the Prophet. Nevertheless, chapters 2, 3, and 4, which include the story of the fall as well as that of creation, include many statements with no counterparts in Genesis 1, 2, and 3, and they close with the words: "And these are the words which I spake unto my servant Moses, and they are true even as I will; and I have spoken them unto you. See thou show them unto no man, until I command you, except to them that believe, Amen." (Moses 4:32.)

While it seems plausible that the Prophet may have been studying the Genesis accounts during the reception of this revelation, so that a word here and there may have slipped through without being suitably corrected, we must assume from Moses 4:32 that additions are the words of God himself. Indeed, the emphatic statement that "they are true even as I will" should stand as a warning against trying to rationalize away statements in these accounts that we find difficult to reconcile with other scriptures or with our own preconceived ideas. The fact that chapters 2 to 4 were rather belatedly published (1844) may reflect Joseph Smith's response to the admonition to show them only to believers—until commanded.

God does not speak to man through his prophets unless he has something important to say. His words are not to be trifled with. The very statements that seem surprising and difficult to reconcile with preconceived ideas may well provide the most intriguing and exciting clues to an understanding of what went on during creation.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954), 1:27: James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1951), p. 39.
