Frank B. Salisbury, Creation ( 1976)

6

Moses and Spiritual Creation

Imagine all the people who have lived. Imagine how many of them have wondered about creation, wondered how it all came about, if there was a reason for it all, what it meant. Some have studied the rocks and the things alive on the earth, trying to deduce and to induce how it all happened—and have found some answers. But a very few have lived such lives of righteousness and devotion that they were actually able to speak with God about creation: Enoch, Abraham, Moses, and probably a few others (Adam, the brother of Jared, Joseph Smith?).

What was it like to converse with God? To speak with him "face to face," as one man speaks with another? To ask questions and to receive answers? In June 1830, the Lord told Joseph Smith what it was like:

THE FIRST CHAPTER OF MOSES: THE VISIONS OF MOSES

"The words of God, which he spake unto Moses at a time when Moses was caught up into an exceedingly high mountain,

"And he saw God face to face, and he talked with him, and the glory of God was upon Moses; therefore Moses could endure his presence.

"And God spake unto Moses, saying: Behold, I am the Lord God Almighty, and Endless is my name; for I am without beginning of days or end of years; and is not this endless?

"And, behold, thou art my son; wherefore look, and I will show thee the workmanship of mine hands; but not all, for my works are without end, and also my words, for they never cease.

"Wherefore, no man can behold all my works, except he behold all my glory; and no man can behold all my glory, and afterwards remain in the flesh on the earth." (Moses 1:1-5.)

Moses spoke with God face to face, being protected ("transfigured . . . strengthened") in some way from God's glory. Unprotected, he would have "withered and died" in God's presence (see verses 11 and 14, below), which no man can see "in the flesh, except quickened by the Spirit of God." (D&C 67:10-12.) God dwells with the angels "on a globe like a sea of glass and fire" (D&C 130:7); his "brightness and glory defy all description" (Joseph Smith 2:17). Apparently God's divine metabolism is such that tremendous quantities of energy emanate from him. Is there some kind of controlled nuclear reaction serving as the source of his energy? Does he release powerful ionizing radiations? That is, is he radioactive? Or does he "merely" emanate visible light at such an intensity that any unprotected thing in his vicinity is raised to the combustion temperature, as when the rays of the sun are focused by a lens? Of course, we know nothing about the nature of God's glory, but the precedents we are learning in our scientific endeavors help us conceptualize this reality.

"And I have a work for thee, Moses, my son; and thou art in the similitude of mine Only Begotten; and mine Only Begotten is and shall be the Savior, for he is full of grace and truth; but there is no God beside me, and all things are present with me, for I know them all." (Moses 1:6.)

Moses is called to the ministry and told that he is in the image of the Son of God—as he would later be told that all men are created in the image of God. The words are the words of God the Father, who knows all things and whose history and dominion have no equal, although he has given the Son a fulness of his glory. (See D&C 93:11-17.) Though the words are clearly spoken in the first person, with God the Father as the speaker, we have been told by our prophets that they were transmitted to Joseph Smith via Jesus Christ, and that the Father only speaks to inhabitants of this earth to introduce the Son. [^1]

"And now, behold, this one thing I show unto thee, Moses, my son; for thou art in the world, and now I show it unto thee.

"And it came to pass that Moses looked, and beheld the world upon which he was created; and Moses beheld the world and the ends thereof, and all the children of men which are, and which were created; of the same he greatly marveled and wondered.

"And the presence of God withdrew from Moses, that his glory was not upon Moses; and Moses was left unto himself. And as he was left unto himself, he fell unto the earth.

"And it came to pass that it was for the space of many hours before Moses did again receive his natural strength like unto man; and he said unto himself: Now, for this cause I know that man is nothing, which thing I never had supposed.

"But now mine own eyes have beheld God; but not my natural, but my spiritual eyes, for my natural eyes could not have beheld; for I should have withered and died in his presence; but his glory was upon me; and I beheld his face, for I was transfigured before him." (Moses 1:7-11.)

The vision shown to Moses of the earth and all its inhabitants must have been a truly unique experience. Thanks to motion pictures and television we can begin to imagine how God could provide a vision of some remote event such as creation, but the vision shown to Moses must have been a spectacular production indeed. It surely humbled Moses! He never had supposed that man was nothing.

"And it came to pass that when Moses had said these words, behold, Satan came tempting him, saying: Moses, son of man, worship me.

"And it came to pass that Moses looked upon Satan and said: Who art thou? For behold, I am a son of God, in the similitude of his Only Begotten; and where is thy glory, that I should worship thee?

"For behold, I could not look upon God, except his glory should come upon me, and I were strengthened before him. But I can look upon thee in the natural man. Is it not so, surely?

"Blessed be the name of my God, for his Spirit hath not altogether withdrawn from me, or else where is thy glory, for it is darkness unto me? And I can judge between thee and God; for God said unto me: Worship God, for him only shalt thou serve.

"Get thee hence, Satan; deceive me not; for God said unto me: Thou art after the similitude of mine Only Begotten.

"And he also gave me commandments when he called upon me out of the burning bush, saying: Call upon God in the name of mine Only Begotten, and worship me.

"And again Moses said: I will not cease to call upon God, I have other things to inquire of him: for his glory has been upon me, wherefore I can judge between him and thee. Depart hence, Satan.

"And now, when Moses had said these words, Satan cried with a loud voice, and rent upon the earth, and commanded, saying: I am the Only Begotten, worship me.

"And it came to pass that Moses began to fear exceedingly; and as he began to fear, he saw the bitterness of hell. Nevertheless, calling upon God, he received strength, and he commanded, saying: Depart from me, Satan, for this one God only will I worship, which is the God of glory.

"And now Satan began to tremble, and the earth shook; and Moses received strength, and called upon God, saying: in the name of the Only Begotten, depart hence, Satan.

"And it came to pass that Satan cried with a loud voice, with weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, and he departed hence, even from the presence of Moses, that he beheld him not.

"And now of this thing Moses bore record; but because of wickedness it is not had among the children of men." (Moses 1:12-23.)

In a sense, then, even this first chapter is a part of the inspired translation or revision of the Bible. Here is something that had been in the original scriptures but was lost.

It is interesting that Satan is sometimes permitted to tempt and otherwise struggle with the individuals to whom God is about to speak. Joseph Smith's vivid account of his struggles with the powers of darkness just before his first vision in the sacred grove is familiar to us all. (Joseph Smith 2:15-16.)

In Moses' words, there are some important insights into Satan's nature. At the council in heaven, he had desired to have God's glory. (Moses 4:1.) Though he was denied this, he continued to seek it whenever possible. He claimed to be the Only Begotten and demanded that Moses worship him. In our day, there has been a revival of Satan worship, but for the most part, Satan must achieve his goals by subtle means, even the denial of his own existence—so common among all the intelligent, educated people of the world (and in fulfillment of Nephi's ancient prophecy: 2 Nephi 28:22).

"And it came to pass that when Satan had departed from the presence of Moses, that Moses lifted up his eyes unto heaven, being filled with the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of the Father and the Son:

"And calling upon the name of God, he beheld his glory again, for it was upon him; and he heard a voice, saying: Blessed art thou, Moses, for I, the Almighty, have chosen thee, and thou shalt be made stronger than many waters; for they shall obey thy command as if thou wert God.

"And Io, I am with thee, even unto the end of thy days; for thou shalt deliver my people from bondage, even Israel my chosen." (Moses 1:24-26.)

Here is the detailed call to Moses. He will deliver the children of Israel from bondage, and he will have power over the waters, even the Red Sea and the water that flowed out from the rock at his command. (Exodus 14:23-31; 17:6.)

"And it came to pass, as the voice was still speaking, Moses cast his eyes and beheld the earth, yea, even all of it; and there was not a particle of it which he did not behold, discerning it by the spirit of God.

"And he beheld also the inhabitants thereof, and there was not a soul which he beheld not; and he discerned them by the Spirit of God; and their numbers were great, even numberless as the sand upon the sea shore.

"And he beheld many lands; and each land was called earth, and there were inhabitants on the face thereof." (Moses 1:27-29.)

Here Moses must have been shown more than a mere movie spectacular. This is not just God's ability to produce a comprehensive vision, but an ability to change Moses so that he could comprehend it. We know that God hears and answers all our prayers—even though many hundreds or thousands of us may be praying at once. God is continually aware of each part of the universe. This is something marvelous to contemplate, especially for those of us who find it difficult to read the paper and listen to our wives at the same time! In some way, Moses must have received a portion of God's power to comprehend all things at once.

"And it came to pass that Moses called upon God, saying: Tell me, I pray thee, why these things are so, and by what thou madest them?

"And behold, the glory of the Lord was upon Moses, so that Moses stood in the presence of God, and talked with him face to face. And the Lord God said unto Moses: For mine own purpose have I made these things. Here is wisdom and it remaineth in me.

"And by the word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth.

"And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten." (Moses 1:30-33.)

Here is the beginning of the sublime revelations that give us a momentary glimpse into the extent of God's creations—the immensity of the universe—and the role played by Jesus Christ in these creations. (See D&C 76:24; 93:9-10; John 1:3; Ephesians 3:9; Hebrews 1:2.) We might deduce that the worlds were created by the power of the priesthood, since we are told that they were created by the word of God's power, which is the Only Begotten Son. Originally the priesthood was called the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God. (D&C 107:3.)

"And the first man of all men have I called Adam, which is many." (Moses 1:34.)

Because of the syntax, this statement is a trifle confusing. Is Adam the first of all men on all worlds created by God? Are there many Adams? Or are there many men? Perhaps a logical explanation, considering the verses before and after, which discuss the many worlds created by God, is that each of these worlds has an Adam who is the first man for that world, and that there are many worlds and hence many Adams.

"But only an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, give I unto you. For behold, there are many worlds that have passed away by the word of my power. And there are many that now stand, and innumerable are they unto man; but all things are numbered unto me, for they are mine and I know them.

"And it came to pass that Moses spake unto the Lord, saying: Be merciful unto thy servant, O God, and tell me concerning this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, and also the heavens, and then thy servant will be content.

"And the Lord God spake unto Moses, saying: The heavens, they are many, and they cannot be numbered unto man; but they are numbered unto me, for they are mine.

"And as one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof even so shall another come; and there is no end to my works, neither to my words.

"For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:35-39.)

Creation is continuous. By the word of God's power, worlds come into being and pass away. The number of worlds that now exist is innumerable unto man. We are learning the truth of this statement. With the 200-inch telescope, we may be able to see (given enough time to study all the sky) one to four billion galaxies. Within our own galaxy, which we see in the sky as the Milky Way, there are clusters of stars, each containing 10,000 to 100,000 stars. These plus those not in the clusters make a total of perhaps 200 billion stars. Counting these would be a hopeless task, and indeed, vast numbers of them must occur behind clouds of interstellar material, or on the other side of our galaxy where they are so densely packed together on our photographic images that we cannot distinguish one from another. Truly the worlds God has created are innumerable unto man.

Actually, we don't even see the worlds—only the suns (stars) that give light to their orbiting planets. Nevertheless, in spite of these numbers, all are known to God, and the worlds that have inhabitants (one or more planets around each star or only a small percentage of the planets that exist?) are continuously in God's awareness. His works are endless in both time and space, and the knowledge that emanates from him—his words—is equally infinite.

And what is it all about? Some of God's purposes remain in him (Moses 1:31), but the guiding, directing, sublime reason for it all is made clear when God tells us that his work, his occupation, his continuous creative activity, is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. This guiding of the eternal progression of all the spirits who are God's children, this bringing of these spirits to the status of godhood in God's presence, this supreme and divine effort is the source of God's glory. It is an inspired and holy concept, such a divine mystery as to testify of the divinity of the restoration of the gospel in the last dispensation.

"And now, Moses, my son, I will speak unto thee concerning this earth upon which thou standest; and thou shalt write the things which I shall speak.

"And in a day when the children of men shall esteem my words as naught and take many of them from the book which thou shalt write, behold, I will raise up another like unto thee; and they shall be had again among the children of men—among as many as shall believe.

"(These words were spoken unto Moses in the mount, the name of which shall not be known among the children of men. And now they are spoken unto you. Show them not unto any except them that believe. Even so. Amen.)" (Moses 1:40-42.)

After the view of the eternal worlds sprinkled through space, the Lord then introduces his account of the creation, implying again the restriction that this account will concern only our world. Does this mean that creation on other worlds followed a different course? Very possibly. There is certainly a tremendous potential variety of other worlds.

The admonition to show this revelation to no one except believers may have been because the Church was very young at that time and such doctrines as continual creation for the immortality and eternal life of man carried out by God the Father through the power of his Only Begotten Son, in whose image Moses was created, would have provided powerful fuel for the critics of the Church. The admonition must have eventually been lifted, because the revelation has been published. Yet we should probably take it as a warning for our day as well as for when it was received. In learning about the gospel, one must first be given the milk before one can handle the meat. (1 Corinthians 3:2.) While the Pearl of Great Price has been published, few nonmembers of the Church are aware of it, and fewer still would have any interest in reading it (only the fanatic anti-Mormon who searches through any Church publication for ammunition). But it is not appropriate to argue with a confirmed evolutionist by quoting from the Pearl of Great Price!

THE SECOND CHAPTER OF MOSES: THE WRITINGS OF MOSES

"And it came to pass that the Lord spake unto Moses, saying: Behold, I reveal unto you concerning this heaven, and this earth; write the words which I speak. I am the Beginning and the End, the Almighty God; by mine Only Begotten I created these things; yea, in the beginning I created the heaven, and the earth upon which thou standest.

"And the earth was without form, and void; and I caused darkness to come up upon the face of the deep; and my Spirit moved upon the face of the water; for I am God.

"And I, God, said: Let there be light; and there was light.

"And I, God, saw the light; and that light was good. And I, God, divided the light from the darkness.

"And I, God, called the light Day; and the darkness, I called Night; and this I did by the word of my power, and it was done as I spake; and the evening and the morning were the first day." (Moses 2:1-5.)

Moses was commanded to write the words spoken by the Lord, so these chapters are entitled "The Writings of Moses." The first verses expand on the Genesis account. In the beginning the earth was created by the Only Begotten. Was this beginning sometime in the far distant past well before the other events described here?

On one occasion, Joseph Smith stated that the term "without form and void," as it appears in the King James translation, should read "empty and desolate," as in Abraham 4:2. [^2] After all, a void earth without form would be no earth at all. Yet in the account in the book of Moses, it remains as it is in the King James Version. Does this imply that Joseph Smith might not have completed his revision of these scriptures? Perhaps, but it is a slim clue and hardly an excuse for us to argue with those scriptures.

It is interesting that God caused darkness to come upon the face of the earth. We might imagine that darkness would already be present. And the statement that God's spirit moved upon the face of the waters has always intrigued me. Is this the spirit that emanates from God to fill the universe? What did it accomplish by moving upon the face of the waters? The division of light from darkness may not have been the division of day and night due to the rotation of the earth, since this is implied as taking place on the fourth day.

"And again, I, God, said: Let there be a firmament in the midst of the water, and it was so, even as I spake; and I said: Let it divide the waters from the waters; and it was done;

"And I, God, made the firmament and divided the waters, yea, the great waters under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament, and it was so even as I spake.

"And I, God, called the firmament Heaven; and the evening and the morning were the second day." (Moses 2:6-8.)

We now think of the firmament as being the atmosphere. What were the waters above the firmament? Was this excess water accumulated at the time the earth was formed but later lost as the atmosphere developed? Or was it simply clouds or mist in the upper atmosphere? Interestingly enough, the words describing these events do not make it impossible for an ancient Israelite to go on believing in a great transparent dome above the earth, appearing blue because of the water on the other side. Seldom, if ever, does the Lord in his revelations correct our scientific concepts.

"And I, God, said: Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and it was so; and I, God, said: Let there be dry land; and it was so.

"And I, God, called the dry land Earth; and the gathering together of the waters, called I the Sea; and I, God, saw that all things which I had made were good.

"And I, God, said: Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, the fruit tree yielding fruit, after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed should be in itself upon the earth, and it was so even as I spake.

"And the earth brought forth grass, every herb yielding seed after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed should be in itself, after his kind; and I, God, saw that all things which I had made were good;

"And the evening and the morning were the third day." (Moses 2:9-13.)

At the beginning of things, the earth was apparently completely covered with water; then the dry land appeared. The water was gathered all "unto one place," leaving a single continent. At this time, according to this account, the earth was commanded to produce plant life, and the laws of procreation and genetics are presented, stating that living things can reproduce themselves, their offspring always being of the same kind as the parents.

"And I, God, said: Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven, to divide the day from the night, and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and for years;

"And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth; and it was so.

"And I, God, made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night, and the greater light was the sun, and the lesser light was the moon; and the stars also were made even according to my word.

"And I, God, set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth,

"And the sun to rule over the day, and the moon to rule over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness; and I, God, saw that all things which I had made were good;

"And the evening and the morning were the fourth day." (Moses 2:14-19.)

Here again the language is clearly such that an ancient Israelite could maintain his concepts about the universe. He could imagine these great lights, which we know to be objects of about the same size as the earth (i.e., the moon and the planets) or much larger (i.e., the sun and the stars), to be attached to that great dome above the earth. Yet we see no denial of the solar system as it actually exists.

The sixteenth verse might imply that the sun and the moon were created at about the same time but that the stars were created at a different time ("the stars also were made"). Scientific thought would have it that the earth was made at the same time as the sun and moon. If this proves to be true, then perhaps the events of the third day refer to the sun, moon, and stars becoming visible through the atmosphere. Before this time, the atmosphere may have been so full of water vapor and perhaps particulate matter (as is the atmosphere of Venus now) that these great lights could not be seen through it. Enough light would penetrate so that night and day could be distinguished ("divided") as apparently occurred on the first day, and plant life could (but probably didn't—see below) exist as we know it today.

"And I, God, said: Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life, and fowl which may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven.

"And I, God, created great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind; and I, God, saw that all things which I had created were good.

"And I, God, blessed them, saying: Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the sea; and let fowl multiply in the earth;

"And the evening and the morning were the fifth day." (Moses 2:20-23.)

The idea that fish and fowl came into being during the same period but before the other land animals is certainly contrary to the evolutionary account taught by science, although science would accept the idea that animals appeared in the waters before they did on the land. Note that fowl fly in the firmament, implying that ancient Hebrews understood the term firmament not only as the dome above the earth but also as the air beneath it. These animals were also provided with procreative abilities and commanded to fill the sea and the earth.

"And I, God, said: Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle, and creeping things, and beasts of the earth after their kind, and it was so;

"And I, God, made the beasts of the earth after their kind, and cattle after their kind, and everything which creepeth upon the earth after his kind; and I, God, saw that all these things were good.

"And I, God, said unto mine Only Begotten, which was with me from the beginning: Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and it was so. And I, God, said: Let them have dominion over the fishes of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

"And I, God, created man in mine own image, in the image of mine Only Begotten created I him; male and female created I them.

"And I, God, blessed them, and said unto them: Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.

"And I, God, said unto man: Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree in the which shall be the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat.

"And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to everything that creepeth upon the earth, wherein I grant life, there shall be given every clean herb for meat; and it was so, even as I spake.

"And I, God, saw everything that I had made, and, behold, all things which I had made were very good; and the evening and the morning were the sixth day." (Moses 2:24-31.)

Land animals, excluding fowl but including insects, were created on the sixth day, and man was created in the image of God. Does the fact that animals were created "after their kind" imply that their prototypes already existed on other worlds? Man was commanded to be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth and subdue it, he was given dominion over all the other creatures, and he was given the products of plants for food. All the animals, including fowl, were also given plants for food. There is no indication that man or the other animals were to consume flesh; all could have been vegetarians. Finally, God placed his seal of approval upon all the creations that he had carried out through the Only Begotten Son.

Note that in Moses, as revealed to Joseph Smith, the Lord gives animals "every clean herb for meat," whereas in Genesis (and Abraham) the words are "every green herb." "Clean" in the ancient Hebrew sense of "allowed" or "permitted" makes better sense. Not all edible plants ("herbs") are green (e.g., mushrooms), but many green plants are poisonous or otherwise unsuited for certain animals.

Note also that the words "let the earth bring forth" or "let the waters bring forth" might allow an ancient Israelite to keep his belief in spontaneous generation: the idea that mud directly produces frogs, meat produces maggots, etc. Science has thoroughly disproven this venerable concept. Yet a careful reading of the narrative shows that the Lord was not really talking about spontaneous generation as his modus operandi of creation: "I, God, made the beasts of the earth," and "Let us make man in our image. . . ."

THE THIRD CHAPTER OF MOSES

"Thus the heaven and the earth were finished, and all the host of them.

"And on the seventh day I, God, ended my work, and all things which I had made; and I rested on the seventh day from all my work, and all things which I had made were finished, and I, God, saw that they were good;

"And I, God, blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it; because that in it I had rested from all my work which I, God, had created and made." (Moses 3:1-3.)

This last of the seven periods of creation as described so far seems to be merely a sanctified resting period, one used for contemplation. Yet there is more of the story to come. Scholars believe that the next verses begin the "second" account of creation. But the next verses may just as well tell us that the first six of the seven periods just presented are to be understood in a rather special, even unexpected way. The concept is critical, so let's read the version in Genesis first:

"These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens,

"And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew: for the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man to till the ground.

"But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground." (Genesis 2:4-6.)

Now in Moses:

"And now, behold, I say unto you, that these are the generations of the heaven and of the earth, when they were created, in the day that I, the Lord God, made the heaven and the earth;

"And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew. For I, the Lord God, created all things, of which I have spoken, spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth. For I, the Lord God, had not caused it to rain upon the face of the earth. And I, the Lord God, had created all the children of men; and not yet a man to till the ground; for in heaven created I them; and there was not yet flesh upon the earth, neither in the water, neither in the air;

"But I, the Lord God, spake, and there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground." (Moses 3:4-6.)

These are the key verses if one is to understand Moses' account of creation. The remnants remain in Genesis, but without the restoration through Joseph Smith, we would never understand the abbreviated "before it was in the earth." The Lord tells us that the six generations of the heaven and the earth just presented refer to a spiritual creation. All organisms had been created "spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth." No plants or animals or men were on the earth up to that point, for it had not rained on the face of the earth from the beginning of this phase of creation (the creation of the earth as we know it now). If the six periods refer to a spiritual creation, we should have no difficulty in trying to reconcile these periods with scientific findings. Science knows nothing about spirit, let alone its creation! So this is how Moses reconciles the "two accounts of creation."

"And I, the Lord God, formed man from the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul, the first flesh upon the earth, the first man also; nevertheless, all things were before created; but spiritually were they created and made according to my word." (Moses 3:7.)

The words following "living soul" do not occur in Genesis. Yet they confirm beyond reasonable doubt the interpretation of the previous verse. Although man was created in the image of God during the sixth period, in this verse we are again told that no man yet existed on earth; men had been created spiritually in heaven. Now, during this seventh period, God forms man from the dust of the ground, and man becomes the first flesh upon the earth. Could this mean other animals were present but aren't considered flesh? The wording seems to eliminate this possibility by saying that man becomes not only the first flesh but also the first man.

Note that this verse refers only to the man Adam—not to mankind. Eve was not created until later. We know from the Doctrine and Covenants (27:11; 107:54; 128:21) that Adam was Michael before he came to earth and received a body, and Brigham Young tells us that as Michael he was one of the gods taking part in creation. Why did he become the first flesh on the earth? Possibly because he was assigned to help in the ensuing biological creation. He was immortal, and he may have retained his memory of his premortal existence and the council in heaven. It is conceivable that with his new immortal body he continued as a god with complete memory of the six spiritual periods of creation, and that he continued to take part in the creation of plants and animals on the earth. Perhaps this is the significance of the statement that he named the animals. (Moses 3:19.)

"And I, the Lord God, planted a garden eastward in Eden, and there I put the man whom I had formed.

"And out of the ground made I, the Lord God, to grow every tree, naturally, that is pleasant to the sight of man; and man could behold it. And it became also a living soul. For it was spiritual in the day that I created it; for it remaineth in the sphere in which I, God, created it, yea, even all things which I prepared for the use of man; and man saw that it was good for food. And I, the Lord God, planted the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and also the tree of knowledge of good and evil." (Moses 3:8-9.)

A garden is planted. That is, plants are now placed upon the earth. There is none of the detail apparent in the discussion of the spiritual creation of plants on the third day. Presumably, the laws of procreation and genetics stated at that time also apply here. The idea of planting implies that creation may have been carried out by bringing seeds and spores from other planets, and indeed, this was suggested by a number of the early leaders of the Church. In these verses the Lord further makes it clear that plants also have spirits and thus are living souls. The soul is defined as the spirit combined with the body. (D&C 88:15.)

"And I, the Lord God, caused a river to go out of Eden to water the garden; and from thence it was parted, and became into four heads.

"And I, the Lord God, called the name of the first Pison, and it compasseth the whole land of Havilah, where I, the Lord God, created much gold;

"And the gold of that land was good, and there was bdellium and the onyx stone.

"And the name of the second river was called Gihon; the same that compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia.

"And the name of the third river was Hiddekel; that which goeth toward the east of Assyria. And the fourth river was the Euphrates." (Moses 3:10-14.)

It would be nice if we could relate these geographical features with those of present earth. It is possible, however, that following the flood some of the geographical names familiar to Noah and those with him before the flood were applied to new features. [^3]

"And I, the Lord God, took the man, and put him into the Garden of Eden, to dress it, and to keep it.

"And I, the Lord God, commanded the man, saying: Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat,

"But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it, nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee; but, remember that I forbid it, for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die." (Moses 3:15-17.)

Adam is given a commandment, but according to the account in Moses (but not Genesis) he is told that he has his agency to choose for himself. A wrong decision will bring dire consequences.

"And I, the Lord God, said unto mine Only Begotten, that it was not good that the man should be alone; wherefore, I will make an help meet for him.

"And out of the ground I, the Lord God, formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air; and commanded that they should come unto Adam, to see what he would call them; and they were also living souls; for I, God, breathed into them the breath of life, and commanded that whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that should be the name thereof.

"And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast of the field; but as for Adam, there was not found an help meet for him." (Moses 3:18-20.)

Here, animal life is created physically, from the dust of the earth, as was man. Animals also are living souls. Further, this is the passage that might imply participation by Adam in biological creation, since the animals were brought to him to receive names.

There is an interesting point about the language. It appeared in verse 4 that the speaker changed. During the seven periods the account is written in the first person with God (Elohim) as the speaker. Beginning with biological creation (Moses 3:4), it is written in the first person with the Lord God (Jehovah) as the speaker. Elohim is the Father and Jehovah the Son. In the Moses account (3:18), however, the Lord God speaks unto the Only Begotten. This confuses the issue nicely and indicates that we can draw no conclusions about who is speaking based upon "God" or "Lord God." Apparently, it is the Father speaking throughout the entire account.

"And I, the Lord God, caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam; and he slept, and I took one of his ribs and closed up the flesh in the stead thereof;

"And the rib which I, the Lord God, had taken from man, made I a woman, and brought her unto the man.

"And Adam said: This I know now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of man.

"Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife; and they shall be one flesh.

"And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed." (Moses 3:21-25.)

Here is the story of Eve's creation. We shall have more to say about it in our discussion of Abraham's account and especially in chapter 16. The interesting play on words (woman because she was taken out of man) is meaningful in ancient Hebrew and in English but in few if any other languages. (Hebrew: man = ish; woman = isha.)

THE FOURTH CHAPTER OF MOSES

"And I, the Lord God, spake unto Moses, saying: That Satan, whom thou hast commanded in the name of mine Only Begotten, is the same which was from the beginning, and he came before me, saying—Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor.

"But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me—Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever.

"Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down;

"And he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice." (Moses 4:1-4.)

Here is a flashback given to Moses to inform him about the council of premortal spirits. This took place in the beginning, at a time not specified here, but according to Abraham (3:22-28) before the creation of the earth in its present form.

Satan's idea must have been an intriguing one. He was willing to redeem all mankind without losing a single soul, this by removing man's free agency. The Only Begotten Son did not present a plan but suggested that the Father's plan should be followed. Satan's plan was rejected for two reasons: First, he wanted the glory of God, to which he was not entitled. Second, he intended to take from mankind the agency received as a gift from God. As discussed in chapter 2, Satan's plan was enticing (wouldn't it be nice to have salvation guaranteed?), but it must have been an impossible plan. Salvation in God's presence requires agency.

The remainder of Moses 4 is the story of the fall. Creation was not complete until this event had been consummated. There are several highly instructive points in this story, enough to merit a careful reading, although to save space we shall not present it all here.

Satan, speaking through the serpent, knew not the mind of God (which is a comforting thought) but sought to destroy the world by beguiling Eve. He mixed a lie (that she would not die) with the truth (that her eyes would be opened so that she would know good and evil). She gave the fruit to Adam, and their eyes were indeed opened so that they recognized their nakedness. They were questioned by God (who in his omniscience surely knew what had transpired) and admitted their transgression. The serpent was cursed and told by the Lord: ". . . I will put enmity between thee and the woman, between thy seed and her seed; and he shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel." (Moses 4:21; Genesis 3:15.) This is of symbolic significance. Satan would bruise the heel of mankind, but Jesus Christ, the Son of God and seed of woman, would bruise his head. [^4]

Eve was cursed so that her sorrow was multiplied in her conception, and her husband would rule over her. The ground was cursed for Adam's sake: he would eat bread by the sweat of his face, and he would return to the dust of which he was taken. Adam called his wife Eve, "because she was the mother of all living; for thus have I, the Lord God, called the first of all women, which are many." (Moses 4:26.) In Hebrew, the word for Eve (Chavah) means living. This statement is reminiscent of the Lord's statement that Adam was "the first man of all men . . . which is many." (Moses 1:34.) The Lord made coats of skins for Adam and Eve and drove them out of the garden, guarding the way with cherubim and flaming sword.

This revelation to Joseph Smith of the writings of Moses about creation ends with the words:

"(And these are the words which I spake unto my servant Moses, and they are true even as I will; and I have spoken them unto you. See thou show them unto no man, until I command you, except to them that believe. Amen.)" (Moses 4:32. Parentheses in original.)

Father Lehi spoke of the fall to his son Jacob. He discussed the importance of opposition in all things, that "man could not act for himself save it should be that he was enticed by the one or the other." Man's state is one of probation:

". . . if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden. And all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end.

"And they would have had no children; wherefore they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin.

"But behold, all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things.

"Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy.

"And the Messiah cometh in the fulness of time, that he may redeem the children of men from the fall. And because that they are redeemed from the fall they have become free forever, knowing good from evil; to act for themselves. . . .

". . . and all things are given unto them which are expedient unto man. And they are free to choose liberty and eternal life, . . . or to choose captivity and death, according to the captivity and power of the devil; for he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself." (2 Nephi 2:22-27.)

Here in relation to the creation story is one of the most sublime scriptures ever received by man. Life is a probationary state in which we are enticed by evil and by good. The decision is difficult, because evil is indeed enticing. Yet man is that he might have joy. If he will stay true to the faith, joy may be his through the redemption of the Son, who was sent by the Father to redeem mankind from the consequences of Adam's fall. It was all part of the plan. Adam truly transgressed, but this was foreseen, and indeed, everything would otherwise have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, knowing no misery, doing no good, knowing no sin. But all things were done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things.

The statement that "all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created" (2 Nephi 2:22) has been interpreted to mean that plants and animals were immortal before the fall; i.e., that there was no death. [^5] (The scriptures are clear as to Adam and Eve's immortality.) Such an interpretation essentially eliminates any "scientific" understanding of the creation scriptures. For one thing, no death equals no fossils. For another, science knows no ecosystem without death. What would animals eat? Even grass that is eaten fails to survive the process! What would decay organisms consume? Thus we are entitled to wonder about the terms "same state." The next verse describes a "state of innocence" for Adam and Eve. Was this state a perfectly balanced ecosystem, an ideal paradise—but one in which both birth and death played their normal functions as we know them?

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] LeGrand Richards, A Marvelous Work and a Wonder (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., revised and enlarged, 1976), p. 5.
[^2] For example, see Klaus Baer, "The Breathing Permit of Hor—A Translation of the Apparent Source of the Book of Abraham," Dialogue 3 (Autumn 1968): 109-34; Hugh Nibley, "Prolegomena to Any Study of the Book of Abraham," BYU Studies 8 (Winter 1968): 171-94; Hugh Nibley, "What Is 'The Book of Breathings'?" BYU Studies 11 (Winter 1971): 153-87; Jay M. Todd, The Saga of the Book of Abraham (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1969); and various articles in the Improvement Era, Ensign, and New Era. An excellent discussion is found in Hugh Nibley, The Message of the Joseph Smith Papyri: An Egyptian Endowment (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975). In this definitive treatise, Professor Nibley places the papyrus fragments in their proper perspective. They are clearly not the source of the book of Abraham, which was produced from other papyri by direct revelation from the Lord. Although only the drawings on the papyri, reproduced as facsimiles, bear any relation to our present book of Abraham, authenticity of the book has been strongly supported by reference to other ancient documents relating to the Abraham story. Professor Nibley and others have been showing this for years. The papyri represent the "Book of Breathings," or "The Breathing Permit of Hor," as it has been called. It proves to be a rich source of information about the ancient ordinances of the Egyptians. As Abraham tells us, "Pharaoh, being a righteous man," was ever "seeking earnestly to imitate that order established by the fathers in the first generations," for he "would fain claim [the priesthood]." (Abraham 1:26-27.) Judging by the Book of Breathings, Pharaoh's imitations were most impressive. In some respects they resemble the modern LDS temple ceremony, known as the endowment.
[^3] Hugh Nibley, "The Meaning of the Kirtland Egyptian Papers," BYU Studies 11 (Summer 1971): 350-99.
[^4] Some of the material is reviewed in James R. Clark, The Story of the Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1955); James R. Clark, "Joseph Smith and the Lebolo Egyptian Papyri," BYU Studies 8 (1968): 195-203; and James R. Clark, Our Pearl of Great Price, Ensign 6 (August 1976): 13-17.
[^5] Thomas W. Mackay, "Abraham in Egypt: A Collation of Evidence for the Case of the Missing Wife," BYU Studies 10 (1970): 429-51.
