Frank B. Salisbury, Creation ( 1976)

7

The Book of Abraham

Why the book of Abraham? When I was a young lad first getting interested in the scriptural accounts of creation, I encountered the creation story in the book of Abraham and noticed that it seemed to be closely similar to its counterpart in the book of Moses. Oh, there were obviously some differences in wording (Moses is written in the first person: "And I, God, said"; while Abraham is in the third person plural: "And they, that is, the Gods, said"), but why should the Lord go to all the trouble of getting the book of Abraham translated just for these minor differences in wording? After all, God has not spoken to man on very many occasions, considering the number of persons who have lived over the ages. When he speaks, his words might be expected to be of real significance.

One can apply such a test to the revelations of God as was suggested by LeGrand Richards: [^1] If a revelation is really from God, it should contain new information previously unavailable or at least unclear to mankind, or it might confirm some previous commandment in need of validation. For example, Doctrine and Covenants 42 is called "the law of the Church," and in it the Lord confirms several of the Ten Commandments.

Upon more careful study of the book of Abraham, it became increasingly apparent to me why the book was restored to mankind. There is valuable historical information in the first two chapters, and chapter 3 is a marvelous view of the insight held by some of the ancients into the workings of the universe, the realities of the God who created it, and his special abode in it. The creation story itself proves to be a unique and marvelous view of creation. It is probably the greatest insight available to man today into the nature of God's creative power. Creation is portrayed not as an act of magic but as the application of a supreme intelligence—truly a divine engineering. There was planning and preparation. Councils were held. Nothing like this is apparent from the Genesis or the Moses accounts. And nothing could be more important for modern man to understand.

THE ORIGIN OF THE BOOK OF ABRAHAM

The rediscovery of some of the papyrus fragments from which the book of Abraham was translated has sparked an eruption of historical research into the events surrounding translation of the book. Several articles and books are available, [^2] and so this topic will not be examined here. As indicated before, I have taken the steps in my own mind to ascertain the divinity of the work, and my interest now is centered more on its content than on its origin. If I accept Joseph Smith as a prophet of God—and I do—then the book of Abraham is one of his inspired and most important products.

Nevertheless, without going into the details of historical research presently under way, we can briefly summarize the origin of the book of Abraham as follows: Eleven Egyptian mummies were exhumed from their tomb near Thebes in Egypt about 1818 by Antonio Lebolo. After Lebolo's death in Trieste in 1823, they were shipped to Ireland and then New York, addressed to Michael Chandler, a nephew of Lebolo. One of the mummies included a roll of papyrus beneath the wrappings covering the breast. These scrolls were in a state of excellent preservation and contained writings in black and a few in red. Chandler heard of Joseph Smith's reputation as a translator, first in the customs house of New York, where he retrieved the mummies, and again on several occasions as he exhibited them throughout the eastern United States. Finally, the mummies and the papyrus were brought to Kirtland, Ohio, and to Joseph Smith on July 3, 1835. Chandler asked him for a translation of the hieroglyphics on the papyrus. The Prophet produced this, and it agreed in detail with suggestions Chandler had received from Egyptologists in the eastern United States. Chandler prepared a certificate attesting to this.

Recent research has produced not only fragments of the papyrus (including especially the illustration of Abraham on the altar) but changes in the dates for Lebolo's discovery and death originally given by Chandler to Joseph Smith. In addition, seven or eight of the original mummies have been located, and several details have come to light, such as the likely fact that Benjamin Bullock III may have been the individual who finally brought Chandler to Kirtland and Joseph Smith.

A number of the residents of Kirtland (apparently not members of the Church) purchased four of the mummies along with the scrolls and presented them to Joseph Smith. With the help of Oliver Cowdrey and others, including W. W. Phelps, Joseph worked intermittently on a translation of the scrolls from 1835 until the time of his death, and ascertained them to be writings from Abraham and Joseph. Only the writings of Abraham up to and including the creation story were ever published. Little is known about the procedures followed during translation. A number of manuscripts in the Church Historical Department contain parts of the book of Abraham along with Egyptian characters, but these were apparently uninspired attempts by W. W. Phelps, Oliver Cowdery, W. Parrish, and others to translate some of the papyrus characters. [^3] Abraham states: "I have given you the fashion of them in the figures at the beginning, which manner of the figures is called by the Chaldeans Rahleenos, which signifies hieroglyphics." (Abraham 1:14.) The implication is that the text of Abraham's book was written in some fashion other than hieroglyphics. It has been suggested that the writing was in an even more ancient language, possibly Adamic.

The book of Abraham was published in two installments in March and May of 1842 in the Times and Seasons at Nauvoo, Illinois. It was subsequently included in the Pearl of Great Price, published by Franklin D. Richards in Liverpool, England, in 1851. This version of the Pearl of Great Price included a number of revelations from the Doctrine and Covenants as well as the material presently included. There were also the words to the song "Oh Say What Is Truth." The first American edition of the Pearl of Great Price was in 1878 in Salt Lake City. Utah. By vote of the Church in 1880 and 1902, this new scripture was accepted as binding upon the Church and as a part of its standard works. Thus these ancient writings of Abraham, the father of the faithful (and Moses, as already discussed), became available as modern-day scripture. [^4]

ABRAHAM'S STORY

Abraham 1:1-4. The first two chapters of the book of Abraham review some of Abraham's history. While they are not directly related to the story of creation, they provide insight into the man who was given this story by God. They are well worth reading, but our summary must be brief.

Writing in the first person, Abraham tells us that he was living in the land of the Chaldeans with his father, and that he was a follower of righteousness, receiving his priesthood through the fathers. In D&C 84:14 we read: "Abraham received the priesthood from Melchizedek, who received it through the lineage of his fathers, even till Noah." Incidentally, it is important to keep in mind that Abraham lived in about 2000 B.C., or about 4,000 years ago. This was about 1,350 years before Moses.

1:5-20. Abraham's fathers had turned to idolatry, offering human sacrifices of men, women, and children. The priest of Pharaoh "laid violence upon" Abraham, binding him to the altar and attempting to offer him as sacrifice. Abraham describes the altar and even presents a picture, the only illustrated event in all scripture. (This illustration is part of what was found in the Metropolitan Museum in New York.) Abraham called upon God, who sent an angel to loosen his hands. Abraham was told that the Lord's name is Jehovah, and that he was going to take Abraham into a strange land. Through Abraham's ministry, Jehovah's name would be known in the earth forever. The Lord then destroyed the altar and "smote" the priest to death.

1:21-28. Abraham digresses to recount some of the history of the founding of Egypt. The Pharaoh was a descendant of Ham and thus carried the blood of the Canaanites. When Egypt was discovered by a daughter of Ham and Egyptus, it was under water, possibly one of the frequent floods of the Nile. The grandson of Ham, called Pharaoh, established the first government of Egypt. He was a righteous man and was blessed with the blessings of the earth and of wisdom but cursed as pertaining to the priesthood. Nevertheless, his descendants claimed the priesthood through Noah, and Abraham's father was led away by their idolatry.

1:29-31. Returning to the story, Abraham stated that a severe famine came into the land of Chaldea, and that his father was so tormented that he repented. Abraham had the record of the patriarchs, in which was a knowledge of the beginning of creation and of the planets and of the stars.

2:1-5. The famine became so severe that Abraham's brother Haran died, although his father, Terah, lived. Abraham married his niece Sarai, daughter of Haran. Then he went to Canaan, taking Sarai and also Lot, his brother's son. His father followed, apparently at a distance, but when the famine abated, Terah again became idolatrous.

2:6-11. Abraham and Lot prayed to the Lord, who appeared unto them. He stated his power (he controls the sea, the wind, the fire, the mountains) and again identified himself as Jehovah, who knows the ends and the beginnings. He promised to make Abraham a great nation and told him that the priesthood and the gospel should be carried to all nations and families of the earth through his seed. He would bless those who blessed Abraham and curse those who cursed him. This covenant between God and Abraham is a key gospel concept.

2:12-21. Abraham expressed his gratefulness, saying: ". . . thy servant has sought thee earnestly; now I have found thee." Following the Lord's instructions, Abraham took Lot and all their possessions and departed. He was sixty-two years old. They dwelt in tents in Canaan with eternity as their coverings. Abraham built altars and made offerings, praying that the famine would abate, but they continued on toward Egypt because the famine was still very grievous.

2:22-25. The Lord warned Abraham that when the Egyptians saw Sarai, who was very beautiful, they would kill Abraham to get her. Abraham was to tell the Egyptians that Sarai was his sister rather than his wife. Presumably, if Pharaoh thought she was his sister, he would have hopes of getting her with Abraham's permission, but if she was Abraham's wife, the only way to get her would be to kill Abraham! This is an interesting little story. Sarai was not only Abraham's sister in the gospel, but may have been a literal half-sister, since his father may have taken Haran's wife to raise children, as was the custom. (Genesis 20:12.) In any case, Abraham, to preserve his life, did not explain these details to the Pharaoh. It seems that such is justified in matters of life and death. (See also 1 Nephi 4:10-18; D&C 134:11.)

ABRAHAM'S ASTRONOMY LESSON

With the beginning of chapter 3, we enter the part of the book of Abraham that has the most direct bearing on the creation. Abraham was given a generalized picture of the universe, and some of the information is of great interest and importance. We shall present the remainder of the book of Abraham verbatim, making comments here and there where they seem appropriate.

3:1-4. "And I, Abraham, had the Urim and Thummim, which the Lord my God had given unto me, in Ur of the Chaldees;

"And I saw the stars, that they were very great, and that one of them was nearest unto the throne of God; and there were many great ones which were near unto it;

"And the Lord said unto me: These are the governing ones; and the name of the great one is Kolob, because it is near unto me, for I am the Lord thy God: I have set this one to govern all those which belong to the same order as that upon which thou standest.

"And the Lord said unto me, by the Urim and Thummim, that Kolob was after the manner of the Lord, according to its times and seasons in the revolutions thereof; that one revolution was a day unto the Lord, after his manner of reckoning, it being one thousand years according to the time appointed unto that whereon thou standest. This is the reckoning of the Lord's time, according to the reckoning of Kolob."

Through the Urim and Thummim Abraham received the sublime truth that God's throne (the planet on which he dwells?) is near to, but not identical with, a great star called Kolob, which star is itself associated with other great ruling stars (those of our galaxy or some more local group?). God keeps time according to the "revolutions" of this great star, which completes one "revolution" in one thousand of our years. Probably this means that Kolob rotates once on its axis in one thousand years, as the earth rotates once each day. But the term revolution refers to movement of a celestial body in its orbit. Did Joseph Smith choose the wrong technical term or does Kolob revolve around "God's throne"?

The Lord told Joseph Smith: "The place where God resides is a great Urim and Thummim. This earth, in its sanctified and immortal state, will be made like unto crystal and will be a Urim and Thummim to the inhabitants who dwell thereon, whereby all things pertaining to an inferior kingdom, or all kingdoms of a lower order, will be manifest to those who dwell on it; and this earth will be Christ's." (D&C 130:8-9.) Thus the Urim and Thummim must be a powerful instrument of divine engineering, designed for information storage and retrieval and for communication. Was the Urim and Thummim that is God's abode transmitting to Abraham's Urim and Thummim to give him this mighty vision?

3:5-13. "And the Lord said unto me: The planet which is the lesser light, lesser than that which is to rule the day, even the night, is above or greater than that upon which thou standest in point of reckoning, for it moveth in order more slow; this is in order because it standeth above the earth upon which thou standest, therefore the reckoning of its time is not so many as to its number of days, and of months, and of years.

"And the Lord said unto me: Now, Abraham, these two facts exist, behold thine eyes see it; it is given unto thee to know the times of reckoning, and the set time, yea, the set time of the earth upon which thou standest, and the set time of the greater light which is set to rule the day, and the set time of the lesser light which is set to rule the night.

"Now the set time of the lesser light is a longer time as to its reckoning than the reckoning of the time of the earth upon which thou standest.

"And where these two facts exist, there shall be another fact above them, that is, there shall be another planet whose reckoning of time shall be longer still;

"And thus there shall be the reckoning of the time of one planet above another, until thou come nigh unto Kolob, which Kolob is after the reckoning of the Lord's time; which Kolob is set nigh unto the throne of God, to govern all those planets which belong to the same order as that upon which thou standest.

"And it is given unto thee to know the set time of all the stars that are set to give light, until thou come near unto the throne of God.

"Thus I, Abraham, talked with the Lord, face to face, as one man talketh with another; and he told me of the works which his hands had made;

"And he said unto me: My son, my son (and his hand was stretched out), behold I will show you all these. And he put his hand upon mine eyes, and I saw those things which his hands had made, which were many; and they multiplied before mine eyes, and I could not see the end thereof.

"And he said unto me: This is Shinehah, which is the sun. And he said unto me: Kokob, which is star. And he said unto me: Olea, which is the moon. And he said unto me: Kokaubeam, which signifies stars, or all the great lights, which were in the firmament of heaven."

Abraham was given a vision of the universe, and it proves to be similar to the picture developing in modern astronomy. Astronomers have recognized that our solar system is in one arm of the Milky Way galaxy, the entire galaxy rotating about a center. The day of the "planet" moon, as was pointed out to Abraham, is longer than that of the earth—about 29 days. The planets beyond the earth have yearly periods that are also much longer than that of the earth. The sun with its planets is revolving in the galaxy with a period of about 200 million years. The galaxy seems to be associated with a number of other galaxies, and they could all be revolving about a center and exhibiting extremely long periods. Thus the picture given to Abraham and translated by Joseph Smith is being substantiated by research in astronomy. Although the concepts had been suggested, there was no evidence in Joseph Smith's day (nor probably Abraham's day) for a solar system rotating within a galaxy.

I have stated that God tells man little about the physical universe via revelation. This idea remains pretty much intact, even after an examination of Abraham's astronomy lesson. We know that the governing force between the planets is gravity. Knowledge of the inverse square law of gravitational attraction is absolutely essential to any understanding of how the planets and stars relate to each other in the universe. This law was well known before Joseph Smith's day, but if it was given to Abraham, it is not mentioned in his writings. Although Abraham knew the set times of the earth, moon, sun, and perhaps the planets, these are not stated in his book. The implication might be that Abraham was arbitrarily given these times without any understanding of the force that controlled them.

It is even possible that the astronomy of his day was able to measure them. Certainly, there was much interest among Abraham's contemporaries relating to the times of movements of the planets (see chapter 9), since they were applied in casting astrological horoscopes. Abraham may have been given highly accurate figures for these times, but contemporary astrologers could always take issue with these based upon their own observations.

When the Lord gives us knowledge relating to the workings of the physical universe, we can usually talk our way out of it if we want to. Even the broad picture of star and planetary motions given to Abraham is so general that it means little without the findings of astronomy. For example, since the moon is a satellite of earth, it is hardly valid to compare the motions of the moon with those of other planets or stars except in the very general manner of Abraham's vision. Our search for God is seldom, if ever, fortified by "hard" scientific evidence. In seeking him, we must examine his precepts for correct living, his revelations about himself and the plan of salvation, and base our decisions on these data.

GOD'S SUPREMACY: THE POINT OF THE ASTRONOMY LESSON

3:14-19. "And it was in the night time when the Lord spake these words unto me: I will multiply thee, and thy seed after thee, like unto these; and if thou canst count the number of sands, so shall be the number of thy seeds.

"And the Lord said unto me: Abraham, I show these things unto thee before ye go into Egypt, that ye may declare all these words.

"If two things exist, and there be one above the other, there shall be greater things above them; therefore Kolob is the greatest of all the Kokaubeam that thou hast seen, because it is nearest unto me.

"Now, if there be two things, one above the other, and the moon be above the earth, then it may be that a planet or a star may exist above it; and there is nothing that the Lord thy God shall take in his heart to do but what he will do it.

"Howbeit that he made the greater star; as, also, if there be two spirits, and one shall be more intelligent than the other, yet these two spirits, notwithstanding one is more intelligent than the other, have no beginning; they existed before, they shall have no end, they shall exist after, for they are gnolaum, or eternal.

"And the Lord said unto me: These two facts do exist, that there are two spirits, one being more intelligent than the other; there shall be another more intelligent than they; I am the Lord thy God, I am more intelligent than they all."

Here is the real reason for Abraham's astronomy lesson. He was not given this information so he could argue with the astrologers of his day—although he was commanded to declare the words. However, these words concerned not the nature of the universe, but the nature of God. As one planet or star was above another in the order of things, so one spirit was above another in order of intelligence. As Kolob was the great, superior, governing star, so God was the greatest and most intelligent of all spirits; this is what makes him God. Here was a radically new theological doctrine—and one that the scientists of neither Abraham's day nor our own would have been likely to elucidate by their researches. In Abraham's day people worshipped many gods. Abraham's message to them was that there was only one truly superior God, and this great Being is more intelligent than all other spirits.

Part of the lesson was also concerned with the covenant made between Abraham and the Lord. As the stars and planets filled the universe and as the sands multiplied along the shores of the seas, so would Abraham's seed multiply after him.

Abraham was also given in detail the doctrine of the eternal nature of spirits: they have no beginning, neither will they have an end. Thus they were not originally created by God (intelligence cannot be created—D&C 93:29), but they were organized to higher levels by God's intelligence. In heaven, they were created as spirits in God's image (Moses 2:26; 3:5), they became God's spirit children (D&C 76:24), and they received from God the gift of free agency (Moses 4:3).

These verses also contain one of the most marvelous statements of God's omnipotence to be found anywhere in scripture. Over the centuries theologians have argued about the nature of God's total power. If God can do anything, can he trisect an angle using only a square and a compass, as mathematicians have proven to be impossible? Or could he build a rock so large he couldn't lift it? Or much more pertinent to our modern day, could he build an earth where his children could live in perfect peace, justice, and harmony with no misery or woe—ultimately returning to become gods in the Father's presence?

If no restrictions are placed upon God's power, then these questions seem valid. But placing restrictions on God's power seems to be a presumptuous act of sacrilegious man, so we seem to be faced with a hopeless dilemma. Yet it was solved beautifully in the statement to Abraham that "there is nothing that the Lord thy God shall take in his heart to do but what he will do it." (Abraham 3:17.) God is indeed powerful enough to accomplish anything that he wants to accomplish. It is not a matter of what he can do, but what he wants to do. Surely with his omniscience, he will not want to do something that is impossible. He is all wise. He is certainly aware of the mathematical impossibility of trisecting an angle and consequently has no desire to do so; he would not be bothered with the trivialities of constructing rocks too large to lift; and most important of all, he knows that man cannot be saved in ignorance (D&C 131:6) but can only return to his presence by learning to use his mighty gift of agency, the power that can lead to salvation (D&C 58:28).

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] For example, Brigham Young in Journal of Discourses, 17:143 and 9:317, and John Taylor, The Mormon, August 29, 1857.
[^2] See Journal of Discourses, 7:285-86; 11:122.
[^3] Examples of these authors and their approaches include the following:
[^4] James E. Talmage, The House of the Lord (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 83.
