Frank B. Salisbury, Creation ( 1976)

8

Abraham and Physical Creation

Abraham's visions of the nighttime, given through the Urim and Thummim, must have greatly exceeded in beauty and glory anything we can possibly imagine. The culmination of this sublime vision was the story of our earth's creation, but the Lord had much to teach Abraham (and through him, us) before this story was told. We have seen that Abraham was taught the basic structure of the universe, and this was used as an analogy of the gradation of spirits and the supremacy of God's power and intelligence.

When God taught Moses about creation, he also set the narrative in the context of his other creations (Moses 1), speaking of the continuous creation of earths, for there is no end to God's works or his words. Why? The work and glory of God is "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) In the same manner, centuries before, the Lord told Abraham the purposes of creation before telling of creation itself. Notice how the scenario moves with no perceptible break from Kolob (already discussed, Abraham 3:1-19) through God's supremacy and purposes in creation, the council in heaven, to creation itself.

THE PURPOSES OF CREATION

3:20-23. "The Lord thy God sent his angel to deliver thee from the hands of the priest of Elkenah.

"I dwell in the midst of them all; I now, therefore, have come down unto thee to deliver unto thee the works which my hands have made, wherein my wisdom excelleth them all, for I rule in the heavens above, and in the earth beneath, in all wisdom and prudence, over all the intelligences thine eyes have seen from the beginning; I came down in the beginning in the midst of all the intelligences thou hast seen.

"Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

"And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born."

God's omniscience is stated in these passages. Here he tells us that he is indeed all wise, confirming the idea that he will not want to do the impossible.

In theology, we refer to the status of man before he became a spirit child of God as being an intelligence. This term depends almost exclusively upon these passages in the book of Abraham. Thus it is interesting to note that the terms intelligences, souls, and spirits are all used in an apparently synonymous way in verse 23. Yet we are justified in thinking of the "intelligence" as the most primeval state of being, because that is what we were "in the beginning," when God came down among us. That must have been when God became God of the intelligences shown to Abraham: when he came down in the beginning among them. Furthermore, as clearly implied by the astronomy lesson and its analogy with the spirits (chapter 7), not all intelligences are equal. Some are noble and great, and these future leaders, including Abraham, were chosen by God before they were born on the earth.

3:24-28. "And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell;

"And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them;

"And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever.

"And the Lord said: Whom shall I send? And one answered like unto the Son of Man: Here am I, send me. And another answered and said: Here am I, send me. And the Lord said: I will send the first.

"And the second was angry, and kept not his first estate; and, at that day, many followed after him."

Here, in a few simple words, is one of the great statements of scripture relating to the purpose of life. An earth was to be created—not out of nothing, but from preexisting materials—and this was to test the intelligences-spirits-souls to see if they would do all things whatsoever the Lord, their God, should command them. If those who were spirits would "keep" their first estate (their status as God's spirit children), they would be added upon by progressing to a second estate, mortality, and if they met the responsibilities of that condition, then they would have glory added upon their heads forever and ever. That is, they would return to the presence of God and become even as he is. (D&C 76:50-70; 132:20.) Lucifer's plan to be the redeemer and to save everyone by taking away their agency (Moses 4:1-3) was discussed in chapter 6. Satan desired to have God's glory, but his anger led to loss of the first estate. Yet he was convincing enough to take many others with him, a third of the hosts of heaven, we are told. (D&C 29:36.)

THE SIX PREPARATORY PERIODS OF CREATION

The general outline of creation follows that in Genesis and Moses. Again we have the problem of the "two accounts" (the seven periods plus the "man-from-the-dust" story). Abraham's solution is completely different from that of Moses, although not incompatible with it. The six times of creation (as Abraham calls them) were times of preparation and planning when the Gods plural, who carried out creation, planned and took counsel among themselves. In each period they also performed some preparatory creative act, readying the earth for the later placement of life. Man was created from the dust of the earth during the seventh time, and during this seventh time plants and animals were also placed upon the earth. There is nothing in Abraham's account to indicate that organisms were placed on earth before that time, although the earth was prepared for them. In the account of Moses, plants, animals, and mankind were created before the seventh day, but they were formed in heaven, and there was not a man to till the ground until man was placed on the earth, becoming the first flesh and the first man also. (Moses 3:5.) Let us examine Abraham's account:

4:1-2. "And then the Lord said: Let us go down. And they went down at the beginning, and they, that is the Gods, organized and formed the heavens and the earth.

"And the earth, after it was formed, was empty and desolate, because they had not formed anything but the earth; and darkness reigned upon the face of the deep, and the Spirit of the Gods was brooding upon the face of the waters."

The Lord, who had identified himself as Jehovah, went down with other gods to organize and form the heavens and the earth from preexisting material. (Abraham 3:24.) Who were the other gods? Michael, who was to become Adam, was one of them, we have been told by our prophets. Michael and Jehovah would make two, accounting for the plural term "the Gods," but others may have been present. Was it the spirit of the Holy Ghost that was brooding upon the face of the waters?

Abraham's description of the primeval earth uses the terms "empty and desolate" rather than "without form and void." As indicated previously, Joseph Smith stated that these words were a far more descriptive translation of the Hebrew. (See footnote 1, chapter 6.)

4:4-5. "And they (the Gods) comprehended the light, for it was bright; and they divided the light, or caused it to be divided, from the darkness.

"And the Gods called the light Day, and the darkness they called Night. And it came to pass that from the evening until morning they called night; and from the morning until the evening they called day; and this was the first, or the beginning, of that which they called day and night."

Perhaps we are to imply from this that the Gods ignited the sun at this time. Astrophysics suggests that a sun becomes a sun when it gathers enough matter to raise its temperature by gravitational compression to a point capable of supporting thermonuclear reactions. According to the accretion hypothesis for the origin of the solar system, matter from an interstellar cloud of material (which is indeed almost "without form and void") might have begun to condense, forming simultaneously the empty and desolate earth, the other planets, and the sun. Accretion of matter into the sun may not have been sufficient to ignite its thermonuclear fires until after most of the earth had been formed.

4:6-8. "And the Gods also said: Let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters, and it shall divide the waters from the waters.

"And the Gods ordered the expanse, so that it divided the waters which were under the expanse from the waters which were above the expanse; and it was so, even as they ordered.

"And the Gods called the expanse, Heaven. And it came to pass that it was from evening until morning that they called night, and it came to pass that it was from morning until evening that they called day, and this was the second time that they called night and day."

Current accretion theories hold that immense quantities of hydrogen, helium, and the lighter elements are present in the clouds of interstellar matter from which a solar system condenses. As the planet heats up by its own accretion processes, many molecules of these lighter gases, including water vapor, may attain such thermal velocities that they cannot be held by the planet's gravity. Perhaps here the Lord is speaking of this period, when some water is cooling and condensing onto the earth's surface (perhaps covering it entirely), while other water—possibly vast quantities—is being lost from the earth's gravity, and an atmosphere is forming above the waters on the earth's surface and below the waters that are escaping to space. Nothing is stated about the composition of this atmosphere called heaven. Modern theories suggest that it consisted primarily of such gases as hydrogen, methane, ammonia, water vapor, etc. There is no reason to believe that free molecular oxygen or probably even nitrogen were present.

4:9-13. "And the Gods ordered, saying: Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the earth come up dry; and it was so as they ordered;

"And the Gods pronounced the dry land, earth; and the gathering together of the waters, pronounced they, great waters; and the Gods saw that they were obeyed.

"And the Gods said: Let us prepare the earth to bring forth grass; the herb yielding seed; the fruit tree yielding fruit, after his kind, whose seed in itself yieldeth its own likeness upon the earth; and it was so, even as they ordered.

"And the Gods organized the earth to bring forth grass from its own seed, and the herb to bring forth herb from its own seed, yielding seed after his kind; and the earth to bring forth the tree from its own seed, yielding fruit, whose seed could only bring forth the same in itself, after his kind; and the Gods saw that they were obeyed.

"And it came to pass that they numbered the days; from the evening until the morning they called night; and it came to pass, from the morning until the evening they called day; and it was the third time."

Apparently there is dry land on earth because part of the earth's crust is lighter and tends to "float" on the heavier rock below (see chapter 11). These balances in the crustal rocks may not have been achieved until after the earth had been in existence for an interval of time, before which the earth might have been completely covered with water.

Soon after the earth came up dry, the Gods made plans for the plant life that would live on it, discussing the laws of plant genetics. They also decided to prepare and organize the dry land in anticipation of the time when plants would grow upon it. After making these decisions, they actually did prepare and organize the land for plant life, but it is not stated that plants were placed upon it at that time.

4:14-19. "And the Gods organized the lights in the expanse of the heaven, and caused them to divide the day from the night; and organized them to be for signs and for seasons, and for days and for years;

"And organized them to be for lights in the expanse of the heaven to give light upon the earth; and it was so.

"And the Gods organized the two great lights, the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night; with the lesser light they set the stars also;

"And the Gods set them in the expanse of the heavens, to give light upon the earth, and to rule over the day and over the night, and to cause to divide the light from the darkness.

"And the Gods watched those things which they had ordered until they obeyed.

"And it came to pass that it was from evening until morning that it was night; and it came to pass that it was from morning until evening that it was day; and it was the fourth time."

As suggested in chapter 6, the primeval earth might have been covered with dense materials, possibly clouds of dust and vapor. By the fourth time, these clouds may have cleared by condensation and settling to the point where the heavenly bodies could be seen from the earth's surface. It is also possible that the moon didn't come into orbit around the earth until this fourth time, and it is even conceivable that the earth might have come into its permanent orbit around the sun at this time. Yet to receive the light mentioned on the second time, it must have been close to the sun or perhaps some other luminous body.

A number of the early brethren stated that the earth was created in the vicinity of Kolob [^1] and that it "fell" away from Kolob at the time of the fall, when Adam and Eve partook of the forbidden fruit. It is difficult to think of an object falling away from a gravitation source such as Kolob must be. To fall is to move toward a center of gravity. The vast interstellar distances also make the concept a difficult one. In any case, if the earth did move from Kolob at the time of Adam and Eve's fall, it must have taken the sun and the moon with it, because these were present and apparent in the fourth creative period.

4:20-23. "And the Gods said: Let us prepare the waters to bring forth abundantly the moving creatures that have life; and the fowl, that they may fly above the earth in the open expanse of heaven.

"And the Gods prepared the waters that they might bring forth great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters were to bring forth abundantly after their kind; and every winged fowl after their kind. And the Gods saw that they would be obeyed, and that their plan was good.

"And the Gods said: We will bless them, and cause them to be fruitful and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas or great waters; and cause the fowl to multiply in the earth.

"And it came to pass that it was from evening until morning that they called night; and it came to pass that it was from morning until evening that they called day; and it was the fifth time."

During this period the Gods prepared the earth for fishes and fowl. They planned carefully, saw that their plan was good, and saw that they would be obeyed—that is, that their plan would work. Again, there is no statement that fish or fowl were actually placed in the waters and in the atmosphere of the earth at that time.

4:24-31. "And the Gods prepared the earth to bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle and creeping things, and beasts of the earth after their kind; and it was so, as they had said.

"And the Gods organized the earth to bring forth the beasts after their kind, and cattle after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the earth after its kind; and the Gods saw they would obey.

"And the Gods took counsel among themselves and said: Let us go down and form man in our image, after our likeness; and we will give them dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

"So the Gods went down to organize man in their own image, in the image of the Gods to form they him, male and female to form they them.

"And the Gods said: We will bless them. And the Gods said: We will cause them to be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and to have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.

"And the Gods said: Behold, we will give them every herb bearing seed that shall come upon the face of all the earth, and every tree which shall have fruit upon it; yea, the fruit of the tree yielding seed to them we will give it; it shall be for their meat.

"And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, behold, we will give them life, and also we will give to them every green herb for meat, and all these things shall be thus organized.

"And the Gods said: We will do everything that we have said, and organize them; and behold, they shall be very obedient. And it came to pass that it was from evening until morning they called night; and it came to pass that it was from morning until evening that they called day; and they numbered the sixth time."

Again, the Gods prepared the earth for future life, this time for land animals. Again, there was much counseling and planning, much description of the ecological balances that would exist, both man and beast being given every herb and the fruit of trees for food, for meat. As in Moses' account, there is no indication that some animals would be carnivorous.

Animals were to be given the gift of life. And the Gods planned to go down and organize man and to cause him to be fruitful and to multiply, having dominion over the other organisms on the earth. They reiterate the soundness of their plan, knowing that it will function, that living things shall be obedient to the laws of life. Yet in all this planning and preparing, there is no statement that life was actually placed upon the earth, neither animal life nor man.

THE SEVENTH TIME: BIOLOGICAL CREATION

The fifth chapter of Abraham is concerned exclusively with the seventh time of creation. All the preparations have been made; everything has been carefully planned. Councils have been held, and decisions have been arrived at. The divine engineering has been accomplished. The laws of biology—the laws of life—have been carefully worked out, based upon the laws of interacting atoms: physics and chemistry. This has been done so carefully that the Gods know they will be obeyed, that their engineering will work. Now it is time to put these plans into operation.

5:1-5. "And thus we will finish the heavens and the earth, and all the hosts of them.

"And the Gods said among themselves: On the seventh time we will end our work, which we have counseled; and we will rest on the seventh time from all our work which we have counseled.

"And the Gods concluded upon the seventh time, because that on the seventh time they would rest from all their works which they (the Gods) counseled among themselves to form; and sanctified it. And thus were their decisions at the time that they counseled among themselves to form the heavens and the earth.

"And the Gods came down and formed these the generations of the heavens and of the earth, when they were formed in the day that the Gods formed the earth and the heavens,

"According to all that which they had said concerning every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew; for the Gods had not caused it to rain upon the earth when they counseled to do them, and had not formed a man to till the ground."

Now the Gods actually put into effect the plans and decisions they had previously made. They came down to earth to carry out their plans about the plants of the field. Here is Abraham's solution to the problem of the "two accounts." There is no mention of a previous spiritual creation, only a planning and preparation of the earth. Now, on the seventh time, the plans of creation are actually to be realized.

In both Moses and Abraham, there is a clear statement that it had not yet rained on the earth. This is a perplexing statement. Does it imply that temperatures had been too high up to this time to permit condensation? Or that the temperature profile of the atmosphere was inverted so that moist air could not rise to form clouds? A scientific understanding of this statement just might open the entire creation story to our comprehension.

5:6-7. "But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.

"And the Gods formed man from the dust of the ground, and took his spirit (that is, the man's spirit), and put it into him; and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul."

Here was the creation of temporal man from the dust of the earth. Abraham does not emphasize that man was the first flesh, as does Moses, but man is mentioned first in the temporal creation of things. Again we must remember that this was the man Adam and not mankind. Eve is yet to come.

Note the emphasis upon man being created from the dust of the earth. The early brethren (especially Brigham Young) taught that Adam was brought here from another planet. [^2] This appears to be in conflict with the scriptural statement that Adam was "formed from the dust of the ground," but there may be some subtle way to reconcile the two ideas. Was Adam brought here in some embryonic form, using the substance of this earth to grow to maturity?

No clear-cut statement of man's spiritual creation is mentioned at this point in the account, but then that is hardly necessary, since Abraham 3 presents such a clear picture of man's preexistence as intelligence and in the first estate. It is simply mentioned that man's pre-existent spirit was placed into his earthly body.

5:8-10. "And the Gods planted a garden, eastward in Eden, and there they put the man, whose spirit they had put into the body which they had formed.

"And out of the ground made the Gods to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food; the tree of life, also, in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

"There was a river running out of Eden, to water the garden, and from thence it was parted and became into four heads."

So plants were planted in the garden. As mentioned earlier, seeds may have been brought from other planets. In any case, the placing of plants on earth had been carefully planned as early as the third time of creation. Note that the rivers are not named as they are in the other account.

5:11-13. "And the Gods took the man and put him in the Garden of Eden, to dress it and to keep it.

"And the Gods commanded the man, saying: Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat,

"But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it; for in the time that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die. Now I, Abraham, saw that it was after the Lord's time, which was after the time of Kolob; for as yet the Gods had not appointed unto Adam his reckoning."

Adam was told that if he partook of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, he would die, and it was made clear to Abraham that this was one of the Lord's times, presumably a "revolution" of Kolob and equal to a thousand years on earth. Adam did die at the age of 930.

Many literalist writers in the Church deduce from this statement that each of the times of creation was also equal to a thousand years, or one of the Lord's times. Certainly this is a logical conclusion. But if we are greatly troubled by the time element, we are probably not compelled to accept this conclusion. In the most literal sense, the statement of time refers only to Adam's dying in one of the Lord's times after he partook of the fruit. It is not explicitly stated that the times of creation were also each equal to the times of Kolob. On the other hand, in each of the times there is a specific reference to "from the evening until the morning" and "from the morning until the evening." Does this refer to the "revolutions" of Kolob?

5:14-19. "And the Gods said: Let us make an help meet for the man, for it is not good that the man should be alone, therefore we will form an help meet for him.

"And the Gods caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam; and he slept, and they took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh in the stead thereof;

"And of the rib which the Gods had taken from man, formed they a woman, and brought her unto the man.

"And Adam said: This was bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh; now she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of man;

"Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife, and they shall be one flesh.

"And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed."

In this account, the creation of Eve is mentioned before the creation of the animals, although the situation is reversed in Moses. (There the order is justified by indicating that even though animals had been created, a suitable help meet for Adam was still not available—lions, horses, and elephants are all right as companions, but they can hardly take the place of a woman!) The fact that the order of things is reversed in the two accounts could mean that one account or the other is in error (which would open the door to speculation), or it may imply that except for man, creation of plants, animals, and Eve did not follow a sequential order but may have occurred simultaneously. Moses clearly states that the man Adam was first, but beyond this, perhaps there is no order to the creation of things: plants and animals were placed on earth, and sometime during all this, Eve was created.

5:20-21. "And out of the ground the Gods formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air, and brought them unto Adam to see what he would call them; and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that should be the name thereof.

"And Adam gave names to all cattle, to the fowl of the air, to every beast of the field; and for Adam, there was found an help meet for him."

Here is the creation of animals, again out of the ground. What about Adam's naming of these animals? Does this mean that Adam was taking part in the formulation of language? Or is there a deeper meaning; namely, that Adam was a participant in creation? (See discussion in chapter 6.)

SOME IMPLICATIONS OF THE SCRIPTURAL ACCOUNTS OF CREATION

The creation accounts of Moses and Abraham differ in several significant ways but are nevertheless not difficult to reconcile with each other. Moses describes six creation periods, stating that plants were created during the third period and animals and man during the fifth and sixth periods. Then we are told that every plant had been created before it grew and that all the children of men had been created in heaven, but that at the beginning of the seventh period there was not yet a man to till the ground, nor had it rained. Apparently, the reference to the creation of plants, animals, and man was a reference to their spiritual creation in heaven.

Abraham emphasizes a different aspect of the story; namely, the preparation of the earth for the ultimate reception of plants and animals and the planning or biological engineering that would be necessary to place these plants and animals on earth. Abraham tells us that on the seventh time, the Gods came to earth to carry out the remainder of their plan, creating man from the ground, placing plants in a garden, creating animals from the ground, and forming Eve from one of Adam's ribs. They also rested on this seventh time after completing their work, and they sanctified the seventh time. This concept of biological creation on the seventh time is born out by revelation to Joseph Smith as follows: "We are to understand that as God made the world in six days, and on the seventh day he finished his work, and sanctified it, and also formed man out of the dust of the earth, even so. . . ." (D&C 77:12.)

So there is no conflict between the accounts of Moses and Abraham. One describes a spiritual creation of life on the third, fifth, and sixth days; the other describes preparations and planning for biological creation, these occurring at the same times as their counterparts in spiritual creation.

This is fine, but two problems remain. First, it is extremely difficult to reconcile such a story with current theories of science, which have life originating early in the earth's history—certainly not in the last one-seventh of the earth's time (unless "life" means only multicellular organisms with true nuclei in their cells; these did appear only during the last one-seventh—plants and animals almost simultaneously). Up to this point, we have simply tried to look at the scriptural accounts as carefully as possible, not worrying much about potential conflicts with science. Soon, in Section III, we shall examine some findings of science, finally returning in Section IV to a comparison of the creation accounts with what science has learned.

Second is the extent to which Latter-day Saint authors seem to disagree on what the creation accounts of Moses and Abraham actually say. [^3] Some take a literal approach to the stories, much as I have done (or even more so); others emphasize the discoveries of science and view the scriptural accounts as being mostly symbolic.

There is also a third problem: A creation story is presented as part of the temple ceremony. [^4] This cannot be considered outside the temple, but those familiar with the ceremony may be aware of certain conflicts, though the ceremony is often extremely illuminating. The conflicts mostly have to do with timing—but time sequences are not clear in the ceremony anyway.

The writings of other LDS authors sometimes trouble me in two ways: when they are too literal and when they are not literal enough. On the one hand, it is suggested (e.g., by Joseph Fielding Smith) that the statement that man was the first flesh (Moses 3:7) really means that man was the first mortal. For me, this is not being literal enough. I wish I could accept it, because it would lessen the conflicts with science. But as I read the words over and over and in their proper context (including D&C 77:12, which speaks of man being created on the seventh day), they just don't say to me that man was the first mortal. If that were the intent, it would have been simple for the Lord to make it clear (although he does speak to us "in parables"). I am also unimpressed by the suggestion that the statements relating to the events of the seventh day are really postscripts meant to apply to the sixth day. Again, the Lord could have said it that way, and again there is D&C 77:12.

On the other hand, authors are too literal for me when they consider every word that the early Church authorities said about creation to be true but seem to think that science has learned nothing of geology, paleontology, biology, cosmology, etc. They accept without question suggestions that Adam and Eve and plants and animals were brought from another planet, that the light bathing the earth on the second day emanated directly from God, that the earth fell from the vicinity of Kolob, and so on. I love to study these statements of the early brethren. They excite me and they expand my mind. They demonstrate the far-reaching, probing, inspired minds of those men. They show how much the early elders were influenced by some of the finest scientific minds of their day. But since they sometimes conflict with each other, with the scriptures perhaps, and certainly with a more modern science, I don't see why we should insist on being conservative about those liberal (in the best sense of the word) statements of earlier years, even though they may contain a great deal of truth.

It is up to the reader to decide what to do about this situation. I have tried merely to look as directly and literally as possible at the scriptural accounts, making an effort not to reinterpret what is stated—even though this may be virtually impossible and certainly poses some serious problems for a scientific reconciliation. At this stage of our ignorance, it seems reasonable to assume that if the revealed accounts diverge from the theories of science—or from the statements of General Authorities—then it is safest to stick with the revealed accounts. Perhaps for the moment we will simply have to admit that the answers are not available and that reconciliations cannot be made. Although various General Authorities have taken various stands, the official position of the Church has always been that we must not take an official position. For comfort, we can remember the Lord's promise that when he returns, he will reveal "things of the earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereof." (D&C 101:33.)

Footnotes

Melvin A. Cook and M. Garfield Cook, Science and Mormonism (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1973). Two scientists who are strictly literalists; contains an excellent summary of what twenty-nine Mormon scientists and scholars and nine presidents of the Church have said about creation.

Henry Eyring, The Faith of a Scientist (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969). Accepts an ancient earth and other scientific findings.

Paul R. Green, comp., Science and Your Faith in God (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1958). Includes statements by the following Latter-day Saint scientists who are not literalists: Henry Eyring, Carl J. Christensen, Harvey Fletcher, Joseph F. Merrill, Frederick J. Pack, John A. Widtsoe, Franklin S. Harris, Sr.

Milton R. Hunter, Pearl of Great Price Commentary (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965). A brief, literalist discussion; emphasizes that Abraham's record of the six days is concerned with planning.

Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966). A totally literalist approach; no reconciliation with science.

B. H. Roberts, The Gospel: An Exposition of Its First Principles and Man's Relationship to Deity (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1965). Comments that indicate a subdued attempt to reconcile science and religion.

W. Cleon Skousen, The First 2,000 Years (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1953). Quotes early brethren but emphasizes that much is not known.

Joseph Fielding Smith, Man, His Origin and Destiny (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1954). The modern spokesman for the literalist—and against science.

---
Notas:
[^1] For example, Brigham Young in Journal of Discourses, 17:143 and 9:317, and John Taylor, The Mormon, August 29, 1857.
[^2] See Journal of Discourses, 7:285-86; 11:122.
[^3] Examples of these authors and their approaches include the following:
[^4] James E. Talmage, The House of the Lord (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 83.
