Frank B. Salisbury, Creation ( 1976)

Section 3:

The Earth and the Universe

". . . I will show thee the workmanship of mine hands . . ."

Moses 1:4

9

The Solar System

Through Moses and Abraham, God gave us a glimpse of his creations. The worlds are innumerable unto man, yet numbered to God. As one earth with its heavens passes away by the word of his power, another comes into being, that man might have immortality and eternal life. Among the governing stars is Kolob, which governs our system and is closest to God's throne. The Lord God is more intelligent than all the spirits.

Yet beautiful as this awe-inspiring revealed message is, it is general in almost every way. No one could construct detailed pictures of the universe from these revealed concepts. However, a relatively detailed picture of the universe has become available to mankind, beginning with Copernicus and Galileo, and coming into especially sharp focus during the past half century—particularly during the past decade or so.

This is the dispensation of the fulness of times when all things are to be revealed to man. Must we believe that this knowledge will come only through the prophets? God has admonished us to study, to be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and to ponder in our hearts. (See D&C 58:27; 88:62, 78-80.) With this approach, men in and out of the Church have been discovering truths about the universe and about creation. God has told us that in the dispensation of the fulness of times nothing would be withheld, including the facts of astronomy: " . . . the sun, moon, or stars—All the times of their revolutions . . . and all their glories, laws, and set times, shall be revealed. . . ." (See D&C 121:28-32.) Many of these things are now known, and new facts are being discovered at a dizzying pace. It seems apparent that God is revealing these scientific matters in the dispensation of the fulness of times via inspiration (seldom recognized as such) to scientists who are pursuing an almost passionate search for these truths.

In this and the next four chapters, we shall review some of the findings of science. We shall briefly examine the universe (astronomy), the earth (geology), some principles of life function (biology), and the modern theories of genetics and evolution that seem to have bearing on the problems of creation. Some general references to material on these subjects, mostly text-books, are included in the Bibliography.

In this chapter we shall examine the development of knowledge about the structure of the solar system. Such an examination shows that science has been going on at least since the ancient Greeks. (Although the method was formalized only in the 1600s by Galileo and especially by Francis Bacon, note the word science in the Bible: Daniel 1:4 and 1 Timothy 6:20.) This story also illustrates the scientific method and how science does what it claims to do: to continue to approach a more exact understanding of reality.

THE FLAT EARTH UNDER THE BLUE DOME

Imagine how early men must have wondered about the universe as they watched the sun move overhead during the day and the stars and the moon at night. The earth appeared vast, immobile, and quite flat. Above was a huge dome, apparently a sphere that rotated on its north-south axis, making a little more than one complete circuit around the earth each day.

This sphere was sprinkled with fixed stars forming patterns, the constellations. There were also seven lights that wandered among the fixed stars on a fairly narrow path, called the Zodiac, with its center tilted 23.5 degrees to the equator of the celestial sphere. The sun, the brightest of these seven lights, moved exactly along the center of this path, and its pathway was called the ecliptic. The year was defined as the time that the sun took to complete one full circuit among the stars and along the ecliptic. The moon made its complete circuit in about 29.5 days, and the five planets, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, completed their circuits in various intervals of time, depending upon the planet. All these things, including the 23.5 degree tilt of an ecliptic to the equator, were observed by ancient man and could be observed by anyone today with no instruments except a protractor that divided the circle into 360 degrees.

But what did it all mean? Having the objective data, it was now up to ancient man to apply the logic. This he did, concluding that everything was just as it looked (certainly the simplest conclusion): The earth was huge, flat, and solid, and the stars were on some kind of huge crystal sphere called the firmament. Perhaps water on the other side of this crystal accounted for the daytime blue color. Seven of the lights on the firmament apparently moved on its surface, and the sun was such a bright light that it obscured the stars, although even ancient man realized that they must be present in the daytime sky.

Of course, ancient man, in addition to his logic, indulged in much creative invention and mysticism. One of his indulgences was astrology. He imagined that the celestial bodies influenced one's life. The position of the sun among the constellations at the time of birth was especially important, although the positions of the planets also somehow influenced the newborn in some way. Clearly, there were no objective data to support all this, but most people, during most of history, have never let this situation bother them much. In any case, astrology was extremely important to the developing science of astronomy, because it became important to predict the positions of the wandering planets. Astronomy was also furthered because of man's need to measure and understand time, particularly as his agricultural practices (planting times) became more sophisticated.

A ROUND EARTH WITHIN A CELESTIAL SPHERE

The Greeks began to extend the objective data by making measurements. They also formalized the processes of logic, but they ended by putting too much emphasis on the logic and too little on the measurements.

From the earliest times, the Greeks understood that the earth was round. Aristotle, who lived from 384 to 322 B.C., summarized the arguments. Some were subjective and based upon mysticism, but the following three were logical and based upon objective data. First, Aristotle understood the phases of the moon and eclipses, as shown in Fig. 9-1. From this model, it was not difficult to imagine that the moon was a sphere and that its apparent shape was determined by the portion illuminated by sunlight. This implied a round earth at the center of the celestial sphere, and Aristotle's second evidence was that, during an eclipse of the moon, the earth's shadow on the moon was round. Third, as one moves north, the stars visible on the southern horizon drop out of sight. Since the surface of the celestial sphere is so far away, the earth must be round to account for this observation.

Aristotle rejected the idea that the earth moved around the sun. He reasoned that if the earth moved that much in the course of each year, surely it would cause the apparent positions of the stars to change throughout the year, as the positions of objects in a distant scene appear to change as the observer changes his position (a phenomenon known as parallax). Since there was no annual stellar parallax, the earth must be stationary in relation to the celestial sphere. Of course, it was possible that the stars were extremely far away, but this seemed unlikely. Yet Aristarchus of Samos (writing around 320 to 310 B.C.) decided that the earth did go around the sun and that the stars were indeed very far away. To him this model best accounted for the data. He also attempted to measure the relative distances to the moon and the sun in terms of the earth's diameter by observing their apparent sizes and the sizes of shadows during eclipses.

THE SIZE OF THEE EARTH AND OTHER MEASUREMENTS

Eratosthenes of the Alexandrian school (276 to 195 or 196 B.C.) measured the size of the earth. He noted that at Syene in Egypt on the longest day of the year at noon, the sun fully illuminated the bottom of a deep well, and hence, it was exactly overhead. (Syene would thus be on the Tropic of Cancer, 23.5 degrees north of the earth's equator.) At the same time in Alexandria, 5,000 stadia north of Syene, the sun was not directly overhead but made an angle to the vertical of about 1/50th of a circle (7 degrees). If the sun's rays were parallel at Syene and Alexandria, then 5,000 stadia must be about 1/50th of the earth's circumference. If Eratosthenes used for his stadium one commonly used by the Greeks (equal to one-quarter of a mile—but we don't know for sure), then he came within 1 percent of the correct value for the earth's circumference. His approach is the principle upon which celestial navigation is based.

Hipparchus (160 to 127 B.C.) was one of the best of the Greek astronomers. He made numerous extremely careful measurements and invented or at least developed trigonometry. He measured the length of the year within six minutes. He was able to predict eclipses quite accurately. He determined that the sun appeared largest and thus came closest to the earth in winter, accounting for this by two models. In one, the sun went around the earth in a circular orbit, but the earth was not at the exact center of the circle. This model was called an eccentric. He also suggested that the sun was itself moving on a portable circle that had its center moving on a much larger circular orbit with the earth at its center. This model he called an epicycle. Either model accounted for the data equally well, but Hipparchus intuitively preferred the model of the eccentric, because it was simpler.

Ptolemy was the last great astronomer of Greek antiquity. He lived about 140 years after Christ, or 300 to 500 years after the Greek astronomers mentioned above. One of his notable achievements was to measure the distance from the earth to the moon by parallax or the change in angle of a line drawn from widely separate points on the earth's surface to a single point on the moon. This he did by measuring one line early in the evening and another several hours later after the earth (or the celestial sphere, as he thought) had turned a certain distance, and correcting for the moon's movement due to the daily rotation, as well as the moon's path on the ecliptic. Ptolemy deduced that the moon was 29.5 earth diameters from the surface of the earth. The true average value is about 30 earth diameters!

RETROGRADE MOTION OF THE SUPERIOR PLANETS: THE PTOLEMIC SYSTEM

One of the main problems facing ancient astronomers concerned the so-called retrograde motion of the superior planets (those that did not stay relatively close to the sun: Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn). Most of the time, these planets move among the stars from west to east. Near the time of opposition, when a planet and the sun are on opposite sides of the earth, however, the planet appears for a while to move backwards; that is, from east to west. A sort of loop is formed in the sky if one plots the path of the planet among the fixed stars. How can we explain it?

Ptolemy constructed geometrically a model based upon Hipparchus' epicycles. If the planet moved on an epicycle, and the rate of movement of the epicycle were adjusted just right, then the planetary motion could be quite accurately predicted. To improve the accuracy of prediction, Ptolemy moved the earth slightly off center (on an eccentric). The planet did not move at a constant rate around the center of its circle but rather at a constant rate around another point opposite to the earth; that is, around another so-called equant (Fig. 9-2). With this complex geometry and the cumbersome Roman numerals (but not algebra), Ptolemy was able to predict the motions of the planets with a high degree of accuracy, making the astrologer's job that much easier.

Ptolemy recorded all this in the Almagast. Nowhere does he claim that his marvelously creative system of epicycles, eccentrics, and equants were a description of reality; rather, they simply provided an excellent model for prediction of planetary positions. Modern astronomers use algebraic equations in exactly the same way. During the Middle Ages, however, Ptolemy's models were accepted by the church as true descriptions of the universe. The scriptures were mingled with philosophy, and the church was thus set up to lose one of those arguments with science.

THE SOLAR SYSTEM: THE COPERNICAN SYSTEM

From 1473 to 1543, Nicolas Copernicus lived in Poland. He did not make observations but was a mathematician who had the advantages of a good number system and algebra. In 1543, he published in De Revolutionibus his arguments for a universe in which the earth went around the sun. They were a triumph of creativity. His arguments, though perhaps not conclusive, were extremely disturbing to the scholars of his day. It had been argued, for example, that the earth must be stationary, or we would feel it moving around the sun. Copernicus showed that one wouldn't necessarily feel motion, and he argued that if the motion of the earth would tear it apart, the motion of the huge and much faster celestial sphere should certainly be catastrophic.

In his heliocentric system, he was able to account nicely for the retrograde motion of planets. He deduced that the planets nearest the sun must go faster than the ones farther away, and hence at opposition they tend to overtake the outer planets, causing them to appear to move backwards among the much more distant fixed stars (Fig. 9-2). He was also able to calculate the relative distances of the planets from the sun. This was simple for the inner (minor) planets and not too difficult for the outer (major) ones. It involved measuring the angular distances between the sun and the planets at various times and applying a little trigonometry. (If you're interested, see the book by Abel in the Bibliography.)

Actually, Copernicus' system, based upon circular orbits for the planets around the sun, was not able to account for observed planetary motions as well as the Ptolemic system. To make it work as well, Copernicus incorporated the eccentrics and epicycles of Ptolemy!

TESTING THE MODELS: TYCHO BRAHE AND JOHANNES KEPLER

The Ptolemic or the Copernican models accounted equally well for the available observations. Tycho Brahe, usually called Tycho, provided the improved observational data required for further testing of the two hypotheses. Tycho was a Danish astronomer (1546-1601) who built an observatory in 1576 on the island of Hveen. For twenty years he made extremely accurate observations of planetary motions and other astronomical events. Although he did not have telescopes, his data were accurate within one minute of arc. (The full moon subtends an angle in the sky of about 1/2 degree or 30 minutes. One minute is about the limit of human vision.) Tycho determined the length of the year within one second.

In spite of these marvelous observations, he rejected the Copernican model. He was unable to measure any parallax of stars, although he thought he could measure some of their diameters as about two minutes of arc. (Actually this was only an illusion—all stars appear only as points of light, even in the largest telescopes; that is, they have no apparent diameter.) Tycho also interpreted certain biblical statements as refuting the idea of a moving earth. Toward the end of his life, he got in an argument with the Danish king and had to move to Prague, taking his observational data with him.

Johannes Kepler (1571-1630) was born in Germany and hired by Tycho at age twenty-nine, the year before Tycho's death. Kepler spent twenty-five years working with Tycho's data. He accepted the Copernican system and attempted to apply the data to it. He began with Mars, spending eight years examining one hypothesis after another to account for Mars' motion.

It was held by the church that only perpetual circular motion was worthy of God, but Kepler finally discarded this notion and tried an ellipse for the orbit of Mars. This worked extremely well. An important property of an ellipse is that from any point on the curve, the sum of the distances to two points inside the ellipse, called the foci of the ellipse, is the same. This is evident when one draws an ellipse by tying a string to two thumbtacks (the foci) and then pushing a pencil against the string.

Kepler found that if the sun was at one focus of the ellipse that described the orbit of Mars, then the speed of Mars around its orbit varied, being fastest when the planet was closest to the sun. He stated these observations as laws of planetary motion.

Actually, Kepler had tried earlier hypotheses that agreed with Tycho's data within about eight minutes of arc, but Kepler was convinced that Tycho's data were more accurate even than this. Kepler's laws accounted for Tycho's data on Mars within one minute of arc, the accuracy claimed by Tycho. Creative, extremely powerful logic and model-building had been applied to excellent objective data.

FURTHER TESTING OF THE MODELS: GALILEO GALILEI

Galileo Galilei (1564-1642), the Italian physicist, was the first really important scientist to emphasize observation over reasoning from basic postulates. Indeed, it is valid to date development of the modern scientific method from Galileo's experimental and creative approach to things. He formulated the law of inertia, which states that bodies tend to remain at rest or in motion unless acted upon by an outside force. This could be applied to the planets in their orbits and to other cosmological questions. He performed numerous experiments on acceleration (by rolling balls down inclined planes) and on falling bodies. Aristotle had written that heavier bodies fall fastest. Galileo is said to have tested this from the Leaning Tower of Pisa and found it to be untrue. (Except for effects of wind resistance, bodies all fall at the same speed.)

In the 1590s Galileo accepted the Copernican hypothesis. It had been argued, for example, that objects would not remain on the earth if it were in motion. Galileo pointed out that when an object was dropped from the mast of a moving ship, it fell directly on the deck below because of its forward inertia. Hence, everything on earth would have the inertia of a moving earth and would not be swept off and left behind. [^1]

Galileo heard about telescopes and in 1609 developed the first one having practical astronomical value without ever having seen one. He finally constructed telescopes magnifying up to 30 diameters and used them to see the Copernican system in all its glory. In 1610 he published, in the Sidereal Messenger, five observations that were in close agreement with the Copernican solar system but not with the model of Ptolemy:

Galileo wrote his Dialogue on the Great World Systems in Italian rather than in Latin. It was a magnificent and unanswerable argument for the Copernican system, meriting its placement on the Catholic index of prohibited books, where it remained until 1835. Galileo was forced to plead guilty to heresy and to deny his teachings. He was placed under house arrest for the last ten years of his life.

NEWTON'S LAWS: REFINING THE MODEL

Isaac Newton (1643-1727) was born in Lincolnshire, England, the year after Galileo's death. Perhaps Newton was the greatest genius who ever lived. He had worked out most of his understanding of cosmology by age twenty-four, but principally for his own amusement. It was published twenty years later in 1687 at the urging of his friends under the title Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica. This is possibly the most important scientific document ever published, for it tied everything together. The Copernican system was a description of the solar system and not an explanation of what was happening. This Newton provided. As an initial basis for his mathematical explanation of the universe, Newton formulated the three laws of motion:

Newton (and others independently) derived a mathematical equation for centripetal force. Centripetal force causes the tension on a string that is whirling an object. The momentum of the whirling object tends to make it go in a straight line, but the centripetal force (tension on the string) holds it to the center so that it goes in a circle. What about the planetary orbits? Galileo had argued that the planets remain in motion because of their inertia, but he didn't worry about why their orbits are nearly circles instead of straight lines as inertia would suggest.

Newton discovered the answer to the question of planetary circular orbits in his law of universal gravitation. He wondered about the force on an apple pulling it toward the center of the earth. Is the apple also pulling on the earth? If this force extends to the moon (the earth and the moon pull on each other), then it might provide the centripetal force required to keep the moon in orbit. Newton formulated a simple mathematical statement of the law of universal gravitation. This says that the gravitational force (F) is proportional to the product of the masses of two mutually attracting objects (m1 and m2) and that it is inversely proportional to the square of the distance (d) between them. His equation also includes a proportionality constant (G) that depends upon the units of mass, distance, and force:

F = G (m1m2/d2)

One problem worried Newton. If all bodies mutually attract each other by the gravitational force, then each portion of the earth is pulling upon the apple, yet the apple falls toward the center. To solve the problem of the direction of force, combining all forces from all portions of the earth pulling on the apple, Newton invented the calculus. (This mathematical procedure was derived independently and simultaneously by Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz in Germany.) By application of the calculus, Newton found that gravitation acted as if all the mass were concentrated at a point called the center of gravity, which in the case of the earth was the center of the earth.

To test the law of universal gravitation as it applied in the solar system, it was necessary to know the gravitational constant (G). Newton compared the effect of the earth's gravity on the apple with its effect on the moon. At the earth's surface, when the apple is dropped, it accelerates 32 ft/sec2. The law of gravitation predicts that because the moon is 60 times farther from the center of the earth than an apple on its surface, its acceleration should be 60 2 times less. It is relatively simple, using the equation for centripetal force, to calculate the acceleration of the earth on the moon required to provide the exact centripetal force necessary to maintain the moon's orbit. When this calculation is performed, the answer turns out exactly as predicted: It is 60 2 times less than the acceleration at the earth's surface. (At the moon it is 0.0089 ft/sec2.) This calculation was extended to the orbits of all of the planets and found to hold exactly in every case. Thus, the mathematical model of universal gravitation was upheld by observational data.

Newton was able to derive all of Kepler's laws of planetary motion from his general laws of motion, centripetal force, and universal gravitation. So by 1687 everything had fallen into place. The Copernican system, as corrected by Kepler (ellipses rather than circles and epicycles) and as accounted for by Newton's laws, fit the observational data of Tycho, Galileo, and others so well that no previous model could any longer be considered.

RECENT DEVELOPMENTS

It is amazing how little has been added to our picture of solar system mechanics since that time nearly three hundred years ago. Two modern advances in physics have been relativity and quantum mechanics, which apparently account for phenomena occurring at extremely high velocities and small distances (within the atom). Newton's laws hold in all the usual circumstances.

A few other evidences for a round, rotating earth have been presented, such as the cyclonic storms mentioned in a footnote above (the Coriolis effect) and the Foucault pendulum. You'll remember that the law of inertia states that objects in motion continue in motion unless acted upon by an outside force. So you can imagine that the plane of a pendulum swinging above the north or south pole would appear to rotate 360 degrees in 24 hours as the earth rotated once under the swinging pendulum. The time for a complete rotation of the pendulum plane will be more than 24 hours at latitudes below the poles, but times can be exactly calculated assuming a rotating earth; the observations exactly match the calculations. Foucalt pendulums can be seen in many museums of natural history.

Distances between the earth and planets (but not the moon) were known only in terms of the astronomical unit (the average distance between the earth and the sun). The next step was to measure this unit in the terms used to measure the earth's diameter; that is, miles or kilometers. One way was to measure the parallax of Mars at opposition. The principle is the same as determining the distance to the moon by measuring its parallax. Of course, accurate telescopes are required to measure planetary parallaxes. Since the distance to Mars was known in terms of the astronomical unit, determining its distance in miles or kilometers allows us to calculate the astronomical unit in these terms. There are other ways. Most recently the astronomical unit has been determined by radar measurements of the distances to Mars or Venus.

Newton's Principia were elaborated into the science of celestial mechanics. This applies the laws of motion and gravity to calculate the trajectories and orbits of the various bodies in the solar system (planets, satellites, asteroids, comets, etc.). Application of celestial mechanics led to the discoveries of Neptune and Pluto. Now it can be applied in sending probes to the moon and planets, where it works exactly, providing the proof of the pudding. The problem with rockets and artificial satellites is in building equipment precise enough to calculate (with computers) the necessary angles and velocities and then to achieve them. It is the technology that limits us, not the theory of celestial mechanics. In any case, our present space explorations confirm in the minutest detail the solar system model as worked out by Newton and his predecessors.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Starspots on Betelguese," Astronomy 3 (October 1975): 18-21.
