Frank B. Salisbury, Creation ( 1976)

10

The Universe

How far is really far? How big is really big? How long is a really long time? People living at the time of the Pharaohs, when the Lord stretched out his hand in the night-time to show Abraham his creations, must have thought the sky-globe around the earth, on which the stars were hung and the sun, moon, and planets wandered, was incomprehensively large and far away. After all, it would take a man a hundred days to walk a thousand miles if he walked ten miles a day, or almost seven years to circle the globe. Since that time, the universe has been getting larger. Now it is truly incomprehensible in size, distance, and age. But the earth gets smaller.

A jet airplane, traveling 600 miles per hour, can circle the earth in a little over 41 hours, but an artificial satellite covers approximately the same distance in about 90 minutes. A telephoned message, going through the wires at the speed of light, circuits the earth nearly seven and a half times in a second, yet it takes light a full 8 1/3 minutes to reach earth from the sun—and nearly 5 1/2 hours to get to Pluto, a planet in our own solar system that is probably far more distant than anything the ancients could imagine. Yet compared to the nearest star, Pluto is almost within touching distance. The nearest star is nearly 7,000 times as far away as Pluto; it takes light 4.27 years to get to us from Proxima Centauri. The diameter of the Milky Way galaxy is over 23,000 times that distance. But to reach one of the most distant galaxies, the Milky Way's diameter must be multiplied 80,000 times, which is 4,700 billion billion (4,700,000,000,000,000,000,000) times the thousand miles a man might walk in 100 days! That's really far and really big. And the light speeding to us from that distant galaxy, going 186,000 miles each second, left about 8 billion years ago—which is almost 30 billion times the hundred days, a really long time. And some estimates are that the most distant quasar (see below) is 13 billion light years away.

We have only been aware of these truly incomprehensible numbers for a little over half a century. We arrived at them by studying parallaxes and by applying logic to objective data in unanticipated ways. Their discovery is a fascinating story.

ASTRONOMY'S TOOLS: THE TELESCOPE, CAMERA, AND SPECTROSCOPE

The modern story of the universe beyond the solar system is so fantastic as to be almost unbelievable. Thus it is important to know something about the foundations of this story. In spite of many new technological advances, most discoveries about the universe have been made with three rather traditional tools, sometimes improved with modern electronics.

The most basic tool remains the telescope. Its primary function is to gather light. Consider that 640,000 times as much light will pass through an aperture 200 inches in diameter as will enter a human eye through an iris diaphragm with an opening of one-fourth inch. The light gathered by the telescope is focused by suitable lenses, allowing us to see things better.

Interestingly enough, however, there are relatively few things in the universe to be seen in the usual sense of the word. The telescope gives us marvelous visual images of the sun, the moon, the planets and satellites of the solar system, comets, interstellar clouds, and galaxies, but mostly, the sky is full of stars, which appear only as points of light. No telescope has yet been built large enough to focus the image of a star so that it appears as a disc (except for one: our sun), although electronic methods applied in 1974 allowed us to visualize details on the face of the giant red sun, Betelgeuse. [^1] The value of the telescope is that it allows us to pinpoint a star's position with an accuracy much greater than would otherwise be possible, and it collects light from individual stars for us to analyze.

The second important instrument aids in gathering light for analysis: the camera. Actually, photographic film is the important "instrument," since the telescope plus a holder for the film form the camera. Because time exposures are required to provide images as bright as those observed with the eye, our continually moving atmosphere distorts the image, and photographs of the planets, comets, etc., seldom show as much detail as the eye can detect. Yet for the same reason, photographs of the galaxies show much more than the eye can detect. With a truly precision instrument, movement of the telescope can exactly compensate for movement of the earth so that exposures can extend for literally hours. This allows the film to build up an image until an extremely faint object that could not be detected by the eye becomes visible.

The camera is at least as valuable in helping to pinpoint positions as it is in giving us visual images. When the pinpoints of light from the stars are recorded on the glass photographic plate, and the telescope position is accurately noted, the ultimate potential of the telescope as a position-measuring device can be realized. Slight changes in position of one star can be detected by superimposing photographic plates taken at different times and matching up the stars whose positions have not changed.

The telescope and the camera are used as light-collecting devices for the third important instrument: the spectroscope. The real revolution in astronomy came when we learned to break light into its component wavelengths by use of the spectroscope, using a prism (as Newton did) or more recently a diffraction grating. When a beam of white light is passed through either kinds of spectroscope, the result is a rainbow or spectrum. The complete instrument used to record the spectrum on film is called a spectrograph.

It was observed that light included wavelengths not visible to the human eye. Temperatures produced by the various colors or wavelengths of light in a spectrum were measured. When the thermometer was placed beyond the red (long-wavelength) part of the spectrum into an area that appeared dark to the human eye, it still increased in temperature, indicating that radiation invisible to the human eye but capable of producing heat was contained in the original beam of light. This was referred to as infrared (beyond the red) radiation. The same phenomenon occurred on the violet (short-wavelength) end of the spectrum, and this was called ultraviolet radiation. We now know that the spectrum extends over a vast range of wavelengths, beginning with the extremely short cosmic rays, passing through X rays, ultraviolet rays, visible rays, infrared rays, and finally the extremely long radio rays. Of course, the cosmic, X-ray and radio radiation are not detected using prisms, but other means have been developed to study and measure them.

Another important discovery made with the spectroscope was that the spectrum of light is strongly dependent upon its source and the medium or media through which it passes. First, the spectrum is a function of the temperature of the source. All objects above the absolute zero are emitting radiation. An object at room temperature emits radiation primarily in the far infrared part of the spectrum. As the temperature of an object increases, the peak of its emitted radiation shifts toward shorter and shorter wavelengths. At the temperature of the filament in a glowing light bulb, the peak of an object's radiation is in the near infrared part of the spectrum, with about 25 percent of the radiation in the visible portion of the spectrum. The rather orange sun emits radiation with a peak of energy in the green part of the spectrum, and still hotter objects such as a blue-white star emit with the peak of their energy in the blue part of the spectrum. Using this principle, one can measure the temperatures of celestial objects.

Radiation is also emitted in a highly specific way that is characteristic of the atom giving off the radiation (as in a mercury vapor lamp or a fluorescent tube). Thus a given atom will emit radiation at a number of highly specific wavelengths, these appearing in the spectrum as a set of highly characteristic, bright spectral lines, a sort of fingerprint of the atom.

On the other hand, when a beam of white light consisting of a continuous spectrum (rather than individual lines), such as that emitted from a high-temperature body like the sun, is passed through some medium—a gas or some transparent, although perhaps colored, liquid or solid—portions of the spectrum are absorbed. As it turns out, if a given atom will produce certain lines in a spectrum when it is excited, it will absorb those same lines when a continuous spectrum is passed through it, so that a set of dark lines is produced in the continuous spectrum.

Thus an astronomer can gather the light from a star with his telescope, pass it into his spectrograph, and record the results on photographic film or electronically. By examining the bright and the dark lines, he can tell what elements were present in the star and what elements and compounds were present in the atmospheres or interstellar gases through which the light from the star has passed. He can do celestial chemistry.

Even this is just a beginning. Spectral analysis makes it possible to measure relative motions of celestial objects. The principle is called the Doppler effect. We have all noticed how a train whistle has a high pitch as the train is approaching and a lower pitch after the train has passed by. This principle works also with light. When the light source is approaching, the waves are pushed together so that they have a shorter wavelength or a higher frequency; they appear more blue. A receding source produces longer wavelengths (lower frequency) that appear more red.

How do we know where the wavelengths were to begin with? When several lines are found spaced at highly characteristic intervals along the spectral scale, then these lines are identified as being emitted by a specific element. The lines of hydrogen, for example, are present in the spectra of most stars, since all stars contain hydrogen. (Some are too hot to show the hydrogen lines.) Calcium, sodium, and other lines also can usually be identified. When these lines are shifted in relation to their normal position in the spectrum, we know that the object is moving in relation to the earth. Since light travels very fast (186,000 miles/sec), when the Doppler effect is observed, the relative velocities of the emitting object and the earth must be very great, on the order of several miles/sec. As it turns out, virtually all objects in the universe are moving toward or away from the earth at such great velocities. Furthermore, if a star is rotating, one edge will be moving toward the earth, while another edge is moving away, resulting in a broadening of the spectral lines. Their breadth is a measure of the rate of rotation.

Clearly, much can be learned by analyzing radiation from celestial bodies. Polarization of light is another property of light that can be measured to gain knowledge about the universe (e.g., the presence of magnetic fields). Radiotelescopes have extended the part of the spectrum that can be analyzed. Satellites and deep space probes have allowed us to carry our instruments beyond the limitations imposed by the earth's atmosphere and sometimes within a few thousand miles of another planet or onto its surface, as the Viking space-craft landed on Mars on July 20, 1976. Such are the tools of modern astronomy.

MEASURING ASTRONOMICAL DISTANCES

Using these tools, the astronomer has made a number of measurements upon which he has constructed our present picture of the universe. Primary among these measurements is the measurement of distance.

You'll remember that a primary argument against the Copernican system was that the relative positions of the stars remain constant, and that this could only be true if they were at extremely great distances, since the distance the earth moved around the sun was itself great. Now, with powerful telescopes mounted on solid mounts and moved by precision mechanisms, we measure parallaxes by recording on film the position of a given star among its background of even more distant stars at one time and then compare this position six months later when the earth has moved halfway around its orbit.

Distances only to relatively close stars can be measured this way, but in 1912, Henrietta S. Leavitt, working with Harlow Shapley, made a most interesting correlation. To begin with, the brightness of a star depends upon its distance; the farther away, the dimmer it will be. So if we knew the absolute brightness of a star, we could measure its apparent brightness and calculate its distance by the inverse square law (brightness is inversely proportional to the square of the distance). Miss Leavitt was studying a distant cluster of stars—so distant that it was safe to assume that all the stars in the cluster were at virtually the same distance from the earth. She noticed that many of the stars in this cluster varied in intensity in about 1 to 100 days, depending on the star. These were the so-called Cepheid variables (named after their prototype, the star Delta Cephei). She further noticed that the longer the period of fluctuation in brightness (the time in days), the greater the intensity of the star at its maximum brightness. The problem then was to know the distance of the star cluster so that absolute brightness of any of the stars could be calculated. Using estimates that we won't discuss here, Harlow Shapley, in about 1914, was able to plot a fairly accurate graph of Cepheid variable absolute magnitude (brightness) as a function of the period length.

Once this correlation had been made, we could assume that it applied to all Cepheid variable stars in the universe. Then when a Cepheid variable was observed, its period could be measured, giving an indication of its absolute brightness (working backwards from Shapley's graph), and its absolute brightness could then be compared with its apparent brightness to calculate its distance. This marvelous relationship allowed the measurement of distances for many stars and even galaxies in the universe. (Shapley's original graph was corrected in 1952 in terms of data obtained with the 200-inch telescope, which became operational around 1950. The corrections in the graph meant that distant objects were twice as far away as we had thought. The universe—in our minds—suddenly doubled in size!)

It has also been found that another kind of variable star, with a period shorter than the Cepheids (less than one day), is also valuable for distance measurement. All stars of this type (RR Lyrae variables) have the same absolute magnitude. So when one of them is found, measurement of its apparent magnitude immediately allows calculation of its distance.

In 1929, Edwin Hubble made still another important correlation. He observed that distant objects such as the galaxies were all receding from the earth, as indicated by the Doppler shift toward the red part of the spectrum. Furthermore, the farther they were away from the earth (indicated by their Cepheid variables), the faster they were receding. It is as though the entire universe is expanding—just as the seeds in a watermelon all recede from each other as the watermelon grows. If this generalization is true, then when an object is so far away that no Cepheid variable stars can be observed, we can still measure its red shift and calculate its distance by assuming that the more rapidly it is receding, the farther away it must be. This is the only method available to us at the moment to estimate the distances of very distant galaxies.

Although there are other ways to measure stellar distance, [^2] much is based upon assumption. We assume that all Cepheid variable stars in the universe have the same characteristic relationship between period and absolute magnitude, for example. We assume that we can make valid estimates of the amount of material distributed in space between the star and us that might change the apparent magnitude of one of these stars. Have we overlooked anything? The measurements based on the red shift seem particularly vulnerable. They are based on the assumption that the universe is really expanding, which assumption is supported only by the red shift—a nice bit of circular logic.

DISCOVERY OF THE UNIVERSE

From 1738 to 1871, William and John Herschel, a father and son, had observed and catalogued 5,079 stellar "clouds" or nebulae. These were interpreted as literal clouds of interstellar gases or dust. One, the Andromeda nebula, is bright enough to be faintly visible to the unaided eye. In 1924 Edwin Hubble used the 100-inch Mount Wilson telescope, which became operational in 1918, to discover that Andromeda and some other large nebulae were not a mass of gases or vapors but consisted of individual stars (Fig. 10-1). He identified some Cepheid variables and calculated their distance as 800,000 light years. This strongly supported an idea suggested by Immanual Kant in 1775 but abandoned by more modern astronomers—that the nebulae were "island universes" of stars.

The idea was also strongly supported by the then recent discovery that our own Milky Way forms just such an island universe or galaxy. Several globular clusters of stars had already been observed, but these were much brighter than the stars in Andromeda and hence were apparently much closer. From 1914 to 1917, Harlow Shapley plotted the positions of 93 of them, determining the distances of Cepheid variable stars in the clusters. He proposed that these clusters formed the "bony frame" of a great galaxy (similar to the Andromeda galaxy) and of which our own sun was a part. Even a good pair of binoculars shows that the Milky Way consists of countless stars. Shapley suggested that these were the members of this great Milky Way galaxy, with our sun located in one of its arms—and thus not at the center of even our island universe.

Many studies since those of Shapley have defined the characteristics of our galaxy in some detail. It appears to be disc-shaped, probably with a bulge at the center. Numerous other galaxies with this form (including the galaxy in Andromeda) are now known in the universe. The edges of the disc are probably made up of great spiral arms of stars radiating out from the center. The diameter of the disc is about 80,000 to 100,000 light- years. Our sun occurs in one of the spiral arms, about 32,600 light-years from the center. As we look toward the center, the stars appear to be so close to each other, or interstellar material becomes so predominant, that we cannot see to the center or to the galaxies on the other side. In the last two decades, however, we have learned to "see" into and through the clouds of material by observing in the X-ray, infrared, and radio parts of the spectrum.

Actually, individual stars as well as many of the clusters in our galaxy form a sphere rather than a flattened disc. These outer stars and clusters form the corona, with a diameter two or three times that of the more dense, flattened disc. At the galactic center, there is a concentration of stars having a thickness of perhaps 10,000 to 15,000 light-years. In a given space at the galaxy's center, there are a million times as many stars as in a comparable space in the vicinity of our sun. If we lived on a planet there, our night sky would have a million stars as bright as the brightest star (Sirius) in our present night sky, giving 200 times as much light as the full moon.

Doppler measurements show that the stars of the galaxy are rotating in relation to the clusters. Our sun is out near the edge of the galactic disc and is apparently moving around the disc along with its neighbors at a velocity of about 200 to 300 km/sec. At this rate the sun's galactic year (the time of one complete revolution) is about 200 million earth years. If we wait half that time, we'll see the other side of the universe!

All this nicely confirms Abraham's astronomy lesson, adding a fantastic amount of detail not reported by Abraham. The earth-moon and the solar systems are indeed prototypes for the galaxy itself, just as Abraham was told. Is Kolob located somewhere at the center of the galaxy, governing by its gravitational forces and energy emanations the countless stars in our island universe? We don't know and may not know until it is revealed to us.

The galactic center [^3] is a source of fantastic quantities of energy. In this respect it is similar to the nuclei of other galaxies that have been observed. Furthermore, large quantities of gas, mostly hydrogen, are streaming out from the center of the galaxy. Apparently there is a ring or spiral arm of the gas that is rotating along with the galaxy but also moving away from the center and toward us with a velocity of 53 kilometers per second. A second arm on the far side of the galactic center is moving away from us at 135 kilometers per second. It is as though these masses of gas were expelled by a gigantic explosion of an object 100,000 times the size of the sun, consuming all the mass of 10 suns and converting it to energy. Or they may have had some as yet undreamed of origin. Inside the hydrogen arms are clouds of molecules forming a ring around the galactic center: ammonia, water vapor, carbon monoxide, formaldehyde, and others (some yet to be discovered). There are stars being born near the galactic center that produce powerful radio waves (and other forms of radiation) from their hot, ionized gases. Near the center there are also powerful infrared ("heat waves") sources. These would occur if a bright sun were surrounded with such dense gas and dust that no light escapes, but the dust, being heated by the sun, emits the infrared energy. Freeman Dyson has suggested that a super civilization might devise a way to surround their sun with some super sphere that could capture and use all the light (energy) from its sun to power its technology, the sphere then becoming a dark but powerful source of infrared radiation. Is this one of the activities of the Gods?

We cannot count the stars that we cannot see near the galactic center; they are "innumerable . . . unto man." (Moses 1:35; Abraham 3:12.) That they are numbered unto God (Moses 1:35, 37) should provide some appreciation of his majesty and power. Yet each globular cluster (the "boney frame") may have from 10,000 to 100,000 stars, and the total number of stars in the galaxy may be around 200 billion.

THE GALAXIES

Huge telescopes such as the 200-inch instrument on Mt. Palomar are able, using long time exposures, to provide photographic images of the distant galaxies. It is painstaking work to examine the sky in this manner. Only a minute portion can be observed at any one time, and the times are limited by cloudy skies. It could take over a thousand years to examine all the sky for galaxies using the 200-inch telescope. Nevertheless, based upon the work completed so far, we can estimate that there may be four billion galaxies within the range of the 200-inch telescope.

The galaxies appear to occur in groups. Our Milky Way and the Andromeda galaxy are in a group with about 21 members called (with a touch of irony) the local group. The assemblage is some three million light years in diameter. We do not see galaxies beyond the center of our own because of its density, but with this exception, the groups of galaxies appear to be fairly evenly distributed throughout the universe. The galaxies occur in four general categories of shapes: ellipticals, spirals, barred spirals, and irregulars. The names are fairly descriptive.

The farthest galaxies presently observed are on the order of five billion light-years away, although some quasars (see below) may be 10 to 13 billion light-years distant from us. This is based on the assumption that the farther away an object is, the more rapidly it appears to be receding from the earth and the greater its red shift. If a galaxy were receding from earth with the velocity of light, then the shift would be so great that the light would not reach us at all. According to Hubble's estimates, this would happen when an object was about 10 billion light-years away. In principle, this sets a boundary to our observable universe.

It is interesting to realize that the above description cannot apply to the universe at this instant in time. We can only know the present on earth. If a star in the galaxy is 40,000 light-years away, we can only know where it was 40,000 years ago. A galaxy located five billion light-years from earth can be known only as it was five billion years ago, which was about the time our sun was born, according to current theories.

How much of this is God's universe? Is Kolob at the center of our galaxy, or is it one of the other galaxies or located at another galactic center? Does Elohim govern all the galaxies, populating all their worlds with his spirit children? Or will those children become Gods of other stars or clusters or galaxies that are now lifeless? We haven't the faintest shred of information pertaining to these questions.

THE BIRTH AND DEATH OF STARS

The Lord told Moses: "And as one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof even so shall another come; and there is no end to my works, neither to my words." (Moses 1:38.) During the past few decades, astronomers have been learning about the birth and death of stars and, presumably, the "earths" that accompany them. Early in this century absolute star magnitudes (an indication of star size) were plotted as a function of star colors (a measure of temperature). The majority of stars fell along a curved diagonal known as the main sequence, on which the largest stars have the bluest color, and the smaller ones tend to be more red. This makes good sense. The larger the star, the greater the gravitational forces compressing its matter at the center, and hence the greater the pressures and temperatures that are generated. Thus, the large stars are the hottest and the bluest. Our sun proves to be a rather ordinary star about half-way along the main sequence.

During the past two or three decades, it has been possible to develop models of stellar evolution. The laws of nature—motion, gravity, relativity, radiation, convection, the interactions of basic particles, etc.—are expressed mathematically and incorporated into the models, which are then fed into computers. It becomes possible to follow mathematically what might happen as a vast cloud of interstellar hydrogen and other material condenses to form a central star with its planets, the star then evolving toward its final death. The different stages generated by the computer-processed models can be compared with observed stars in the real universe, thereby testing the models.

The first steps involve a slow condensation from huge interstellar clouds of material consisting of hydrogen and a small percentage of other elements. As condensation occurs, the temperature increases; when a star has formed at the center of a condensing cloud and its temperature reaches about 30 million degrees Fahrenheit, its hydrogen fires become ignited—thermonuclear fires in which hydrogen is converted to helium, similar to the explosion of a hydrogen bomb.

If the star is about the size of our sun, it is relatively unstable for the first few million years but then settles down to about a ten-billion-year lifespan on the main sequence. Our sun appears to be about halfway through that stage. Finally, when its hydrogen reserves at the core become exhausted, the outer layers begin to be consumed, and the luminosity increases to about four times today's level. Then, during the next 600 million years, the red giant structure begins to emerge. The star expands, and its surface temperature drops. Our sun in its red giant stage would probably engulf the orbits of Mercury, Venus, and the earth. Heat transfer from the core is decreased, so its temperature rises. When it reaches about 100 million degrees, helium nuclei combine to form heavier elements such as carbon, and a maximum red giant size is reached. Our sun will be about 5,000 times as luminous as it is now on the main sequence. Matter may be puffed off in shells for 50,000 years, forming a huge circular cloud called a planetary nebula. As the last of the helium burning is complete, the star cools and contracts. Finally, it collapses to a white dwarf, occupying a volume about the same as our present earth. Matter is so compressed that a cubic inch of material from the white dwarf would weigh about 10 tons on the earth's surface. In spite of its high temperature, no more nuclear reactions are initiated, and it gradually cools by radiating heat into space until it becomes a black dwarf: a cold, dark, lifeless hulk of super-dense material.

A star having only about a third the mass of our sun would go through essentially the same history, but because it was smaller, its temperatures would be lower, hydrogen would burn more slowly, and it would remain as a red dwarf on the main sequence for 50 to 100 billion years. In its last stages, it would also be a small red giant, a white dwarf, and finally a black dwarf.

The larger stars have the most violent histories. They heat to higher temperatures to begin with, so hydrogen burning occurs much more rapidly. They remain on the main sequence for only about 100 million years, depending upon their size. In this condition, such a star may be about ten times the diameter of the sun and 10,000 times as luminous. When helium burning finally begins, the outer layers balloon into a red super giant 500 times the sun's present diameter. The core heats up to an incredible 600 million degrees, at which temperature carbon—the end product of helium burning—is consumed by nuclear processes, forming magnesium and other heavier elements. When the carbon runs out, collapse again occurs, and temperatures increase even more. Now many of the heavier elements are formed, but when iron is formed, a critical point is reached. The formation of iron actually absorbs heat rather than generates it, so that the core suddenly, within only hours, begins to cool; all the available heat is swallowed in the sudden production of iron.

The core collapses catastrophically, but this fantastic collapse generates immense amounts of explosive energy, ejecting material at 5,000 miles per second. As the outer parts of the expanding shell are ignited to enormous temperatures, the exploding star shines with the light of a billion suns and could be seen from neighboring galaxies. This is a super nova. One is expected to occur in our galaxy every 50-100 years. Present theory holds that the heavy elements formed at the last are thrown into space where they subsequently become parts of other clouds of material and, thus, parts of new solar systems. The elements in our earth upon which we depend for our technologies and even for our very lives (our bodies consist of them) would thus have been formed in the core of a super-giant star and then released in the super-nova explosion. We are children of the stars.

After the super nova, the material that has not been irreversibly thrown out into space begins to collapse to the white-dwarf stage, but since there is more mass (the star was much larger to begin with), gravitational collapse doesn't stop there. When the atomic particles get close enough together, they begin to interact in new ways. Protons combine with electrons to form neutrons. The final result is a neutron star consisting of matter so densely packed that it is completely beyond our experience or our imagination. A neutron star may have the mass of 10 to 20 times that of our sun compressed into a ball only 10 to 20 miles in diameter—rotating sometimes 100 times in a second and giving off pulsations of intense X rays and other radiant energies. (When neutron stars were first discovered, they were called pulsars.) Each super-condensed spoonful of material from a neutron star would weigh tens of millions of tons on the earth's surface.

But if the original star had a mass more than about 20 times that of the sun, collapse does not stop when neutrons are formed but continues until the star becomes a black hole—an object with such colossal gravitational forces that nothing can escape, not even light. If the matter in the earth were condensed until it became a black hole, it would occupy a volume about equal to that of a Ping-Pong ball!

Black holes have been the objects of considerable study during the past few years (less than a decade). There is reason to believe that huge black holes occur near the center of galaxies. Minute black holes may have been formed at the time of the formation of the galaxy; some think they may be common in the universe. Some mathematical theories suggest that black holes might even lead one into another realm of space and time. It might be possible to enter (in a spaceship, presumably) a black hole that was hundreds of millions of miles across, gradually enough that the individual so entering would not be torn apart by uneven gravitational forces. If the black hole were rotating and the astronaut navigates his ship at just the right angle, instead of being drawn to oblivion at the hole's center, he might be flung to another region of time and space. But we would never know if he were successful: it would be impossible for him to return. Could this be the "outer darkness" mentioned in some scriptures such as D&C 101:91?

Of course, the theories presented above are extremely new and may well change. I have found several different versions while preparing these paragraphs. [^4] Yet there is evidence that many of the postulated stages (e.g., main sequence stars, red giants, white dwarfs, super giants, neutron stars, even black holes) actually exist in the universe. Nevertheless, things not presently known or assumptions not properly included in the models could upset the above sequences. For one thing, the models do not adequately account for the initial condensation from the interstellar cloud. Several "uncomfortable" assumptions must be made. Here, I like to imagine that the Gods might be in control. It is at these initial stages that suitable interventions in the course of events might have the greatest impact on the organization of future worlds—and for the least expenditure of energy.

Theories of stellar evolution are based on the idea that stars have a finite amount of hydrogen. The explanation in Figure 5 of Facscimile 2 in the book of Abraham suggests that the Egyptians said that the sun "borrowed" its light from Kolob. Clearly, the sun is not reflecting light from Kolob, as our moon is reflecting light from the sun. If this were the case, we should be receiving much more light from Kolob than we do from the sun. Cook and Cook [^5] have suggested that the statement can be understood according to a theory of accretion. Matter (mostly hydrogen) may be continually expelled from Kolob and captured by the sun, refueling its atomic fires and contributing kinetic energy as it falls into the sun. It's an interesting idea, but what we actually observe seems to be contrary: The solar wind consists of protons (hydrogen nuclei) flowing away from the sun rather than toward it.

QUASARS

In the 1950s, many powerful radio sources were observed in the sky. Some of these sources looked exactly like stars, yet their spectra were unusual. In 1963, the spectral lines were finally identified for two of these so-called quasi-stellar radio sources or quasars. [^6] The lines were shifted so far toward the red part of the spectrum that the two objects were apparently receding from us at velocities 14.5 and 30 percent of the speed of light. Hence their red shifts indicated that these objects were on the order of billions of light years away. By now, well over a hundred quasars have been identified, and in 1973 one was calculated to be 10 to 13 billion light years away (depending upon the exact model of the universe used in the calculation).

Immediately upon their discovery, profound paradoxes became apparent. They seemed to be extremely small, appearing only as points of light, yet if they are at the calculated distances, they are radiating energy at rates 100 to 10,000 times that of an entire galaxy! Some vary in intensity with periods of one day to a year or so. It is impossible to imagine that an object with a diameter larger than about one light day could pulsate with a period shorter than a day; hence, at the largest, they can't be much larger than about twice the diameter of our own solar system—a mere pinpoint compared to galaxy dimensions. Such small objects emitting such fantastic amounts of energy differ by orders of magnitude from anything else known in the universe. How can these paradoxes be resolved?

Either the objects must be much closer than the red shifts seem to indicate (implying that we fail to understand the red shifts), or there must be physical laws that we fail to understand, or both. An early suggestion was that the red shift is some kind of gravitational effect: that photons of light leaving points of extremely high gravity are somehow slowed or de-energized. Another possibility is that the objects are much closer (and hence much less energetic) but moving away from us at high velocity for some unknown reason. Many quasars seem to be quite close to galaxies; that is, they appear associated on photographs, although the quasars could be much farther away from us than the galaxies. Could the quasars have been ejected from their "associated" galaxies? At least one case is known in which a portion of a galaxy connected to a parent galaxy by a stream of stars and interstellar material is moving away from us at a velocity about twice that of the galaxy itself. But if this is the explanation, why should all quasars be moving away from us and none of them toward us, as might be expected if the ejection from galaxies occurred randomly in all directions? Or are the quasars the "other side" of black holes that exist in some other realm of space and time? Does matter fall into a black hole and end up in a quasar in another universe? How does God control these celestial events to achieve his goals?

HIS MANY MANSIONS

Christ said: "In my Father's house are many mansions." (John 14:2.) Furthermore, Paul spoke of different bodies in the resurrection, some being compared with the glory of the stars, others with that of the moon, others with that of the sun. (I Corinthians 15:40-52.) In section 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants is recorded a small portion of a vision of Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon in which they were shown the final state of resurrected beings. Those with telestial bodies (comparable to the glory of the stars as seen from earth) were to dwell in a place where God or Christ never come (D&C 76:76-78, 86-88), presumably on a telestial sphere; those with terrestrial bodies on a terrestrial sphere comparable to the glory of the moon; and those with celestial bodies on a celestial sphere comparable to the glory of the sun. We are told that telestial or terrestrial bodies can never go to the celestial glory. Apparently they won't be able to tolerate conditions there. The earth itself is to be prepared for celestial glory. (D&C 88:18; 130:9.) The implication of all this (and much more) is that there are many kinds of suns and planets in God's universe.

The findings of modern astronomy provide ample precedent for the great variety of celestial bodies implied by the scriptures. The suns along the main sequence vary in size, intensity, temperature, and color. There are also the white dwarfs, the red giants, and the super giants, not to mention pulsars, black holes, and quasars. Furthermore, planets could vary as much as or more than stars. If a planet is as close to its sun as Mercury, it will be hot; if distant (Mars to Pluto), cold. If its axis is tipped as with the earth or Mars, it will have seasons. If its orbit is highly elliptical (Mars), its seasons will be influenced. If its rate of rotation is slow (Venus or Mercury), then the days and nights will be long and the temperature extremes between them will be great. If the planet is as small as Mercury, it will not hold an atmosphere; if large, its atmosphere may be as dense and oppressive as Jupiter's. In short, when the Gods said, ". . . we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell" (Abraham 3:24), they were speaking of their future activities in planetary engineering. When the Gods prepare dwelling places for resurrected beings, they will again face the challenges of planetary design and construction.

Lastly, God promises that those who return to his presence with celestialized bodies may themselves become kings and queens, priests and priestesses, even gods and goddesses, being blessed with the riches of eternity, including even an eternal increase. (D&C 38:39; 76:50-70; 132:19-21.) Modern astronomy helps us to understand that there is ample space and material in the universe for the Lord to make good on these promises.

In spite of our recent insights, numerous questions remain. How many stars have planets? How many of these planets support life? How common is intelligent life: the other children of God? Not a single planet beyond our solar system has yet been viewed by man.

Someday we shall have the answers. Consider again, this time in detail, the Lord's description of the dispensation of the fulness of times: He speaks of "a time to come in the which nothing shall be withheld, whether there be one God or many gods, they shall be. . .

". . . revealed and set forth upon all who have endured valiantly for the gospel of Jesus Christ.

"And also, if there be bounds set to the heavens or to the seas, or to the dry land, or to the sun, moon, or stars—

"All the times of their revolutions, all the appointed days, months, and years, and all the days of their days, months, and years, and all their glories, laws, and set times, shall be revealed in the days of the dispensation of the fulness of times—

"According to that which was ordained in the midst of the Council of the Eternal God of all other gods before this world was, that should be reserved unto the finishing and the end thereof, when every man shall enter into his eternal presence and into his immortal rest." (D&C 121:28-32.)

Perhaps the time will come when Christ will meet with righteous learned men of the world, holding symposia and revealing knowledge of the universe. Then we shall know about creation and its bounds. But must we wait until then to know these things? Perhaps, to know them all. But now is the dispensation of the fulness of times ". . . in the which I will gather together in one all things, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth." (D&C 27:13.) We have seen that many of the things the Lord promised to reveal have already been discovered by modern astronomers (". . . times of their revolutions . . . appointed days . . . glories . . . laws . . ."). Is it such a surprising thought that God, prior to his coming in glory, might reveal these things during our dispensation by inspiring modern astronomers? And what a blessing to live now when it is possible to take part in this accretion of knowledge—or at least to enjoy its fruits!

What does all this mean to you and to me personally? Should it have any impact on our daily lives? Of course it can provide us with the joy of new knowledge. God delights in wisdom, and as his offspring, so do we. I have enjoyed preparing these astronomy chapters, and hopefully you have enjoyed reading them. But can they really teach us something about life?

When we learn about God and the manner in which he interacts with us, we are learning about life—about how we should live. The message of these astronomy chapters is that God clearly wants us to ponder and to be engaged in good causes of our own free will—to be exercising the gift of agency that he gave us. He knows we are curious about how the universe works and what it all means; he made us that way. And he wants us to apply the talents he gave us to discover these things on our own. He may inspire and subtly direct, but he doesn't outwardly intervene in our search for truth when we can find it on our own. The astronomy lessons given to Moses and Abraham were parables to help them (and us) understand things about God that they (or we) could never discover without his help. But we can learn a fantastic amount about astronomy on our own.

Doesn't this also apply to our daily lives? Should we expect God to solve our problems when we can solve them ourselves? Won't our efforts to find solutions bless us with growth and satisfaction? Let's pray for the guidance of God's Spirit, but then let's attack our problems with all the enthusiasm, intense thought, and concerted action that Harlow Shapley or Edwin Hubble must have used to find understanding of the universe. That's the real lesson of modern astronomy.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] One of the most vocal modern proponents of cataclysm in the earth's history is Immanuel Velikovsky (not a creationist). His book Worlds in Collision caused much negative reaction from the scientific community in 1950 when it was published. Ages in Chaos and Earth in Upheaval followed. His thesis involved Venus being ejected from Jupiter and coming close to the earth. Some vindications of Velikovsky's views were reviewed recently by Fred Warshofsky, "When the Sky Rained Fire: the Velikovsky Phenomenon," Readers Digest 107 (December 1975): 219-40.
[^2] Melvin Calvin, "Chemical Evolution," American Scientist 63 (1975): 169-77.
[^3] Dorsey Hagen, Practical Oil Geology (New York: McGraw-Hill, 6th ed., 1951), p. 99.
[^4] W. Lee Stokes, Essentials of Earth History (Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice Hall, Inc., 1966), p. 19.
[^5] J. D. Love and John C. Reed, Jr., Creation of the Teton Landscape (Moose, Wyo.: Grand Teton Natural History Association, 1st ed. rev., 1971).
[^6] For more details, see Tom Alexander, "A Revolution Called Plate Tectonics Has Given Us a Whole New Earth," Smithsonian 5 (10): 30-40; and "Plate Tectonics Has a Lot to Tell Us About the Present and Future Earth," Smithsonian 5 (10): 38-47.
