Frank B. Salisbury, Creation ( 1976)

11

The Earth

An Oklahoma farmer has just finished preparing his fields for seeding. The soil has been plowed and harrowed, and it now lies moist, exposed to the elements. Black clouds are forming on the horizon. Soon these billowy, cumulus giants have moved over the farm, and it is beginning to rain. Within minutes, the scattered gentle drops have turned into a torrential downpour. Vast quantities of water are falling onto the surface of the land. Nearly all is absorbed at first, but soon the soil is saturated, and the runoff begins. Little rivulets are collecting into medium and then moderate size streams, carrying the soil along. Before it is all over, a miniature Grand Canyon, complete with tributaries, dissects the farmer's field.

A meandering river follows its tortuous course across a valley bottom. The water has its greatest momentum and hence its most efficient scouring power on the outside of the curves. Its flow rate is relatively slow on the inside, so mud is being deposited there. Thus the graceful bends become even larger until finally, perhaps at flood time, overflow occurs, the channel is straighter, and a large bend remains as an oxbow lake.

On the West Coast, the spring rains have been unusually intense. The soil along the coastal bluffs has finally reached the saturation point. A large segment of highway slips away into the ocean.

In 1954, a severe earthquake occurred near Fallon, Nevada. The result was a twelve-foot vertical face of newly exposed soil running for some distance along the base of a mountain range, which is now several feet higher relative to the valley.

A glacier in Alaska has been studied for decades. It is in motion, traversing a distance of two or three hundred feet each year. Vast quantities of crushed rock and other debris are expelled from the moving ice mass. Clearly the glacier is widening and deepening the canyon that it fills, scouring out basins and building up mountains of material along its exposed sides and at its end.

To the great surprise of a farmer, a volcanic eruption begins in a field in Mexico in 1943. Gas, debris, and finally molten lava are expelled. A mountain called Paricutin forms where the farmer once grew corn.

By studying such events and many others, it is not difficult to deduce that such processes, continuing over an immense span of time, might account for many of the earth's surface features. Such a deduction, refined during the early part of the nineteenth century, became the theory of uniformitarianism. It states that the present is the key to the past: that events going on now are representative of those that, continued over vast spans of time (millions to billions of years), shaped and formed the present earth.

God has told us little about how the earth was created. There is the statement that "there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell. . . ." (Abraham 3:24.) So the earth was "organized and formed" from preexisting materials, and "the earth, after it was formed, was empty and desolate. . . ." (Abraham 4:1-2.) The Spirit of the Gods brooded upon the face of the waters, and the earth was prepared and organized to bring forth grass and living creatures.

Important as these concepts are, they don't inform us about the rivers and plains, oceans and mountains, and other structural features that we see on the face of the earth. How were they formed? Did God direct the current geologic processes in a kind of uniformitarian creation, or did he shape the earth's features by directly applying forces as a sculptor works with clay? Did it all happen in seven 24-hour days of creation, seven 1,000-year creation periods, or gradually over an immense span of time, perhaps as long as 4.5 billion years?

Judging by the paucity of scriptural comments relating to these questions, one must deduce that the Lord expects us to seek answers for ourselves. He has instructed us: "Teach ye diligently . . . all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand; Of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth. . . ." (D&C 88:78-79.) He has promised that when Christ returns, he will explain to us about "things of the earth, by which it was made . . .—Things most precious, things that are above, and things that are beneath, things that are in the earth, and upon the earth, and in heaven." (D&C 101:33-34.)

For about the last two centuries, men and women have been intensively applying the scientific method to a study of "things in the earth, and under the earth," and they have been speculating about "things of the earth, by which it was made." Geology is the broadest of the earth sciences, concerned with all the questions posed above. The objective data upon which the science is based come from studies of the earth's surface, its mountains, plains, oceans, and other features; from drilling cores brought up from deep oil wells; and from other data such as earthquake shocks. Paleontology is a subscience of geology, concerned with the study of fossils. It attempts to understand the organisms that have lived on the earth.

The problem of reconciling God's word about creation with the findings and theories of science is mostly a problem of understanding the time intervals involved. Like other problems of science and religion, this is an important modern question exactly because no completely satisfying answers are available. There are ways to reconcile what God has said with the findings of geologists, as we shall see in section 4, but no one knows which is best or exactly how it all fits together. The creationists, scientists many of whom believe that the Genesis account of seven 24-hour periods of creation is literally true, emphasize that catastrophes, [^1] such as the flood, could bring about profound changes in short time intervals. But traditional geologists accept the doctrine of uniformitarianism. I will resist (although not completely) the temptation to get into that argument here, saving the viewpoints of the creationists for chapter 14. For now, let's look objectively and sympathetically at traditional geology and uniformitarianism. There is much to learn!

THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH AND OF LIFE

The most popular current theory suggests that the earth and all the planets were formed simultaneously with the sun by condensation and accretion in a vast cloud of interstellar material consisting of gas (mostly hydrogen, with some helium and the lighter elements) and some solid material. The sun and the planets all revolve in the same direction, and their orbits are in about the same plane, as if the primeval cloud were rotating. As it slowly contracted by gravitational force (attraction of all its atoms and molecules for each other), it rotated faster and tended to become flattened into a disk. Most of the materials were drawn to the center of this rotating cloud where they became the sun. The rest first condensed into smaller units (called protoplanets) and then finally into the planets and asteroids as we know them now. The planets originally swept up large quantities of the primeval hydrogen, helium, water vapor, and other gases.

Based upon the accretion hypothesis, biologists, astronomers, and geologists go on to speculate about the origin of life. The game plan is to assume that everything happened by chance-directed natural processes; that is, that God had no part in these events.

When the earth first formed, it was extremely hot, but heat was slowly lost by radiation into space. The gases of the atmosphere were, for the most part, the original gases of the interstellar cloud: hydrogen and helium with some other gases. Still other gases were released from the molten rocks (as from modern volcanoes): carbon dioxide, ammonia, methane, water vapor, etc. Hydrogen and helium molecules and atoms are too light to be held by the earth's gravity and would gradually escape into space, but while they were present in excess quantities, the hydrogen would react chemically with everything exposed on the earth's surface as well as with the other atoms and molecules in the atmosphere. All would become reduced, which is a chemical condition opposite to that of being oxidized (the present condition of the earth's surface and atmosphere). As the earth cooled, water would condense in torrential rains to form oceans.

Thus the primeval earth may have been covered by an ocean under a reducing atmosphere. There were many energy sources. Volcanoes and the earth itself, still cooling from its fiery beginning, would produce heat. The sun's radiation was then, as now, an important energy source. The gases of the primeval atmosphere did not absorb ultraviolet light, so this highly energetic form of radiation from the sun could penetrate to the earth's surface at intensities much higher than can penetrate today. Violent electrical storms would have been common.

It was suggested in the late 1940s that large quantities of energy released in a reducing atmosphere of hydrogen, methane, ammonia, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, hydrogen sulfide, and water vapor would result in the formation of many complex organic molecules. This was tested in the laboratory. Gases were mixed in proportions that might have been present in the primeval atmosphere, and energy in the form of electrical discharges, ultraviolet light, heat, etc., was put into the system. After hours to days or weeks, the resulting system was analyzed, and organic molecules of all kinds were found to be present. Amino acids, sugars, nucleotides (see chapter 12), and even simple proteinlike molecules have been found in related experiments. In the most recent studies, these compounds have been generated more directly from cyanide. The conclusion is that the basic building blocks of life might have been formed by natural processes under primitive earth conditions. Such molecules have now also been discovered spectroscopically in clouds of interstellar material toward the center of our galaxy, suggesting that some might have been present on the earth from the very beginning.

From here on, the story is based much more strongly upon speculation. [^2] It is said that proteins and nucleic acids originated in those ancient soupy seas, and that some way, these became associated and surrounded by a membrane to produce a primitive cell. So-called coascervate droplets, which are said to resemble cells in some highly primitive ways, form in some of the laboratory mixtures. It is suggested that the primitive cells fed on the molecules present in the primeval seas, but as these molecules began to run out, the cells gradually became capable of synthesizing the molecules for themselves from simpler substances. Eventually a green plant capable of photosynthesis (perhaps a single-celled alga) might have appeared.

Oxygen is a product of photosynthesis, and carbon dioxide is used. It is suggested that the oxygen released by plants gradually built up in the atmosphere, carbon dioxide was removed, hydrogen and helium escaped into space, and the atmosphere as we now know it was produced. Ozone forms from oxygen in the upper layers of the atmosphere. It absorbs ultraviolet light, and the lowered intensities of ultraviolet radiation at the earth's surface could have allowed life to move onto the land—or so the story goes.

Recent evidence (some rather dubious "fossils") seems to indicate that the most primitive cells appeared at an early stage in the earth's history—perhaps 3.5 billion years ago. Yet the oldest clearly identifiable fossil remains of many animals and some plants are dated at about 600 million years ago, when numerous organisms appear suddenly in the fossil record.

THE GEOLOGIC TIME SCALE

The most recent 600 million years on the geologic time scale is divided into three main eras (Fig. 11-1). All the perhaps 4-billion-year time interval preceding this is referred to as the Precambrian. The most ancient of the three eras is the Paleozoic, which began about 600 million years ago and lasted 370 million years, over half the geologic time characterized by well-formed fossils. The second era is the Mesozoic, which continued for 165 million years until about 65 million years ago. The most recent era is the Cenozoic. It is divided into the Tertiary period, which continued up to about 3 million years ago, and the Quaternary, which has continued until the present.

What is the basis of this time scale involving millions and even billions of years? Our present concepts have their roots in the study of sedimentary rocks. Most of these rocks form in such bodies of water as lakes, large inland seas, and the oceans. Sediments are washed into these bodies of water, forming layers as conditions producing the sediments change with time and as the sedimentary particles are sorted according to size by the moving water. As deposition continues, the weight of the deposited material exerts pressure, and eventually the sediments are consolidated into rock. Glacial deposits or wind-blown material may also be consolidated into rock, as in the solidified sand dunes of Zion National Park in Utah.

The characteristic layering of sedimentary rocks can be recognized from many miles away. Think of the mountains of Glacier National Park or the pyramids and spires of the Grand Canyon. The layers are not always horizontal, however, since extensive tilting, and even bending and folding, occur during the processes of mountain building. Another characteristic is the presence of fossils (Fig. 11-2). These are the preserved bodies of once living organisms, their imprints, or their petrified castings. Most are marine animals, but plant remains are also abundant in some rocks. Coal, for example, consists almost exclusively of plant remains. The sediments containing only animals were probably formed on the bottom of relatively deep seas, while those containing plants must have formed in shallow, swampy areas.

Beginning in England about 1790, William Smith, an engineer, kept careful notes of the rocks and their fossils in England. These led to the first geologic map, published in 1815. It became apparent that certain strata (layers of sedimentary rock) could be characterized by the presence of certain fossils, and that the strata virtually always occurred in a certain order. For example, a stratum containing one kind of invertebrate animal would always be found below but never above another stratum containing a certain kind of bony fish. Fossils were the same below and above strata of coal in England, France, and Russia, for example. By 1833 enough was known about strata from all over the world that Charles Lyell (who became a close friend of Charles Darwin) proposed a standard geologic column. This ordered the strata with the oldest (simplest fossils) on the bottom. The layers of rocks, though they often graded gradually into each other, were given distinct names. The familiar diagram had achieved its modern form by about 1905 (Figs. 11-1 and 11-2).

Typically, only a small portion of the geologic column exists at any given location, and often when this is compared with the same part of the column at some other location, it can be seen that portions are missing from one or the other. This is certainly what we might expect, because we wouldn't think that deposition would always be constant and continuous over the whole earth. For example, an area might be covered with a shallow sea for a few million years, finally drying up, only to be covered again at some later date. Nowhere do the sedimentary rock formations account for more than several thousand feet of thickness (perhaps at most 75,000 feet in the San Joaquin-Sacramento Basin [^3]). But if representative strata from all the geologic eras could be stacked in the proper sequence, the total thickness might reach 450,000 feet or about 80 miles. [^4]

It is reasonable to imagine that the deposition of such extensive sediment must have required long intervals of time, but estimating the exact intervals has not been an easy task. All methods of dating must apply the principle of uniformitarianism. Most fundamental (and questionable) are those in which one measures the present rate of sedimentation, divides it into the total thickness of the strata, and arrives at an estimate of age. Based on this approach, estimated time intervals have been applied to the strata in the standard geologic column shown in Figs. 11-1 and 11-2.

A method of dating that seems somewhat more reliable involves the radioactive decay of certain elements. We know that many environmental factors can speed up or slow down the rate of sediment deposition, but so far we have been unable to detect any physical forces (temperature, pressure, etc.) that significantly influence the rate of radioactive decay. A number of these "clocks" are now known. Uranium changes gradually into lead, rubidium to strontium, and potassium to argon, for example. A crystal can be taken from a rock that was once molten. The quantity of each isotope of uranium and of lead can be carefully measured. When one knows the exact rate at which a given isotope of uranium changes to a given isotope of lead, it is then possible to estimate with considerable accuracy how long it has been since the crystal formed from the molten rock.

A serious problem is that sediments cannot be directly dated by the radioactive clock. The particles from which they form may have crystallized eons before sedimentation and consolidation occurred. If, however, molten rock covers or intrudes into a crack of sedimentary rock, cools, and crystals form, these can be dated, and it is then possible to say that the sedimentary rock must be older than the intruded or overlain crystalline rock. But how much older is only a guess. The trouble is, such situations are relatively rare. Nevertheless, the few examples that are known support the ages assigned to the geologic column in Fig. 11-1.

THE GRAND TETONS: EARLIEST EVENTS

In the northwest corner of Wyoming lies Yellowstone National Park, a high plateau consisting of volcanic rocks with many hot springs, geysers, and similar features. Just to the south lies the Teton Range, [^5] encompassed now in Grand Teton National Park. The granite peaks at the center of the range jut skyward to over 13,000 ft. above sea level (Fig. 11-3). They seem to rise vertically from the floor of the broad valley lying east of the range, called Jackson Hole by the early trappers. Jackson Lake fills a large glacial basin near the north end of the range, and Leigh Lake, String Lake, and Jenny Lake fill smaller basins south of Jackson Lake (Fig. 11-4). The central peaks of the Tetons stand well above their supporting cast of lesser mountains, forming some of the most impressive (although not the highest) mountains on the North American continent. To the west, they slope off somewhat more gradually into the Teton Valley of Idaho, a rich agricultural area. Let's weave the rest of our story of geology around this scenic region.

The most ancient rocks in the Tetons, those of the Precambrian era, are somewhat granular layered gneisses. These were probably once volcanic and sedimentary rocks that were then exposed to extreme pressures and temperatures—perhaps 1,000 degrees F., five to ten miles below the surface of the earth. Among these are some layers of marble, for example, that are thought to be the result of exposing limestone to such enormous pressures and high temperatures. Rocks subjected to such changes are called metamorphic rocks.

Why are they considered to be the oldest rocks? First, because they occur "below" all the other rocks in the Grand Teton Range. (Some have been elevated above others, but the strata on top of them match the lowest Paleozoic strata in the area.) Furthermore, the layered gneisses have been intruded by granites that are more than 2.5 billion years old on the radioactive clock. Thus the layered gneisses are among the oldest rocks in North America and record (albeit nebulously) the earliest events in the building of the North American continent.

The granites that intruded the layered gneisses form only the central part of the Tetons: the Grand Teton and its surrounding peaks (Fig. 11-3). Other peaks in the range consist mostly of the gneisses. Often these have cracked, and the cracks are filled with the 2.5 billion-year-old granites and so-called pegmatite dikes.

There is another kind of dike in the Tetons: black diabase dike. These rocks resemble basalt chemically, but they were intruded like the granites rather than being extruded on the surface as is the usual case with basalts. There is a spectacular black dike that extends from the top of Mt. Moran to its base (Fig. 11-5). It has been traced for seven miles westward toward Teton Valley. On Mt. Moran, it is 150 feet thick, narrowing to about 100 feet at its western extension. It cuts across all the other Precambrian rocks and hence is the youngest of these rocks. It does not, however, cut any of the oldest Paleozoic beds (the Cambrian beds). The dike has been dated by the radioactive clock at 1.3 billion years.

About the time that the black dikes were forming, sandstone was being deposited to the northwest of the present Teton Range. This was later compressed (metamorphosed) into quartzite. Later erosion carried vast quantities of this material into the valley of Jackson Hole, so that the valley is now filled with quartzite boulders.

After the dikes intruded, the Precambrian rocks were uplifted and eroded to an almost level plain. Perhaps about 700 million years were required for this to occur—more than all the time since then! Then about 600 million years ago, at the close of the Precambrian era, this plain began to settle and was covered by a shallow sea. The sea advanced and retreated at intervals over the next 500 million years.

The advance of the shallow sea marked the beginning of the Paleozoic era. Thousands of feet of sediment were deposited at intervals by this sea. Later, all was elevated and tipped so that the strata sloped to the west. Where the sediments were elevated the most, in the center of the Teton Range, they were subsequently almost completely eroded off, although a sandstone layer still caps a part of the peak of Mt. Moran. To the north and the south of the central peaks, the sediments were not elevated as high, and they are still plainly visible.

THE PALEOZOIC AND MESOZOIC SEAS

In Teton Village, about fifteen miles northwest of the town of Jackson, an aerial tramway runs to the top of the Teton Range. In winter this provides a variety of ski trails, traversing over 4,000 feet in vertical elevation—some of the most precipitous runs available anywhere. In summer, the view from the top of the tram is one of unexcelled alpine splendor, and looking southward, one can clearly see the sedimentary formations of the Paleozoic era (Fig. 11-6).

The lowest of these formations is the Gallatin Limestone. Nearly 600 million years ago, a shallow sea extended from California, northeastward across Nevada into Utah and Idaho. Mountains consisting of Precambrian rock probably existed to the east of this sea. They were being eroded and deposited into the sea. As this occurred, the land gradually dropped so that the seashore moved slowly eastward. Sand was deposited along the shore (as occurs today), and as the shore moved eastward, mud was deposited on top of the sand. Thus there are formations of sandstone and shale that occur beneath the Gallatin Limestone (at other locations besides the one shown in Fig. 11-6). Simple invertebrate marine organisms called brachiopods and trilobites occur as fossils in these ancient strata. When the shoreline of the shallow sea had moved far enough eastward so that most of Wyoming and Montana were covered, the water was about 100 to 200 feet deep in the Teton area, and the Gallatin Limestone was deposited. This is dated by traditional geologic means (not radioactivity) at about 510 to 520 million years ago. The sea continued to move eastward until it connected with another shallow sea that covered the eastern part of the United States. This story of early Paleozoic seas is based upon reconstruction from the sedimentary rocks (sandstones, shales, and limestones) of North America.

After the Gallatin Limestone was deposited, the seas retreated, and the Teton area was uplifted for perhaps 70 million years, only to sink again when a second shallow sea covered the area to deposit the Big Horn Dolomite (perhaps 430 to 450 million years ago). Fossil corals and other animals of clear warm seas occur in this rock formation. The sea retreated again for perhaps 60 million years and returned to deposit the Darby Formation (360-370 million years ago) on top of the Big Horn Dolomite. Rock in the Darby Formation indicates that the sea bottom was foul and the water turbid, but numerous brachiopods, corals, bryozoans, and even bony fishes occur as fossils. These animals were more advanced than those of the Big Horn Dolomite or the Gallatin Limestone, but some animals (e.g., brachiopods) from the earlier formations were still present. The sea left for another 50 million years but returned to deposit the Madison Limestone about 310 to 340 million years ago. Again the water was clear, and numerous beautiful marine organisms became fossilized. The testimony of the Gallatin Limestone, the Big Horn Dolomite, the Darby Formation, and the Madison Limestone is that seas came and went for 285 million years. The waters were present for perhaps 180 million years, and the rest of the time the land was elevated with some erosion occurring.

The Mesozoic era was also a time of marine sediment deposition, but there were transitional periods and times when the area was typically continental. Fossils are numerous and varied from marine mollusks to dinosaurs—far more advanced than the fossils of the Paleozoic. Still, the shallow seas came and went. For example, the Sundance Sea gradually moved down from Alaska until it covered all of Wyoming. It was warm and muddy with many marine mollusks. There were tropical humid flood plains. At other times, there were swamps with dinosaurs and extensive land vegetation. Finally, the area was covered with a cretaceous sea (the youngest of the Mesozoic seas), which retreated eastward 85 million years ago. There were extensive coal swamps. Numerous complex strata, too involved for detailed discussion here, testify of these events.

THE TERTIARY UPHEAVALS

About 70 million years ago, during the so-called Laramide Revolution, the Rocky Mountains began to be elevated. The quartzite boulders in Jackson Hole testify that ranges existed west of the Tetons before that, but no trace of these mountains remains today. Near the end of the Mesozoic era, about 65 million years ago, the dinosaurs became extinct and the Tertiary era began. As the most recent era, it provides the most detailed evidence about its events. Furthermore, no region in the United States has a thicker or more complete nonmarine Tertiary record than that of the Teton area, where the record testifies of much crustal motion, erosion, faulting, and volcanism. Many of these events were related to the Laramide Revolution, which reached its climax about 50 to 55 million years ago.

The fossils are far more complex than those of the earlier periods. There are snails and clams, plus beaver bones and teeth, aquatic mice, suckers, and other fossils typical of fresh water lakes. Indeed, Teewinot Lake covered much of the area during Tertiary time. Mammals became abundant, and there were numerous coal swamps. The climate was subtropical for a time and then temperate. Many of the plants and animals were similar to those presently living in the Teton area. There are fossil conifers and flowering plants, for example.

Near the close of the Tertiary era, about 9 million years ago, the Teton Range finally began to be elevated. With an age of a mere 9 million years, the Tetons are clearly the youngest range in North America. Their relative youth explains why they are so spectacular, with their steep slopes, jagged peaks, and precipitous cliffs.

CRUSTAL DEFORMATION AND MOUNTAIN BUILDING

What caused the Tetons to be elevated? The processes of mountain building have long intrigued geologists, and during recent years we have begun to approach an understanding. One key was the study of earthquakes. A quake occurs as rocks slip past each other along a fault. Apparently tension builds up until slippage occurs, releasing the stored energy in an earthquake.

Faulting can occur in many ways. In the San Andreas Fault in California, both sides of the fault remain horizontal, but the west (actually, southwest) side moves northward while the east side moves southward. The fault slipped as much as 16 to 21 feet along a 270-mile line in the earthquake that devastated San Francisco on April 18, 1906. The San Andreas Fault with its many tributary branches has been traced for 600 miles along the coastal region of California. During its history over millions of years, it has slipped at least tens of miles and possibly over 100 miles.

Probably a vertical displacement along a fault is more common than a horizontal slippage. One side may go up while the other side goes up or down, or one side may remain relatively stationary. The Yakutat Bay (Alaska) earthquake of 1899 resulted in a vertical displacement that lifted part of the coastal belt nearly 50 feet! Many mountain ranges, especially in western America, have been built this way. Displacements by faulting can be observed at present, and relatively fresh fault scarps (the newly exposed rock along the fault) can be observed at the base of many mountains, such as the one near Fallon, Nevada, mentioned earlier. The strata exposed on the mountain faces can often be found by drilling into adjacent valleys. Much crustal movement occurs well below the surface, so no scarps can be observed. Seismographs (delicate instruments designed to detect minute movements in the earth's crust) can usually pinpoint where the subsurface movement has taken place, since they record not only motion but also its exact direction.

The Tetons were apparently produced by faulting as the east face was raised in relation to Jackson Hole, the entire block being tilted as though it were hinged along its western edge. The eastern face is the remnant of the fault scarp, but erosion has carved numerous canyons and peaks from this uplifted block.

How well does the principle of uniformitarianism apply? Were the Grand Tetons elevated to their present height by slippage of a foot or so every two or three centuries during the past 9 million years? (This is the calculated rate.) Or were they elevated in one mighty cataclysmic event lasting from a few minutes to perhaps a few brief centuries? The uniformitarian view is strongly favored by secondary evidence such as the patterns of erosion that formed the canyons in these fault-block mountains. The formations in the Tetons indicate that several thousand feet of sediments once existed above the present Tetons. We can imagine that this could have been eroded away if the Tetons were gradually raised over a 9-million-year period, but this seems much less likely if they had been raised cataclysmically. We seem to be dealing with an ancient earth.

We should note that a uniformitarian concept of mountain building is not incompatible with occasional cataclysms. The formation of the volcanic Paricutin mountain in the Mexican field was certainly a cataclysmic event! Indeed, earthquakes are cataclysms by human standards. Uniformitarianism merely says that such "minor" cataclysms extended over vast intervals of time could account for mountain building.

But what about cataclysms on a global scale? In 3 Nephi 8 and 9, we are told of the great upheavals that occurred at the time of the crucifixion of Christ and his visit to the American continents. Mountains were thrust up, cities submerged into the seas, etc. I do not know of geological deductions about specific cataclysmic events occurring nearly 2,000 years ago—but then I don't know much about geological deductions. Perhaps no one has bothered to look for the evidence of such events. Latter-day Saint geologists might well become involved in such a search.

THE INTERIOR OF THE EARTH AND PLATE TECTONICS

What are the forces that lead to mountain building? Apparently, they come from deep within the earth. But what is happening there? Two kinds of earthquake shocks or waves pass through the earth: those in which individual particles move forward and then back along a line parallel to the direction of the wave (compression waves) and those in which the particles move at right angles to this imaginary line (shear waves). The two kinds of waves move with different velocities, which depend upon the material through which the waves are passing. Only the compression waves move through liquid. In either case, the waves may be refracted (bent) as they pass through different kinds of material. Thus by studying the movement of earthquake waves through the earth, we can deduce much about its interior. And by applying sophisticated mathematics to data on artificial satellite orbits, we can measure the earth's moment of inertia—the distribution of mass within the earth's interior.

The evidence indicates that there is an inner solid dense core with a radius of about 860 miles surrounded by an outer molten core of iron and nickel about 1300 miles thick. This circulates and causes the earth's magnetic field, which has changed during geologic time as the circulation patterns have changed. Overlying the molten core is the solid mantle with a thickness of 1800 miles, and covering the mantle is the crust, varying from a few miles to about 40 miles thick. The crust is thickest under the continents, which are huge plates of granite, a relatively light rock, "floating" in the heavier basalt-like rocks that form the ocean floors. Under the tremendous pressures existing several miles below the earth's surface, rock, while it remains solid in a literal sense, is capable of gradually flowing. Thus as the mountains are worn off by erosion, they continue to rise as an iceberg rises when the sun melts the ice above the surface. Clearly there is more to the story, however. The Tetons have not always been in existence, their granite masses floating in the underlying basalt. We've seen that the area was repeatedly covered by inland seas.

During about the past decade, geologists have been enjoying a scientific revolution as profound and exciting as the one that has been revising our concepts of the cosmos. The roots of the revolution trace to the 1950s and before, but convincing data supporting the ideas began to be obtained first in 1964. Since then, geologists have developed a sequence of insights, explaining one geological mystery after another in terms of the new concepts.

The new theory, called plate tectonics, is based on an old suggestion, that of continental drift. In Genesis 10:25, in the genealogy of the descendants of Noah, it is stated: ". . . the name of one was Peleg; for in his days was the earth divided. . . ." For many years this statement has been interpreted by theologians to mean that the continents were separated from each other in Peleg's days. (Or was it a political rather than a geological division of the earth?) It is easy to see that the west coasts of Europe and Africa fit into the east coasts of North and South America. One can fit all the continents (including their continental shelves) together as a jigsaw puzzle into a single vast continent called Pangaea. Geologists didn't take the idea of continental drift seriously until so much evidence had accumulated that it could no longer be ignored. Strata on the west coast of Africa closely match comparable strata on the east coast of South America, for example, and the distribution of plants and animals also agrees with the idea that the continents were all unified at one time and then separated. During the 1950s, and 1960s, continental drift was placed on a firm footing. It was estimated that the rate of separation of Europe and Africa from the Americas was about 10 kilometers/million years, beginning about 200 million years ago—well before the days of Peleg!

But what is causing the continental drift? Because of submarine warfare during World War II, the oceans were studied as never before. A striking discovery was that an undersea range of mountains runs along the center of the Atlantic and extends for 47,000 miles, forming a continuous, serpentine, underwater ridge system around the globe. This discovery led to the theory of plate tectonics. The earth was seen as a system of dynamic crustal plates spreading apart at the midocean ridges, where they were and even now are being manufactured by processes deep within the earth's interior. Material is welling up from below, forming the ocean ridges and pushing the plates asunder at rates of 1 to 7.5 cm (one-half to three inches) per year. Where the plates collide, one may slip under another, forming the deep ocean trenches, another fairly recent discovery. The average depth of the Pacific Ocean is just over 14,000 feet, but the Mariana Trench reaches a depth of 35,800 feet. The basalt that forms the ocean bottom seems to be plunging slowly into these trenches to depths of 400 miles, where it is destroyed as crust and becomes part of the mantle. Thus the plates grow at the mid-ocean ridges and are returned to the mantle in the trenches. Once the granite continents (including the continental shelves) form, they never disappear. They seem to float serenely above the plate turmoil below. But they do undergo many transformations.

Most earthquakes occur at the edges of the plates: the mid-ocean ridges and the deep trenches. The San Andreas Fault is where two plates are sliding by each other. When two plates butt their edges together with comparative gentle force, instead of forming a trench with one plate slipping deep into the mantle, they slowly deform and emerge above sea level as great folded mountain ranges such as the Alps. Thus buckling may occur at some distance from the plate edge, as is the case with the Rocky Mountains, which are still growing. This is how the Teton area could be covered with shallow seas for millions of years, only to be deformed by buckling and intrusions of molten granites (melted, perhaps, by the heat of radioactive decay trapped below).

Modern geologists have traced the movements of the plates during geologic time to account for the shallow seas, the elevation of specific mountain ranges, changes in ocean circulation patterns, the consequent changes in climate, and the effects of all this on the earth's plants and animals—including the extinction of the dinosaurs. Other long-standing problems that appear to be solved by the theories of plate tectonics include the formation of island chains (e.g., the Hawaiian Islands), and the mechanisms of mineral deposition (so-called hydrothermal alteration at spreading ridges and other locations). Thus plate tectonics is one of those marvelous theories that makes science so much fun. It successfully ties together many scattered and apparently unrelated facts, predicting phenomena that can then be tested by observation. [^6]

THE QUATERNARY GLACIERS IN THE TETONS

So, thanks to plate tectonics, we have gained some insight into how the Tetons came into being beginning about 9 million years ago. The Quaternary period includes the last 3 million years of the Tertiary era. It was during this time that most of the geologic processes responsible for the present landscape were taking place. There continued to be much faulting and volcanic activity (especially to the north in Yellowstone Park). There were also numerous lakes, but perhaps the most significant geologic process of the late Quaternary period was glaciation. The rocks testify that there were three ice ages or periods of glaciation during this time:

The Buffalo Glaciation was the oldest. It began about 200 thousand years ago and was by far the most extensive glaciation in the Teton area. Huge ice sheets came from the Bear Tooth Mountains to the north and the Wind River Mountains to the south, filling Jackson Hole perhaps to a depth of 2,000 feet and moving gradually through the Snake River Canyon into Idaho.

The Bull Lake Glaciation occurred about 35 to 80 thousand years ago, being less than half as extensive as the Buffalo Glaciation. Deposits from the Bull Lake Glaciation are overlaid by deposits of loess, fine soil particles with sharp edges that apparently were blown in from Idaho to the west. Fossil shells deposited in this loess have been dated by carbon-14 at 13,000 to 19,000 years old, so the Bull Lake Glaciation was before then.

The Pinedale Glaciers were younger than the 13,000-year-old loess. This was the most recent and the least extensive glaciation to occur in the Teton region, but it added the final touches to the landscape and was more than any other geologic process responsible for the present features. The glaciers may have been extensive in the canyons of the Tetons as recently as 9,000 years ago, but there is evidence that a warm period occurred about 6,000 years ago, during which all the glaciers melted. The trend has been a cooling one during the most recent past, and small glaciers have again formed in the Tetons. In any case, the lakes of Jackson Hole were formed by the Pinedale Glaciers, as were the present conformations of the Teton canyons and the glacial moraines (piles of glacial debris) that stand up as timbered island hills in the sagebrush flats of the valley. It is easy to interpret the glacial features in the area, because it is possible to see such features being formed today in conjunction with glaciers in Canada, Alaska, Switzerland, and other locations.

WHAT DOES IT ALL MEAN

For many years, I have done a lot of wondering about what all this means and how it relates to the scriptural accounts of creation. It would be nice for scriptural interpretation if the geologists were all wrong, and the earth were only some 13,000 years old (6,000 since Adam plus seven 1,000-year periods of creation). I have listened to fundamentalist preachers argue with the findings of geologists. I have emphasized in my own mind the weaknesses of the uniformitarian doctrine. Why should the present be the key to the past? Perhaps the plates slid around much faster during the 7,000 years of divine engineering (or in Peleg's days) than they do now. I have examined the arguments of Melvin and Garfield Cook [^7] and others who try to place catastrophism on a scientific foundation. Now, having indulged in these exercises, I'm afraid I must conclude that the evidence still is in favor of an extremely ancient earth, one that is at least hundreds of millions, and probably billions, of years old.

Yes, I can imagine that much sediment might have been deposited during the flood. I can imagine that many plants and animals might have been trapped in these sediments. But the regularity of the stratigraphic column (the ordering of fossils with more complex forms nearly always occurring in the upper layers) is not easy to account for in a theory based on the flood.

Surely the rocks are trying to tell us something: that our planet has been around for a long, long time, [^8] and that there has been a continuous and orderly parade of life forms for at least 600 million years. Many species (perhaps 99 percent of all that have lived) have flourished in abundance for millions of years only to become extinct. Simple invertebrates began the story in the ocean as did highly simplified plants on land. As the earth progressed through time, spinning on and on around the sun, increasingly complex life forms made their appearance on its surface. For a few million years, the dinosaurs reigned. Seed ferns, cycads, giant horsetails, and lycopods flourished in the swamps. Then the conifers covered the hillsides for eons before a flower appeared. Finally the flowering plants made their debut at about the same time that mammals were spreading on the face of the earth and dinosaurs were becoming extinct. How strongly can I question this story when the signs are nearly as clear as the glacial moraines of Jackson Hole?

Please note that "a parade of life forms" is not necessarily equivalent to an evolution of life forms. The fossils and the sediments seem to tell us that the life forms were there, for about how long, and the approximate order in which they appeared, but there is no way of knowing from the fossils alone that one life form evolved into another.

Does the Lord want us to doubt the ancient age of the earth with its parade of life? Perhaps, but I don't think so. Isn't it more reasonable that he wants us to weigh the evidence, both the scriptures and the story in the rocks? To study "things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth" (D&C 88:79)? We shall return to these questions.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The fascinating story of this monumental discovery is documented by James D. Watson in The Double Helix (New York: Atheneum, 1968). Now available in paperback.
[^2] Melvin Calvin, "Chemical Evolution," American Scientist 63 (1975): 169-77.
[^3] Dorsey Hagen, Practical Oil Geology (New York: McGraw-Hill, 6th ed., 1951), p. 99.
[^4] W. Lee Stokes, Essentials of Earth History (Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice Hall, Inc., 1966), p. 19.
[^5] J. D. Love and John C. Reed, Jr., Creation of the Teton Landscape (Moose, Wyo.: Grand Teton Natural History Association, 1st ed. rev., 1971).
[^6] For more details, see Tom Alexander, "A Revolution Called Plate Tectonics Has Given Us a Whole New Earth," Smithsonian 5 (10): 30-40; and "Plate Tectonics Has a Lot to Tell Us About the Present and Future Earth," Smithsonian 5 (10): 38-47.
[^7] 7. Melvin A. Cook and M. Garfield Cook, Science and Mormonism, op. cit.
[^8] 8. In this regard, it is interesting to note that the close associates of Joseph Smith were not dismayed by the idea of an extremely ancient earth, as indicated by the following excerpt from a letter of W. W. Phelps to William Smith (brother of Joseph), published in Times and Seasons 5 (January 1845): 758. "Well, now, Brother William, when the house of Israel begin to come into the glorious mysteries of the kingdom, and find that Jesus Christ, whose goings forth, as the prophets said, have been from of old, from eternity: and that eternity, agreeably to the records found in the catacombs of Egypt, has been going on in this system (not this world) almost two thousand five hundred and fifty five millions of years. . . ."
