Frank B. Salisbury, Creation ( 1976)

12

The Unity and Complexity of Life

This is a glorious time of year in Cache Valley, Utah. It is May, and I have brought my dictaphone into the foothills about three miles from my home. There are fields of dry-land wheat and alfalfa, but I'm on a strip of unplowed land between two high-tension power lines running along the lip of a bluff slightly too steep and rocky for convenient plowing. The soil is beginning to dry, and spring won't last much longer, but right now I am surrounded with large, yellow balsam root flowers, which are similar to sunflowers but close to the ground. There are pink phlox, the white death camas, a lovely blue penstemon, a mostly white, but faintly blue forget-me-not, and many equally lovely but somewhat less showy mustards, grasses, geraniums, and others.

Along these shorelines of ancient Lake Bonneville and up and down the ridges of the mountains, I can see the yellow fields of balsam root. Living things are growing and developing just as their Creator planned. I tend to be preoccupied with the plants, but there is a beautiful butterfly, and our old black Labrador, Princess, panting from the walk up, reminds me that animals also grow and develop in the springtime, and that, strange as it might seem, they have many complexities in common with the planets. We've marveled at the galaxies and the plants, the structure of the earth; now let's briefly examine the unity and complexities of the living things God placed on this creation.

THE VARIETY OF LIVING THINGS

The fantastic diversity of organisms living on the earth's surface is most impressive. There are hundreds of thousands of plant species and probably millions of animals—mostly insects! Emphasis upon the diversity of life was at a peak in the mid-1700s when Carolus Linnaeus (Carl von Linne) in Sweden was classifying the world's plants and animals. The study of anatomy also tended to emphasize diversity. It got its start, perhaps, in 1628 when William Harvey demonstrated the circulation of the blood. Although we are surrounded by plants and animals, it is almost impossible to grasp the extent of this variety without formal, extended study. For one thing, many are invisible to us without a microscope. But imagine that you are going to study all the 700,000 known species of insects. You are wealthy and can command the help of the world's experts. The specimens are brought to you one by one, so you can spend exactly one minute looking at each. You do this eight hours a day, seven days a week, but it takes you four years and one day to look at all 700,000. Yet there may well be 3 million or more kinds of insects when all have been cataloged! But say that you want to examine all the species of plants: 10,500 species of bacteria and blue-green algae (both single-celled organisms without organized nuclei in their cells), the 100,000 fungi and 17,000 lichens (organisms that consist of both an alga and a fungus), the 25,000 species of other algae (including the browns, reds, golds, and greens, to mention a few), the 23,000 kinds of mosses and liverworts, the 21,000 ferns and their relatives, the 665 species of conifers, cycads, ginkgo tree (a single species with no close relatives) and all their relatives, and finally the 300,000 species of flowering plants, making a total of about half a million plant species. Then take a look at the million animal species (assuming only 700,000 insects): the 30,000 kinds of single-celled animals, the 13,800 species of sponges, jellyfish, corals, sea anemones and their relatives, the 30,000 kinds of worms (round, flat, and segmented) and other minor invertebrates, the 770,000 species of "jointed animals with external skeletons" (insects, spiders and mites, centipedes and millipedes, and crustaceans, including crabs and lobsters), the 100,000 clams, snails, squids, octopuses and their relatives, the 5,700 kinds of starfish and relatives, and finally the 45,000 animals that have a notochord (a structure associated with the spinal cord or its apparent precursor) at some time during their life cycle (the fishes, frogs and salamanders, snakes, lizards, turtles, birds, and mammals—plus some other minor groups). For this job, let's reduce your work load to a forty-hour week, fifty-two weeks per year. But you must still spend exactly one minute on each species. It will take you almost exactly 12 years to examine all 1.5 million known species. By then you should be well impressed with the variety of God's creations.

Yet the emphasis of this chapter is on unity. Although living things may look as different as an elephant and a yeast cell, or a mushroom and a tiger, all have much in common. All consist of cells, and the molecules and organelles that make up those cells are very much alike.

DISCOVERING THE UNITY OF LIFE

It is striking to realize that the unity of life has become apparent only rather recently. It all began a little over 300 years ago with the discovery of the microscope. This instrument first extended our appreciation for the diversity of living things: the microscopic world of single-celled plants and animals; the algae, protozoa, and bacteria. Then in 1665, Robert Hooke, who built one of the first compound microscopes, sliced a thin section from a piece of cork and observed that it consisted of minute empty spaces that reminded him of the cubicles in a monastery. He called them cells and began to notice them in sections cut from living plant tissues, in which the cells were not empty but were filled with fluid and barely discernible particles. This was the beginning of our appreciation for the unity of life.

During the early 1800s, the sciences of organic and inorganic chemistry were developing, and their findings were being applied to an understanding of living things. By the 1830s, it was possible to formally state the cell theory: that all living things consist of cells. And the realization was developing that cells are minute chemical factories, functioning according to the laws of physics and chemistry. Back when the newly restored church of Jesus Christ was being organized and going through the tribulations of Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois, biologists were learning about cells and cell chemistry.

By 1947, one hundred years after the arrival of the pioneers in the Salt Lake Valley, we had accumulated a vast amount of information about plant and animal cells and about the chemical reactions that make them what they are. Then there was another knowledge explosion. Most of this came about in response to the development of some powerful and marvelous tools. The electron microscope, quite advanced by the end of the 1940s, could be used to examine cells during the 1950s, because extremely sharp knives made of glass or diamond were invented to cut exceedingly thin sections, and special stains (often utilizing the atoms of heavy metals) absorbed the electrons in the electron beam and made cellular structures visible in these thin sections.

The technique of chromatography was worked out for the accurate and complete separation of closely similar molecules. (The pigments mixed in a drop of liquid, as in many inks, placed on a piece of filter or blotter paper, will often separate as the liquid moves on the paper by capillarity—illustrating the principle of chromatography). The technique of X-ray diffraction, which had been used to visualize the arrangement of atoms in inorganic crystals, was extended to proteins and other important molecules of cells. Numerous other techniques contributed so that our understanding of cell structure and function has multipled several times from about 1950 until the present.

The revolution in biology has been quite comparable to the revolutions in astronomy and geology. A formidable body of fact and theory has accumulated about how organisms work, especially at the molecular level. In discussing the questions of creation, I want to base some of my arguments upon this new information, so in the following pages I will try to outline a few highlights and insights that have been discovered during the past two or three decades. Let's see what biologists have been learning about God's creations.

THE CELL: KEY TO UNDERSTANDING

We knew there were numerous particles in the cell, but thanks to the electron microscope, we now know how they are put together and what they do. We have probably learned as much in the past two decades as had been learned in the previous 300 years—and this doubling of knowledge could happen again during the next two decades.

Each cell is a unit factory in itself, usually with the potential to reproduce itself. A single-celled bacterium, alga, or protozoan performs all the necessary life functions, but some cells, in addition to performing the functions necessary to stay alive, are highly specialized. A nerve cell transmits nervous impulses, thyroid cells produce the thyroid hormone, muscle cells contract and relax, and a microspore mother cell in the anther of a flower produces pollen. So there is no such thing as a perfectly typical cell, and in the following discussion where we are mostly talking about cells as though there were only one kind, we are not really telling things quite like they are. Nevertheless, most of the important features and structures of plant and animal cells are fairly well-represented in a leaf cell and a liver cell. Electron micrographs of a plant cell, along with two interpretive drawings of cells, are shown in Fig. 12-1.

CELL MEMBRANES AND WALLS

Each cell is surrounded by a membrane, and many of the particles in the cell, such as the nucleus, chloroplasts, mitochondria, and others are also surrounded by membranes, although all these membranes are not exactly alike. Membranes are marvelous structures. They control the passage of substances in and out of the cell or the cell organelle. Sodium (in sodium chloride, common salt) is pumped out of most cells, for example, and potassium is pumped in. There are dozens of similar membrane functions, involving probably hundreds of dissolved substances.

In addition to the cell membrane, plant cells are surrounded by a cell wall consisting largely of cellulose but often including pectin, hemicellulose, lignin, protein, and other materials. Wood or cork consists mostly of the cell walls of once living cells that had contained membranes and all the other organelles. In living plant cells, the wall is capable of sustaining high pressures from within—pressures that would cause an animal cell to burst. (Incidentally, in newspapers, magazines, and the like, cell membranes of animal cells are often incorrectly called walls.)

THE NUCLEUS: GENES AND NUCLEIC ACIDS

One of the most notable organelles of the cell is the nucleus. Most of the cell organelles are nearly transparent, but nuclei readily absorb certain applied stains and become quite prominent. Discovery of this technique led to the discovery that most cells have nuclei and got biologists to thinking along the lines that led to the cell theory. Yet not all cells have nuclei. By the time human red blood cells and phloem cells in the bark of plants have matured, all traces of nuclei have vanished. More important, there are two large groups of microorganisms that never contain organized nuclei: the bacteria and the blue-green algae. Nuclear functions are carried out in these cells, however, because the important molecules we will be discussing shortly are present there, but these are not surrounded by a nuclear membrane as in all other organisms.

The important molecular material in the nucleus is the brightly staining chromatin. When the cell is dividing, the chromatin forms into elongate bodies called chromosomes, the shape and number of which are quite constant for a given species. There are 23 pairs of chromosomes in man, for example, making a total of 46.

Chromatin consists primarily of two kinds of molecules: protein and nucleic acid, but the nucleic acid is of special and immediate interest. It is the genetic material. The genes that control the inheritance of such features as blue or brown eyes, straight or curly hair, white or pigmented skin, and probably even musical ability and intelligence are really molecules of nucleic acid. These marvelous molecules must do two kinds of things: they must reproduce themselves whenever the cell reproduces, and the information they contain must be used to produce inherited features. Furthermore, the genes in a given cell must act only at the suitable time and place. The genes that produce brown eyes, for example, must be active only in the cells that constitute the iris of the eye.

We can imagine that there must be hundreds of thousands of genes, since there are certainly that many different inherited features. Of course we are not talking only about the things that make people (or petunias) different, such as eye color; we are talking about all the physical and perhaps mental things that make people people! Virtually every detail of bodily structure and function is controlled by the genes. And when the egg is fertilized by the sperm cell, all the genes that will control all those features in a mature adult (be it plant or animal, including human) are present in that fertilized egg. Some will act at certain times and places, and others will act at other times and places, but the result will be the mature individual.

How do the genes work? In 1953, the molecular structure of nucleic acid was worked out, and this immediately suggested how molecules of nucleic acid might reproduce themselves. In the next ten to fifteen years, we learned how the information of a nucleic acid molecule might be transferred out into the cell where it can control function—at least in many cases, and probably the principle applies to all. We still do not know, however, why a gene (a molecule of nucleic acid) acts only at the suitable time and place. The discovery of that principle would equal in importance the discovery of the atomic bomb or any other discovery ever made in science. It could open to our understanding and control the very secrets of life itself.

There are two kinds of nucleic acid, designated DNA and RNA. It is the DNA that is the stuff of genes. Each kind of nucleic acid molecule is a long chain of smaller molecules. There are four kinds of links in each of these chains. Each link, called a nucleotide, consists of three other kinds of molecules: phosphoric acid (which gives the nucleic acids their acidic nature), a 5-carbon sugar, and a larger molecule consisting of carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms. There is one kind of sugar molecule (deoxyribose) in DNA; another sugar (ribose) in RNA. There are four kinds of organic bases (the carbon-oxygen-nitrogen part of the molecule) in DNA, and three of these occur along with a fifth kind in RNA. For our discussion, it is not important to understand anything about the chemistry of these molecules except to know that a DNA molecule is a chain of four different kinds of nucleotides and that RNA also consists of four different kinds of nucleotides.

The way in which the nucleotides are put together was worked out by James D. Watson and Frances H. C. Crick in 1953. [^1] As it turned out, a molecule of DNA is a double helix, or spiral. That is, there are two chains of nucleotides twisting around each other. The links are held together through the sugar and the phosphate groups, and the organic base parts of the nucleotides protrude toward the center of the spiral. A nucleotide in one spiral is lined up with its counterpart in the other spiral.

The significant discovery was that only certain nucleotides fit together. We can designate the four nucleotides in DNA by the letters T, A, C, and G (standing for their chemical names). In the double helix, a T in one chain will always be opposite to an A in the other chain (and vice versa, of course). C in one chain always has a G as its counterpart in the other chain. This arrangement of T equals A and C equals G is known as complementary bonding. It makes possible the reproduction of a molecule of DNA. All that is necessary is that the two strands in the double helix separate, and that new nucleotides then form a second strand in conjunction with each of the first strands. Each half of the original double helix will act as a template for the formation of the second half of the new strand.

What is the "information" in a molecule of DNA? Apparently it is the sequence of nucleotides (links) in the DNA strand. It is easy to understand that information is contained in this sentence because of the sequence of letters and spaces. Of course the sentence could be translated to Morse code, in which the dots, dashes, and spaces more closely approximate the four kinds of units in the DNA code. The language of the gene, then, is in the arrangement of its nucleotides. But how does this work? We shall see next as we discuss proteins and enzymes.

PROTEIN SYNTHESIS

Certain minute round bodies, apparent in electron micrographs as black dots, are called ribosomes. Some cells have hundreds of thousands of these. Their role is to build proteins. Since the protein enzymes are the working machinery of the cell, it is important to know how proteins are made.

As nucleic acids consist of links of nucleotides, so proteins consist of long chains of amino acids. There are twenty kinds of amino acids, and all have in common two molecular structures, a carboxyl or acid group, and an amino, or basic group. We will not discuss the detailed chemistry of amino acids. In proteins, the amino acids are hooked together with the amino group of one amino acid attached to the carboxyl group of another.

Aside from the amino and carboxyl groups, each of the amino acids is different from the others in its molecular structure. Some have a considerable attraction for water molecules, and others are attracted by fatty molecules such as benzene or ether. Some of the amino acids also are acidic or basic, and under different conditions, they can have minute electrical charges that are either positive or negative. Thus you can imagine a protein as a long chain of amino acids with each link being highly specific in its solubility, electrical, and other chemical properties. The chain will be folded according to the nature of its amino acids, water-loving ones to the outside and fat-loving to the inside.

You might begin to suspect how the nucleic acids relate to the proteins. In both cases we are dealing with long chains of highly specific molecular links. But in the one case, the chain consists of only four kinds of links, and in the other case, twenty kinds are involved. The sequence of nucleotides in a molecule of DNA (a gene) might control the sequence of amino acids in protein. But since the two "languages" have a different number of "letters," some kind of translation is necessary, as when Morse code is translated into conventional English. The key to such translation is that several symbols in the Morse code are required to determine a single letter in English.

So it is in the synthesis of proteins. Three nucleotides in DNA determine a single amino acid in a protein. Actually, taking the four nucleotides three at a time, it is possible to have sixty-four combinations, so it would be possible for DNA to control sixty-four kinds of amino acids in protein. But in nature this doesn't happen, and as many as six of the possible three-nucleotide combinations (called codons) may determine the same amino acid. If I'm not careful, we'll soon be getting in deeper than we need to for this discussion, but the important point to remember is that a nucleic acid language consisting of four symbols (the nucleotides) can be translated into a protein language consisting of twenty symbols (the amino acids).

The translation occurs with the help of RNA and the ribosomes. When a gene is active in the nucleus, a strand of RNA with its four nucleotides is synthesized along the gene (DNA molecule), using it as a template much as occurs in the reproduction of a DNA molecule. Probably the DNA double helix unwinds a bit, and the RNA strand forms along one of the DNA strands. The RNA that is formed is called messenger-RNA (m-RNA), because it carries the message of nucleotide arrangement from DNA out into the cytoplasm of the cell, where the message is translated into the amino acid sequence of protein.

The messenger RNA attaches to a ribosome in the cytoplasm. In another series of complex steps, individual amino acids have become activated or energized and attach to another kind of small RNA molecule called transfer-RNA (t-RNA). The transfer RNA molecules line up along the messenger RNA strand in conjunction with the ribosome. This is where the actual translation occurs. Three nucleotides in the transfer-RNA molecule become complementarily bonded to three nucleotides along the messenger-RNA strand (i.e., to a codon). Obviously, this must begin at one end of the strand, and none can be missed or overlapped or the message is badly garbled. It is the enzymes that control all this. Finally, when transfer-RNA molecules with their attached activated amino acids are lined up next to each other along the RNA strand attached to a ribosome, then chemical bonds are formed between the amino acids (the amino group of one to the carboxyl group of another) to make the amino acid chain, which is a protein molecule. That's all there is to it!

If you have never encountered this story before, it will certainly sound complicated in spite of all my efforts to mention only the bare essentials and to simplify as much as possible. That is simply because the story is extremely complicated. The workings of living organisms are not simple, which is the whole point of this discussion. When we consider the theories proposed to account for the origin and evolution of life, we need to realize the fundamental complexity of living things.

ENZYME MOLECULES, THE CELLULAR MACHINERY

Why are we so interested in proteins? Because the secret of life function is found in the enzymes, which are all protein molecules. Life is literally thousands of different chemical reactions going on in cells at any given moment. Complex molecules are being built up and broken down, and energy is being transferred in numerous ways. And this multitude of chemical reactions depends upon the enzymes. So the important question is: How do enzymes work?

A given enzyme catalyzes a single chemical reaction. That is, it causes it to go much faster than it would otherwise. As it turns out, enzymes do not make reactions happen that could not otherwise take place; enzymes merely speed up reactions. But often the acceleration amounts to thousands or millions of times, and the fact that numerous enzymes are present in a cell at any moment, catalyzing numerous reactions, means that the compounds entering into these reactions are present in the cell because of the enzymes. That is, a given reaction going on in a cell would probably not occur in nature, simply because the compounds that enter into the reaction would not be present at sufficient concentrations if it weren't for other enzymes.

Again, if we begin discussing the specific reactions that occur in cells, we will soon get lost in chemical details that are way beyond the point of this discussion. But you need to have some appreciation for the fantastic complexity of cellular metabolic processes, so let's wet our feet a bit in the vast ocean of biochemistry.

Consider the fate of a sugar molecule in a cell, a molecule that is about to be burned (combined with oxygen) to produce carbon dioxide, water, and energy in a form that can be used to power the functions of the cell. The process is called cellular respiration. The sugar molecule is first activated or prepared by having two molecules of phosphate attached to it. This requires special enzymes and the very compound, a molecule called ATP, that respiration is going to produce. The phosphorylated sugar molecule can then enter into one of two systems of biochemical reactions that occur in the cytoplasm part of the cell. One of these systems involves about nine enzymes, and the other about eight enzymes. The sugar molecule is changed in several ways, but no oxygen is used yet, and only one of the six carbons is given off as carbon dioxide in the second system. The first system produces some ATP and another energy compound called NADH; still another compound (NADPH) is formed in the second system. The molecular product of the first system (pyruvic acid) may be acted upon to form alcohol and carbon dioxide, lactic acid, or other molecules in a process known as fermentation, providing no oxygen is present. Or the pyruvic acid may go through a third series of reactions controlled by about nine more enzymes that are located in the mitochondria of cells. (Mitochondria are shown in Fig. 12-1.) To begin with, a carbon atom is lost as carbon dioxide from each molecule of pyruvic acid, and the remaining 2-carbon fragment is combined with a 4-carbon molecule to make a 6-carbon compound, citric acid. This is then cycled until two molecules of carbon dioxide have been given off, and the original 4-carbon molecule has been regenerated. Still no oxygen has been used. But at several steps in all three processes, energy has been transferred to NADH or NADPH, and these molecules are now acted upon by a fourth system of perhaps twenty or more enzymes, called the electron transport system. Hydrogen atoms that originally came from the sugar molecule are moved along the chain of enzymes that exists in the mitochondria, producing several molecules of ATP and finally combining the hydrogen with oxygen to produce water.

All together, about fifty enzymes are involved in cellular respiration, and at least a part of the system is organized on the membranes of the mitochondria. It is a marvelous system that allows a controlled burning in the water of the cell, with much of the released energy being trapped in molecules of ATP that can then be used directly for energy-requiring processes in the cell.

Does this all sound complex and confusing? Surely it does if you have never encountered it before. Yet it is a relatively simple system compared to what is now known about photosynthesis! Anyway, you certainly don't need to understand the details of cellular respiration or photosynthesis to grasp the important point that the cell is indeed a complex, yet beautifully ordered and designed chemical factory, and that it works because of its enzymes.

Each enzyme is a minute machine. A protein molecule is too small to see even with the electron microscope, except as a minute speck. With other powerful techniques developed during the past decade, however, it is possible to determine the structure of proteins. Each determination requires a great deal of laborious effort, first to learn the sequence of amino acids in the protein chain (by one set of techniques), and then to learn the complex manner in which this chain is folded upon itself (by another set of techniques, particularly X-ray diffraction). Although the procedure was developed in the late 1940s, only a few protein structures had been worked out by 1970. The process goes somewhat faster now. The marvelous thing is that by combining knowledge of the structure with knowledge of the reaction catalyzed by the enzyme, it is possible to understand what is going on.

The enzyme lysozyme, for example, breaks down a substrate chain of sugar-like molecules found in the cell walls of bacteria. Knowing the structure of lysozyme, we can visualize how the substrate chain fits exactly into a deep cleft along this globular protein and further how the protein flexes slightly, causing one of the bonds in the sugar chain to break. No other molecular chain will fit in the enzyme cleft. In another case, we know how a protein is digested when the end of its amino acid chain goes into a waterless hole in the digesting enzyme, where the cleavage becomes possible.

In each case so far studied, we can see how the structure of the protein-enzyme molecule is capable of catalyzing the observed reaction in a purely mechanical way. We can understand, for example, how the fat-loving amino acids are confined to the inside of an enzyme molecule away from the surrounding water molecules, where they are ideally suited to catalyzing some reaction of a fat-loving substrate. Again, we could soon go too far into the chemical details, but the important thing at this point is to visualize protein enzymes as minute bits of machinery that snip apart other molecular chains or that staple bits and pieces together to form other complex molecules.

Enzymes are even involved in the duplication of DNA, in the synthesis of a messenger RNA molecule on a DNA template, in the activation of amino acids, in the attaching of transfer RNA molecules to messenger RNA, and finally in the formation of bonds between amino acids to produce other protein molecules—which in turn may themselves act as enzymes. Enzymes are made to make enzymes—and to do all else in the cell that needs doing. It's a complex business, but its complexity is its beauty. The more we delve into these matters, the more we can appreciate the intricate engineering involved in life processes, and if we are of a proper mind to do so, we can appreciate the ingenious creativity of the God who engineered it all.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The fascinating story of this monumental discovery is documented by James D. Watson in The Double Helix (New York: Atheneum, 1968). Now available in paperback.
