Frank B. Salisbury, Creation ( 1976)

13

Evolution by Natural Selection

As we grow old enough to look around, pay attention to things, and begin to wonder what it's all about, we find ourselves living on a beautiful world. We soon appreciate that life forms on earth are characterized by a fantastic diversity, the thousands of species and varieties that make up the planet's ecosystems. If we really get down to the heart of things, going into the laboratory to study the cells with their enzymes and genes, we also appreciate that life on this planet is characterized by an intricate complexity and unity of structure and function.

How did it all come about? That's the question that all this has been leading up to. Two principal answers (each with many complex subdivisions) have been seriously considered: theism and atheism. Some have believed that our earth, with its life forms, was the creation of God, a divine, creative Intelligence—that it was thought out, ordered, planned, and then brought into being by divine engineering. Others have argued that God doesn't exist, but that matter and energy in the universe interacted in ways that eventually gave rise to our planet.

THEISM AND ATHEISM

In 1802 William Paley, in his book Natural Theology, spoke of someone finding a watch by a path. The finder examines its intricate design and structure. How did the watch come into being? There could be only one answer: It was engineered by a watchmaker. Paley argued that the earth, by comparison, was far more intricate and complex than the watch. His book was devoted to an examination of the complexity of living things to the extent possible in his time. Charles Darwin, as a young man, read Paley's book and was thrilled by it.

The argument that the complexities of creation imply the existence and intelligence of God had been around much longer than William Paley. The psalmist declared: "I will praise thee; for I am fearfully and wonderfully made: marvellous are thy works. . . . Thine eyes did see my substance . . . in thy book all my members were written . . . when as yet there was none of them." (Psalm 139:14, 16.) And again: "When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained. . . . O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth!" (Psalm 8:3, 9.)

Alma presented the argument with eloquence to Korihor, the Anti-Christ: "Thou has had signs enough; . . . all things denote there is a God; yea, even the earth, and all things that are upon the face of it, yea, and its motion, yea, and also all the planets which move in their regular form do witness that there is a Supreme Creator." (Alma 30:44.)

The Lord told Enoch the same things: "And behold, all things have their likeness, and all things are created and made to bear record of me, both things which are temporal, and things which are spiritual; things which are in the heavens above, and things which are on the earth, and things which are in the earth, and things which are under the earth, both above and beneath: all things bear record of me." (Moses 6:63.)

Finally, the Lord summarized the argument in a revelation to Joseph Smith when, speaking of the earth, the moon, and the stars, he said: ". . . any man who hath seen any or the least of these hath seen God moving in his majesty and power." (D&C 88:47.)

The alternative to creation by intelligence is the concept of naturalism or logical positivism, which suggests that everything can be explained atheistically by natural law—whatever that is. Because of the astonishing successes of science during the first half of the nineteenth century, and perhaps because atheism is rather undemanding (sin becomes only relative), naturalism became highly appealing. Yet, until 1858 and 1859 when Charles Darwin constructed the bulwark of faith, naturalism was on shaky ground. In this chapter I would like to present his argument with its later embellishments, these mostly from the science of genetics. Then in chapters 14 and 15, I would like to tell why I don't believe the argument to be conclusive; indeed, why I think it fails.

CHARLES DARWIN

As everyone knows, Charles Darwin gets the credit for the theory of evolution. To state the case more accurately, he proposed the concept of natural selection, which provided a reasonable foundation for the idea of evolution, an idea that had been around for some time. Many authors, including Darwin's grandfather, Erasmus Darwin, talked about the evolution of one species from another, all species eventually originating from some simple, one-celled ancestor. It was all part of the philosophy of naturalism. Darwin suggested a model to account for this in rational terms. At least the terms seem rational to those who accept the idea.

Before Darwin's natural selection, about the only proposed mechanism of evolution was that of the inheritance of acquired characteristics, suggested by the great French biologist, Jean Baptiste LaMarck. This was the familiar idea that giraffes develop longer necks by stretching to reach higher leaves, and that because of this their offspring were then born with longer necks than the previous generation. By now this idea has been thoroughly discredited, and even Darwin referred to it as "that LaMarckian nonsense."

Charles Darwin is one of the truly fascinating personages of history. This is especially true because so much is known about the details of his life. He carried on voluminous correspondence with many people, he kept diaries and wrote a detailed autobiography, and he wrote several books and many papers that provide deep insight into his thought processes. Though he proposed a theory that may have done more to destroy belief in God than any other idea, I nevertheless find myself highly sympathetic toward Darwin. He was an honest seeker after truth. It is easy to feel compassion for him, considering the dilemmas he faced and how they led to his eventual loss of faith in God, in spite of his background and his deep and overwhelming reverence for the beauties of the earth and its organisms. He was a good man. I sincerely hope that he and his Emma have now accepted the gospel.

Darwin began his schooling in medicine, but because he could not bear to watch surgery on children without anesthetics, he entered theology in Cambridge. Yet his heart was not in it. Instead, he came under the wing of a devout and wonderful botany teacher, John Steven Henslow. He collected plants and beetles and was so thoroughly excited by these pursuits that when the opportunity came, he embarked on a scientific voyage on the H.M.S. Beagle. From 1832 to 1837, as the ship cruised around the world, Darwin collected avidly on the Cape Verde archipelago (off the coast of Africa), and then at many locations around South America, especially on the Galapagos Islands off the coast of Peru. As he left on the voyage, Henslow gave him a copy of Charles Lyell's new book on geology, which was the first really persuasive argument for uniformitarianism. Henslow advised Darwin to read it carefully, but not to believe a word of it! Darwin did read it carefully but became quite converted to the uniformitarian approach. He wondered how this might logically be applied to the evolution of species. What do we see in nature today that might tell us how species could evolve from one to another, given enough time?

Upon returning from the voyage, Darwin was a convinced evolutionist. He noted, for instance, that the birds on the Cape Verde archipelago resembled the birds on the nearby African landmass; birds on the Galapagos resembled those on the South American landmass. Since it seemed to him that a Creator should make island birds everywhere alike, the observation seemed incompatible with his concept of special creation. On the other hand, if the birds on the island got there from the mainland and then evolved into relatives that were similar yet definitely distinct, this would account for the observation. Based on this and other observations, Darwin tended to reject God, a rejection that became complete many years later. See pp. 22-23.

Darwin took up bachelor quarters in London, where he read "heaps of books" on horticulture, agronomy, and other topics. He became thoroughly familiar with plant and animal breeding. Pigeons, for example, are selected for desired characteristics and then used to breed the next generation; those without the desirable characteristics are not allowed to reproduce. This was what we call artificial selection, and in the fall of 1838 it led Darwin, in a marvelous flash of insight (as he later described it), to the concept of natural selection.

At about the same time, he married his cousin, Emma Wedgewood. She and the rest of the relatives (the Darwins and the Wedgewoods) were extremely devout, and Darwin began to face the conflicts that would bedevil him for the rest of his life. He loved the quiet Victorian England in which he lived, yet he recognized that his developing ideas could destroy the foundations of faith.

Darwin didn't so much as write down his ideas. Apparently, he did not want to freeze into writing ideas that might otherwise grow and flower beyond their primordial state as they existed in the fall of 1838. He moved to a comfortable house in Down, where he was able to live and do his research with the support of family money. Eventually he prepared an outline of his ideas, and he indulged in a great deal of correspondence with a few trusted scientific colleagues. The first of these was Joseph Dalton Hooker, who was a few years Darwin's junior and who admired him greatly. Charles Lyell also became a close friend, and Hooker and Lyell were frequent visitors at Down. The developing theory was discussed at length, but it was not published.

Darwin spent some eight years studying barnacles. Was this discipline to make him a more thoroughly trained scientist? Or was it an escape from the publication and defense of his theory of natural selection? He was ill much of his life; indeed he was a notorious hypochondriac—who lived into his seventies. Were the tangible symptoms of his illness due to a tropical disease acquired on the voyage of the Beagle, or were they psychosomatic, developing within him in response to his internal conflicts about the faith of his beloved Victorian England and the impact his natural selection might have upon that faith? Possibly, they were a little of both.

Finally, things were brought to a head. Darwin received a letter from Alfred Russel Wallace, who described a theory identical to Darwin's own, even to the similarity of certain terms. Wallace had arrived at the idea independently but had inklings of Darwin's work. What was to be done? At the urging of Hooker and Lyell, Darwin prepared a joint paper with Wallace for presentation before the Linnean Society in the summer of 1858, twenty years after the marvelous flash of insight. The paper was presented by Hooker because Darwin was sick at home and Wallace was in South America. There was apparently little response to the paper itself, but the idea was soon being discussed all over England. In 1859 when Darwin published his "abstract" (actually a thick book entitled On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection or the Preservation of Favored Races in the Struggle for Life), all of the first edition was sold out on the first day.

There is much more to the story, such as the famous debate between Bishop Samuel Wilberforce and Thomas Huxley, who defended Darwin. Soapy Sam, as he was called, waxed eloquent. Finally he stepped over the bounds of Victorian decency by asking whether Huxley descended from the apes on the maternal or the paternal side. Huxley devastated the Bishop and won the day with words to the effect that he would be hardpressed to decide whether he would rather have an ape as an ancestor or a man who would use his talents to ridicule the humble seeker after truth!

NATURAL SELECTION

But what was Darwin's theory of natural selection? The basic idea was that in nature, the struggle for existence took the place of the plant or animal breeder who does the selecting. Hence it is natural selection rather than artificial selection. Let's consider the various parts of the theory.

First, Darwin was impressed by the writings of Thomas Malthus. This eighteenth century cleric studied a population of oysters, recognizing that there was a tremendous potential for overproduction. If a population is going to remain stable, only two of the offspring of any average set of parents can themselves become parents. If, on the average, fewer than two become parents, the population will decrease; if more than two, it will increase. Yet all organisms are capable of producing far more than two offspring per set of parents (or only one offspring from a bisexual parent, such as most plants). Think of the thousands of acorns produced during the life of an oak tree, for example, or the number of eggs laid by a single female fish or insect. Even when we think of higher animals that produce a relatively limited number of offspring, the potential for extremely rapid growth of a population is nevertheless there.

The human population increased at an annual rate of about 2 percent during the 1960s. Compared to other examples, this is not a rapid rate of increase. It is achieved by each couple producing between three and four children in a lifetime. Yet at a 2 percent annual rate of increase, the population doubles after 35.1 years. After 35.1 years, 3.5 billion people become 7 billion. Beginning with only 100 people, the 7 billion mark is reached in 912.1 years. In another 502.2 years, that 7 billion will have increased to 148,400 billion people, which is one person for each square meter of the earth's land surface; only 62.2 more years cover the oceans also! About 2,389 years after the 100 people began their 2 percent annual increase, the mass of flesh will equal the volume of the earth; only 3,852 years after this beginning, the mass of flesh will fill a sphere with a radius equal to the distance from the earth to the sun! But, of course, such a geometric population increase cannot really happen, because an increasing population must draw on many resources, especially food. These resources are finite and eventually run out.

This led Darwin, and Malthus before him, to the second point: A continual overproduction of young inevitably leads to a struggle for existence. Malthus deduced that food supplies increase arithmetically, while populations increase geometrically. He was right in principle, at least in the sense that populations are theoretically capable of geometric increase extending to infinity, while the supply of resources, including food, shelter, and space, is finite. Malthus was wrong, however, in his specific predictions; food supplies and consequently the human population are now much larger than he ever thought possible. Ultimately there must be a limit, but Malthus did not know what the limit was, and we do not know today what it is, although many recent authors have made estimates. In any case, expanding populations of organisms do in our experience lead to a struggle for existence, although we find certain complications and exceptions. Often natural populations are limited by yet-to-be-understood decreases in the birth rate that seem to be characteristic of crowding. This is true for laboratory mice, black-tailed jack rabbits in northern Utah, and numerous other populations that have been studied.

Third, Darwin was impressed with the variety that he had observed in numerous populations of plants and animals. We are immediately aware of the variety in the human population. I'm told that a cowboy learns to recognize the individual steers in a herd. Variety is not only the spice of life, it is one of its most dependable characteristics. Its recognition was the key to Darwin's theory.

Fourth, Darwin recognized that if a struggle for existence was going on within a population of variable organisms, some would, on the average, be better able to cope with the struggle for existence than others. There would be a survival of the fittest. Any feature that helped an individual survive would tend to be preserved. Organisms that were least able to obtain food, escape from their predators, or find mates would be least likely to pass on these characteristics to another generation. We now emphasize that the important thing was not so much survival of a given individual as production of offspring with the parental characteristics.

In Darwin's scheme, the survival of the fittest led to evolution. The principle was a statistical outcome of the overproduction of offspring and the struggle for existence in a population that included variety. The struggle for existence was selecting out features that made the population best suited to its environment, just as the plant or animal breeder selected the features that he wanted in his domestic plants or animals. Given a great deal of time, Darwin reasoned (and Lyell and the uniformitarians had provided him with the necessary immense span of time), and given some source of new variety continually coming into the population, populations of organisms might be expected to gradually change or evolve.

If a population were some way divided into two groups (e.g., by some natural disaster, by migration into a new area, etc.), then the two groups might be expected to gradually diverge from each other in response to different environmental factors in the different areas, and also in response to different chance variations in the features of the populations. Two species might thus evolve from a single ancestor species.

Carrying the process on over long enough periods of time, both in water and on land, couldn't we begin with a single, simple form of life, perhaps a single cell such as an amoeba (which seemed simple to Darwin, at least), and end with the immense diversity and complexity of life that we see on earth today? Darwin suggested that we could, and his book was an eloquent and detailed argument supporting this contention. It seemed that a way had been provided whereby Paley's watch by the path could indeed be created according to natural law and without the necessity of a God in the universe. Man, who made the watch and who is himself far more complex than the watch, had simply evolved by the statistical natural selection of minute differences in populations, beginning with some simple form of life several billion years ago.

Please note that the argument was really compelling. Please realize that the people who accepted it, and thereby rejected God, were not ignorant, stupid people. Certainly many people who accepted it were not evil. Most were honest, sincere seekers after truth. The arguments that raged were violent arguments, because the contenders on both sides were utterly convinced that they were right.

Yet the logic was not as totally incontrovertible as many nineteenth century proponents of evolution seemed to think. There was a weakness in Darwin's scheme. He was aware of it and discussed it at length, especially in the later editions of his book. The scheme depended completely upon some source of variety in the population that would produce changes rapidly enough and of the right type for evolution to work—for some amoeba-like ancestor to evolve into a man and into an oak tree. Darwin couldn't account for this source of variability. Finally, he retreated to the "LaMarckian nonsense" he had so thoroughly rejected originally. Surely this indicates the desperation of his position. He tried to imagine how the use of a part (a giraffe stretching its neck) could influence the future offspring. He decided that there must be something transmitted from the used part (the giraffe's neck) to the reproductive cells, changing them in some special way. The something he referred to as pangenes. But unknown to Darwin, in the 1860s an Austrian monk was making discoveries that would lead to formulation of another theory of how the variety originated, although the theory would not be recognized for two decades after Darwin's death in 1882.

GREGOR MENDEL

Mendel's story is almost as interesting as Darwin's, but contrasted to Darwin, we know virtually nothing about Mendel's life. He did not write down every thought and mood for the benefit of posterity. As a matter of fact, his spectacular insight, published in 1868, had virtually no impact upon human thought. No one paid any attention until 1900, when three other scientists had duplicated his experiments and rediscovered his concepts, and then independently found his paper. (Two of the three men had rediscovered Mendel's laws; there is some question about the third.) The discoverers of Mendel's paper, as well as virtually all modern biologists, give Mendel the credit for discovering the laws of inheritance, upon which the science of genetics is based, and indeed he did discover these laws. Yet his discovery didn't really make any difference, because it was ignored until rediscovered.

Mendel was an Austrian monk who experimented with pea plants. His experiments were a model of scientific method. He was careful and thorough, doing much preliminary research with many varieties of peas before deciding on the ones that he wanted to use. Finally, he did something that was not common in the biology of his day: He applied simple mathematical principles to the results he had obtained.

Let's consider one of his experiments. Normally, pea flowers are self-fertilized; that is, the stamens that produce the pollen do not grow out of the flower, so the pollen falls upon the stigma in the same flower (Fig. 13-1). There it germinates, and a tube grows through the stigma to the ovary, where eventually the nucleus of the pollen combines with the nucleus of the egg cell. This is fertilization. Mendel would remove the stamens from a pea flower with a set of tweezers before they had begun to produce pollen. Then he would dust the pollen from a mature stamen onto the stigmas in the flowers from which he had removed the immature stamens. This way he could achieve cross-pollination (cross-fertilization), which is the normal situation in many flowers, where the pollen is taken from one flower to another by honeybees, wind, or other means.

When Mendel crossed plants producing red flowers with plants producing white flowers and then planted the resulting seeds, all the plants that grew from these seeds produced red flowers; there were no white flowers among the offspring! Mendel then allowed these red flowers (with red-and-white-flowered parents) to self pollinate in the normal way. He planted the seeds from the second cross and observed that the resulting plants had both red and white flowers; namely, 705 red and 224 white. Mendel recognized that there were about three times as many plants with red flowers as there were plants with white flowers (3.15 times as many red-flowered plants). He noticed the same three-to-one ratio in the six other characteristics that he studied. In each case, one of the two contrasting features appeared in the first generation, and the other didn't; in the second generation there were three times as many plants with the feature that appeared in the first generation as there were plants with the contrasting feature.

MENDEL'S LAWS

Mendel explained his results by proposing two laws. From his work we can derive three general principles of heredity. The first of these, which has stood the test of time and stands as the basis of our present science of genetics, was the concept of unit inheritance. Mendel suggested that there was some unit (which we would now call a gene) that came from each parent and that influenced the appearance of a given character in the offspring. There was a unit for red flowers and a unit for white flowers, for example.

The second principle is that of dominance. Mendel suggested that one of these genes might dominate the other, so that if both were present, the observed feature in the offspring would be determined by only one of them. Thus the gene for red flowers dominated the gene for white flowers, round seed dominated wrinkled seed, etc. This was why only one of the two contrasting features appeared in the first generation. In that first generation, all the pollen from red-flowered plants, for example, would contain only the gene for red flowers; all the egg cells in white-flowered plants would contain only the gene for white flowers. Thus all the offspring would have a gene for red flowers and a gene for white flowers, and the gene for red flowers would dominate, producing only red flowers.

The pair of genes in cells of adult plants separate when pollen or egg cells are formed. Hence, in the second generation, half the pollen grains from red flowers would have the gene for red flowers and half would have the gene for white flowers; half the egg cells would contain genes for red flowers and half for white flowers. So the gene for red flowers in a pollen grain might combine with a gene for red flowers in the egg cell, or with a gene for white flowers. And a gene for white flowers in a pollen grain might combine with a gene for red flowers or a gene for white flowers. There are four possibilities: One is to combine two genes for red flowers; two of the four possibilities combine one gene for red flowers with one gene for white flowers (producing red-flowered plants); and the final possibility combines two genes for white flowers. Thus three of the possible four combinations will produce red flowers, and one will produce white flowers—which is the ratio Mendel observed.

You should note from Table 13-1 that the numbers are not exact. We are dealing with chance processes, and so they are bound to be only approximate. You can obtain the same ratios by flipping two coins at a time for several hundred throws. Approximately one-fourth of the tosses will be double heads, one half will be a head and a tail, and the final fourth will be double tails.

OBSERVED CHARACTERISTICS FIRST GENERATION SECOND GENERATION F2 RATIO

(F1) (F2)

Round X Wrinkled seeds All Round 5474 Round: 2.96:1

1850 Wrinkled

Yellow X Green seeds All Yellow 6022 Yellow: 2001 3.01:1

Green

Red X White flowers All Red 705 Red: 224 White 3.15:1

Inflated X Constricted All Inflated 822 Inflated: 299 2.95:1

pods Constricted

Green X Yellow pods All Green 428 Green: 152 2.82:1

Yellow

Axial X Terminal flowers All Axial 651 Axial: 207 3.14:1

Terminal

Long X Short stems All Long 787 Long: 277 Short 2.84:1

Table 13-1 Mendel's results from crosses involving 7 single character differences.

One of Mendel's laws and our third principle is that of independent segregation. He studied various combinations of features in red and white flowers on tall and short plants, for example. In every case, he found that the results of the crosses could be explained by assuming that the different characters acted quite independently of each other. After the science of genetics began to develop in the early 1900s, however, this was found in many cases not to be true. We now know that genes are located on the chromosomes that appear during cell division. If the genes are on separate chromosomes, they will segregate independently. As it turns out, there are only seven pairs of chromosomes in pea cells, and the gene for each of Mendel's seven characteristics occurs on a separate chromosome. This was certainly an amazing stroke of good luck. If two genes appear on the same chromosome, then they will not segregate in this independent way, although some separation occurs because chromosomes intertwine with each other and exchange segments in a process called crossing over.

GENETICS AND EVOLUTION

So Mendel's laws developed into the science of genetics, which studies both heredity and the causes of variability in populations. Actually, a given feature may be controlled not just by two kinds of genes, but by many kinds (called alleles). Furthermore, a single character (tallness or skin color in man, for example) may be controlled by several sets of genes (several allele pairs). Variability is also caused by the many ways that genes are expressed. Mendel's law of dominance holds for only about half the genes that have been studied. In other cases dominance is incomplete. In snapdragons, for example, a cross between red and white flowers produces pink flowers. All this provided one answer for the source of variety in evolution: It is the recombination and expression of genes.

Many modern textbooks define evolution as a change in gene frequencies in a population in response to environmental selection pressures. A classical example, to which we shall return in chapter 15, is that of the peppered months of England. At the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, most individuals of the moth population were white with a speckling of black spots on their wings. During the day, on the bark of lichen-covered trees with the same light gray appearance, they were extremely well camouflaged. A few, however, had black wings with white spots and were rather easily spotted by their predators (several bird species). With the coming of the Industrial Revolution, pollutants in the atmosphere killed the lichens on the trees, and the bark became covered with black soot. Now the dark moths were much better camouflaged than the light ones. After only two or three decades, most of the peppered moths were of the dark variety. That is, the frequency of the gene or genes for blackness had increased in the population. (Say, for example, that at the beginning the gene frequency was 5 percent or 0.05 for the genes controlling blackness, and 95 percent or 0.95 for the genes controlling lightness. Gradually the gene frequency for blackness increased until it was about 95 percent and the gene for lightness was only 5 percent.)

But if, to make evolution work, we only had to change the frequencies of genes that already existed in a population, then we would be forced to imagine that the genes in the ancient amoeba were sufficient, after they had been properly recombined and their frequencies shifted, to account for all the organisms living today. Surely this couldn't be true, so there must be some other source of variety besides genetic recombination, if Darwin's selection is to work.

Around 1900 it was suggested by Hugo DeVries, a Dutch botanist (one of the discoverers of Mendel's paper), that this other source of variety was mutation. DeVries observed in his experimental plants that occasionally totally new features seemed to appear in the population from nowhere. He assumed that these features represented changes in the genes. As it turned out, DeVries was wrong about his specific features—they had already existed in his populations but had gone unobserved. His principle was correct, however, and other scientists soon discovered valid examples of mutations.

In the 1920s, Herman Mueller, a geneticist at the University of Indiana, discovered that he could induce mutations in organisms by irradiating them with X-rays or with ultraviolet light. We understand now that such radiations will slightly change the configuration of the DNA molecules, which are the genes. This in turn leads to configurational changes in the protein enzymes (that is, changes in amino acid sequences) controlled by these molecules, which presumably leads to changes in metabolic functions and structural features of the organism possessing the mutated gene. At last there seemed to be a source of variety sufficient to account for Darwin's natural selection. During the 1920s and 1930s, a number of geneticists (and others) took these new tools (the concepts of genetics, including mutations) and applied them to evolutionary theory.

THE MODERN SYNTHETIC THEORY OF EVOLUTION

The modern synthetic theory of evolution says that variety first enters a population by mutations. Genes change in totally random ways in response to the ultraviolet and ionizing radiations of nature (e.g., cosmic rays, radioactive decay) and also certain chemicals that are now known to cause mutational changes in the genetic material. It is immediately apparent that when we randomly change something as complex as a DNA molecule and the protein whose structure it controls, most changes are likely to be bad. Imagine making random changes in the structure of a watch! So the vast majority of mutations are either harmful or fatal.

Nevertheless, it is said by modern biologists, a mutation will occasionally be positive. Either it will make the organism better suited to its environment, or it will make it potentially better suited after many recombinations and perhaps environmental changes. Perhaps only one mutation in a thousand will be positive in this sense, it is often stated, but considering the mutation rate observed in nature, one good mutation in a thousand random gene changes ought to be plenty to account for evolution. Estimates have been made of the number of genes present in a given organism, the number of mutations required to produce them, and the available times. It seems to work out.

Evolutionary theory thus finally came of age. All the details seemed to fit. The impact on biology was profound. It gave direction to the science by providing a framework for conceptual thought in many diverse fields. Numerous positive discoveries trace their origins to the theory. Without it, for example, many biologists would flounder in their research. When they apply the concept to the natural populations they study and the classifications they devise, it works well.

Yet there are problems. From the standpoint of our philosophies about creation, the theory really does seem to do away with the need for God. The modern biology student is presented with a theory that seems to be even more compelling than Darwin's original concept of natural selection. Everything seems logical, and all is backed with the prestigious authority of famous scientists. Books have been written, learned treatises have been presented—how could it possibly not be true? And isn't the earth extremely ancient? What about the fossils? Don't taxonomy, embryology, and anatomy argue conclusively that evolution did happen, regardless of how? And don't the calculations of population geneticists, who have studied the recombinations of genes and the shifts in gene frequencies, finally once and for all prove the modern synthetic theory of evolution?

This view of the origin of biological diversity and complexity is now the foundation of faith, the catechism of belief, the great biological dogma, the prevailing and pervading doctrine. Who could doubt it? It is discussed in classes at one level or another from grade school to graduate school. Always it is presented as the inviolate truth. Yes, the details may be discussed and questioned, but the overall dogma is taught and accepted as fact. Anyone who would question it is clearly a heretic.

It was questioned by fundamentalists and creationists in the state of California until a law was put on the books that it must be taught only as theory and not as fact. There was an immediate hue and cry from the world of biology. Editorials were written. Biologists felt they were witnessing a witch hunt as repulsive as the Catholic inquisition.

I can't agree. I believe that the modern synthetic theory of evolution is indeed a theory. It may work well with contemporary populations, but I don't believe that it has really solved Darwin's question of the origin of variability applied to his general theory: an amoeba to man. (One positive mutation in a thousand mutations seems hopelessly optimistic.) I believe that variability remains the Achilles' heel of the entire concept. Indeed, I believe that the findings of modern science during the past two decades have greatly increased the seriousness of the original problem, that the origin of variability and complexity is a greater mystery than ever. I believe, with William Paley, that the complexities of living things argue for their creation by divine intelligence. I believe, with Alma, that "all things denote there is a God; yea, even the earth, and all things that are upon the face of it. . . . "(Alma 30:44.) The reasons I believe these things form the topic of the next chapters.

Note: Since the type was set for this book, I heard in a sacrament meeting talk, in relation to Paley's story of the watch (page 99) that Voltaire (1694-1778) said, "If a clock proves the existence of a clockmaker, and the universe does not prove the existence of a Supreme Architect, I am content to be called a fool."
