Frank B. Salisbury, Creation ( 1976)

Section 4:

Evolution or Creation?

"And the earth, after it was formed, was wmpty and desolate . . ."

Abraham 4:2

14

Evidences from Rocks and Family Trees

Now it's time to get down to business. The general theory of evolution implies a creation directed only by chance events and "natural laws," while the scriptures tell of creation by divine intelligence. Hence we are entitled to ask: How conclusive are the scientific evidences for atheistic [^1] evolution? Does scientific knowledge support or conflict with a concept of creation by a God of intelligence? Can we reconcile what God has revealed and what science has discovered?

The answer to the last question is clearly no. Certainly we cannot reconcile science and revelation in a way that will satisfy everyone. If we could, books like this wouldn't be written. Yes, there are suggestions to make and possible interpretations to give. That is the point of this section. But few of the ideas can be considered conclusive. Often there are several alternatives that all seem equally likely. God hasn't told us the whole story, and science hasn't collected all the data. The facts simply aren't all in—in science or religion. My personal viewpoint has changed considerably during the past thirty years (even during the past few weeks). As new discoveries are made, and as new thoughts come to mind, I expect my viewpoint to continue to change.

So the conclusion of these chapters must be that there cannot yet be a real conclusion. The name of the game must be "wait and see." My appeal must be for you to remain objective, to realize that you can't know for sure at this stage exactly what the answers are. This is a difficult position to take. We have been taught that it is courageous to take a stand, to fight for what we believe. That's fine for broad philosophical principles such as a belief that God was the Author of creation. That viewpoint is fortified by his revelations to us through the prophets. But the best things you can learn now about how creation took place are the arguments on both sides of the question, why totally satisfying answers can't be obtained at this time, and that you must be reasonably tolerant of all viewpoints that are based upon facts. It is already clear that there is much truth on both sides of the argument.

THE ROLE OF FAITH

But if you do learn the lessons of these chapters—be objective, wait and see, don't expect a final answer now, and be tolerant of all views—you probably aren't going to be exactly comfortable in your discussions about evolution. Few people have learned these lessons. On both sides of the question, many are completely convinced that they are correct. Since, as we shall see, the evidence doesn't warrant such conviction, their beliefs must be based on faith.

The modern biologist often states his total devotion to the evolutionary dogma with intense religious zeal. Consider this statement of H. G. Wells: "One thing is certain. Not one fact has ever emerged, in a stupendous accumulation of facts, to throw a shadow of doubt on what is still called the 'Theory' of organic evolution. In spite of that violent lying and yapping of the pious, no rational mind can question the invincible nature of the evolutionary case." [^2] These are strong words and eloquently put, but similar statements couched in less eloquence can be found in almost any textbook of biology. Yet many straightforward facts are presented and assembled by highly rational minds that cast considerable doubt on the theory of evolution. If you mention these facts to most modern biologists, you will immediately be labeled a "fundamentalist" whose arguments come from "anti-evolutionary tracts." And on that basis, you will be ignored.

The general theory is taught in most schools as though it were proven fact. The extensions from this approach are naturalism, logical positivism, existentialism, and atheism. Furthermore, these philosophical doctrines are often subtly introduced, even by teachers who do not believe in them. As we have seen, naturalism is one of the rules of the scientific game that must be accepted by anyone who will do science, whether he accepts it as a universal philosophy or not. Even a devout scientist must play the atheistic game and assume that God will not interfere with his experiments. Hence the assumptions of naturalism are usually implicit in classroom discussions of evolution in particular or science in general, so that even a good Latter-day Saint biologist can strengthen the case for atheism (via naturalism) without even being aware of it.

On the other hand, teachers of religion with little training in science, especially biology, can make dogmatic statements about the wicked, evil, foolish scientist who rejects God. They have strong faith in the idea that nothing about evolution can be true. Acceptance of evolution is said to be tantamount to apostasy. I talked to one good brother who was totally baffled in trying to understand how anyone could accept the concept of evolution. In his mind the scriptural as well as the scientific evidences were so strong against evolution that it was incomprehensible to him how anyone could possibly be fooled into believing the doctrine. It is not incomprehensible to me.

In the standard biology class, several evidences for evolution are usually presented. It is instructive to consider these evidences from a somewhat more objective viewpoint than one usually encounters in such classes. As we'll see, some of the "best" evidences for evolution turn out to be equally good or even better evidences for creation by God. We'll examine these evidences from the standpoint of what might be predicted on the basis of atheistic-evolutionary or creation theories.

THE FOSSIL RECORD

For me the fossil record was always the most compelling evidence for evolution. In chapter 11, we saw that one can tell a reasonably coherent story based upon the fossils and upon the assumption that evolution did occur. The stratigraphic sequence has been studied on a worldwide scale, and it seems to tell of a progression of increasingly complex life forms on this planet during about the past 600 million years. Such a progression is exactly what the theory of evolution would predict.

I've been reading some of the creationist literature, [^3] however, and I am becoming convinced that the fossil record is not such a compelling evidence after all. Indeed, a strong case can be made that two important predictions of evolutionary theory in relation to the fossils fail to work out. On the other hand, predictions based on a creationist theory fit rather well.

We have discussed what might be called the general theory of evolution, namely, that all organisms are related by descent from a common ancestor (some primordial cell), the increasing complexity being accounted for by a natural selection over an immense span of time of the best-adapted micromutations and new combinations of genes. A way to test a theory is to deduce what the theory predicts and then to observe nature to see if the predictions are substantiated. What does the general theory of evolution predict in relation to the fossil record? At least three things come to mind:

What would a theory based upon creation by God predict? This is a more difficult question, since the details of such a theory must depend heavily upon one's interpretation of the scriptures. If the theory is based upon the seven-period account in Genesis 1, for example, then it might predict that fossil plants should occur in strata more ancient than those containing the oldest animal fossils—if such a creation theory allowed the geologic strata to be formed at all during the periods of creation! But one might soon run into problems. If there were no death before the Fall, for example, then the fossils would have to be formed after the Fall, perhaps during the Flood. On the other hand, the fossils might have been formed during some period before the creation account given in the scriptures.

So to make any predictions, we must make certain assumptions. We shall build our creation theory on the accounts in Moses and Abraham. Remember that actual biological creation occurred only during the seventh period, when man was created and the Gods rested (Moses 3:5; Abraham 5; and D&C 77:12), and that there was no mention of the order in which biological creation took place, except that the man Adam (but not Eve) came first (Moses 3:7). Organisms were commanded to bring forth only after their own kind. How they were created is never mentioned, except that some were made from the dust of the earth. Since the record states that a garden was planted (Moses 3:8; Abraham 5:8), it is conceivable that seeds (in the broad sense, including spores or other reproductive structures) were brought to the earth, where they would use the "dust of the ground" to grow into mature plants—and in turn be consumed by animals that might have been brought to the earth from somewhere else (in embryonic form?). Based on these ideas, and assuming that the period of biological creation was long enough and conditions were such that fossils could be formed during creation (an assumption with which many might not be comfortable), there are at least two things that a creation theory might predict with respect to the fossil record:

So what does the fossil record actually reveal after 200 years of careful study? Certainly, as we saw in chapter 11, the fossils are usually increasingly complex in the upper (younger) strata (Fig. 11-2) just as the general theory of evolution might predict. This is hammered into students from the first grade to graduate school, and it is no doubt the reason why I felt that the fossils were the strongest evidence for evolution. A moment's reflection, however, makes it clear that the fossils are only a good evidence for evolution if the other predictions are also met. Increasing complexity by itself means little, since a reasonable creation theory might well allow the same thing. The importance of increasing complexity in the fossil record depends upon many things, such as the time spans involved and how the fossils were formed.

As to the other two predictions of the two theories, Creation comes out ahead. There is no fossil record of gradual evolution of the phyla and divisions (Fig. 11-2). The most ancient fossils of multicellular organisms are found in the Cambrian strata, and virtually all the invertebrate phyla of animals are represented. These include many highly complex and varied organisms with extremely well developed structures. Remnants of such single-celled organisms as bacteria or algae apparently occur in Precambrian rocks, but where are all the intermediate stages leading to the several invertebrate phyla? They are simply not to be found; complex forms appear suddenly in the record!

And how about the transitions or continua in fossil types that allow us to see how genera, families, orders, and phyla come into being by evolutionary pathways? Such series simply do not appear in the record. Any book on either plant or animal paleontology makes this quite clear. The transitional forms just aren't there. Again and again the authors must state that the origin of some major group such as the insects, mollusks, rodents, birds, fungi, mosses, ferns, gymnosperms, or flowering plants must be deduced from contemporary anatomical evidence (and such deductions always remain tentative), because the fossil record is "silent" or "shrouded in mystery." For some reason, the reader always tends to imply (I always did) that some group or groups other than the one under immediate discussion does have clear-cut fossil ancestors. But the fact of the matter is, no major group has obvious fossil predecessors that inform us as to how the group came into being by evolution.

Could the modern synthetic theory be wrong? (Heaven forbid!) Perhaps, as the evolutionist (a geneticist) Richard B. Goldschmidt [^4] suggested, a lizard may lay an egg and a bird may hatch from it! That is, extensive changes may occur all at once (i.e., in one or a few generations) by some evolutionary mechanism not yet understood. This was the "hopeful monster" hypothesis. But all the evidence is against this suggestion, and it was rejected by Goldschmidt's contemporaries.

The biology teacher always points to the horse as the classical example of a gradual increase in complexity. The way the fossils are displayed in the American Museum of Natural History seems to show a gradual increase in size, loss of toes until a hoof developed, etc. Yet the professional in the field [^5] knows that the story is not as clear-cut as it appears to be in the museum display or on the textbook page. Each of the intermediates is completely distinct from others in the series and appears suddenly in the record. There is no way of knowing that one of the so-called fossil horses gave rise by an evolutionary process to any other in the sequence, or even to be sure of the supposed dates assigned to these fossils.

Actually this is an extremely important weakness of the fossil record: it is impossible to find rigorous proof that any one fossil was the descendant of any other. The paleontologist, in his attempts to establish evolutionary sequences, assumes that morphological similarity implies relationship and descent. Similar form may well imply relationship and descent, but it certainly does not prove it. If it did, we would have to conclude that Fords and Chevrolets are genetically related and that 1976 Fords descended from 1975 Fords. But each automobile is the product of an act of special creation, and the designs evolve and descend only in a more figurative sense in the minds of automotive engineers.

A few fossils have been presented as missing links—not the hundreds of thousands that one might expect, but a few. These specimens seem to be transitional, having intermediate characteristics between those of two organisms postulated to be related by descent. Most are vertebrates, including intermediates between fishes and amphibia, amphibia and reptiles, reptiles and mammals, and reptiles and birds. But consider an example: A fossil called Archeopterix has both reptilian and avian (bird) characteristics. There are feathers, but the ends of the wings have claws, and there are teeth. Is this really a missing link? The creationist points out that Archeopterix was simply a bird with claws and teeth. Its feathers and other structures for flight were as well formed as those of any modern bird. Birds with claws are known in the jungles of South America today (the hoatzin), and other fossil birds have teeth.

CREATIONIST ATTACKS ON UNIFORMITARIANISM

The creationist says that fossils were probably not formed gradually as uniformitarian doctrine holds, but rather they were formed cataclysmically. We normally assume that plants or animals fell to the bottom of a swamp, or shallow sea, where they were gradually covered with sediments and fossilized. But organisms that fall to the bottom are usually eaten, or they decay. Why didn't the organsms that became fossils simply decay?

In many locations a cataclysmic origin of the fossils seems to be clearly indicated. There are whole beds, such as the "bone bed" at Agate Springs, Nebraska, containing thousands of bones of fossil mammals, for example, as though an entire population were suddenly trapped in a mud slide or some other cataclysm. The deposits in Lincoln County, Wyoming, contain vast numbers of fossil fish, palms, alligators, birds, mollusks, crustaceans, turtles, mammals, and insects, all jumbled together. The creationist usually suggests that the biblical flood was the cataclysm that produced such fossils.

One of the most striking examples of fossils that appear to be produced by catastrophe are the hairy mammoths of Siberia. These have been studied in detail and documented by many authors. There are areas where thousands of the beasts have been found, and the total number along the coast of Siberia reaching all the way to Alaska may be as high as 5 million. A few of the better specimens are so well preserved in the permafrost that the meat has been thawed out and fed to the dogs—or, in a few cases, to explorers! The stomachs of these well-preserved specimens contain the undigested remains of tropical plants. In a few examples, tropical food was actually found in the mouths of these frozen mammoths. Certainly a drop in temperature sharp enough to quick-freeze a hairy mammoth before he could finish swallowing his mouthful of tropical food ought to qualify as a catastrophe! In chapter 16, we shall consider one of the proposed explanations for this observation.

The creationists have zeroed in on the stratigraphic sequence. They point out that there is no place on earth where all the strata lie one on top of another, as the sequence appears in the geology textbooks (Fig. 11-1). Comparing the fossils in the strata that occur around the world, the stratigraphic sequence was constructed. Obviously this involved some assumptions. In particular it involved the assumption that evolution occurred, that organisms became increasingly complex through time. But isn't that what we were trying to prove in the first place? We have an excellent example of circular reasoning: To construct the stratigraphic sequence, we must assume that strata containing more complex fossils are younger than strata containing simpler fossils, because evolution happened. Then once the stratigraphic sequence has been constructed, we point to it with glee as the most convincing evidence that evolution occurred.

Furthermore, as the creationist is quick to point out, the stratigraphic sequence isn't all that well established anyway. Numerous examples are known in which simpler (and therefore presumably older) fossil beds occur on top of more complex ones. These are so completely against the assumptions of evolution and uniformitarianism that they have been serious problems. But a way has been conceived to accommodate these examples in uniformitarian theory: the concept of the overthrust. The idea is that, since the apparently older strata could not have formed on top of the younger ones, they must have been formed somewhere else and then moved to their present location.

Consider the Lewis overthrust. This is an elongated area running north and south for about 135 miles, crossing the border between Montana and Canada. It includes the spectacular portion of the northern Rockies where Glacier National Park is located. The area is about 15 miles wide, consisting of Precambrian limestone resting on top of cretaceous shalebeds. That is, limestone that is supposed to be 500 million to a billion years old rests on top of shale that is supposed to be only 20 million years old. How did it happen? The answer of uniformitarianism is that Precambrian limestones several thousand feet thick and along a line about 135 miles long were pushed 15 miles to the east until they rested on top of the cretaceous shales.

If thousands of feet of limestone along a line 135 miles long were pushed for fifteen miles over shalebeds, there really ought to be some sign of this gigantic movement at the interface between the limestone and the shale. In some areas the rocks do seem a bit broken, but certainly no more so than in many other areas where an overthrust is not postulated. Much more impressive is that the contact between the limestone and the shale appears at many locations to be quite typical of contacts between strata as they occur over most of the world, where no overthrusting is postulated. That is, there is simply a normal contact line with no evidence of extensive metamorphoses, breakage, faulting, etc. In any other situation, the geologist would simply interpret this as one stratum being deposited normally upon another. The concepts of plate tectonics (continental drift) might account for the forces that caused the movement, but where is the expected breakage and distortion? Such cases can be multiplied many times throughout the world.

The creationist cites other examples that are contrary to the establishment picture of fossil sequences. For example, footprints that appear human have been found with dinosaur footprints in a cretaceous limestone formation near Glenrose, Texas. This is completely unacceptable to uniformitarian geology, since the dinosaurs supposedly became extinct about 70 million years before man evolved. As a consequence, such observations must be ignored or explained away. It is usually suggested either that the fossil footprints were artificially made by someone wanting to perpetrate a hoax, or that they belong to some creature other than man who had a foot closely resembling man's. Yet if it were not for their position of occurrence, they would be accepted immediately as genuine. It is important to realize that if there are examples of strata or even single fossils completely out of sequence (as the overthrusts and misplaced fossils might imply), then the whole story told by geologists is wrong. No compromise position is possible.

THE ORIGIN OF MAN

The difficulties with the fossil record reach their peak when it comes to fossil man. The story is complex and has a long history; indeed, there is far too much detail for presentation here. Table 14-1 summarizes the important findings (up to 1975) that have been interpreted as humans or ancestors of humans. There are not really many specimens that are thought to be prehuman, and many of these are only fragments, perhaps a piece of a jaw-bone or a few teeth.

Table 14-1 Some fossils postulated to be human ancestors or near relatives; summary of some members of the family Hominidae.

Name Discoverer - Date Age Brain Comments

Place (years) Capacity

Homo

sapiens 10,000 1,200 to Many races

Modern man 1,600 (3 to 30,

Cro-Magnon (France) 1888 40,000 cubic depending

man Many fossils centimeters upon the

criteria)

all

interfer-

tile; no

sharp divi-

sions. Cro-

Magnon man

appeared

rather

suddenly in

Europe.

Similar in

virtually

all

respects to

modern man,

especially

Scandinav-

ian and

Anglo-

Saxon

types.

Fairly

advanced

culture:

art,

sculpture,

ritualistic

burial,

etc.

Probably

had

counter-

parts

in the

rest of the

world.

Homo

neanderth-

alensis Johann Karl 1856 120,000 1,200 to Short (5 to

Neanderthal Fuhlrott (ends 1,600 5.5 feet),

man (Germany); 35,000 receding

first years ago) forehead,

recognized eyebrow

fossil man ridges,

chin, but

large

brain.

Many tools.

Buried dead

(religion?).

Eliminated

or absorbed

by Cro-

Magnon man.

(Original

fossils

said to be

pathologic

modern

men—

Rudolf

Virchow.)

Gibralter

man (Gibralter; 1848

usually

overlooked.)

Homo

erectus Eugene 1894 750,000 775 Specimens

Erect man, Dubois (Java— (200,000 to from Java,

Java man, locked up his 1,000,000) 1,300 Asia,

Peking man, material until Africa,

etc. 1920s!) maybe

Europe

(Heidelberg).

Davidson 1927 Much variety

Black & (many names.)

Franz Primitive

Weidenreich facial

(Peking, features:

China) large jaw

and teeth,

almost no

chin,

receding

forehead,

bony

eyebrow

ridges,

broad

lowbridged

nose. Used

tools and

fire, maybe

speech.

Ralph von 1930s

Koenig-

swald (Java)

Louis S. B. 1960s

Leakey and

Mary Leakey

(East

Africa;

Olduvai

Gorge)

Homo

habilis Mary Leakey 1975 3.35 to Teeth and

(East Africa; 3.75 lower jaws

Laetolil) million from 11

individuals;

potassium-

argon dated.

Oldest

fossils of

Homo,

older than

many of the

Australop

-ithecus

noted below.

Richard 1972 2.8

Leakey million

(East

Rudolf,

Kenya)

Australo-

pithecus

sp. Raymond 1924 500,000 450 to Erect

African South Africa- to 750 (bipedal),

ape man the Taung 2,500,000 simple

baby) (Pleisto- bone tools,

cene Geolo- large jaws,

gical Epoch) almost no

Two species Robert 1933 forehead or

now gener- Broom chin. At

ally (South least two

recognized: Africa) species for

africanus

robustus 3 million

years—one

was an

herbivour

(robus-

tus).

but predator

(afri-

canus)

would

probably be

the human

ancestor.

Also found

in North

Africa and

in Java.

Louis and

Mary Leakey

(East 1959

Africa)

(Ethiopia) 1969 2-4 million

Bryan 1971 4 million Arm bone

Patterson 5.5 million Jawbone

(Kenya) (Pliocene)

Rama- Leakeys 1960s 14 million Teeth and

pithecus (Late Miocene jaw frag-

punjabicus ments only

(breviro- Roof of jaw

stris) is arched,

5-cusp

molars.

Possibly

hominid

ancestor,

but little

is known.

Proconsul Leakeys 1930s 20 million Part monkey,

(Dryopithe-

cus) (Lake (Miocene) part ape-

Victoria, man. A

Kenya) diverging

point.

Perhaps went

from the

trees to the

ground.

Oligopi-

thecus (Egypt; 1961 28 to 40 Teeth with

Fayum million 4-cusp

Depression) (Oligocene) molars

as in

monkeys.

Propliop-

ithecus (Egypt; 1963 350 to Teeth with

Fayum in 450 5-cusp

Chimpa- molars

nzee as in apes

and men.

Depression)

The story of man's postulated descent has been changing radically since Darwin published his book on the evolution of man about 100 years ago. The scheme I learned at the University of Utah around 1950 is not taught today. For one thing, one of the "fossil human ancestors" that I learned about (Piltdown man) proved to be a hoax. A human skull had been combined with a "doctored" monkey jawbone. But most of the changes have come about not because of the discovery of hoaxes, but because of additional fossil finds.

For the last century and a half, when a fossil of an alleged human ancestor was found, it was given a highly specific name. This was true even if the fossil was only a tooth. Trying to fit all these types into an evolutionary scheme was extremely difficult or impossible, although it was often tried. In recent years many of these fossils have been grouped together, and most texts outline the evolution of one group to another, much as they are shown in Table 14-1. Proconsul 20 million years ago was supposed to be the ancestor of Ramapithecus, which lived 10 to 14 million years ago and which gave rise to Australopithecus, which lived one to 5 million years ago. Australopithecus, which was very ape-like, gave rise to Homo erectus, which was also quite ape-like and which lived 200 thousand to 2 million years ago, giving rise to Neanderthal man (45 to 200 thousand years ago) and finally modern man (Homo sapiens).

This scheme seemed simple enough, and it seemed to greatly reduce the confusion. One could argue with many of the points of evidence used to support it, but it was nevertheless accepted by many biologists. In recent years this has been considerably upset by the researches of a husband and wife team of archeologists from East Africa: Mary and the late Louis S. B. Leakey, and now their son Richard. Richard in 1972 and Mary in 1975 [^6] have reported finding fossil jaws, teeth, leg bones, and a skull that appear much more modern (like Homo sapiens) than Homo erectus (Peking Man and Java Man) or even Australopithecus, but that lived from 2 to 3.75 million years ago. Four of the recent fossils, reported by Mary Leakey, were found imbedded in volcanic ash that was dated by the potassium-argon method at 3.35 to 3.75 million years. So again the scheme is upset. The modern form predates the ones that seemed to be its ancestors by at least 2 million years. Richard Leakey has said that "either we toss out this skull or we toss out our theories of early man." The surprisingly large braincase "leaves in ruins the notion that all early fossils can be arranged in an orderly sequence of evolutionary change. . . . It simply fits no previous models of human beginnings." And Leakey has no new model to supply in place of the old one.

It is worthwhile to examine a few of the details relating to the history of research on the origin of man. This history includes a form of science that is a far cry from the experimental and observational approach that has led to our present understanding of the cell, for example.

JAVA MAN AND PEKING MAN

Consider the story of Java Man. A Dutch physician named Eugene Dubois became convinced that the "missing link" would be found in Dutch Java. In 1891, along the bank of the Solo River, he found a skull cap with a low, sloping forehead and heavy brow ridges. About a year later and 50 feet from the original spot, he found a human thigh bone (femur) and two molar teeth. He found another tooth in 1898. The collection was called Pithecanthropus erectus (erect ape man) and was estimated to be 500,000 years old. Dubois concealed until 1922 the fact that he had found two human skulls at about the same level in nearby Wadjak. Many authorities identified the skull and the teeth as those of a gibbon or chimpanzee. The femur was clearly human. Why associate the femur and the skull cap found at different times and places? Only because of the need to find a "missing link." Dubois, who was most aware of the circumstances of the find, changed his mind before his death and declared that his Java Man was nothing more than a large baboon. But anthropologists have elevated the skull cap, teeth, and femur to Homo erectus, or erect man.

Peking Man, now also called Homo erectus, is even more tenuous, although he is considered one of the strongest links in man's alleged evolution. Dr. Davidson Black, in the 1920s, found a single tooth and said it came from Sinanthropus pekinensis. Later, about 30 skulls, 11 lower jaws, and 147 teeth were found in unlayered debris in the side of a cliff, which was called a cave but hardly fits that description. Remains of modern man were also found somewhat higher up in what was allegedly an upper cave. All the fossils except two teeth disappeared sometime between 1941 and 1945, so now we have only the models, descriptions, and modern reconstructions. There is ample evidence that construction of the models involved much subjectivity and pre-conceived ideas. For one thing, they differ markedly from the early descriptions.

A most interesting observation is that the skulls were found with only a few other bones, these always occurring separately. No skull had an associated lower jaw, and all the skulls were damaged in much the same way, bashed in at the base. It is as though they had been brought to the site by a hunter who consumed the brains. This is a reasonable explanation, and it is accepted by most authorities. Who was the hunter? Believe it or not, the evolutionists have concluded that the hunter was Peking Man himself. Yet the best assessment of the site is that it was a stone quarry and not a cave in the usual sense. There is ample evidence of cut stone, and apparently the roof had collapsed, producing the unstratified rubble in which the skulls were found, including the human remains. Thus it is reasonable that True Man was the hunter, and that the ape-like skulls represent his prey. Why isn't this simple explanation accepted? Because Peking Man could hardly be the ancestor of True Man if they co-existed together.

The above two paragraphs summarize a rather extensive discussion by Duane T. Gish, associate director of the Institute of Creation Research. [^7] His discussion is based on several well-documented sources but relies heavily on a book by two evolutionists [^8] and another by a Catholic priest [^9] who was a creationist and who was in China while the excavations were being carried out (although he never visited the site personally). During the final revision of this manuscript, I have been reading a recently published book entitled Peking Man by Harry L. Shapiro, chairman of the Department of Anthropology at the American Museum of Natural History in New York. [^10] Although the tone of the discussion is very different (Shapiro harbors no doubts that man evolved), some of the facts mentioned in the above two paragraphs are indeed confirmed: human remains were found in the upper caves, the skulls had indeed all been damaged, and early workers had suggested that the damage was the result of cannibalistic feasts. But other ideas were not clearly confirmed, so after worrying for awhile, I telephoned Dr. Shapiro. Gish's discussion implies that we have only models and reconstructions of the original fossils. Shapiro assures me that the museum has actual castings, probably the first and best made from the molds, although they are not of as high quality as castings made with more modern materials. (Incidentally, to insure against the loss of the castings, the original plaster casts have recently been recast using modern materials.) Dr. Shapiro would not support the idea that the original caves were the result of quarrying, although he agrees that the peasants have quarried in the area intermittently during recent times. He says that the caves were really natural fissures in the limestone, and that the roofs did indeed collapse. He says that many of the fossils were found in the collapsed, unstratified material, but he thought (wasn't sure) that some were found in layered material below the rubble.

My present feeling is that proponents on both sides of the question have overemphasized and exaggerated points that seem to be in their favor. This is certainly not deliberate deception; it is virtually impossible to rise above one's biases or prejudices regardless of how one tries. Gish has certainly distorted the picture somewhat in his attempt to portray a recent stone quarry with human hunters of ape-like creatures. But Shapiro has no doubts that the Peking skulls represent the remains of a community that flourished half a million years ago; he speculates and rationalizes until any evidence to the contrary becomes minimized in his thinking.

SUBJECTIVE SCIENCE

The real problem with the story of the evolution of man is that it is the product of basically bad science. To begin with, only a small handful of scientists have actually studied the problem intensively, although a great many more are somewhat conversant with it. All the individuals involved have been completely convinced from the beginning (before they started their researches) that man did evolve. That was never the question at issue. There has been much argument about the placement of given fossils in man's evolutionary history, but for about the past century, no one in the halls of establishment science has seriously questioned the idea that man did evolve. Creationists have advanced many scientific arguments against the idea, but the establishment completely ignores these. (And it must be conceded that their arguments are not always all that scientific.)

In the context of the superficial science associated with the evolution of man, I tend to think of examples in which the scientific community has been totally convinced about an idea that has subsequently turned out to be wrong. In areas where the acquisition of data is extremely difficult, it is often possible to make highly convincing arguments for some viewpoint that later proves to be totally incorrect. Certainly evidence relating to the evolution of man is of this nature; it is fragmentary, highly incomplete, and subject to extremely broad and subjective interpretation.

Consider our ideas about conditions on Mars. These ideas were always based upon the best available scientific information, yet they changed radically over the years. Around the turn of the century it was possible to think of Mars as being rather similar to the earth, supporting life represented by the large markings that change color with the seasons. By the 1940s, the picture had completely changed. Mars was known to be much colder than had originally been thought, and the atmosphere was known to be extremely thin. In 1964, the first Mariner spacecraft to approach Mars sent back eighteen historic pictures that showed a surface resembling that of the moon, and our ideas about Mars again changed radically and rapidly. The subsequent Mariner spacecraft caused equally drastic modifications in our thinking. For example, the atmosphere of Mars proved to be at least ten times as thin as the thinnest earlier estimate, and nitrogen appeared to be completely absent. The 1976 Viking Lander detected nitrogen in the atmosphere after all, about 3 percent. As this book was going to press, Viking seemed to be reporting signs of life. The reason that the picture could change so rapidly and with such little stress in the scientific community is that either picture is quite acceptable emotionally. Indeed, the present picture of a virtually lifeless planet seems to fit rather nicely into the establishment atheistic universe. Questioning evolution, however, is another matter.

THE FOSSIL EVIDENCE: A SUMMARY

Although I have presented some of the creationists' views about the fossil evidence, I would like to close this discussion by reemphasizing that the fossils continue to provide the evolutionist with one of his strongest arguments. True, the general theory of evolution does not predict a sudden appearance of major groups in the fossil record nor the lack of transitional forms. But the evolutionist can exercise a little faith and speak of a time when a little more information will solve these problems. In the meantime, the stratigraphic sequence fits well with the idea that the earth is very old and that a parade of life forms moved across its surface over eons of time. If we just knew why evolution occurred so rapidly sometimes (accounting for sudden appearance and lack of transitional forms), all would indeed be well.

Although the existence of the fossils does not prove or even strongly support the general theory of evolution, I must presently conclude that it is easier to account for the fossils in terms of an ancient earth, long populated by life, than it is to accept the creationists' suggestions that the fossils were all formed at the time of the Flood or during other relatively recent cataclysms. This suggestion doesn't seem to account for the generally valid progressive increase in complexity toward the upper strata (although the creationist speaks of the most complex organisms moving to mountaintops or swimming to the upper floodwaters). Furthermore, although I haven't made the calculations in detail, it seems that the vast amounts of coal, oil, and other fossils represent far more organic material than could exist as living organisms at one time on earth, to be destroyed in a single flood. Nor can I imagine how a flood could account for the fifty or more alternating layers of coal and sandstone or other rock that exist in some locations (although the creationists do have proposals). Limestone and diatomaceous earth are also of fossil origin but appear to have been laid down gradually over vast time intervals. So my present feeling is that the fossils testify of an ancient earth and a parade of life forms (whether part of this creation or not), although this is clearly not equivalent to the atheistic general theory of evolution. But keep an open mind, and read a few of the creationists' books if their ideas appeal to you.

AGE OF THE EARTH

The strictest interpretation of the Genesis creation account suggests that the earth is not really very old: about 6,000 years since the time of Adam, and perhaps seven 24-hour days, or seven 1,000-year periods of creation, preceding that. Evolutionary theory, on the other hand, requires that the earth be extremely old, on the order of hundreds of millions to billions of years. When uniformitarian geology developed, asserting that the earth was indeed extremely old, a naturalistic theory of evolution became possible. So what is the evidence for an ancient earth?

We have seen in chapter 11 that the evidences are uniformitarian in that they assume that the present is the key to the past. As indicated in the above paragraphs, existence of fossils (especially coal, oil, limestone, diatomaceous earth, etc.) argues rather strongly for an ancient earth. But of the several approaches to dating of the rocks, the radioactive clock is by far the most impressive. Again we could consider some of the suggestions made by the creationists. The importance of assumptions is emphasized, for example, especially the assumption that the element produced by radioactive decay was not present in the rock to begin with. After such a discussion I would personally conclude that the evidence for an extremely ancient earth remains strong. The arguments are indeed uniformitarian, however, and perhaps the present is not the key to the past in this case, any more than it is in some other cases. So again, I shall recommend that if you are interested in these arguments you might study some of the creationist literature.

CARBON-14 DATING

There is one line of reasoning that is worthy of our examination. It is concerned with the technique of dating with carbon-14 (14C). This radioactive atom decays (changes form) at a consistent rate. Given a certain amount of 14C, half will be gone in 5,730 years. This so-called half-life is too short for dating the strata, but radiocarbon could be of considerable value in measuring ages of objects that are younger than about 40,000 years. If the proportion of 14C compared to 12C has been constant in the atmosphere for the past 40,000 years, then as green plants photosynthesize, they would incorporate this proportion into their tissues. Animals eating the plants would incorporate the same proportion into their tissues. Then we could measure the ratio of 14C/12C in any ancient organic object and calculate its age.

Where does the 14C in the atmosphere come from? Neutrons produced by cosmic rays are absorbed by nitrogen atoms (14N) in the upper atmosphere to produce 14C with loss of a proton. If it were known that cosmic ray fluxes have been constant for the past 40,000 years, that the relative proportion of nitrogen to other gases (including water vapor) in the atmosphere has been constant during this period, that the rate 14C becomes incorporated into or released from living matter has been constant throughout this period, and that the rate of radioactive decay has been constant, then the method should be valid for dating objects up to this age—providing also that the objects studied have not been contaminated with more recent or more ancient carbon!

How can we go about testing these assumptions? Beginning about 1946, Dr. Willard F. Libby attempted to obtain objects of known ages to measure their 14C/12C ratios, and to see if ages based upon these ratios agreed with the known ages. When Libby began he was astounded to learn that no objects are known with positive ages older than about 5,000 years (the first dynasty in Egypt). We continually encounter dates of 20,000 or more years in the archaeological literature, but these are all estimates based upon positions in sediments, etc. That is, they are uniformitarian guesses. Libby applied the method to many objects up to about 5,000 years old and found that it worked rather nicely. But what about things older than that? Here we are left only with the assumptions mentioned above (plus a few others).

As Melvin and M. Garfield Cook [^11] have pointed out, there is a problem with the 14C clock that was recognized originally by Libby but then ignored because "everybody knew the earth was ancient." If the quantity of 14C in the earth's atmosphere has remained constant for the past 40,000 years, then the rate at which 14C is formed should equal the rate at which it disappears by radioactive decay. Consider the bathtub analogy: If the level in a bathtub is to remain constant while the tap is on, then the rate at which water flows out the drain must equal the rate that it comes in through the tap. It turns out that the rate of formation of 14C in the atmosphere by cosmic rays can be rather accurately measured. The rate at which 14C disappears by radioactive decay is also known. As it turns out, these two rates are not equal to each other. Radiocarbon is appearing in the atmosphere more rapidly than it is disappearing.

In the bathtub analogy, this means that the water is coming in faster than it is draining out, so the level should be rising. We could measure the rate at which the level is changing in the tub and easily calculate back to the time when the tub was empty. If we can't actually measure the rate of change in level, we can calculate it by measuring the rate water is coming in and going out and by knowing the dimensions of the tub. This is what must be done in the case of 14C. We measure the rate of its formation and the rate of its decay. We consider the size of the atmosphere so we can calculate the present rate of change in 14C levels (a rate too slow to observe directly). Then we can calculate back to the time when there was no 14C in the atmosphere. According to Cook and Cook, this proves to be 6,000 to 10,000 years ago. Since their interpretation of scripture is that the beginning of creation was about 13,000 years ago, they see this as a highly satisfactory calculation.

If the calculation holds up, it would be an impressive evidence for significant changes in the earth's atmosphere during relatively recent times. It would also mean that there was less radiocarbon in the atmosphere several thousand years ago than there is now, and that objects dated by the radiocarbon method would therefore appear to be older than they really are (the less 14C compared to 12C, the older the object appears to be).

Although this would be strong evidence against accepted uniformitarian interpretations of the earth and would support the cataclysmic ideas of the creationists, we should realize that it is itself a uniformitarian argument. It assumes that processes have been constant during the past 10,000 years or so. Furthermore, radiocarbon dating has been refined and extended since Libby's first studies. Most impressive, perhaps, are the recent direct tests of the method. Tree rings from bristlecone pines have been dated in long, continuous sequences extending back over 7,400 years. Radiocarbon from these rings can be measured. Such studies, combined with studies of dated sediment in lakes, the oceans, and soils (sediments in which a single layer called a varve is laid down each year), show that rates of formation of radiocarbon in the atmosphere have indeed changed during the past 7,400 years. There have been increases and decreases in the rates of formation. For example, wood dated by the radiocarbon method at about 5,000 B.C. would actually be 800 years older. [^12] But this is exactly opposite to the prediction of Cook and Cook. In spite of the creationists' arguments, the earth continues to appear very old.

CLASSIFICATION AND COMPARATIVE ANATOMY

The old standby of the evolutionist is the evidence of classification and anatomy. Surely evolution works, it is implied in the biology class, because plants and animals can be organized in a reasonable way that seems to indicate how it happened. This is what the general theory of evolution would predict. First there were single-celled protozoa, like the amoeba; then there were sponges, then jellyfish, and so on up the ladder of increasing complexity until we get to man. The early forms have stayed around without changing much, so it is possible to construct the evolutionary tree. Of course, there was much branching along the way, so the tree is complex and not like a simple ladder, but then that is what evolutionary theory would predict. Next to the fossils, this is probably the most convincing evidence for most students.

I find this evidence much less convincing. The picture seems reasonable in a beginning class, where only large groups are discussed in a general way, but when one looks at the details, a different picture emerges. As a matter of fact, except for one point, I personally consider classification and anatomy to be one of the strongest evidences against evolution.

To begin with, we should realize that classification could not be convincing even if everything were just as the general theory might predict. A creation theory might predict the same thing. An Intelligent Creator would certainly not be haphazard in his creations. Surely he would follow a plan, and most of the early taxonomists (scientists who specialize in classification) thought that they were discovering the details of this plan followed by God in creation.

The scheme followed by an Intelligent Creator would not necessarily be exactly like the phylogenetic trees one might predict on the basis of a theory of evolution, however. It could be the same, but God could do things not allowed by an evolutionary theory. The general theory predicts that there should be a rather continuous sequence of organisms from the simplest to the most complex—if not living today, at least represented in the fossil record, although we can accept some discontinuity due to rapid evolution and other factors. We have seen that discontinuity is the overwhelming rule and that a creation theory allows this.

The general theory of evolution also says that increases in complexity come about by chance mutations and recombinations of genetic material that are preserved by natural selection in the struggle for existence. Since there is a vast variety of potential genetic forms (chapters 12, 13, and 15), it is unlikely that a given feature would appear more than once during evolution. Thus if evolution really worked, so-called natural classification systems should not be too difficult to construct. The eye, for example, with its amazingly complex focusing lens, might be expected to appear only once. Thus all creatures that have eyes with a focusing lens should be related to each other through a direct line of descent.

Actually, classification based on similar features is virtually never clearcut as one might expect if evolution really worked. Indeed, the whole idea of evolution would be completely disproven if one insisted upon application of the principle exactly as stated above. But of course the evolutionist has a way out. He speaks of parallel evolution. The focusing eye apparently arose separately at least three times in the course of animal evolution: in the mollusks (octopus and squid), in the arthropods (spiders, crustaceans, etc.), and in the vertebrates (fish, lizards, mammals, etc.). The wing supposedly was developed independently in fish, insects, reptiles (fossils only), birds, and mammals (the bat). Natural classification schemes (based upon relationship through evolutionary descent) are thoroughly riddled with such examples of parallel evolution. Indeed, these examples are a source of awe to the student of evolution. He marvels at how wonderful the natural selection of chance mutations and genetic recombinations can be, producing such beautiful examples of seemingly impossible accomplishments. The reverence men used to reserve for God is bestowed upon these chance-directed "processes of nature."

As a young student going through the basic classes in evolution, I managed to maintain my faith in a God of creation, but I felt for a long time that the case for atheistic evolution was so logically sound that it could not be refuted even if false. This is the spirit in which it was presented. But my faith in the invincibility of the evolutionary case began to crumble when I took a class in Advanced Taxonomy of the Angiosperms (flowering plants). Here at last it became evident that the classification of flowering plants faced problems that could only be surmounted by exercising much faith; that is, by frequently invoking the principle of parallel evolution, and then by making unprovable assumptions about which features came first.

The idea is not difficult to grasp. It is illustrated in Table 14-2 and Figure 14-1. The table lists a few representatives of the flowering plants, and the figure illustrates ways in which they can be classified based upon which assumptions one is willing to make. Actually, the two schemes shown in Fig. 14-1 have deep historical roots. One scheme was developed from 1897 to 1936 by Adolf Engler and K. Prantl, based upon a still earlier system. It was assumed that the uniting of the petals in the flower to form a tube was of fundamental importance. All plants having flowers with united petals were considered to be related by descent; those without united petals formed another important line. At about the same time (1897 to 1915), Charles A. Bessey at the University of Nebraska was developing another scheme that went back nearly 200 years in history. Bessey assumed that the position of the ovary in the flower was the most important feature. If the ovary was attached above the attachment points of other flower parts, it was called superior; if below, inferior (Fig. 14-2). Flowers having inferior ovaries were thought to be related by evolutionary descent, as were those having superior ovaries. But the problem is that flowers with inferior ovaries have both separate and united petals, as do flowers with superior ovaries. Thus, in the Bessey system, uniting of the petals was assumed to be an example of parallel evolution. In the Engler and Prantl system, the inferior position of the ovary was thought to be an example of parallel evolution.

There are numerous other features and examples of parallel evolution. In the Bessey system, for example, the petal tube is irregular with two lobes on top and three on the bottom in the two separate evolutionary lines (honeysuckles; snapdragons and mints). The cacti and the euphorbes are other classic examples. Both are closely similar in appearance (Fig. 14-3), but one has flowers with inferior ovaries and the other with superior; hence they are completely unrelated in the Bessian system. Consider the milkweeds and the orchids, which seem as unrelated as possible. In any system, they are in the two major separate groups of flowering plants: the monocots and the dicots. Yet they have two interesting features in common: The stamens are fused to the pistil, and the pollen grains are transported in a waxy mass called a pollinium. These features don't occur in any other group of flowering plants, but they are common to these otherwise highly dissimilar groups.

These examples of parallel evolution offer no difficulties whatsoever for a creation theory. Certainly it is logical that an intelligent God would be orderly in his creation of things, but if he wanted to include similar features in widely divergent groups, he could do so. It's like two different automobile manufacturers both adopting disc brakes.

Actually, modern insights in biology further weaken these arguments from comparative anatomy. The whole attempt to classify organisms into a natural evolutionary scheme based upon similar anatomical structures that have a common ancestor (called homologous structures) assumes that these structures are controlled by the genes, and that the genes pass more or less unchanged through the generations of evolutionary history. Homologous structures in plants would be the spore-producing sporophylls in ferns, leaves of higher plants, and the various parts of a flower, for example. In animals, the bones in the fore-limb of a horse, bat, penguin, dog, manatee, and man would provide other examples. Yet, modern researches have clearly shown that homologous structures need not be controlled by identical or even related genes, and that characters that are controlled by identical genes may not be homologous. [^13]

These observations seem to destroy the very foundations upon which the general theory of evolution is constructed. If the anatomical features used in classification schemes do not owe their similarities to similar genes, then what is responsible for them? And how could a theory of common descent account for them? God's creative activities would, of course, not be bound by the restrictions placed upon the general theory of evolution.

VESTIGIAL ORGANS

There is one observation from the field of classification and comparative anatomy that must be regarded as strong evidence for evolution. It is not proof positive, but strong evidence it certainly is. Someday this evidence may give us insight into the nature of God and his methods of creation. It is the evidence of vestigial organs.

During the early stages of development of the human embryo as well as embryos of other vertebrates, gill slits are clearly visible. As the embryo develops further, these eventually disappear in land animals (including man). The evolutionist says that the gill slits are a vestigial remnant from the ancestors of the vertebrates, these ancestors being fish. The human embryo also has a "tail" that disappears. The obvious evolutionary interpretation is that human ancestors had tails. Actually, it was thought that a developing embryo went through stages representing its ancestors in the course of evolutionary history. These stages (phylogeny) were recapitulated by the developing embryo (ontogeny), making possible the sophomoric statement that premedical students loved to quote to their non-science friends: ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny. Careful study in embryology has found numerous apparent exceptions to this generalization, although there are several examples such as the two mentioned above.

But vestigial organs are not restricted to the stages of embryonic development. The human appendix has often been cited as an example of a vestigial organ; it has some value in lower vertebrates but seemed to be quite worthless in humans where, the evolutionist says, it is a remnant that evolution never eliminated. But now it appears that the appendix is made of tissue similar to the tonsils, and that both are important in fighting disease. At one time the evolutionist listed 180 organs in the human body that were vestigial, but with increasing knowledge the list has shrunk until it approaches zero. Yet it would be difficult to argue that the gill slits and the tail of the human embryo served a purpose (and equally difficult to prove that they do not).

So granted the existence of vestigial organs, what are we to make of them? We must admit that they are exactly the kind of thing the general theory would predict. The reason that vestigial organs do not prove evolution is that God could have designed things that way if he wanted. But why would he? Did he want to confuse the modern-day biologist? I personally resist that kind of an explanation. Perhaps in the process of creation, vestigial organs were a natural result of the way things were created. As the Gods "counseled among themselves" (Abraham 5:3), perhaps they found it efficient to design the developmental program for one kind of organism (e.g., the vertebrates) and then simply to modify parts of this program to produce the different kinds (species?) representing this main type (e.g., fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, mammals). If this is what the vestigial organs really mean, then they do indeed give us a great deal of insight into the means of creation—the planning and organizing and decision-making mentioned by Abraham.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] F.B. Salisbury, Truth by Reason and Revelation (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1965), Ch. 8, "Natural Selection and the Complexity of the Gene," Nature 224 (1969): 342-43; and "Doubts About the Modern Synthetic Theory of Evolution," The American Biology Teacher 33 (1971): 335-38.
[^2] 20 104 = 10x; 104 log20 = x log 10; 10 4..1.302 = x. 1.00; x = 135.5.
[^3] N. H. Horowitz, "On the Evolution of Biochemical Syntheses," Proceedings of U. S. National Academy of Sciences 31 (1945): 153.
[^4] Robert H. Whittaker and P. P. Feeny, "Allelochemics: Chemical Interactions Between Species," Science 171 (1971): 757-70.
[^5] James A. Fay, Molecular Thermodynamics (Reading, Mass.: Addison Wesley, 1965). George N. Hatsopoulos and Joseph H. Keenan, Principles of General Thermodynamics (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1965).
[^6] Richard E. Leakey, "Skull 1470," National Geographic 143 (1973): 819-29. Mary Leakey's find was reported in the news media in the fall of 1975. My information was obtained from "Hominid Bones: Old and Firm at 3.75 Million," Science News 108 (1975): 292.
[^7] Duane T. Gish, Evolution: the Fossils Say No (San Diego: ICR Publishing Co., 1973).
[^8] M. Boule and H. M. Vallois, Fossil Men (New York: The Dreyden Press, 1957, an English translation of Les Hommes Fossiles, published in 1952).
[^9] 9. P. O'Connel, Science of Today and Problems of Genesis (Hawthorne, California: Christian Book Club of America, Book 1, 1969).
[^10] 10. Harry L. Shapiro, Peking Man (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1974).
[^11] 11. Science and Mormonism, pp. 165-71.
[^12] 12. Elizabeth K. Ralph and Henry N. Michael, "Twenty-five Years of Radiocarbon Dating," American Scientist 62 (1974): 553-60.
[^13] 13. Sir Gavin de Beer, Homology, an Unsolved Problem (London: Oxford University Press, Ely House, 1971).
