Frank B. Salisbury, Creation ( 1976)

15

Genetic and Molecular Evidences

We have been considering the traditional evidences for evolution: the fossils and classification schemes. We have found them impressive but not convincing. Indeed, some parts of these evidences favor a creation theory more than the general theory of evolution. But these evidences are all rather old-fashioned anyway, the biology teacher might imply. Wait until you hear the results of modern studies! Now we have powerful mathematical tools to use in studying the flow of genes through populations, and there are computers to handle vast quantities of data in these studies and in modern approaches to natural classification schemes (called numerical taxonomy). More than that, we have all the knowledge of biochemistry to testify of the validity of the general theory. Not only do we know about enzymes and genes—proteins and DNA molecules—but we can actually map the sequences of amino acids in a protein and thereby many of the nucleotides in its controlling gene, finding just what the theory of evolution would predict. Computers and biochemistry seem especially impressive.

In many ways these modern evidences are impressive, as we shall see, but as in the case of the more traditional evidences, these turn out not to be proof positive after all. Often they are compatible with a creation theory, and as in the case of vestigial organs, when they seem to be almost incompatible, their real importance is that they may well tell us something about how creation took place—and hence about the nature of God. But most important, certain new insights from molecular biology are extremely difficult to reconcile with the modern synthetic theory of evolution. They stand as powerful evidences for intelligence in creation. It's a fascinating story and one I'm anxious to get on with.

POPULATION GENETICS

Although virtually all biologists consider that their research contributes to a better understanding of evolution (the "unifying theory" of modern biology), most research being done today with the specific aim of better understanding the evolutionary process is carried out in the field of population genetics, which provides the modern definition of evolution. It states, as we saw, that evolution is a shift in gene frequency within a population occurring in response to Darwinian selection.

Remember the British peppered moths (p. 212). Early in the nineteenth century, most specimens had light- colored wings; few had dark. The light moths were well camouflaged, but with the coming of the Industrial Revolution, soot soon filled the skies of England and covered the tree trunks. Now the light moths were most visible to their predators, and the dark ones were best camouflaged. Gene frequencies in the population began to shift, so that the number of genes for dark color increased, and the number of genes for light color decreased, providing our classical example of evolution.

The creationist cannot argue with this. Population geneticists have observed dozens, perhaps hundreds, of similar situations. Examples that come to mind are the DDT-resistant flies that build up in a population following the use of DDT, or the bacteria in hospitals that have become resistant to various antibiotics. The artificial selection discussed by Darwin (controlled breeding of domestic plants and animals) also proves the point, although this is no longer natural selection. The creationist must simply admit that if evolution is defined this way, then evolution works in nature. It would be well if those who defend creation would thoroughly realize this. There is no need for a seminary teacher, for example, to attempt a disproof of evolution if this is the idea under discussion.

But does it prove the general theory of evolution? Does the change in peppered moth gene frequencies really allow us to conclude that some primordial glob of protoplasm (the first cell) evolved in just a few billion years into a human being capable of contemplating this question? Most biology teachers apparently seem to think that it does.

But this is the invalid argument by extrapolation. This form of inductive reasoning often leads to the truth, but doesn't necessarily lead to the truth. When our first son was born, I had some fun with extrapolation. During the first two or three weeks he gained a pound a week. Since he weighed about 7 pounds at birth, this meant that he would weigh 59 pounds on his first birthday, 111 pounds on his second birthday, 527 pounds on his tenth birthday, and 5,207 pounds if he lived to be 100! Such are the dangers of extrapolation.

It is important to recognize that features can change in a population in response to selection pressures. Surely the Creator would design things this way. As conditions change, the population tends to adapt. But this is a far cry from producing new phyla, orders, families, and genera from some common ancestor. The evolutionist has great faith in the ability of these so-called micro changes to account for evolution on the macro scale, but his proof is limited to the micro scale.

Please note in the example of the peppered moths that no new genes appeared; there was simply a shift in the frequencies of genes already present. So this classical example of "evolution" includes only a portion of the modern synthetic theory; mutations play no role at all. In many other examples, such as the appearance of new bacterial strains resistant to an antibiotic, this also proves to be the case. In other cases it is more difficult to know whether new genes have appeared, and it may be impossible to prove that they have or have not. Certainly, new genes do appear in natural populations as they do in laboratory populations treated with X rays, etc. But can new genes with potential adaptive value appear rapidly enough in natural populations to account for evolution as proposed? No one knows. Certainly the usually quoted examples such as the peppered moths or the resistant bacteria don't prove that the mechanism would work.

The studies in population genetics have provided us with a vast body of fascinating biological information. We can understand, often in detailed mathematical terms, how populations can change in response to environmental selection pressures. The evolutionist is firmly convinced that all this proves his case. I am firmly convinced that it does not. It is an enormous intellectual leap of extrapolation and an induction of the most invalid kind to believe that the proven micro cases also prove the macro theory.

MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

There are now a number of books that discuss the origin of life and the postulated role of molecules in evolution. (See Bibliography.) Many biologists feel that this area provides the strongest evidences for the modern synthetic theory. It seems that the theory surely must be true if we can apply it to explain the varieties of molecules in living organisms. Yet I feel that by far the most serious challenge to the modern synthetic theory comes from the field of molecular biology. Thanks to the development of knowledge about molecules and cells, we can now return to the old question of complexity, and do so at a much higher level of precision, where something can be said about the probabilities involved in producing structures (enzyme molecules) with a given degree of complexity. But before I present my argument [^1] about natural selection and gene complexity, let's look at the evidences in favor of evolution.

It has become fashionable in recent years to analyze molecules from various organisms to see if the observed structural differences seem to bear a relationship to the postulated evolutionary history of the organisms. This is probably most relevant when it is done with proteins. You'll remember from chapter 12 that an enzyme is a protein molecule consisting of a chain of amino acids hooked together through peptide bonds, the chain being twisted and folded in ways determined by the specific parts of amino acids (the so-called R groups) standing out along the chain. Those groups that are repelled by water push the chain toward the inside of the final folded molecule; those attracted to water stay on the outside. The end result is an extremely complex structure, a portion of which may be designated as the active site. In this region of the molecule, the enzyme exactly fits and combines with its substrate, interacting with it so that some highly specific chemical reaction is likely to occur. Each enzyme molecule is synthesized in response to "information" contained in a molecule of DNA, a gene; the sequence of nucleotides in the DNA molecule is translated according to the genetic code into the sequence of amino acids in the protein chain. Clearly, the relationships between structure of protein enzymes in different organisms could be highly interesting from the standpoint of evolution, since the genes (DNA) that control the enzymes are inherited from generation to generation. This is where evolution ought to occur.

CYTOCHROME C

Of the several examples we could discuss, that of cytochrome c is probably the best. You may remember that sugars and other molecules are broken down in all cells by a highly complex process called cellular respiration, involving in many cells about fifty enzymatically controlled steps. Hydrogen atoms with their electrons are removed at various points and moved along a chain of about twenty enzymes in the electron transport system. At the beginning of the chain, the proton part (nucleus) of the hydrogen atoms is released into the solution as a hydrogen ion, and only electrons are moved along the chain. Energy-rich molecules of ATP are synthesized, utilizing the energy originally carried by the electrons. Finally, at the end of the chain, the electrons are combined with the hydrogen nuclei (protons) and oxygen to produce water. Near the end of the chain the electrons are passed from cytochrome to cytochrome c, then to cytochrome c, and finally to cytochromes a and a3, where the water is formed. Cytochrome c, then, is an enzyme, third from the end in this chain. It has been widely studied because it is relatively easy to isolate, and it is quite small, consisting in most organisms of only 104 amino acids.

All organisms, plant and animal, contain cytochrome c molecules, and as far as we can tell, all these cytochrome c molecules act equally well. Yet they are not identical in structure. Sixty-nine of the 104 amino acids have been found to vary in different organisms. To determine this, the cytochromes c were extracted from 38 organisms, and the sequences of amino acids were determined for all these. There were mammals (man, chimpanzee, donkey, rabbit, etc.), other vertebrates (pigeon, peking duck, rattlesnake, bullfrog, tuna, etc.), insects, lower plants (two yeasts and a mold), and higher plants (wheat, sunflower, pumpkin, etc.).

Cytochrome c from man is identical to that from the chimpanzee, and the cytochromes c from chicken and turkey are identical, but each of the others differed from all the rest. Thirty-five of the amino acids were identical at a given position in all 38 organisms studied. At 23 locations in the chain, either of two related amino acids could be found; at twelve locations, either of three amino acids. There were 24 locations where a considerable variety of amino acids could be found, but if a water-repelling amino acid (for example) occurred in one organism at such a location, then a water-repelling amino acid would occur in the other 37 organisms at that same location. At five locations, apparently any of the twenty possible amino acids could occur.

The significance of all this is that the organisms could be related to each other in a kind of evolutionary tree with those having the greatest number of dissimilar amino acids being the farthest apart. (Fig. 15-1) The conclusion is that since man and the chimpanzee have identical sequences, they must be closely related, while man and higher plants must be distantly related, since they have the fewest sequences in common.

How does all this relate to the theory of evolution? It is not an example of evolutionary "progress," but it, nevertheless, seems to provide a powerful evidence for the general theory of evolution. It is not that the cytochromes c of higher organisms are better than those of lower organisms; rather, the differences are said to be tolerated ones. Of the random mutations that have been occurring during the millions of years of evolution, those that led to amino acid changes that had no effect upon the function of cytochrome c were not eliminated by selection and hence can be observed now. The longer it has been since two organisms diverged from a common ancestor, the more time there has been for random tolerated changes to occur, so the number of changes (different amino acids) ought to be greater. Apparently the most ancient ancestors of life already had highly functional cytochrome c molecules. The argument is similar to that of vestigial organs, with the unchanged amino acid patterns being vestigial.

This is indeed a compelling story and certainly one of the most impressive evidences that the evolutionist can produce. If it didn't really happen this way, how can we account for these patterns? Why would God design organisms in this way?

Why shouldn't he? Certainly God might have had his own good reasons, unfathomable to us, for designing organisms in this way. It is also possible that we may someday understand the amino acid sequences as we now understand some vestigial organs. Perhaps the different patterns do have meaning in terms of the metabolisms of the various organisms. That is, perhaps the changes are not just tolerated; perhaps they are actually adaptive to the organism. But at the moment there isn't the slightest shred of evidence for this idea.

There is another side to the cytochrome c story, however. Where did cytochrome c come from in the first place? The study with 38 different organisms allows us to say something in an objective, mathematical way about the complexity of the cytochrome c molecule. And the overwhelming conclusion is that any cytochrome c molecule is far too complex to be accounted for by the modern synthetic theory.

THE POWER RULE

To understand, you need to know about information theory and the "power rule." How many four-letter words are there? Let's perform a little mathematical exercise: How many one-letter words are there? Since there are 26 letters in the alphabet, it is obvious that there are 26 one-letter words. How many two-letter words? The letter A can be combined with another A, or with any of the other 25 letters in the alphabet; the same is true for the letters B, C, D, etc. Thus there are 26 x 26 = 676 possible two-letter words. How many four-letter words? 26 x 26 x 26 x 26 = 456,976. Five-letter words? 26 5 = 11,881,376. Clearly, when we keep multiplying by a number as large as 26, the result goes up very rapidly (a geometric progression). Of course it is obvious that not all the 456,976 four-letter words would have informational value in English, or for that matter in any other language. Most would consist only of consonants, for example, and would thus not be usable. In any case we have derived the power rule: The number of possible words of any length that can be constructed of an alphabet consisting of any given number of letters equals the number of letters in the alphabet raised to the power of the number of letters in the desired word (e.g., the number of possible four-letter words in an alphabet with 26 letters = 26 4).

The exact principle applies if we want to calculate the number of possible protein molecules of any given amino acid length that could be synthesized from the 20 possible amino acids. For example, the number of possible small peptides containing four amino acids equals 20 raised to the fourth power: 160,000. (Note what a difference the six extra letters make in our example above!) What is the number of possible protein molecules each containing 104 amino acids, the number in the usual cytochrome c molecule? Clearly, this will be 20 to the 104th power. Using a little algebra, [^2] this works out to 10 135.5 (let's say 10 135). This is the figure one followed by 135 zeroes! This is a totally incomprehensible number. I have tried to think of examples from nature that might help to provide some insight into the enormity of such numbers. It has been estimated, for example, that there are about 10 79 atoms in all the universe (a universe with 500 billion galaxies). It would take 10 56 universes to account for 10 135 atoms!

Let's think of a model universe. According to our present theories of cosmology (chapter 10), the universe is expanding, and the farther objects are away from each other, the more rapidly they are receding from each other. Objects farther than about 10 billion light years from the earth would be receding with a velocity exceeding the speed of light, so they could never be visible to us. Assume, then, that our universe is a cube (to make the calculation a trifle easier) that is 20 billion light years on each side. (Remember that a light year is the distance light travels in a year at its velocity of 186,000 miles = 300,000 kilometers per second.) We'll let our model universe include 5 billion galaxies, each of which has 20 billion planets. It would occupy a volume of 8,000 billion billion billion (8 x 10 30) cubic light years. Consider the dimensions of such a model universe in Angstrom units, the smallest unit normally used by science. (One Angstrom equals 0.00000001 centimeters.) Our model universe would be 2 x 10 36 Angstroms on each side of the cube, and its volume would be 8 x 10 108 cubic Angstroms. To occupy a volume equal in cubic Angstroms to the number of possible protein molecules, each the size of cytochrome c, we would need a hundred million billion billion (10 26) universes the size of my model!

Let's have one more go at portraying the size of the number 10 135. Current theory postulates that at one time the oceans of the earth were filled with organic molecules, including proteins, and that in this organic soup life originated (chapter 11). Presumably some of the protein molecules had enzymatic activity, and eventually one appeared that had the activity of cytochrome c. With this greatly oversimplified background, let's do our next mathematical exercise—one that clearly points up some of the weaknesses in the theory.

Say that the primitive ocean covered all the earth to a depth of two kilometers. Say that it contained about 15 percent of its weight in protein molecules the size of cytochrome c (104 amino acids). There would be about 2.19 x 10 44 molecules of protein—far fewer than the possible number of kinds. Let each protein molecule reproduce one million times each second, and (for ease of calculation) assume that each molecule changes each time it reproduces, and that no two protein molecules are ever alike. Let this process go on in our two kilometer ocean for five billion years, producing 10 67 different kinds of molecules—still nowhere near the 10 135 possible kinds. If we cover all the 10 20 planets in the model universe with two kilometers of water, etc., and let the protein molecules multiply on all the planets for 5 billion years, we will produce 10 87 different kinds—still nowhere near enough. If we are going to make all the possible 10 135 kinds of protein molecules (each the size of cytochrome c), we will have to let the process continue on our 10 20 planets for 10 57 years—or if we are unwilling to wait so long, having only 5 billion years at our disposal, then we must let the process occur in 10 48 of our model universes. Hopefully, you are beginning to see that 10 135 is indeed a large number. Imagine the minute possibility that a human-type cytochrome c would be produced. In our model universe, there is only one chance in 10 48 possibilities that the molecule would appear!

But, says the skeptic, you are assuming that only one of the 10 135 possibilities will have cytochrome c activity. Yet we know that this is not the case—the cytochrome c molecules from the 38 organisms that were studied differed in many ways, showing that many different amino acid combinations can have the same enzymatic activity. It's exactly like the analogy of language. "This above all, to thine own self be true," is one way to convey a certain bit of information, but approximately the same information can be conveyed by other combinations of letters, such as "It is more important to be true to yourself," or "Dies uber alles: dir selbst treu sein."

That is the beauty of the situation relating to cytochrome c. We actually have some concrete information that allows us to make estimates about how specific a molecule must be if it is to have cytochrome c activity. Remember that 35 of the amino acids in the chain of 104 could apparently not change without loss in activity. According to the power rule, if amino acids are randomly hooked together, the chances that 35 of them will be absolutely specified at 35 previously specified positions are 1 in 20 35, which equals one chance in 10 45.5. Twenty-three of the amino acids could be any one of two amino acids; the chances of this occurring are 10 23. Seventeen of the amino acids can be any one of three; the chances of this occurring are about one in 7 17 = 10 14. Twenty-four of the amino acids can be any one of ten; the chances are 2 24 = 10 7. A fundamental law of probability states that the chances of any two events occurring simultaneously are equal to the product of the chances of these events occurring independently. Thus we multiply together the above list of probabilities (simply by adding their exponents). The result informs us that, based upon our present understanding of the structure and function of cytochrome c, the chances of a protein molecule with cytochrome c activity being produced by random combination of 104 amino acids are one chance in 10 89.5 (say, 10 89). This is an improvement over the idea that only one molecule in 10 135 would have cytochrome c activity, but when you think about, it doesn't make much difference. To be certain that at least one molecule of active cytochrome c would be produced, we must use 100 of our model universes and the 5 billion years to produce 10 89.5 different kinds of protein molecules, each having 104 amino acids in its chain!

TELEOLOGICAL EVOLUTION

The evolutionist has his faith. He says: "We may not know how it happened, but the fact of the matter is, evolution did happen. So it must work. Besides, your argument has a fallacy. It makes the mistake of assuming that evolution is teleological, that it is being directed some way toward a goal. On the contrary: It is purely opportunistic, fortuitous. There is no Director. Who says there ever had to be a cytochrome c? Certainly, it is unlikely that cytochrome c would appear. It is also unlikely that any specified bridge hand will be dealt. Every bridge hand is unlikely! Yet all you have to do to get some set of four hands is to shuffle and deal. And the game then progresses based upon the hands that appear. So is evolution. If cytochrome c had not appeared, life today would be different—but it would still be life! Just because each and every enzyme is so totally unlikely, we can be certain that life on any other planet, evolved independently from our own, will be totally different from life as we know it. Each planet is its own bridge game."

This is a rather compelling argument. If true, it would indeed negate my probability calculations. But it is not true. The modern synthetic theory of evolution is not analogous to a bridge game (or other game of chance). There are numerous points where evolution must have been goal directed, in spite of what the evolutionist says about its opportunistic nature. It is as if the game could not be played unless certain hands were dealt out. It is true that most of the time the opportunistic argument seems to apply, but this may be due mostly to our ignorance. I am becoming aware of an increasing number of cases in which the goal would have been established by previous steps in evolution, and the process would ultimately have to stop if the goal were not reached. It is the goal that establishes the selection pressure, and only one goal is readily conceivable. Consider two examples:

Norman Horowitz [^3] suggested a scheme to account for the evolutionary origin of complex metabolic pathways. The idea has been widely accepted. It suggests that the "primeval soup" contained virtually all of the organic molecules now found in living cells. The first organisms merely incorporated these into their structures as they grew and multiplied, changing them little if at all. Eventually these organisms would fill the seas, and then one or more of the essential organic molecules in the "soup" would begin to run out. At that point, there would be a strong selection pressure in favor of any enzyme that could convert one of the molecules present in abundance into the one that had become limiting. That is, the whole business would have to grind to a halt unless an enzyme capable of one function appeared and were selected. Each time a molecule became limiting, there would be a teleological necessity for an enzyme that could produce it. Horowitz assumed that this went on until organisms like present green plants existed, having all the necessary enzymes to convert carbon dioxide, water, light energy, and a few minerals into living protoplasm. I believe the process would face impossible odds at each step where the environment (limited molecules) demanded the evolution of some new enzyme. The situation demands that in some relatively small number of trials a given hand must be dealt out—or the game stops. And each time the chances of getting the hand are vanishingly small. (Unless the complexity of the necessary enzyme were much lower than in the above examples—i.e., that the bridge hand included only three cards, so that its appearance became quite likely—a possibility that at the moment hasn't a shred of evidence to support it.)

A new field is developing, called chemical ecology. It is concerned with the chemical interactions between organisms. For example, a shrub in the California soft chaparral releases volatile terpenes (e.g., camphor) that are adsorbed on nearby soil particles, preventing the germination of competitive species (gas warfare!). Or some plants contain special insect hormones that upset the insect's course of development when the plant is eaten. The point is that literally dozens of cases are now known in which one organism has apparently evolved a special set of enzymes in direct response to the chemistry of some other organism—which not infrequently seems to have returned the compliment. Here, again, is evolution to a goal. "As the defensive chemistry of the plants evolves, intensifies, and differentiates through time, the chemical adaptations of existing consumers of plants must evolve, if these consumers are not to become extinct." [^4] Evolution as proposed may indeed sometimes be teleological.

CREATION OR CHANCE?

Such arguments could be multiplied at length, but the crux of the matter is simple: The findings of molecular biology during the past few decades have given us a much deeper appreciation for the intricacy and complexity of life (although few scientists seem to have realized the implications of all this). The argument against the modern synthetic theory of evolution is the same as the argument originally put forth by many thinking people against Darwin's original theory. The principle of natural selection of variability in populations (this variability being produced by genetic recombinations and mutations, according to the modern theory) as a means of generating complexity falls far short when we contemplate the level of complexity that would have to be produced. Original opponents of Darwinism mentioned the wing and the eye as examples. They were unable to accept the idea that natural selection of small variations was really capable of producing such complexity. Yet they did not really know in any kind of mathematical way how complex a wing and an eye really are, nor do we know today. We do, however, know something that can be expressed mathematically about the complexity of protein and DNA molecules. We have the power rule and the concepts of information theory to help us along. We arrive at the exact point arrived at by the opponents of evolution 100 years ago: Natural selection is simply incapable of doing the job. Variety won't appear rapidly enough—not by tens of orders of magnitude.

A common creationist argument is that evolution breaks the second law of thermodynamics, which states that order can never spontaneously increase in the universe. Entropy, a measure of disorder, must always spontaneously increase. I haven't liked this argument much, because order can increase if energy is put into the system and if there is a controlling or guiding mechanism, as in the growth of a plant or animal from a fertilized egg cell. The evolutionist says that there was plenty of energy, and natural selection was the guiding mechanism. The above arguments show, however, that natural selection is an inadequate mechanism, because when we study the situation at the micro-level of mutations, we see that the proposed mechanism falls far short of providing sufficient variety for natural selection to function. The second law of thermodynamics is now being understood on the basis of the probabilities of events occurring at the micro-level. [^5] My argument and that based on the second law then reduce to a single basic idea.

One thing should be made quite clear in closing this chapter: The examples of complexity discussed here nowhere near approach the kinds of things that could be discussed. Cytochrome c is a relatively small protein, which is why it has been studied so intensively. Furthermore, it is one enzyme in a chain of twenty others making up the electron transport system, which is only part of the overall system of cellular respiration (with its fifty enzymes) that goes on in each cell. And respiration is only one of many functions. Photosynthesis is at least as ordered and complex (probably more so), and there are numerous other equally important metabolic pathways that must be accounted for, such as the synthesis of the amino acids that go to make up the proteins, or the nucleotides that make up the DNA molecules, or the complex fatty substances that constitute the all-important membranes around and within all living cells. Some way, each of these many complex individual units must be accounted for if we are going to account for the origin and development of life in purely mechanistic, chance-directed, atheistic ways. And all the units must be integrated together. We must even account for how cells can divide, multiply, and specialize at exactly the right times and places to produce from a single fertilized egg cell a mature organism as complex as a thinking human being.

'"But," the skeptic says, "you solve the problem of complexity in living things by postulating an even more complex intelligent Creator. Where did God come from?" Of course we don't know. But perhaps it is some consolation to know that we have finally reached the most difficult dilemma, one that seems completely beyond human comprehension: When did time begin, when will it end—or where does space end? Since everything in our existence has a beginning, it is impossible to imagine a universe without a beginning, but it is equally impossible to imagine a universe with a beginning. We can no more think of something coming into existence where nothing (not even empty space) existed before than we can think of an end to space. Science has no answers, nor has God ever explained these things to man through the prophets.

Thus we arrive at a conclusion of logical positivism: that no philosphy can provide us with a true explanation of the universe—and a certainty that it is true. Yet we can know the truth of some things. We can know that God lives and that he was the Creator, not just because we can't explain the universe any other way (in which case God becomes a "God of the gaps"), but because he has revealed himself and this knowledge to us (to the prophets, and to each of us if we qualify ourselves). Believing and finally knowing this, we can then see God's hand in all things; we can see that the complexities of the universe, the solar system, the earth, and the creatures on it declare his glory and bear record of him.

Knowing that God lives and creates doesn't solve all the problems, but it certainly helps with some. Writing Shakespeare by letting monkeys pound typewriters isn't very promising; it is comparable in many ways to the problems of generating enzymes by chance as described above. But letting Shakespeare apply his intelligence to the task is perfectly reasonable. One can imagine the Gods counseling together to work out the intricate metabolic pathways or the fascinating chemical interactions between organisms. To me, the lessons of molecular biology and indeed all biology and science are that God verily spoke the truth when he said: " . . . all things are created and made to bear record of me. . . ." (Moses 6:63.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Creation was an act of intelligence, 1. Actual mechanisms of creation. According to our experience, the 1. What is the origin of species? CREATION BY A GOD OF MAGIC This summary of the last days represents my tentative interpretation of Joseph Smith 1 (the scripture that relates the order of events), embellished by several other scriptures, including as basic sources: Matthew 24; Mark 13; Luke 17:20-37; 21:5-38; D&C 45:15-75. Also: D&C 29:9-21; 34:7-9; 72:12; 88:92-116; 101:23-24; 121:28-32; 130:1; 133:17-56; 1 Nephi 12-14; 2 Nephi 26-32; Moses 7:65-67; and the book of Revelation.
[^2] Creation was carried out by the Son, the matter that is "more fine or The Earth is a planet orbiting the for the vast range of variety and EVOLUTION BY CHANCE-DIRECTED NATURAL SELECTION Duane E. Jeffrey, in "Seers, Savants, and Evolution: The Uncomfortable Interface," Dialogue 8 (3/4): 41-71, has shown with careful documentation that the Church has never taken an official position on the details of creation, the role of evolution, etc.
[^3] Creation had spiritual and temporal 3. The time element in creation. The structure and dynamics of 2. How do organisms really FLYING SAUCERS AND ANCIENT ASTRONAUTS I have written about this topic in (1) Truth by Reason and by Revelation (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1965), pp. 247-51; (2) The Utah UFO Display (Old Greenwich, Conn.: Davin Adair, 1974); (3) "The Scientist and the UFO," Bioscience 17 (1967): 15-24; and (4) "Recent Developments in the Scientific Study of UFO's," Bioscience 25 (1975): 505-12.
[^4] Creation involved much planning 4. The nature of the Fall. (What is Most indications are that most INITIAL CREATION, THEN NATURAL SELECTION Erich von Daniken, Chariots of the Gods (New York: Bantam Books, 1968), and Brinsley LePoer Trench, The Sky People (London: Neville Spearman, 1960).
[^5] The man (to be called Adam) was all things immortal before Sedimentary rocks contain fossils A DIRECTED 4.5-BILLION-YEAR EVOLUTION Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, The Phenomenon of Man, trans., Bernard Wall (New York: Harper, 1959); Le Compt du Nouy, Human Destiny (New York: New American Library, 1947); Edward W. Sinnott, The Biology of the Spirit (New York: Viking Press, 1955).
