Frank B. Salisbury, Creation ( 1976)

16

The Millennial Symposium: Scenarios of Creation

Let's use the literary device of moving ahead in time to the Millennium and then looking back in retrospect. There have been so many momentous events during recent times that it is virtually impossible to have any real feeling for just how long it has been since the beginning of the twenty-first century. On the one hand, events have followed one another in such machine-gun succession that it seems like only yesterday when we celebrated, in a world so full of turmoil that almost any celebration seemed falsely hollow, that New Year's Day that was also the first day of a new century. On the other hand, when I think of all that has happened, the fantastic changes that have occurred in the world, it would not be difficult to account for the passage of many decades. It is amazing that so much could have transpired in just one generation—but it did, just as the prophecies said. And now today is that day for which many of us have been waiting most of our lives.

There were false Christs and false prophets in the twentieth century. A few actually claimed to be Christ, but many others with outstanding qualities of leadership gave their messages to the world with prophetic force. There were gurus from India who could teach the most subtle arts of mental self-control and psychotherapists who taught the opulent life via scientific principles of the mind. There were religious leaders, many with radio and television programs, who seemed to return almost exactly to the church of God as it was established in the meridian of time. And there were great signs and wonders being shown forth among the people. Technology took man to the moon in the 1960s and produced computers that could simultaneously consider the hundreds of parameters of a tropical hurricance. But faith healers in the Philippines and in South America in the 1970s still performed bloodless operations with rusty knives or even their bare hands. Numerous individuals claimed to be in touch with visitors from outer space and sometimes could produce sings and wonders that seemed to support their claim, such as making gasoline by adding a little black powder to water, or quenching a roaring fire with a pinch of another powder.

The elect, according to the covenant, were gathered from the four corners of the earth to old Jerusalem and to the new Zion. All this gathering led to far-reaching political upheavals. During the last half of the nineteenth century and all of the twentieth century, there were wars and rumors of wars. There were also famines and pestilences, and terrible earthquakes were not uncommon. During much of the twentieth century, these events were known in all the world only moments after they happened, thanks to electronic communications systems, which themselves were great sings and wonders.

Yet in spite of the detailed fulfillment of prophecy, the love of many waxed cold. Millions decided that God was only a remote concept, and many actually denied his existence. Wickedness abounded in the earth; indeed, it was as in the days of Noah. Sins such as adultery and Sabbath breaking, which were once punished by death, were openly committed and justified in all the entertainment media and even by learned professors speaking before groups of young people. Lust replaced love. Yet the gospel of the kingdom had been restored, and it was being preached throughout much of the world during the last half of the twentieth century. Indeed, all these things were either fulfilled or well in the process of fulfillment by the 1970s.

Finally the preaching of the gospel was complete, standing as a witness to all nations. Then came the abomination of desolation, as prophesied originally by Daniel and repeated by the Savior when he was here. The terror of this abomination that made everything desolate remains vivid in the minds of those who witnessed it. Then came the great natural calamities. Many of the mountains were made low, and the valleys were raised up. The whole earth trembled and reeled to and fro as a drunken man. This geological commotion filled the atmosphere with dense dust, such that the very sun itself appeared to be darkened, and the moon appeared to be changed into blood. Part of the celestial body that came close to the earth and caused these convulsions shattered into billions of small pieces that fell into the atmosphere as fiery meteorites, such that the stars themselves appeared to be falling from heaven. These fierce atmospheric upheavals produced tremendous electrical storms, with devastating hail. Flies and maggots multiplied upon the land, the flesh fell from many creatures, while others were devoured by beasts.

Suddenly there was a great sign in the heavens. In the midst of these turmoils, seemingly the ultimate of natural calamities, a supernatural event took place. Angels flew through the midst of heaven. Now that we have seen them and recognized them for what they are, we wonder how our forefathers could have gained such twisted impressions of reality as the winged beings portrayed by medieval artists.

The angels gathered the elect from the four corners of the earth—and even from the very ends of heaven itself. Many saints who had slept in their graves were resurrected and assembled. Then the angels, with powerful devices that made even the advanced electronic communications of our time seem inconsequential, announced the imminent return of Jesus Christ, the Savior of mankind. As the day progressed, these angels also recounted the deeds of mankind during the 6,000 years of history. Then Christ returned in the clouds of heaven, even in a pillar of fire. Everyone alive on earth at that time could see and hear him at once as he returned to the planet where he had made his atonement complete, dressed in a glorious red apparel that signified his trodding of the winepress alone, his bringing to pass the redemption of mankind by the shedding of his blood.

The great and abominable church was cast down, and naturalism collapsed! Christ and his accompanying angels were terrible to the nonbelievers who had constructed their atheistic, intellectually conceived universe. In great fear, those who had been the unquestioned voice of leadership stood off at a great distance, trembling. [^1]

But these mighty events, as you all know, were just a prelude to today. Now is the time for the Millennial Symposium. Now all will be told. At last Christ will "reveal all things—Things which have passed, and hidden things which no man knew, things of the earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereof—Things most precious, things that are above, and things that are beneath, things that are in the earth, and upon the earth, and in heaven." (D&C 101:32-34.)

The meeting hall has been prepared. It will seat the many thousands who have been assembled. Not only are we who lived through the terrible events preceding the Savior's return present here today, but many are here who in life were concerned with the topics to be discussed today. There on the podium are Aristotle, Hippocrates, Linnaeus, Charles Darwin, Gregor Mendel, and many others. Today is the day for the presentation of the creation story; other topics to be revealed will be presented on other days. We are now waiting with much anticipation to hear the proceedings in the Adamic tongue, which miraculously we can all understand.

THE CREATION SCENARIOS

That is as far as I dare go with the past tense approach, as though I really knew what were going to happen in that Millennial Symposium, if there really is such a symposium. But whatever the format, a time will come, after the collapse of naturalism, when the Savior will reveal "things of the earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereof." What will he reveal on that momentous occasion? Obviously, if I knew, there would be no need for him to reveal it. He is going to tell us "hidden things, which no man knew . . . things most precious. . . ." So we might just as well relax and realize that we are not going to foresee those things in advance. Nevertheless, when they are revealed, they are certainly going to agree with things that have already been revealed—the stories of creation, for example. It's just that we shall see those stories in a different perspective, one that we can't imagine now.

Thus for the moment we must train ourselves intensively in the careful art of not making a decision—when none is justified. [^2] It is as bad to arrive at an inflexible position regarding the detailed nature of creation based upon the scriptural accounts as to decide that there is no God and that all happened by chance-directed evolutionary processes.

To fortify this open-minded stance, I would like to present, in the format of the Millennial Symposium, the possible interpretations of creation of which I am aware. This means that they appear possible to me or to others in terms of the scriptural accounts and/or the findings of science. Although accepted by many, the first three conflict with either science or revelation or both (Table 16-1 summarizes a few of the things that are known or not known about creation). In my opinion, these three indicate what didn't happen. The remaining four may have elements of truth, although the last is an easy way out, and there are difficulties with each of the other three. My own feelings and prejudices have changed in the past and will probably change in the future, so use these scenarios only as springboards or talking points—and be suspicious if you find yourself becoming convinced that any of these approaches, or one of your own, really reflects the whole truth. For that, you'll have to wait for the real Millennial Symposium.

Table 16-1THE KNOWN AND THE UNKNOWN ABOUT CREATION

SCRIPTURES (Revelation) SCRIPTURES

THE KNOWN THE UNKNOWN (No mention made)

involving purpose. 2. The nature of spirit. (What is

under direction of the Father pure?" D&C 131:7-8)

(Gods plural).

phases, divisible into seven periods. (Where the "times" each 1,000

years? Abraham 5:13)

and preparation before life was placed the physiochemical nature of a

on Earth. change to mortality? Were

the first man and the first flesh the Fall, as II Nephi 2:22 and

on Earth. several Mormon theologians seem

to imply?)

SCIENCE SCIENCE

THE KNOWN (it is possible to contest THE UNKNOWN (This list could be

some of these points if one insists almost infinite in length,

upon doing so.) depending on its level of detail.)

law of cause and effect (effects the modern synthetic theory of

have causes) always operates in the evolution (mutations, gene

universe. frequency shifts, etc.) account

sun, which is a star in the Milky complexity in the Earth's

Way galaxy. organisms?

the Earth can be at least partially function? For example, how can a

understood according to the laws of fertilized egg develop into a

physics and chemistry. a mature individual?

rocks of the Earth are extremely

old (millions to billions of years).

and can be ordered according to the

standard geologic column, indicating

that the Earth has seen a parade of

life forms during millions of years.

existed (been fossilized) are not

here now.

which can be organized only into

imperfect classification schemes.

mechanical constructions that obey

the laws of physics and chemistry.

populations in response to Darwinian

selection pressures. (According to

this definition, evolution occurs

at present.)

Details (plus many points not summarized here) are discussed in Chapters 5 to 15. Some points, in both the scriptures and science, are known with much more certainty than others.

Let us return to my imaginary symposium. The participants fill the great hall. At the highest point on the podium is Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world. The radiance of this glorified being dominates and overwhelms the entire congregation, although many on the stand and in the congregation are resurrected beings. Some will speak today. Those who lived on the earth when the gospel was not here have now accepted Christ as their Savior and have had the ordinances performed for them vicariously. After the introductory revelations of Christ, who is now the uncontested God of this earth, many others will discuss the details of creation, and then one will summarize. What will the summary speaker say?

The speaker is introduced. He could be any of a number of philosophers of antiquity, perhaps, or Saint Augustine of the early Christian era. Probably Bishop Samuel Wilberforce, who debated with Huxley, would also be appropriate to give this talk. He begins by paying homage to the god of creation, "a god whose majesty and power is derived from man's inability to comprehend him and who is incomprehensible not so much because he transcends our experiences, but because descriptions of him are fabricated from complex internal contradictions. He is a god without body, parts, or passions, yet a god of love and vengeance, who fills the universe but can dwell in the minute volume of one's heart. He is a great being who consists of three separate beings that are nevertheless one being.

"He is totally powerful in such a way that anything man or god might conceive of, he can accomplish. His power is not a power of controlling causes to produce effects; rather, it is a power in which totally inadequate causes are sufficient to produce effects. His whims are obeyed by the very inanimate elements. Indeed, he created these elements from nothing and he created time itself as a context for their existence. When he created light, for example, he simply said: 'Let there be light,' and there was light. Saying it was enough. There was no need to do anything, nor indeed to expect any other being to do anything in response to his command. Thus the creation of light was a supreme act of magic. The god of creation was and is a god of magic."

But wait a minute! Could this talk possibly be given at our Millennial Symposium? Certainly not, if the most fundamental conclusions of science have any meaning whatsoever. All the experiences gained by application of the scientific method argue against the existence of magic in the universe and for the cause-and-effect relationship. Furthermore, the scriptures themselves clearly portray a creation that was not by magic—at least the scriptures brought forth in the restoration of the gospel portray such a nonmagical creation. Yet the creation story in Genesis almost allows one to believe in a God of magic, as does the story in Moses: "And I, God, said: Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and it was so; and I, God, said: Let there be dry land; and it was so." (Moses 2:9.)

But for the most part, the modern scriptures include statements of cause and effect—positive action—not magic:

". . . by mine Only Begotten I created these things. . . . and I caused darkness to come up upon the face of the deep. . . . I, God, ended my work. . . ." (Moses 2:1-2; 3:2.) It is in Abraham that the verbs of cause and effect are most striking:

". . . the Gods, organized and formed the heavens and the earth. . . . And . . . they divided the light, or caused it to be divided, from the darkness. . . . And the Gods ordered the expanse. . . . And the Gods said: Let us prepare the earth. . . . And the Gods organized the earth to bring forth grass. . . . And the Gods watched those things which they had ordered until they obeyed. . . . And the Gods prepared the waters. . . . And the Gods prepared the earth. . . . And the Gods took counsel among themselves. . . . And the Gods said: We will cause them to be fruitful and multiply. . . . we will give them life, and also we will give to them every green herb for meat. . . ." (Abraham 4:1, 4, 7, 11-12, 18, 21, 24, 26, 28, 30.)

". . . And thus were their decisions at the time that they counseled among themselves to form the heavens and the earth. And the Gods came down and formed these the generations of the heavens and of the earth . . ., According to all that which they had said. . . . And the Gods planted a garden, . . . And out of the ground made the Gods to grow every tree. . . . And the Gods caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam; and he slept, and they took one of his ribs, and they closed up the flesh in the stead thereof; And of the rib which the Gods had taken from man, formed they a woman, and brought her unto the man. . . . And out of the ground the Gods formed every beast. . . ." (Abraham 5:3-5, 8-9, 15-16, 20.)

Clearly "the gods" were not some collective immaterial god of magic. Creation was an act of power, a power derived from intelligence, which is God's glory. Surely this talk will not be given.

The speaker is J. B. S. Haldane, although it could just as well be Julian Huxley, George Gaylord Simpson, George Wald, numerous other scientists who work in the field of evolution, or, for that matter, thousands of modern biology teachers. "You see," Professor Haldane begins, "the scientific process was finally vindicated. True, for a long time there were many unsolved questions, but by the year 2000, every serious objection had been overcome. It was possible to outline all the essential mechanisms in the evolutionary process. After the laws of physics and chemistry were really mastered, it was only necessary to apply these laws to a total understanding of the nature of life. Then it became possible to formulate a second modern synthetic theory of evolution, one against which no objections whatsoever could be raised. Random molecular interactions, operating within known laws and combined with the powerful processes of natural selection, were quite sufficient to account for the generation of organic complexity within the available 4.5 billion year time span. Obviously, no supernatural influence, no God of creation, was needed to understand the universe. Life itself was synthesized in the laboratory and under suitably controlled conditions could be made to evolve in any direction environmental selection pressures might require. Thus the problem was solved. There may well be more advanced races in the universe, but man represents the supreme kind of creative intelligence. There is no God."

But wait a minute again! As we saw in the previous chapter, difficulties with the modern synthetic theory of evolution are not likely to be that easily set aside. Furthermore, our theological convictions tell us that this talk won't be given. If it could, there would clearly be no Millennial Symposium. If the universe contains no God of creation, then Christ will not return in the clouds of heaven to reveal all things. But order in the universe is the product of a God of creation. By him the worlds were and are created. How do we know? Not just because of the apparent order and design; our minds are not yet capable of excluding, or perhaps even considering, all the possible alternatives that might account for what we see around us. Far more important, God has revealed himself to us. This is how we know he exists. He has spoken to prophets and allowed some of them to see him. He has revealed his will and his work, and these seem in every way to be worthy of him. Most of all, he will speak by the Holy Ghost to each and every person who earnestly seeks after him and keeps his commandments.

This is a difficult scenario to develop, mostly because at this stage it could be any of several dozen scenarios, depending on who is talking. The approach may not be well known, but it will probably become better known in the years to come. This is because it seems to offer a logical way to reject the revealed God of the restoration but to take the scriptures at face value. It is a way to accept the miracles and the visions of scripture as events that really happened without accepting the theology, or even the existence of God as we know him. Most people who presently adhere to the flying saucer faiths do accept God and are fundamentally religious, but a few individuals take another approach, one that could become extremely important.

Before attempting a flying saucer scenario, let's establish the credibility of such an approach (to the extent possible) by summarizing the UFO story. [^3] Since 1947, thousands and perhaps millions of people have been seeing things in the skies and sometimes on the ground that they cannot understand and that could be interpreted as vehicles from some other world. Careful study of the reports makes it possible to identify many of these "unidentified flying objects" as some conventional phenomenon such as the planet Venus, some other planet or star, a special cloud formation, a weather balloon, ball lightning, a reflection from an airplane, a flock of birds, a satellite, a sun dog or other mirage, etc. After this preliminary screening, a small percentage (perhaps 2 to 8 percent) of the sightings remain unexplained. In actual numbers this still amounts to many tens of thousands of sightings.

Some of these residual sightings may be purely psychological phenomena, such as hallucinations or after-images, but few sightings really seem to fit this category, and psychology has been unable to provide an answer to the UFO enigma. A very few of the remaining sightings may be of secret machines being developed by the United States or some other government (a rocket shield used at the White Sands Proving Ground may be an example), but again, this hypothesis fails as an explanation for most unexplained sightings, since they go far back in history. For example, the Romans recorded that they saw flying shields in the skies. Some sightings are hoaxes. Either the hoaxer fools the witness by releasing some object into the sky (e.g., a plastic bag buoyed up by hot air from a candle), or the UFO story is simply a lie (sometimes supported by fraudulent photographs) told by the "witnesses." It is extremely difficult to believe that all good sightings are the result of hoax, although it is extremely difficult to prove conclusively that they are not.

After these explanations have been tried, we are still left with thousands of unexplained sightings. Typically, these have little in common with the explained ones. It's not just that we lack enough information for an explanation; rather, the sightings involve such detail, multiple witnesses, ample time for observation, close encounters, etc., that they simply cannot be explained as the planet Venus, hallucinations, secret weapons, or hoaxes. A large object (e.g., 50 feet in diameter) with windows, flashing lights, antennae, and a spinning rim may be seen by several witnesses at close range for minutes to an hour or more.

It is barely conceivable that some physical or psychological explanation for these good sightings will yet be found, but this seems extremely unlikely. Thus it is possible that we are being visited by vehicles with technological capabilities completely beyond any presently found on earth. These could be coming from other solar systems; they could even be forerunners of the ten tribes or the city of Enoch. Alternatively, they could be signs and wonders concocted by Satan to deceive the very elect!

One part of the UFO story involves the so-called contactees: individuals who claim to have been contacted by the flying saucers, taken for rides to other planets, and instructed in the wisdom of the universe. If there is one thing these numerous stories have in common, it is that they tell of a universe that is totally foreign to modern science. Before our astronauts went to the moon, for example, George Adamski told of his trip there. He described the other side of the moon as being covered with lush forests, gem-like lakes nestled in the rolling hills, and spic-and-span towns with citizens walking to church, since all the inhabitants of the universe except for the wicked people of the earth are deeply religious beings. If George Adamski or one of his ilk were to present the talk in the Millennial Symposium, he would tell of a universe governed by God and peopled with benevolent and superior beings of high intelligence whose lives are spent in worshiping God. He would tell how these peoples move through the galaxy in mighty spaceships, visiting inhabited planets in their smaller scout craft. But this scenario of creation would not be much different from many others set in a religious context.

If the symposium talk were given by Erich von Daniken or Brinsley LePoer Trench, [^4] however, it might really be an alterative approach to the other six scenarios. Since they are alive, I don't think I had better speak for them, but H. G. Wells wrote The War of the Worlds and might be sympathetic with this approach. Let's let him give this talk:

"Now you all know that both science and religion were right all along. It was all in the interpretation placed upon the events recorded in scripture. There has almost always been intelligent life in the universe. Its origins go back so many billions of years that they have been totally lost, even to the gods. These gods were the ones who recently arrived in the clouds of heaven in their space vehicles, accompanying Jesus Christ, who was taken away in such a vehicle three days after his crucifixion and restored to life with medical technologies developed during the billions of years that the gods had been in existence. Of course these same technologies bestow immortality upon those who possess the knowledge. The science that could actually reconstruct or resurrect men goes so far beyond even the most advanced earth knowledge that it must seem like magic, but let me assure you that it is not. Anything that is possible in the universe has now been achieved by these supercivilizations of incomprehensible age. They are able to ignite or extinguish a star! They can capture all the energy output from such a luminary and use it to drive their supercivilizations. They can exceed the speed of light in their travels and their communications, using principles that never were discovered on the earth before this return of the gods. They can even read and control thoughts from great distances.

"As to creation and the elements of religious history: one faction of the gods, those you have called ancient astronauts, thought they would like to learn something of their origins (long lost to history) by doing an experiment in planetary ecology and sociology. The relatively unorganized solar system was chosen. The planet earth had supported various forms of plants and animals for eons; earlier scientists among the gods had visited the planet at intervals and adjusted its biota by introductions, extinctions, controlled mutations, etc. Of course they scarcely left a trace, since an extremely small intervention was sufficient to cause far-reaching effects.

"Finally, two human beings who had been especially bred and raised on another planet were brought to the earth and placed in a specially prepared garden. Using appropriate communication technologies, they were instructed by the gods in various ways. They had been carefully protected from the elements of their own culture, and as a further precaution amnesia was induced when they were placed in the garden. They were given simple little tests to perform. For example, they were instructed not to partake of the fruit of a certain tree, but they were given other instructions that seemed to conflict with this. As punishment for partaking of this fruit, they were cast out of the garden. This and other stories are familiar to you.

"At intervals throughout ensuing history, the gods from space intervened in various ways. Sometimes these interventions were technologically relatively simple, as when the god in charge of the experiment visited Moses on the mountain top amidst an impressive display of light and sound. Other times the illusion took some real doing, as when the sun apparently stood still. This required a tremendous artificial light source and production of a huge cloud to eclipse the sun! The crossing of the Red Sea involved some of the more subtle technologies in which gravity is controlled. The antigravity beams were generated by equipment in the pillar of fire and cloud. When Elijah was taken into heaven in a chariot of fire, this was one of the more brilliantly illuminated small scout ships. The angels who often communicated with prophets and others were, of course, extraterrestrial beings taking part in the experiments: laboratory technicians, so to speak.

"So it was throughout history. The miracles of the New Testament were really illusions brought about by the intervention of the sky people—the gods. Even Joseph Smith in the Sacred Grove was fooled by the chief experimenter and his supervisor. The gods also communicated with people in other cultures such as India, China, and the Americas, sometimes giving them conflicting theologies. Some of the revealed stories that are now part of the Judeo-Christian scriptures were not really true; they were just part of the experiment. The creation narratives provide a good example. Yet it was not all really a farce. Much of what these brothers from space revealed to people on earth was true. The ethics of righteous living are the best conceivable formula for ultimate happiness. But deep down it was really all a kind of sham, because it was not really carried out for the benefit and progress of mankind."

It should be apparent that this kind of an argument, not yet really appreciated by most people, has all that might be essential to "deceive even the very elect." The astronaut gods have much in common with the God we worship, who has revealed himself in the scriptures. So if a person wants to believe in naturalism and to reject our concept of God, he can think of God merely as a supercivilized being who has achieved the ultimate in technology. What is the difference? The subtle but extremely important differences perhaps boil down to questions of motives (of the "experiment" versus "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man"), to the role of the Holy Ghost in testimony, to priesthood as authority with power, and to the nature of the relationship between God and the prophets (e.g., a God who could not lie).

There is a younger group of scientists who in their writings are establishing the basis for such an "ancient astronaut" approach. Given a few more decades there may well be large segments of the population who accept a scheme not too different from that outlined above.

Who but Charles Darwin could give this talk? Would he feel indisposed, as he did on most such occasions during his lifetime? If so, someone else would have to give the talk for him, and there are numerous possibilities, including many well-educated religious people, some who are members of our church. But Darwin is in fine speaking condition. (After all, he is now a resurrected being.) He begins by saying:

"Although it may appear a bit immodest, I have been specifically requested to initiate my remarks today by reading the last paragraph from the sixth and last edition of my book on the origin of species:

" 'It is interesting to contemplate a tangled bank, clothed with many plants of many kinds, with birds singing on the bushes, with various insects flitting about, and with worms crawling through the damp earth, and to reflect that these elaborately constructed forms, so different from each other, and dependent upon each other in so complex a manner, have all been produced by laws acting around us. . . . Thus, from the war of nature, from famine and death, the most exalted object which we are capable of conceiving, namely, the production of the higher animals, directly follows. There is grandeur in this view of life, with its several powers, having been originally breathed by the creator into a few forms or into one; and that, whilst this planet has gone cycling on according to the fixed law of gravity, from so simple a beginning endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful have been, and are being evolved.'

"Since I left the sphere of mortality, I have been instructed by members of the heavenly hosts as well as some of those who left mortality ahead of me, such as Carlos von Linneaus and Sir Isaac Newton. They have been explaining to me the details of my suggestion that I did not take very seriously myself, but included mostly in deference to my dear wife, Emma, whose faith in God was much deeper than my own. If I had but listened to her, I might have looked at things much differently, especially during those last, frustrating years of my life when I had lost all faith in God but felt convinced that my theory of natural selection must be valid in spite of the variety problem.

"It was really the physicists and the chemists who were pursuing the right spore toward an understanding of creation. The laws of creation were embodied in the elements all along. The simple laws of compound formation went infinitely farther than anyone had imagined during my time—or even during most of the twentieth century. Little did we realize the intricate engineering required of our Creator when he imbued these elements with these laws. The very complexity of a human brain was built into the atoms with their protons, neutrons, electrons, etc., so when the earth was established with a suitable mixture of these atoms and at the proper distance from the sun, the evolutionary development of man and all other living things was inevitable.

"Some of you may be surprised to learn that God did not intervene in creation after he had established the earth with its suitable environment. You may be especially surprised, because when you read the creation stories in Genesis (or in Moses, revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith while I was still a medical student; or in Abraham, revealed at about the time I was formulating my theory of natural selection), you may get the idea that God was intervening at many steps during creation. But you must realize that the scriptural accounts were never meant to have any scientific value. They were originally given to ancient Hebrews and to other ancient peoples steeped in the superstitions of their times, peoples who had no concept whatsoever of atoms and molecules, let alone natural law. Any attempt to explain the real mechanisms of creation to these people would only have confused them and made them even more superstitious.

"The Hebrews could accept the idea that an all-powerful God might command the elements and be obeyed, just as the people obeyed Moses when he spoke with authority. The Egyptians, with their complex sociological systems of priests and rulers, could understand the planning and organizing that play such a role in the account Abraham received while he was among them. But what could either of these peoples think if God told them about mutations in DNA and about gene frequency changes in populations in response to selection pressures? Why did later peoples with more sophistication try to take these creation stories so literally, when they were really only meant to say that God's intelligence was behind it all? Couldn't they see that the stories were given to ancient superstitious peoples?

"But enough of these philosophical introductory comments. What I and my colleagues intend to explain during the next several hours of this symposium will be the actual laws imbued by God into the elements, making an evolutionary creation possible. As you listen to our presentations, surely you will be overwhelmed with awe at the fantastic intelligence and ingenuity of your Creator. Let us begin by considering the primeval earth, with its atmosphere of hydrogen, methane, and ammonia, and the energy inputs via electrical discharges, radiation. . . ."

I personally doubt that this speech will be given. First, Mormon theology teaches that the "elements are eternal." (D&C 93:33.) Since specific elements are created in atomic reactions (e.g., in the stars), this must refer in a general way to the matter-energy stuff of which the universe consists. In any case the creation story says nothing of the creation of matter-energy and imbuing it with laws. The Gods said: " . . . we will take of these materials. . . ." (Abraham 3:24.) Second, the idea that God did not intervene during creation after he once got it started goes totally against the scriptural accounts. Yes, this argument can be circumvented by assuming that the scriptures are not to be taken literally but are only symbolic, and that they were meant not for us but only for ancient peoples. Yet as I see it, far more people are able to study the creation accounts now than could ever have done so in ancient times. There are far more people now than then, and the printing press brings the accounts into the hands of nearly everyone. Thus I firmly believe that the accounts were meant as much for us, with our scientific insights, as for anyone.

But then that's my opinion. You should realize that there are many brilliant and well-educated men in the Church who have deep and profound testimonies of the existence of God and the divinity of the restored church and who agree in principle with Darwin. They could be right. Until the facts are presented in the Millennial Symposium, we need open minds.

The next step beyond Darwin's suggestion is to assume that God was not only initially responsible for creation, but that he intervened at many, possibly even all, the steps along the way, even though these steps were basically the ones outlined by the evolutionists. Many great minds of the twentieth century have taken similar positions, although of course the scenarios of creation they have outlined in their writings vary considerably in detail. Well-known proponents of related or similar ideas are Teilhard de Chardin, LeCompt du Nuoy, and Edmund Sinnot. [^5] Several biologists in the Church are happy with this approach. [^6] Thus it is difficult to suggest who might be the speaker at the Millennial Symposium if this is the viewpoint that turns out to represent the truth. Whoever the speaker might be, parts of the talk might go like this:

" . . . so the scriptural accounts of creation were indeed mostly symbolic, not to be taken literally, and written for ancient peoples who had no concept of scientific principles. Nevertheless, even though these records omitted the details of creation, their message was quite clear: not only was God the initiator of creation; he was deeply involved with it all the time. As species evolved for several billion years, special genes were created whenever the need arose. Often this was done in ways that might appear perfectly natural to an outside observer; the cosmic ray that rearranged the atoms to produce a certain mutation appeared to be a random event in the functioning of the universe. Yet it was assuredly directed by God's intelligence. So when the scriptures state that man was created in the very image of God, the concept was meant to be taken most literally—although man's creation was clearly not a molding of clay and a magical conversion of this to human flesh. Rather, as the genes mutated and were selected, the ultimate goal—man in the image of God—was always clearly present in the Creator's mind. When this goal had been achieved, a divine spirit was placed in man. The story of Adam and Eve was meant to convey this sublime truth."

This is an appealing idea to many scientifically trained religious people, both in and out of the Church. I am often drawn to this idea and could accept it readily if I could just reconcile it better with some scriptures (e.g., ". . . man became a living soul, the first flesh upon the earth, the first man also. . ."—Moses 3:7). Perhaps someday I will be able to make this reconciliation, at which time it would be easier to be a scientist in the modern world. And I would feel comfortable in having these important ideas in common with many of my fellow biologists in the Church.

The speaker here could be any of many individuals both in and out of the Church. Any one of the creationists might be appropriate. Orson Pratt and Brigham H. Roberts discussed creation in terms similar to those in this section. [^7] Joseph Fielding Smith was also a strong proponent of this approach during most of his lifetime, although he was not in a position to evaluate the scientific aspects of the problem as well as Melvin Cook, for example, who has written extensively from the standpoint of a formidable scientific competence. Apostles John A. Widtsoe or Joseph F. Merrill might also be appropriate speakers, although they were perhaps somewhat less inclined to take the creation scriptures literally. This may also be true of Elder James E. Talmage, yet I believe he would be a highly appropriate speaker for the Millennial Symposium. Trained in geology and chemistry, he was considered one of the outstanding scientists of his time. He also had an unwavering faith in the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. He seemed to know without the faintest shadow of doubt that everything would work out in a perfectly reasonable, intellectually acceptable way if we would just be patient. With due credit to those mentioned above as well as to several others, [^8] let's let Elder Talmage occupy the podium:

"Although I failed to fully appreciate it during my lifetime, the scriptural key to an understanding of creation was Abraham's parenthetical statement, in which he remarks that the creation story 'was after the Lord's time, which was after the time of Kolob; for as yet the Gods had not appointed unto Adam his reckoning.' (Abraham 5:13.) The Lord had already explained his time scheme: '. . . Kolob was after the manner of the Lord, according to its times and seasons in the revolutions thereof; . . . one revolution was a day unto the Lord, after his manner of reckoning, it being one thousand years according to the time appointed unto that whereon thou standest. This is the reckoning of the Lord's time, according to the reckoning of Kolob.' (Abraham 3:4.) Thus the seven periods of creation each lasted a thousand years of earth time.

"This was a stumbling block to one such as I, who had been trained in geology, the science of the earth. As a student I had been thoroughly imbued with the concepts of uniformitarianism, which led inevitably to the conclusion that the earth was of ancient age. Yet the key to understanding had been present all along in a statement of the Prophet Joseph Smith: 'This earth was organized or formed out of other planets which were broken up and remodeled and made into one on which we live. The elements are eternal. . . .' [^9]

"Here was the answer to the problem! To reconcile the scriptural accounts of creation with what I had learned in the science of geology was not at all difficult. As a geologist, I had studied the remnants of earlier planets that were brought together to form this earth. Of course they were ancient! They had supported God's other creations for eons of time! Yet when they were assembled to create our planet, this new planet was at first 'empty and desolate,' as Abraham says. Yet in the sometimes twisted and distorted strata forming the tectonic plates that were transported through space by gravity control to form a mantle for our planet, there were deposits of coal, oil, natural gas, other fossils, gold, silver, and the many other resources that God's children would need during their brief 6,000-year period of telestial history, with its final centuries of technology. These resources will even suffice for the coming 1,000 years of terrestrial peace.

"As the Gods, with Jehovah in immediate command under the direction of Elohim, began with the empty and desolate earth, much preparation was required. The first thousand-year time was used in exploring and comprehending this new earth ('the Spirit of the Gods was brooding upon the face of the waters'—Abraham 4:2), igniting the sun ('Let there be light; and there was light'—Abraham 4:3), and establishing the rotation period of the planet ('and they divided the light, or caused it to be divided, from the darkness'—Abraham 4:4).

"The second thousand years was used to form a suitable atmosphere, obviously a difficult and detailed job ('the expanse, so that it divided the waters which were under the expanse from the waters which were above the expanse . . . called the expanse, Heaven'—Abraham 4:7-8). This was mostly chemical engineering.

"During the third thousand years, an ocean was formed, as plate tectonics began to function, and the earth came up dry—obviously a most challenging and difficult feat of geological engineering, only possible with the tools and energy sources available to the Gods. During this period the earth was also prepared to bring forth plants when the time would come; that is, erosion patterns were established on the face of the earth, with mountains, valleys, plains, and other geographical features, and weathering was initiated to begin the physical aspects of soil formation. During this time, plant spirits were created back near Kolob ('in heaven').

"During the fourth thousand years, the Gods set cosmic forces into motion to bring the great lights of the universe into their present relationship—the sun, moon, planets, and stars as they appear in the sky. The earth's atmosphere cleared so these heavenly bodies could have been seen from the surface. The Gods watched the progress of things to see that their plans would be carried out ('obeyed').

"During the fifth thousand years, most of the planetary engineering involved the oceans and other waters on the earth's surface. These needed to have the proper concentrations of minerals, acids and bases, dissolved gases, etc. Thus they were prepared to 'bring forth great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters were to bring forth abundantly after their kind.' (Abraham 4:21.) Preparations were also made for the 'winged fowl' that would eventually be placed upon the earth. Plans were made as to how these fish and fowl would 'be fruitful and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas or great waters.' (Abraham 4:22.) Much of this planning took place near Kolob, where the spirits of fish and fowl were being created.

"During the sixth thousand years, the Gods put the finishing touches on this planet, which they were readying for life. It was organized to support other animals, and at that time the Gods also took counsel among themselves to go down and form man, and to bestow upon him those familiar biological characteristics: his urges to reproduce and to subdue and replenish the earth, having dominion over all the plants and animals, and his appetites for herbs and fruits and the flesh of beasts. Man was to be given life itself! During this sixth period, as the Lord explained to Moses, the spirits that would become mankind were being created in God's abode; that is, they were being born to their heavenly parents, Elohim, the God whom they would learn to call Father in heaven.

"By the end of the sixth time, the earth was prepared and ready for life, ready for the Gods to carry out the plans they had formulated during the six thousand years. So the Gods were really busy during the seventh or last thousand years of creation; they ended their work as they had planned, and then they rested and sanctified the seventh time. First of all they formed a man. This had been carefully planned beforehand; the fantastically complex nucleotide sequences were brought from the celestial sphere near Kolob. These were cultured using materials obtained from the earth's elements, so that Adam was literally created from the dust of the ground. He was given the breath of life and also a spirit: the spirit of Michael the archangel who had taken part in creation. As Adam, Michael's spirit was clothed in a body that was not subject to the processes of senescence that lead to aging and eventual death. Given his full level of intelligence, he was able to take an active part in the planting of the earth and in populating it with animal life. This he did from his headquarters in the garden called Eden.

"To plant the garden and the rest of the earth, the Gods brought seeds and spores from heaven and from other planets and planted them into the soil that had been prepared beginning about four thousand years previously. Each variety was planted in its appropriate location. While the earth was being covered with vegetation, a process requiring only a relatively short time under the intensive cultural practices applied by the Gods, animals were brought from other planets and distributed on the earth's surface.

"During these last phases of creation, the Gods had nearly completed all the things that they had planned, so the earth was nearly ready to begin its function as a testing grounds for the spirit children of Elohim. Then Adam was placed under anesthesia, a rib was removed, and cells from this rib were treated so that they divided miotically to become haploid and then divided without spindle formation to become diploid. A cell with a nucleus having two X chromosomes was chosen, and it grew and developed in simulated uteral conditions to become Eve, who also then received her preexistent spirit. At that time the memories of Adam's preexistence as one of the Gods of creation, and even the role played after receiving his physical body, were blocked, as were Eve's recollections of her preexistent life.

"Let me digress from this chronological account of events to tell you something that has given me great joy since I have had the opportunity of hearing this story from the Gods themselves. I had begun to sense this when I read in the eighth chapter of Proverbs, 30th verse and verses preceding, that wisdom, which was present with God before and during all Creation, 'was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him.' The application of wisdom, that special righteous blend of knowledge and intelligence, was a source of transcending joy to the Gods during the divine engineering of creation. This essential and highly rewarding step in bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of God's children was and is God's work and his glory. All of you, being made in his image, can understand God's joy in creation; you know the personal joy of your own creations.

"Of course, the Gods did not start from scratch in their divine engineering. They did not create in a vacuum, building this earth and its biota from nothing and with no previous knowledge of temporal life. For you who have not yet passed through the veil, eternity is difficult to comprehend. You cannot imagine how the universe can continue without end—nor can you imagine how it could possibly have an end! It is even more difficult to imagine the beginnings. Knowing only the supreme God, it is difficult to imagine how he could have once been as man now is, paying homage to his supreme God. Yet such is the nature of eternity. As a God has always existed, so man has always existed somewhere in the universe as you exist now. And as there has always been man somewhere, so there have always been plants and animals: life in its numerous forms. [^10] Yet as a few calculations with the power rule may help you to realize, the possible forms of life are truly infinite, as are the ways in which they can be combined with each other on a planet's surface.

"So when the Gods created the earth and all thereon, they faced a truly stupendous challenge, one worthy of Elohim's intelligence and that of Jehovah and the others. Only now, in the time of this Millennial Symposium, has knowledge on the earth increased to the point where you can begin to comprehend this. Creation was not just the transplanting of a few plants and animals as a man might plant a garden (though the story almost makes it sound so simple!). Rather, several million species had to be combined on an earth that had been prepared in intricate detail. Many of these species were new creations: new combinations of genes interacting in new ways. Consider the organisms of the tropical rainforest, the desert, or the tundra to appreciate the challenge!

"Clearly the details of creation were so beyond man's comprehension during nearly all his 6,000-year sojourn on the earth that there was no possible way God could tell man more than was told in the scriptural accounts. But during the last few centuries, science directed by the Holy Ghost has discovered virtually all that was required for a proper understanding of creation. Geology, astronomy, biology—even genetics and studies of 'evolution' (gene frequency changes)—all these things were part of the picture. What was needed was a correct context and viewpoint. That is the purpose of this Millennial Symposium.

"To return to the story, while the Gods rested during the later part of that sabbath of creation, enjoying the fruits of their labors on their sanctified terrestrial sphere, Adam and Eve lived an idyllic existence in the garden, where joy was the sum total of existence. As you all know, such a condition could not last long, because all of God's spirit children were waiting for their opportunity to face the tests of mortality. Thus Satan, who had been Lucifer in the preexistent worlds, was allowed to confront Eve in the form of a serpent, saying to her. . . ."

Clearly this presentation could vary in a number of important ways from the approach that I have caused Elder Talmage to follow. Perhaps Adam and Eve were transported to the earth from some other planet, as suggested by several of the early brethren. In this case, both the "dust of the earth" and the story of the rib must be only symbolic. (Of mankind's relationship to the mother planet and of woman's dependence on man?) Perhaps the geology of the earth is not to be understood only in terms of its having been assembled from the parts of earlier planets. Perhaps the parts were only dust particles—certainly no fossils. If that is the case and the earth is really young after all, then cataclysms including the flood must account for most of the geologic record. Volcanic action, glaciation, sedimentation, mountain-building, and numerous other processes might have taken place cataclysmically during the six thousand years of creation before life was actually placed on the earth. Or such cataclysms, including the flood, might even account for the fossils, the strata, etc., these cataclysms having happened at various points on the earth's surface after Adam and Eve were cast out of the garden, and at all times up to the rather recent past. Some of the creationists take this approach.

Consider the hypothesis presented by Donald Patton, [^11] one of the creationists. Remember the thousands of hairy mammoths frozen in Siberia with tropical food in their stomachs (p. 226)? Patton suggests that at the time of the flood a comet, consisting mostly of ice at the near absolute zero temperature reached by objects in outer space, approached the earth so closely that gravitation from the earth was stronger than the gravitational forces holding the comet together. (That is, it came within a distance that can be calculated and that is called the Roche limit.) Thus the comet shattered into relatively small and extremely cold ice particles. These went into orbit around the earth, forming a ring not unlike those of Saturn. Protons from the sun (in the solar wind) became attached to these particles. When sufficiently charged, they moved along the earth's magnetic lines of force, falling suddenly onto the earth's magnetic poles—and plunging the temperature so rapidly that a single breath froze the lungs of the mammoths before some of them even had a chance to swallow.

As the comet circled the earth before shattering, its gravity raised fantastic tides so that "all the fountains of the great deep [were] broken up." (Genesis 7:11.) And these gravitational forces acted on the land as well as the waters, breaking the earth's crust and suddenly raising a chain of mountains most of the way around the globe (in the single landmass before the continents moved apart). Much ice fell into the hot layers of the upper atmosphere, further heating by friction, and melting to form the worldwide rain that raised the ark and lasted forty days and forty nights. "The windows of heaven were opened." This destroyed the "canopy" or inversion layer of the atmosphere, permanently changing the earth's climate. This canopy had until this time caused a nearly uniform, warm climate over all the earth and had prevented moist air from rising and condensing to form rain: " . . . the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth. . . ." (Genesis 2:5.) Rather, plants were watered by dew that formed "in the cool of the day." (Genesis 3:8.) Destruction of the canopy also allowed small amounts of ozone, formed from oxygen in the upper atmosphere by ultraviolet light from the sun, to reach the earth's surface, greatly shortening the lifespans of people born after the time of Noah. The movements of land and water in the flood redistributed vast quantities of sand, silt, clay, and other sediments, trapping living plants and animals, which became the fossils. It's a rather impressive subscenario, and one worthy of our careful thought.

Although I personally find the idea that the fossils were left over from earlier creations to be a better answer than cataclysms, there are times when I find some variation on Patton's theme to be most acceptable. Basically, however, I am probably most attracted to the scheme that I have had Elder Talmage present. It might even make palatable the idea of no death before the fall. But there are certainly problems. How could science have missed the story so completely—found no evidence, for example, that the earth was "empty and desolate" as recently as 13,000 years ago, and that organisms were not here until about 7,000 years ago? The bristlecone pines reliably dated to 7,400 years ago (p. 238) would be among the first organisms on earth during this phase of creation! Of course, science has not really looked for such evidence, but wouldn't it be so striking that it could not be missed? When I get to thinking this way, I am not entirely happy with this scenario; then I am more impressed with the previous one, in which science tended to be about right all along, and the scriptures were mostly symbolic. A few relatively minor mistakes in science could indeed make this last scenario an acceptable one, but I think we should be careful not to accept it too glibly.

For the life of me, I can't imagine who might present this talk at the Millennial Symposium or what they might say. I see no way in which both scientific teachings and literal interpretation of the scriptural accounts can be correct. Either the scriptures are highly symbolic, or science has made some rather important errors. The scenarios presented above solve the dilemma by amputating one or the other of its two horns.

Yet I will not be terribly surprised if a solution is ultimately found. Certainly this kind of thing has happened in the past: some new finding has completely upset our concepts of the universe. For example, near the end of the nineteenth century, physicists led by the great Lord W. T. Kelvin calculated with sophisticated principles of chemistry and the new thermodynamics that the sun could not be more than about 20 to 100 million years old. A chemical fire of that size could not last much longer. Yet when nuclear reactions were discovered, the entire picture changed. We had Einstein's equation to tell us that matter and energy were interconvertible. Suddenly a sun that could burn for 10 billion years was reasonable and easy to accept.

Will some similar discovery allow a total reconciliation of the scriptures with science? Probably we will have to wait for the Millennial Symposium to find out. In the meantime we can study science intensively, for it tells us many marvelous things about our universe and about how God acts. And we can strengthen our testimonies of God's existence and his speaking to prophets by studying his word, living his commandments, and enjoying the sublime blessings of feeling his divine Spirit inspire and communicate with our own spirits. We can fulfill the measure of our creation and find joy therein.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] It is certainly appropriate that an appreciation of creation should intensify our worship of the Creator. This is evident from many scriptures (in addition to the creation stories) that mention creation as one of the credentials of divine glory, usually of the Son. For example: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, who created the heavens and the earth. . . ." (D&C 14:9. See also D&C 45:1; 76:24; 93:10.) "By these things we know that there is a God in heaven, who is infinite and eternal, . . . the framer of heaven and earth, and all things which are in them; And that he created man, male and female, after his own image. . . ." (D&C 20:17-18.) "Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honour and power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created." (Revelation 4:11. See also D&C 29:31; 39:3; 45:1; 76:6-7; 88:20; 93:9-10; 95:7; 104:14-17; 117:6-7; 1 Nephi 17:36; 2 Nephi 1:10; 2:14; 11:7; Jacob 4:9; Ether 3:15; Psalm 148:5; Isaiah 40:26, 28; John 1:1-3, 14; Ephesians 3:9; Colossians 1:16; Hebrews 11:3; Revelation 10:6.)
[^2] Creation was carried out by the Son, the matter that is "more fine or The Earth is a planet orbiting the for the vast range of variety and EVOLUTION BY CHANCE-DIRECTED NATURAL SELECTION Duane E. Jeffrey, in "Seers, Savants, and Evolution: The Uncomfortable Interface," Dialogue 8 (3/4): 41-71, has shown with careful documentation that the Church has never taken an official position on the details of creation, the role of evolution, etc.
[^3] Creation had spiritual and temporal 3. The time element in creation. The structure and dynamics of 2. How do organisms really FLYING SAUCERS AND ANCIENT ASTRONAUTS I have written about this topic in (1) Truth by Reason and by Revelation (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1965), pp. 247-51; (2) The Utah UFO Display (Old Greenwich, Conn.: Davin Adair, 1974); (3) "The Scientist and the UFO," Bioscience 17 (1967): 15-24; and (4) "Recent Developments in the Scientific Study of UFO's," Bioscience 25 (1975): 505-12.
[^4] Creation involved much planning 4. The nature of the Fall. (What is Most indications are that most INITIAL CREATION, THEN NATURAL SELECTION Erich von Daniken, Chariots of the Gods (New York: Bantam Books, 1968), and Brinsley LePoer Trench, The Sky People (London: Neville Spearman, 1960).
[^5] The man (to be called Adam) was all things immortal before Sedimentary rocks contain fossils A DIRECTED 4.5-BILLION-YEAR EVOLUTION Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, The Phenomenon of Man, trans., Bernard Wall (New York: Harper, 1959); Le Compt du Nouy, Human Destiny (New York: New American Library, 1947); Edward W. Sinnott, The Biology of the Spirit (New York: Viking Press, 1955).
[^6] Numerous organisms that have LITERALLY TRUE SCRIPTURAL ACCOUNTS WITH A FEW SERIOUS ERRORS IN SCIENCE For example, Bertrand F. Harrison, "The Relatedness of Living Things," Instructor, July 1965, pp. 272-76.
[^7] Organisms exist in a great variety, BOTH THE SCRIPTURES AND SCIENCE WERE RIGHT ALL ALONG Orson Pratt, in Journal of Discourses, 21:197-206, and B. H. Roberts, The Gospel and Man's Relationship to Deity (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1959). Roberts' ideas were perhaps best summarized in an unpublished manuscript briefly reviewed in the following article: Truman G. Madsen, "The Meaning of Christ—The Truth, the Way, the Life: An Analysis of B. H. Roberts' Unpublished Masterwork," BYU Studies 15(3): 259-92 (see esp. pp. 271-72).
[^8] Organisms are extremely complex James E. Talmage, "The Earth and Man," first published in the Deseret News Church Section in 1931 and subsequently reprinted as a pamphlet and in Instructor, December 1965, pp. 474-77, and January 1966, pp. 9-11 See also Duane E. Jeffrey, "Seers, Savants, and Evolution: The Uncomfortable Interface," Dialogue 8 (3/4): 41-75. This article includes numerous references to Church writers.
[^9] Gene frequencies change in Alma P. Burton, Discourses of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 3rd ed., 1965), p. 207.
[^10] In this respect, consider the following statement of the Prophet Joseph Smith, made in relation to John's visions of beasts recorded in Revelation 4 and 5: "I suppose John saw beings there of a thousand forms, that have been saved from ten thousand times ten thousand earths like this,—strange beasts of which we have no conception: all might be seen in heaven. The grand secret was to show John what there was in heaven. John learned that God glorified Himself by saving all that His hands had made, whether beasts, fowls, fishes, or men; and He will glorify Himself with them. Says one, 'I cannot believe in the salvation of beasts.' Any man who would tell you that this could not be, would tell you that the revelations are not true. John heard the words of the beasts giving glory to God, and understood them. God who made the beasts could understand every language spoken by them. The four beasts were four of the most noble animals that had filled the measure of their creation, and had been saved from other worlds, because they were perfect: they were like angels in their sphere. We are not told where they came from, and I do not know, but they were seen and heard by John praising and glorifying God." (Joseph Fielding Smith, comp., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976], pp. 291-92.)
[^11] Donald Wesley Patton, The Biblical Flood and the Ice Epoch (Seattle: Pacific Meridian Publishing Co., 1966).
