Frank B. Salisbury, Creation ( 1976)

Epilogue

There is so much more to the creation than the controversies between creationists and evolutionists. They force us to live with the insecurities of being indecisive: the knowledge that we cannot know for certain how creation was really brought about. But let's not let contention and indecision be our final thoughts about creation. There is so much more!

Let's you and I each go alone to a mountaintop where we can properly meditate about creation and what it means to each of us. I think I'll go in summer to Mount Wolverine above Brighton in Big Cottonwood Canyon, east of Salt Lake City. The peak is flanked so that it is not easily seen from the valley floors, although it stands above all its neighbors. The rounded pile of boulders that forms its summit provides a view that is sublime. It is a fit place to approach God. Your trip is the important one, your personal experience, but I'll assume as I go with you in my mind's eye that it will be like my trip.

You start amid the willows that border Silver Lake. When you see the fish jump, you are aware of the complex ecosystem within that pond. Your legs work like pistons as they pull you up along the trail through the aspens, disdaining the ski lift that could save you some of this effort. You walk by Englemann spruce and alpine fir, noticing geranium, monkshood, columbine, arnica, nine-bark, huckleberry, and all the other wonderful plants that flourish here in the summer, slumbering during the winter under nine feet of snow. A lizard darts across a rock where the trail rounds a sunny ridge, and a chipmunk protests your coming with his high-pitched staccato. You're deep in thought, moving quietly, so when the buck with his ten-point antlers bounds through the brush off to your right, you are at first startled and then thrilled at the marvelous sight. The going gets easier along Twin Lakes as you work your way toward the head of the cirque. It is easy to imagine how this canyon was once filled with ice, a smaller glacier carving the rounded vales near the top and dumping its debris over the ledge of the hanging canyon onto the large glacier in the Brighton Valley below. The trees are getting few and far between as you work your way up the steep slope at the head of the canyon, but the meadow is green, moist, and filled with pungent-but-sweet alpine odors.

At last you have reached the pass, and the steepest part is behind you. You look over into Grizzly Gulch in Little Cottonwood Canyon, and your eyes follow the ridge to the south that will take you to the top of Mount Wolverine. The last mile will be a rocky, sometimes steep, sometimes nearly level climb. The going so far has taken its toll, and as your lungs work hard and rapidly to expel the carbon dioxide in exchange for the precious oxygen in the thin air, and your heart pounds to circulate the blood throughout your system, you become sharply aware of your physical body, that most priceless mortal possession created for you by God.

At last you have reached the summit. First you sit on a rock to catch your breath, and then you let your gaze follow the horizon from the Alta peaks to the southwest around to the mountains bordering the Salt Lake Valley, and finally to the distant Uintas shimmering in the haze far to the east. Clearly, it is a marvelous earth that God has made for you. You have felt the sun beat down on you during the late afternoon of the climb; now it is evening, and soon that fiery orb will settle into the red-orange, burnt sienna, and even the blue and purple of a desert sunset. Then, while you wait for the half-moon to rise after midnight, you see the stars with a brilliance never possible from a valley floor. The mighty Milky Way, stretching from pole to pole, and traversed by an occasional satellite, seems to follow the sun slowly to the west as the earth spins slowly to the east. The moment is now right. From the depths of your soul, you call mightily upon God to give you understanding and the spirit of truth, so you can comprehend and appreciate the meaning of creation.

Your thoughts drift back over what you have seen along the trail: not only the trail to the peak, but your trail through life, and even the pathway through the sixteen chapters of this book. There are things that you could observe with your senses, these senses sometimes being sharpened by the instruments of science and the careful observations of others. You have beheld a vast and mighty universe structured of shining stars with their orbiting planets, billions of these, though separated by incomprehensible distances, yet organized to form the great galaxies. As you stand on this granite peak thrust up by the convulsions of the North American plate contending with the Pacific abyss, you are aware that your planet has intricate structure that provides a spacious stage for you and your several billion brothers and sisters to work out your salvation in fear and trembling.

Having dwelt upon these mighty physical works of God, you then contemplate the great assemblage of organisms, the plants, that draw their sustenance from this old earth or the animals that scurry on its surface. You imagine them absorbing the water and the gases, basking in the sunshine, or absorbing its photons to make energy-rich carbohydrates, fats, and proteins. The realization of the variety in these organic creations is almost overwhelming, but when you think of the intricacy and complexity of design in each of these bits of living machinery, it is nearly too much, and you can only fall to your knees and praise that God who is the Author of it all.

On the screen of your mind's eye, you see the cells with their nuclei. Inside are the chromatin strands that will form chromosomes when the cell puts on its most spectacular performance by dividing to form two cells. You see on the strands of chromatin the molecules of DNA, the genes, each with its hundreds to thousands of nucleotide links, telling the stories of life by their sequences. As you think about it, you can almost comprehend how the different genes are interacting with each other and with the other components in the cell, directing, like an advanced computer, the activities that we recognize as life. The messenger-RNA molecules are forming on the active genes, moving out of the nucleus to the ribosomes in the cytoplasm, assembling the transfer-RNA molecules each with its own activated amino acid, and putting these amino acids together to form a protein enzyme molecule. Then, finally, as your mind rambles through this submicroscopic machinery of the cell, you see the enzymes cutting and stapling, releasing and tying, constructing all the other cellular parts. You see the mitochondria making the energy currency, the ATP molecules, that allowed your muscle cells to contract and carry you to the top of Mount Wolverine. Now you are teleported into the cytoplasm of a green leaf cell where you see the chloroplasts absorbing light energy, separating charges across membranes, and combining water and carbon dioxide molecules to make carbohydrate. Through much of the night, while the universe wheels overhead, you meditate on the products of God's creation. You know with Mormon that creation was indeed a miracle. (Mormon 9:16-17.) [^1]

Then, as light begins to appear far to the east over the Uinta Mountains, his Holy Spirit begins to bring to your recall vivid knowledge of things that you cannot know by the senses. You can almost imagine Elohim in his glory somewhere near that mighty star called Kolob. Though glorious beyond comprehension, he is your Father, and it is this feeling of relatedness that is most powerful. You think of his Only Begotten Son in the flesh, the Creator of this world, your Redeemer, the Author of your salvation. You think of the other Gods of creation: Michael, the Holy Spirit, perhaps others. The voices of Moses and Abraham thunder in your mind, and all the scriptures you have read give you insight into the nature of God and his activities. Your confidence waxes strong in his presence.

This presence is the overwhelming fact in the universe of his creations that have been filling your mind during most of the night. Now with this realization, you are especially aware of that plan of salvation by which you can someday return to his presence. Now his glory, especially as exhibited through his creations, burns so strongly in your bosom that you know beyond doubt that he lives, that your spirit is his offspring, and that his Son is your Redeemer! Your testimony is a shining light within you and the only really important thing in the universe.

So, you ask: "Who am I? Am I a child of the universe?" Of course, but you are much more: You are a child of God! "Where have I been?" you ask. You have been with him. You always existed, but on the sixth day he created your spirit in his presence. "But what am I doing now? What is the real me?" You have advanced to another of your Father's creations, but by doing so you have left his presence so that you can be tested. You are something very special. As his child, he knows you, every fiber, every chromosome within you. He loves you as only he can love. But he knows that he cannot by himself exalt you; you must do your part. The real you, deep within, wants more than anything else to achieve these things that your Father has made possible for you to achieve. "So where am I going?" If you prove valiant, you will return to his presence. You shall have glory added upon your head forever and ever. Your dominion shall be everlasting. Can you prove valiant? Are you awaiting Christ? Are you living for him? Can you imagine the glory of his millennial creation, when the lamb and the lion shall lie down together? Do you hunger and thirst for that thousand years of peace in his presence? Can you imagine the celestialized earth? Is your faith strong enough to appreciate such a world of glass and fire? Have you learned from studying the creation that the beauty of God's works lies in their information content, in the order, design, and purposes that characterize them above all else? Can you imagine that a world of glass and fire could be a creation with unsurpassed information content—order, design, and purpose—and thus a world of infinite beauty, incomprehensible to you now?

The sun is well above the horizon in the east. Your body is fatigued, but your soul has been renewed by its night of contemplations and communion with its Creator. Now it is time to wend your way down from the mountain, back into the world. But creation and the Creator have wrought their work upon you. You are going back into the world, but you won't be part of the world. You are resolved that your eye shall be single to God's glory, so that your whole body shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; because that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things. Therefore, you are resolved to sanctify yourself that your mind may become single to God, for "the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will." (D&C 88:67-68.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] It is certainly appropriate that an appreciation of creation should intensify our worship of the Creator. This is evident from many scriptures (in addition to the creation stories) that mention creation as one of the credentials of divine glory, usually of the Son. For example: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, who created the heavens and the earth. . . ." (D&C 14:9. See also D&C 45:1; 76:24; 93:10.) "By these things we know that there is a God in heaven, who is infinite and eternal, . . . the framer of heaven and earth, and all things which are in them; And that he created man, male and female, after his own image. . . ." (D&C 20:17-18.) "Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honour and power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created." (Revelation 4:11. See also D&C 29:31; 39:3; 45:1; 76:6-7; 88:20; 93:9-10; 95:7; 104:14-17; 117:6-7; 1 Nephi 17:36; 2 Nephi 1:10; 2:14; 11:7; Jacob 4:9; Ether 3:15; Psalm 148:5; Isaiah 40:26, 28; John 1:1-3, 14; Ephesians 3:9; Colossians 1:16; Hebrews 11:3; Revelation 10:6.)
