Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

PRESSING FORWARD, BEING STILL

We can press forward with hope in Christ, like green shoots growing upward toward the sun, only if we have within us the peace and stillness that are the rich seedbed of such growth and progress.

—Elouise Bell

A Steadfastness in Christ

CAROL LEE HAWKINS [^1]

Those of us from the Relief Society and Brigham Young University who have planned this conference during the past ten months have done so hoping to enrich your lives. By placing you in an atmosphere of inquiry, we want to aid your personal quest of pressing forward with a steadfastness in Christ and demonstrate several ways to help achieve the perfect brightness of hope to which Nephi referred in 2 Nephi 31:20:

"Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life."

Our goal was a conference that emphasized intellectual stimulation, cultural enrichment, and spiritual affirmation. In trying to achieve such purposes—and then appeal to a varied audience of women and men, young and old, married and single, parents and children—we recognized a need to offer a full spectrum of subjects using insights from a diversified slate of participants.

We realized the impossibility—even the undesirability—of a consensus emerging from the many ideas that would be presented in a two-day conference. While we have encouraged contrasting ideas, we have wanted you to realize that a unity of purpose actually binds all of us in the family of Christ. This kind of unity can transcend differences in perspective.

A year ago at this same conference, President Rex E. Lee said he would be surprised, even a bit disappointed, if his audience agreed with everything said during the conference. He encouraged us, "in the finest tradition of the gospel and the free and open society guaranteed by our Constitution, to approach each experience not only as an evaluator" of what we heard but also as a student with the opportunity "to learn from new ideas and new points of view." As he encouraged spiritual and intellectual investigation, he said he expected us to "come away . . . with new questions as well as new insights and answers." [^2]

We submit that new insights are best sought by linking both scholarship and faith with a bridge of tolerance and acceptance. If you do no more than reaffirm the beliefs you bring with you to this conference, we will have failed. Our intention is to open your minds and hearts beyond your own experience.

It has pleased me in past conferences to observe some of you learning not only from presenters but also from each other in the lunch halls and in sincere discussions between sessions. I have also been heartened by the caring acceptance I have seen among many of you. This conference should provide a place for an affectionate sisterhood that moves into the deepest realms of charity: charity of thought, understanding, sympathy, support, and empathy.

While I encourage you to "deal frankly with each other"—as counseled more than a century ago by Emma Smith—I also advise you to "knit your hearts as one" with "measures that promote union in the society." [^3]

We as sisters need each other desperately. As explained by BYU history professor Mary Stovall, "Each of us will experience over our lifetime physical pain, emotional anguish, heartache, grief, even betrayal in one form or another. If we attempt to deny the problem or to cover it with a facade of forced sweetness and light, we imperil both ourselves and each other—ourselves because we deny the healing that can result from the love, strength, and insights of true friends, and each other because people then assume we are our facades and feel even more isolated with their problems." [^4]

To these words we add the loving guidance of Lucy Mack Smith, who recommended that we "cherish one another, watch over one another, comfort one another and gain instruction, that we may all sit down in heaven together." [^5] At the same period, her son Joseph Smith reminded us that "by a union of feeling we obtain power with God." [^6]

Our hope is that we will leave the conference having been challenged to think deeply and redirect, where necessary, our outlooks. Much as the rays of the sun burst from a common center into many angles that suffuse their warmth, so should we, from our common center, feel free to use our diverse gifts and strengths to build the kingdom of God. May our common faith in Christ steady us all as we "press forward with a . . . brightness of hope."

---
Notas:
[^1] Sheldon Kelly, "The Rebirth of Sichan Siv," Reader's Digest, Feb. 1991, p. 138.
[^2] Alfred, Lord Tennyson, "Ulysses," in The Victorian Age: Prose, Poetry, and Drama, 2d ed., ed. John Wilson Bowyer and John Lee Brooks (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1954), p. 86.
[^3] Emily Dickinson, Final Harvest: Emily Dickinson's Poems, ed. by Thomas H. Johnson (Boston and Toronto: Little, Brown and Co., 1961), p. 34.
[^4] Elaine L. Jack was called as general president of the Relief Society in March 1990. She has also served in the Young Women general presidency and as a volunteer in civic organizations. She attended the University of Utah as an English major and is an avid reader. Reared in Canada, she and her husband, Joseph E. Jack, are the parents of four sons.
[^5] 5. "Record," 9 June 1842.
[^6] 6. Carol Lee Hawkins has served as chair of the women's conference at Brigham Young University and as a member of the Relief Society general board. She has lived in various parts of the world with her anthropologist husband, John P. Hawkins, and their four children. Sister Hawkins has assisted in research projects dealing with women and families in Guatemala, Mexico, and Germany.
