Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

A Perfect Brightness of Hope

ELAINE L. JACK [^1]

If I asked you what your favorite word was, what would you say? I once asked a number of friends to share with me their favorite word. What began as a point of conversation soon became a period of testimony, for my friends suggested such words as commitment, family, love.

I have thought since that time about what my own favorite word might be. Rejoice is a major contender, but I think hope wins. To me hope embodies happy feelings, anticipation of good things, the best of the gospel, and zest for life. The word hope is embedded in the instructions of Nephi to followers of Christ: "Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men." (2 Nephi 31:20.)

In this women's conference, we celebrate "a perfect brightness of hope." What a light, ebullient phrase that is. I have stood on a mountaintop at sunrise and thought of that phrase, it warms and moves me so. Hope—what it does to my soul when I feel it. Hope—what it does for the world when we act upon it.

Since my call to be general president of the Relief Society, I've met hundreds of you sisters, received sheaves of letters, and attended meetings in many places with and about Latter-day Saint women. I've learned a lot. One most important insight I have gained is that many of our sisters have lost hope. I see and hear evidences of that far too often—and it grieves me.

Some women have said:

"How many dates do I have to go on to find an eternal partner?"

"I am no longer needed. My family is gone. What good am I?"

"I don't get any support from my husband. I have to take care of everything related to Church and children myself."

These are only a few of the feelings of discouragement and frustration I have heard. They make me sad, because a life without hope is not life—not in the gospel sense. After Moroni had witnessed the destruction of his own family and all his friends and people, he wrote to the Lamanites: "And except ye have charity ye can in nowise be saved in the kingdom of God; neither can ye be saved in the kingdom of God if ye have not faith; neither can ye if ye have no hope. And if ye have no hope ye must needs be in despair." (Moroni 10:21-22.)

For me, to live in despair is not to live. I cannot imagine life without hope. Perhaps that is because I learned early that hope is a personal quality essential for righteous living. In fact, hope is one of the personality traits of godlike men and women. Paul explained that Church members who wish to live "acceptable unto God" are in part characterized as those "not slothful in business; fervent in spirit; serving the Lord; rejoicing in hope; patient in tribulation; continuing instant in prayer." (Romans 12:1, 11-12.)

Recently I read an article about a Cambodian family who endured unimaginable suffering at the hands of the Khmer Rouge. At the end of a particularly arduous day, the mother gathered the family together and taught, "Remember, children, . . . hate does not end with more hate but with love. And from that we take hope. Without love and hope, our lives will be empty." [^2] What a wise mother!

My own dear mother taught me a lot about love and hope. She was ill for many years, yet she was always a bright, hopeful person. She taught me that in any circumstance those who are "acceptable unto God" can be recognized because their belief is evident in their attitudes and actions. Mother knew that hope helps us rebound.

To me it is very important that "rejoicing in hope" is on the list of godlike characteristics, especially because we benefit so much from the comfort and happy expectation of hope in tumultuous times. (Romans 12:12.)

Karen's children are close in age. Since her son Brad, now six, nearly drowned two years ago, he has required much extra care. Her father-in-law died about the time her own mother entered a nursing home. Shortly after her mother died, her father remarried. And during all of this, her husband has been starting up his own business.

As Karen knows, as all of you know, daily living can be draining. The demands on women seem to multiply. Personal lives can be in such chaos. Yet, hope stands as a beacon—warm, steady, and inviting. It is reassuring to me that this quality I enjoy so much is also requisite for those who would follow the light and life of the Savior of the world.

Hope Matters

My dear sisters, hope matters. I repeat, your hope matters. May I suggest three reasons why.

First: Hope, charity, and faith are very closely related. Paul concluded his treatise on charity with the words: "And now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three." (1 Corinthians 13:13.) An early revelation received by Joseph Smith states, "And faith, hope, charity and love, with an eye single to the glory of God, qualify him [or her] for the work." (D&C 4:5.) Moroni explained, "Wherefore, there must needs be faith; and if there must be faith there must also be hope; and if there must be hope there must also be charity." (Moroni 10:20.) Alma exhorted, "And see that ye have faith, hope, and charity, and then ye will always abound in good works." (Alma 7:24.)

These three good friends—faith, hope, and charity—become stronger through their association with each other. Perhaps what is most important about them is that they only exist together. The charitable woman is also the hopeful, faithful woman. Hence, when a woman loses hope, she will also lose faith and charity. I have known women who have let go of hope and yet claimed to maintain faith. But it appears from the interlacing of these qualities that if we lack one, we shall soon lack the others. Sisters, let us cling to our faith, our hope, our charity, remembering that upon this trio hangs our well-being, now and forever.

Second: Without hope, we despair. Moroni wrote that "if ye have no hope ye must needs be in despair." He then added, "and despair cometh because of iniquity." (Moroni 10:22.) It seems clear, then, that when hope leaves us, despair ensues. And to me despair is no better an alternative than iniquity. The woman living close to God rebounds from despair; in righteousness lies resilience.

Several years ago I watched a woman experience a brief, unhappy marriage. At age thirty-two, after many years of longing for marriage and children, she finally did marry in the temple. She discovered on her honeymoon that this man for whom she had faithfully prepared all her life had not faithfully prepared for her. He wanted the appearance of marriage. But he had no intention of living its realities. What he had said before marriage was not what he intended to do after marriage. On their honeymoon he divulged that he had chosen her only because she seemed strong and self-sufficient—able to provide for herself financially and emotionally.

She was devastated. She despaired. She wondered if her whole heart had been crushed irreparably, along with her girlhood dreams. The world was black, and everything went poorly for many months.

But a remarkable thing happened. She was still very much alive; she just didn't know it for a time. During this period of intense difficulty, I watched the law of hope take its course. My friend desired righteousness all the while she struggled with choices, questions, and personal pain. Her hopeful desire, often unexpressed during those many months, began to work in her. In her fertile soul, dormant seeds of hope, which she had forgotten she'd planted, began to sprout. Then they began to grow. She felt them and, as she was able, nurtured those volunteer tendrils.

It wasn't easy, but hope, faith, and charity are powerful. Once growing, they are not easily dissuaded—if the soil is right. Those tendrils strengthened. Ever so gradually, her anger, disappointment, pain, and even despair were replaced by fresh, fragrant plants of compassion, understanding, and patience, of faith, hope, and charity. My friend lived the biblical teaching that "[she] that ploweth should plow in hope; and that [she] that thresheth in hope should be partaker of [her] hope." (1 Corinthians 9:10.)

It is undeniable that life can bring each of us heartache, devastation, and despair. It is undeniable that the gospel brings us hope, which, when well planted, grows into a magnificent garden.

In 1991 I visited Ricks College for Women's Week. There I met Aja, a beautiful, self-assured woman who was receiving the Woman of the Year Award. I was impressed by her maturity and positive comments about her own future. When I commented on this to one of the leaders, she explained that Aja had won those feelings out of a real struggle. Aja, her twin sister, and their mother had been abandoned by her father many years earlier. Aja's mother had raised the sisters close to each other and to the Church. Tragically, her mother died when Aja was just sixteen years old. The twins were not only orphaned but also destitute. They lived with friends, worked hard, scrimped, and now, four years later, Aja stood on the brink of graduation and marriage. Hers is a story about the resilience of hope well planted and well cultivated.

Third: Hope is an anchor to the soul. Hebrews 6:18-19 says that "we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us: which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast."

Little in life is sure. I became particularly conscious of this fact during the Mideast crisis, for our son Dave was serving in Saudi Arabia. During the most intense part of the conflict, including the bombing raids and the entire ground war, I was traveling in the Pacific. I was very anxious for news but found it was hard to get. When I could, I studied newspapers while I was waiting for airplanes, but television and radio news was almost inaccessible. I learned as I stood up to speak in Brisbane, Australia, that the ground war had started. I learned of the cease-fire as I left for a meeting in Papeete, Tahiti.

Throughout those weeks when I had no way of knowing where or how Dave was, I prayed a lot, and I prayed hard. Dave was always on my mind, and I longed for his well-being and for that of his wife and baby, who were waiting for him in the States. I wondered many times each day if he were all right. It was a frightening few weeks for me.

What anchored me during that time was my hope. I have great hopes for Dave and great faith in him. I also know how sensible and spiritual his wife is. I felt good about them and their spiritual preparation for such a time. Most of all, I felt good about our mutual faith in the gospel. I knew that each member of our family—whether in Salt Lake, or Boston, or Walnut Creek, or Riyahd, or Brisbane—would pray, would expect the best, would prepare for the worst, and would live each day with hope.

Hope is a steadying influence. As an anchor it can keep us from drifting aimlessly, or getting caught in whirlpools, or running into sandbars. Hope, the anchor, is essential in this world so full of tidal waves. Sometimes those waves slap us from behind. Sometimes we see them coming but cannot stop them or get out of the way. In all cases, hope ties us to safety. The waves come and go in their fury or playfulness, but hope is always there, if we will but use this sure anchor.

How to Obtain Hope

How can we obtain hope? In all our circumstances, we can benefit from answering this question.

First and foremost, we look to Christ with joyous expectation. As Paul began his first epistle to Timothy, he identifed himself in this wonderful way, "Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the commandment of God our Saviour, and Lord Jesus Christ, which is our hope." (1 Timothy 1:1.) Truly, the Lord Jesus Christ is our hope. And what type of hope should we have? "A lively hope." (1 Peter 1:3.)

I was truly complimented when an Australian stake Relief Society president said, "Sister Jack, you're real." I couldn't have been more pleased, especially since this wonderful sister had wanted things to be so perfect for my visit that she had bought new hose because she was concerned I'd disapprove of a snagged pair.

I am real—and realistic. I know faith and hope are not a placebo meant to placate the questions and desires of our hearts. They are realities. My hope and my joy in life are based upon the atonement of our Savior and the restoration of his gospel in these days. I base my life on it; therefore, I have reason for my hope.

My sisters and my friends, our Savior lives, and he loves us. This gospel is one of light and joy, warmth and belonging. Just consider these confirming evidences: The angel declared at our Savior's birth, "I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people." (Luke 2:10.) The prophets describe our Lord as he who "inviteth . . . all to come unto him and partake of his goodness; and he denieth none that come unto him, black and white, bond and free, male and female; and he remembereth the heathen; and all are alike unto God." (2 Nephi 26:33.) The Savior introduced himself as "Jesus Christ . . . the light and life of the world." (3 Nephi 11:10-11.)

Dear sisters, our joy, our hope, begins and ends in our Savior. A letter I received from Susan, a sister who had been struggling with the loneliness of single parenting, illustrates this hope in Christ:

"Not long ago I was feeling sorry for myself. . . . I've been struggling . . . to pay bills. Upon retiring to bed one night feeling the worse for the daily battle . . . , I lay in my bed moaning to myself. . . . It was then that I looked up to the picture I have of the Savior on my wall, and I felt his eyes come to life. They seemed to look into my very soul, and at the same time these words came to my mind: 'I am here. I've always been by your side, taking the pain you feel as well. I drank the bitter cup for you and I gladly did so. I love you. I always will, and I'll always be here with you every step of the way.'

"As tears streamed down my face, I felt like the Savior's arms had circled my body and were hugging me. I felt so secure, so loved, and wanted—a feeling I can still feel as I write this on paper. The feeling of loneliness left me immediately."

As I read this letter, I thought, "How blessed Susan is to have a personal knowledge of the Savior." What could be more joyous?

Don't defer hope. Proverbs 13:12 states, "Hope deferred maketh the heart sick." Physically, emotionally, and spiritually, hope deferred sickens our hearts. To prevent illness, grab on to, hold on to your hope.

I ask you, as Joseph Smith asked the Church in 1842, the year Relief Society was founded: "And again, what do we hear? Glad tidings from Cumorah! Moroni, an angel from heaven, declaring the fulfillment of the prophets . . . giving us consolation by holding forth that which is to come, confirming our hope!" (D&C 128:20-21.)

Sisters, daily confirm your hope. Some of you feel troubled, I know. Perhaps the source of your concern is your perception of how the Church is run. Others of you may be troubled to your core by the injustices of the world. You may wonder why so many undeserving people live in abundance while so many innocents suffer. Some of you are the innocents. You bear emotional scars because of the abuse of others. Still others of you carry a personal problem that weighs on your soul even as you sleep. May I gently speak to your hearts—don't defer hope even when you feel most hopeless. Confirm your hope every way you can.

My friend who found herself so unhappily married told me that it was the smallest things that kept her going during those first weeks when all her world looked black. A bunch of crocus burst through the snow and then announced their victory with purple blooms. The robins whistled from their nest in her front-yard tree. The sun broke over the horizon every morning. People in her office lived their quiet routines. A person spoke kindly to her at the grocery store. Her little niece hugged her around the legs. Each small, loving, daily detail confirmed her hope. They showed that life still was good. She didn't feel it, but she did not defer her hope. She focused instead on every confirmation that God lives. And if God lives, life could still be sweet, and she could feel hope again.

What to Hope For

What should we hope for? Sisters, let us hope for a better world. To hope for a better world means that we invest in it now. Our investment of hope is measured in the sum of small things.

My neighbor Amy planted a spring garden every year of her adult life. Her own failing health did not dampen her need to plant the flowers she knew she might not live to see.

Every mother invests daily. One mother I know pinned a note on her two-year-old each morning. It said, "Don't give up. I will turn 3." That's hope!

I admire people who read to the blind or take a neighbor to the store, who organize a neighborhood crime watch or local recycling program or tree planting in the park. I admire people who hug each family member daily or remember their aunts' birthdays, those who take neighbors' children with them on trips, and those who can be silly with their friends. I know a widow confined to a wheelchair who crochets dishcloths for all her Relief Society sisters. She takes great personal interest in their homes, children, and all their concerns. She asks her visiting teachers to deliver her gifts at church to the sisters celebrating their birthdays. On each cloth is a note kindly but definitely reminding the sister that cleanliness is next to godliness. Sisters, all our efforts, in the home, the workplace, and the community are investments in a better, kinder world. The prophet Ether taught, "Whoso believeth in God might with surety hope for a better world, yea, even a place at the right hand of God, which hope cometh of faith, maketh an anchor to the souls of [women and] men, which would make them sure and steadfast, always abounding in good works, being led to glorify God." (Ether 12:4.)

Just think of all the small ways you live with hope for your world. Each day that you take a vitamin with iron, you are planning for the future. Every time you spring clean, you probably say, "Whew, I'm glad that's over. I won't have to do it for a year." You bottle fruit so there will be cherry pie next winter. You pore over the atlas, studying the roads you'll drive on your next family vacation. Whether you recognize it or not, your days are full of a hundred acts born from your personal perfect brightness of hope.

Alfred, Lord Tennyson's poem "Ulysses" helps me understand hopeful investments in the world. You remember the story of Ulysses, the Greek hero of Homer's Odyssey. Through Tennyson's words we see Ulysses as an old man, still looking out to sea, still seeking the adventures of his youth. He knows full well his age, his position, his responsibilities, his experience. And having recounted them, he then says:

How dull it is to pause, to make an end, To rust unburnished, not to shine in use! . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Come, my friends. 'Tis not too late to seek a newer world. Push off, and sitting well in order smite The sounding furrows. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . We are not now that strength which in old days Moved earth and heaven, that which we are, we are— One equal temper of heroic hearts, Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield. [^3]

I enjoy thinking about Tennyson's ideas. I like the phrase, "How dull it is to pause . . . to rust unburnished." I met a spry eighty-one-year-old woman in Perth, Australia, who has been deaf since she was two. We communicated through written notes and her own quick, descriptive hand movements. When I asked her what she loved to do most, she wrote in big letters, "DRIVE A CAR." Then she added that she didn't like to drive in Perth because it was too dull. She missed driving in Sydney where the traffic is heavy, the lanes are narrow, and the motorists drive like Evel Knievel. This woman was definitely not rusting away.

I also love these earlier lines from Tennyson's poem:

I am a part of all that I have met; Yet all experience is an arch wherethrough Gleams that untraveled world whose margin fades Forever and forever when I move.

More than ever, I find my favorite archway is the one on my own front door. My home is the source of my fondest dreams and best hopes—also some of my finest adventures. What better archway to look through than the one through which I'll find the people I love best in the world?

What's glorious about my stage in life is realizing how meaningful my investment in relationships has become. I am grateful for my relationship with the Lord. I'm glad for every moment I've spent in prayer, in study, in service. I'm grateful for every friend I've made, for my husband, for every child I've had, for every person with whom I've shared a gospel experience. And I am happy to know that those relationships can get even better.

Nothing has ever been as satisfying to me as my relationships. Note that I did not say easy. I said satisfying. It's not perfect out there, I know. And it's not perfect through the archway into my home. Still, it's mostly good, and my relationships always give me hope.

The thirteenth Article of Faith reminds us, "We hope all things." I asked some of my friends and family what they hope for. Here's a short list:

My sister says, "I hope my family continues to love each other and to be good friends."

My elderly neighbor says, "I hope I'll endure independent to the end."

My son Eric says, "I hope my CPA practice will grow."

I say, "I hope the sisters will understand the joys of the gospel."

My single friend says, "I hope I'll get married and have a family of my own."

My physician husband says, "I hope my patients recover quickly, without complications."

My teenage neighbor says, "I hope our baseball team takes state."

My niece says, "I hope my children grow up remembering a happy home in which they felt secure."

We do hope all things, don't we? How much happier our lives are when we daily add the conscious optimism of hope. Emily Dickinson wrote:

"Hope" is the thing with feathers— That perches in the soul— And sings the tune without the words— And never stops—at all— [^4]

I think of hope as a basket full of glorious spring flowers, each blossom representing one part of what my family, friends, and I hope for. Together these hopes are a radiant, abundant, fragrant bouquet. Whatever our metaphor for it, hope remains an effervescent, expectant, happy part of life. My dear friends, my dear sisters, hope matters. May we "press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope." (2 Nephi 31:20.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Annie Dillard, Pilgrim at Tinker Creek (New York: Harper Magazine Press, 1974), p. 265.
[^2] Samuel Johnson, "On the Spring," Rambler, no. 5, rpt. in Samuel Johnson: Rasselas, Poems, and Selected Prose, 3d ed., ed. Bertrand H. Bronson (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1958), p. 74.
[^3] T. S. Eliot, "The Hollow Men," The Complete Poems and Plays (New York: Harcourt, Brace and Co., 1952), p. 56.
[^4] John Keats, "Ode on a Grecian Urn," rpt. in The Norton Anthology of Poetry, ed. Arthur M. Eastman (New York: W. W. Norton and Co., 1970), p. 698.
