Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

Peace, Be Still

ELOUISE BELL [^1]

I have a colleague who is convinced that we teach the things we ourselves most need to know. I have always agreed with this idea in general, but I have come to understand how it applies to me in particular only recently.

Months ago, Carol Lee Hawkins invited me to be part of the BYU-Relief Society women's conference. She invited me on a Monday, and on Tuesday she asked me for a title for my speech. (That's how it's done these days, you know. People invite you to speak at an event six months from now, and with the optimism of the long view, you say yes. After all, you have six months to prepare. But twenty-four hours later, they ask you for a title for the speech. And writers, unlike pregnant mothers, don't have sonic scanners to tell them in advance the general anatomy of the unborn baby!) In this case, however, when Carol Lee asked me for a title, I knew the general anatomy: "Peace, Be Still." In my mind at that time, I had the idea that I would preach "Be Still" by way of balance for the admonition to "Press Forward" that was stated in the conference theme: "Press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope." (2 Nephi 31:20.) Something in me very much wanted to say to all of you, "Don't press." I did not want one woman to leave this conference anxious about how to fit more chores into her daily planner; I did not want to be part of adding the least shred of guilt to anyone's psyche; I did not want to have our theme, "Press Forward," result in pressing that is painful: depressing, repressing, suppressing.

After a few conversations with Carol Lee, however, I realized that she was as concerned as I not to say, "You're not doing enough; work harder." I felt much better after these conversations, and I began to think more deeply about the balance between pressing forward and being still. I came to believe that pressing forward and being still are not contradictory or mutually exclusive, either-or actions that needed to be "balanced," as I had initially thought, but different ends of a single continuum, different positions on a single line, different moments in one life.

Then quite recently, I found myself viewing these two phrases in yet another way, one which I'd like to explain in some detail. To begin with, you need to know that this past year has been a full one for me, a very fulfilling one, an uncommonly busy one. And I have loved it. I feel gratitude to many people for the rewards of this past year. But along with those rewards, I have had a planner full of commitments and have given far too many talks. A few weeks ago, after giving a speech that, frankly, hadn't been very good, I began to understand that, for the moment at least, I was an empty bucket.

That's when the title of my speech, selected months ago in response to Carol Lee's deadline, came to my rescue. More than anything I might need to tell you, "peace be still" is what I needed to tell myself. Peace and stillness were what I needed to fill my bucket. At that point, I moved to a more complete understanding of the relationship between pressing forward and being still. They are not contraries or opposites; but neither are they truly different positions on the same continuum. Peace and stillness constitute the fuel that drives our forward motion. Peace and stillness make possible that progress. To change the metaphor, we can press forward with hope in Christ, like green shoots growing upward toward the sun, only if we have within us the peace and stillness that are the rich seedbed of such growth and progress.

Peace and stillness helped me fill my bucket, as I will explain, but maybe your problem right now isn't burnout or the empty bucket so much as a confusion about the next step you are to take. Many aspects of women's lives are changing in this generation, and although the great truths and values remain constant, many of us are honestly, sincerely puzzled about how to make the practical choices that will implement those truths. Very little is simple for today's woman, whether she be twenty or forty or sixty or eighty. (I think when you hit one hundred, maybe it gets simple again!) Simplistic axioms and glib catch-phrases don't solve the dilemmas we face. The solutions come, I believe, in our moments of stillness and silent searching. Only after we have sought in silence and in trust can we press forward with hope and in confidence that our particular path, however different from another's, is the appropriate path for us, for now.

In Pilgrim at Tinker Creek, the wise and reverent Annie Dillard writes of a transition time such as many of us are facing. She is actually writing about the death of the Self, or what we might call the death of ego, and she says: "It is waiting like a hollow bell with stilled tongue. The waiting itself is the thing." [^2] That is what I want to say: sometimes being still itself is the thing. Being the hollow bell is the experience we need.

Being the hollow bell, being still and waiting, is hard—hard for many women, and especially hard for me. There are many reasons: there's too much to do; I have too many responsibilities; there's not enough time; there's no convenient place to enjoy solitude; I can't sit down and do nothing while the list of today's duties nags at my conscience. You can add to the list, I know. There are cultural reasons for our avoidance of stillness and solitude as well: our western culture (as contrasted with the culture of the Far East) doesn't value reflection and meditation; we have long confused stillness with idleness, and we view idleness as of the devil; our culture particularly discourages women from idleness, reflection, and so forth. All these assessments are true, but there is a deeper reason why I, for one, have a problem with stillness. I think many share it. The great English dictionary-maker, writer, and speaker Samuel Johnson shared my weakness. "It may be laid down," he said, "that when a man cannot bear his own company there is something wrong. He must fly from himself, either because he feels a tediousness in life from . . . an empty mind, . . . or he must be afraid of the intrusion of some unpleasing ideas, and, perhaps, is struggling to escape from the remembrance of a loss, the fear of a calamity, or some other thought of greater horror." [^3]

There are a number of fancy names for the feeling Johnson was talking about. It's the same feeling that makes some people so uncomfortable when they are alone, even in their own house or car, that they cannot be still with themselves, but must snap on the television, radio, or stereo. The silence is too oppressive. That oppression is sometimes called the sense of the "existential void," a feeling of emptiness, of loneliness, of being unanchored. I think that is the real reason so many of us simply cannot, or more accurately, will not spend significant amounts of time alone in contemplation. We are frankly uneasy, perhaps even afraid. We may not admit as much to ourselves; we may truly believe it is time or space or other commitments or other people that keep us from being still and cultivating inward peace. But whenever I get too quick with excuses like that, I remind myself that the Savior, despite all the responsibilities he had and all the people who must have wanted him to come here, come there, do this, heal that, explain the other—despite all that and the short period of time he knew he had for his mortal ministry, he still took time regularly to go apart—into the desert, into the mountains, out on the sea—to be alone and silent. Sometimes he took as much as forty days for this activity. Surely he must have seen it as a priority. No, I think my external excuses are not the real reasons I avoid that kind of contemplation.

In a small hotel room in Florence, Italy, one spring, I tried to find out why I felt that way—why, for instance, in that most glorious of all art centers in the world, I was uncomfortable being in my room alone, reading or studying, or why I was ill at ease visiting the art museums alone. I asked for enlightenment, and I received it. By myself, I was told, I felt empty, hollow, void. I was afraid I'd discover I was a permanently empty bucket. I believe it is that way with many of us. The fear is that in the stillness we will discover our own hollowness. T.S. Eliot, the Nobel Prize-winning poet, gave us that label early in this century, when he wrote, "We are the hollow men . . .headpiece filled with straw." [^4] Joseph Conrad, the great Polish-born novelist, created in Heart of Darkness a character neatly dressed in white, but inwardly hollow. He seemed made of papier-mache, as if one could poke a finger right through him and find just sawdust and a little dirt. These two writers were expressing the way many twentieth-century people feel because of the great uprooting of our era. It's important to remember that even though Latter-day Saints have a different philosophy from the prevailing one of our century, we still live and breathe in the same cultural atmosphere, and we absorb many of the same attitudes and anxieties, though we may not be aware of it. There is only one atmosphere, and we all breathe it. And a good many of us have absorbed, one way or another, that feeling of uneasiness and fear of our own emptiness.

But Annie Dillard explains what really happens, if we let it: in stillness we discover our fullness, in her words, our joining with "the great rock heart of the earth." Latter-day Saints would say that we discover our connection to Deity. Psalm 46:10 explains it this way: "Be still, and know that I am God." When we still our fears and wait quietly before him, we know that he is God and that we are eternally connected to him—not abandoned, isolated, empty, disconnected, or at sea, but filled with his Spirit and his love. As the lyrics from the musical Into the Woods affirm, "No One Is Alone."

So when I felt empty, the title of my yet unwritten talk gave me a direction to go. I needed to be at peace, to still myself. Even though that stillness and solitude could make me uneasy, that was how I would be replenished. Thus, on a beautiful Sabbath day, with the sky very blue and filled to capacity with great white clouds, and the wind vital and crisp to remind me that the Spirit listeth where it will, I went out into Utah Valley to still myself. I went to Nature, not to find out from Nature what I needed to say to you—I am not a pantheist, and I don't believe Nature per se gives revelations—but to see if Nature could remind me, could help me develop from within the ideas that I believe were already there but not yet visible.

Let me explain that last thought. I believe that most of what we need to know is already within us. When N. Eldon Tanner was made president of the West European Mission in the early l960s, he visited missionaries in France, and I was among those fortunate young people. I remember vividly his telling us that we were not really taking to our investigators new and undreamed-of doctrine. "No," he said. "Instead, think of it this way: all these people were exposed to the gospel long before you or they came to this earth. It's all there in their minds and spirits, like undeveloped photographic film. Your job is just to develop the film."

I went out to Nature on that beautiful Sunday to see if I could develop some sharp pictures. I gassed up the van, took the calmest and most companionable of my three dogs, and set out.

First I drove into the canyon east of Provo to an overlook from which I could see the whole valley, the lake in the distance, the surrounding mountains. I parked the van, slid and shuffled my way some yards down the steep hillside, tethered Mickey to a bush, and sat down to wait. To be silent, and to try to be still. Silence is not synonymous with stillness; but it is a good, often a necessary, first step.

I waited. I tried to be receptive. I looked over the valley, the hills and the distant roads, and I waited.

Then I noticed Mickey, who was also looking at the scene, very alertly. His pointed terrier ears were up, and he was sweeping his gaze from one end of the panorama to the other. "What is he seeing?" I wondered. He might see the same objects as I saw, but he did not make the same sense out of them. A plane, a distant car moving on the highway, a puff of smoke, a tiny flag flapping in the breeze—none of these had meaning for him, so far as I knew. But for that matter, just what did I see? Had an angel lighted beside me at that moment, she would have seen a picture as different from mine as mine was from Mickey's. Then I realized that if I would sit and look and be quiet, my picture would change and expand. I could begin to see and understand what I saw in a different, a nonroutine way. I might even get the tiniest glimpse of what the angel would perceive. I began to realize that in stillness, we hear. In silence, we see. If we can truly still ourselves and be fully attentive—what a huge if!—we can see now. Not the past or the future, both of which usually blind us to the present, but the now. We can see what is. Not what is not, not what we want, but what is. How rarely we see that way!

I know people who look at their children, for instance, and almost never see what they are, right now. The parents see what the children aren't—what they aren't doing, what they aren't producing—and they see what they themselves want—the A student or the well-mannered son or the skilled pianist daughter. How much we lose for not seeing what exists in the moment!

I suspect that the young men and women who spent those frightful months in Saudi Arabia this past winter now look at their hometowns in a very different way from the way they did before. They see what is. And they see the marvels of a simple home, and a quiet street, or a busy college campus, for the miracles they are. Do you remember Emily, in Thornton Wilder's play Our Town? When, after her death as a young mother, Emily is allowed to visit a past moment of her life, she can barely stand the beauty of the simplest day in her mortal life, the day of her sixteenth birthday.

We can learn to see that well, even while we are in mortality. But we must be still to do so. Some of you have seen the movie Awakenings. As is so often the case, the book is better. But the point is well made in the film. Men and women frozen by disease into paralytic states that lasted decades discovered, when they were freed from the paralysis, that they saw life, and every aspect of life, much more sharply and appreciatively than the so-called healthy people who were walking around only half-awake themselves. These awakened patients saw people, nature, music, food—every aspect of life—as infinitely precious, infinitely beautiful. This story, of course, chronicles an unusual and unhealthy stillness, but the narrative dramatizes for us how healthy it is truly to see and revel in the present moment.

In that particular moment when I sat among the brush on the hillside, I was directed to the Psalms, specifically to Psalm 104. Do you feel as I do, that the psalmist was seeing with great clarity, out of a deep well of peace and inner stillness that enabled him to touch and fully know the present moment?

"Bless the Lord, O my soul. O Lord my God, thou art very great; thou art clothed with honour and majesty.

"Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment: who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain:

"Who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters: who maketh the clouds his chariot: who walketh upon the wings of the wind:

"Who maketh his angels spirits; his ministers a flaming fire:

"Who laid the foundations of the earth, that it should not be removed for ever. . . .

"He appointed the moon for seasons: the sun knoweth his going down.

"Thou makest darkness, and it is night: wherein all the beasts of the forest do creep forth.

"The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from God.

"The sun ariseth, they gather themselves together, and lay them down in their dens.

"Man goeth forth unto his work and to his labour until the evening.

"O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast thou made them all: the earth is full of thy riches. . . .

"Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created: and thou renewest the face of the earth.

"The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever: the Lord shall rejoice in his works.

"He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth: he toucheth the hills, and they smoke.

"I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I will sing praise to my God while I have my being.

"My meditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in the Lord.

"Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be no more. Bless thou the Lord, O my soul. Praise ye the Lord." (Psalm 104:1-5, 19-24, 30-35.)

After I had read and savored this psalm, we climbed in the van and drove just east of the Provo Temple. I sat looking at the people strolling on the grounds, at the spire pointing to the heavens, and at the valley stretching to the lake. I sat quietly and waited.

This time I opened to Psalm 130:5-7:

"I wait for the Lord, my soul doth wait, and in his word do I hope.

"My soul waiteth for the Lord more than they that watch for the morning: I say, more than they that watch for the morning.

"Let Israel hope in the Lord: for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption."

I know there are many who have endured dark sorrows and much pain and who must occasionally ask, "How long must I wait?" Their cry is certainly understandable. But I think this emphasis misses the point of "waiting for the Lord." I think the appropriate question is not "How long must I wait?" but "How must I wait?" We customarily think of "waiting" for a period of time, waiting until something happens. But by "wait" the scriptures probably mean "attend," "pay attention to," "listen to," or "heed." When we wait upon the Lord, we listen for direction. Regular stillness, the practice and the discipline of stillness and peaceful waiting, ensures that we will hear those directions when they come.

As I sat there thinking about waiting and attending, I realized that I hear small promptings, sometimes. Sometimes the promptings are so quiet and so gentle that I barely hear them; they are on the threshold of my consciousness only. Sometimes, although I have an awareness that they're there, I still miss them, don't heed them. It's always my loss when I don't. Now, here's a question: why are the promptings so gentle, so quiet? Why not dramatic and unmistakable? The heavens can send dramatic messages, without question. So why is the still small voice so still, so small? I think we are being trained to be sensitive attenders, sensitive listeners, not only to inner voices and divine whisperings but also to outer voices and garbled mutterings, to the messages other people give us indirectly, even silently, because they can give them no other way.

For instance, Jill, a social worker, was meeting one-on-one over a period of weeks with several troubled teens from a poor area of a big city. These interviews were being videotaped for later study. One girl, Louise, was especially hard to reach. She did not respond at all to Jill's overtures. In fact, Jill felt she was getting nowhere and had just about decided to stop working with Louise. One night she reviewed the last videotape. And she saw something she had never seen before. There was Louise, as usual, head down, eyes averted, silent, answering only in grunts and monosyllables. But the video clearly showed Louise with one arm stretched out towards the social worker, silently asking for the help she couldn't ask for directly. At the next session, Jill quietly reached out and took Louise's hand as they talked—and that day the floodgates opened, the tears came, and the talk and the healing began. Jill had heard the silent message.

Our children, our young people, our old people, those we know and love well, and strangers—all at times give us crucial messages in subtle or barely perceptible ways, as we give similar messages to them. I believe one way we learn to hear these messages is by training ourselves in stillness and by attending to the silence.

After attending to the silence above the temple for a while, Mickey and I drove over to campus. West of the Maeser Building where I have my office is a lovely hill; it used to be called Temple Hill, before the temple was built farther north. It is a gently sloping hill with a rich inviting lawn. I lay on the grass and could see, for 360 degrees, the mountains of Zion—Y Mount and Rock Canyon to the east, Mount Nebo and Maple Mountain to the south, West Mountain and the Oquirrhs, and of course, magnificent Timpanogos to the north. It was a day to make Wordsworth sharpen his pen in tranquillity, a day to make the Welsh poet Dylan Thomas young and easy once more.

But as I lay and watched the clouds float by, my thoughts too floated, and they drifted to the future, and they became anxious about one thing and another, one task or another yet undone. I tried to bring my mind back to the present, to attend and wait in peace and in trust. But again my thoughts rushed to the future. As they did, however, a phrase drifted into my mind: "This, too, will be given." With the phrase came understanding: I knew at once what the phrase meant. It meant that in stillness we receive vision and revision; that as well as experiencing the fullness of the present moment, we can receive promptings about the future and the past. Countless times, when I have been fretting and fussing about the outcome of some future event, if I have been able to quiet myself, I have received not only general comfort and reassurance but also specific direction, specific vision for the situation. Many of you have had such experiences. We can have more of them; we can start by asking and listening. And by waiting. We can understand not only the future, but also the past, and by understanding it, change it in crucial ways, if we reflect in stillness and openness. There is much more to be said about changing the past, but that is a subject for another day. "This too will be given."

As the sun moved towards the west, Mickey and I rode west, first going down through the rural areas of the county, down towards Palmyra and Lake Shore, and then turning towards West Mountain. The wind picked up, and the shrubs were whipping as I parked the van and walked the dog along a rocky path.

I began to see the process of contemplation more clearly. Silence can lead to stillness, which facilitates meditation or reflection. Reflection leads often to prayer. Prayer of the most useful sort, I think, leads to receptivity, to attending, to waiting on the Lord. And if we are receptive and hear the whisperings, then we are led to more reflection and meditation, and to an ever deeper stillness.

I began to think that prayer is less a deed than a condition, less something we do than something we are. To most of us, prayer means asking for something or expressing thanks for something. But there is, of course, more. We are told to pray always. We read of the Savior praying throughout the night. Are we talking here about endless repetition of requests, pleading and repeating our petitions? Or does "pray always" mean to be ever receptive, ever attending, listening, waiting?

Annie Dillard reminds us, "The waiting itself is the thing." Is it possible that the praying itself is the thing, more important than whatever we ask for, whatever we say? I think perhaps so. I have also come to know that some things can be communicated only in silence. The poet John Keats wrote, "Heard melodies are sweet, but those unheard are sweeter." [^5] He was drawing our attention to those things communicated only in silence, in stillness.

That Sunday when I went out into the valley because I felt empty, I was ministered to by the earth itself. Joseph Smith taught that the earth has a spirit; and I have learned that that spirit is a healing spirit. The poet Gerard Manley Hopkins, a man of religion, a priest, looked at what was happening to the world already in his time and saw the fragmenting and the turmoil that were growing everywhere, but nonetheless he wrote:

And for all this, nature is never spent;

__There lives the dearest freshness deep down things;

And though the last lights off the black West went

__Oh, morning, at the brown brink eastward, springs—

Because the Holy Ghost over the bent

__World broods with warm breast

____and with ah! bright wings. [^6]

There is deep down freshness for those who feel temporarily burned out. There are unfailing springs for those of us whose buckets are momentarily empty. There is morning for those whose world seems black. There is peace. And there is comfort. Mother Earth, as I have said, has a healing spirit. But we can find that healing stillness in other places as well as in nature. We can be still and find peace in our own homes (even if the bathroom is the only sanctuary), or in silent intimate communication with a spouse, a sister, a friend. Often music helps to still the chatter within. Balm of Gilead is freely available, a freely given gift.

It is my hope, it is my prayer, that each of you can increasingly discover your own sources of comfort, peace, and reassurance. My prayer is that if inner voices nag at you, telling you that you do not do enough, try enough, give enough, that you will still those voices. Silence those voices. Tune out the static and attend to the voices that speak comfort and love and assurance, for it is love and confidence, not fear and anxiety, that will motivate us to press forward with hope in Christ.

---
Notas:
[^1] Annie Dillard, Pilgrim at Tinker Creek (New York: Harper Magazine Press, 1974), p. 265.
[^2] Samuel Johnson, "On the Spring," Rambler, no. 5, rpt. in Samuel Johnson: Rasselas, Poems, and Selected Prose, 3d ed., ed. Bertrand H. Bronson (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1958), p. 74.
[^3] T. S. Eliot, "The Hollow Men," The Complete Poems and Plays (New York: Harcourt, Brace and Co., 1952), p. 56.
[^4] John Keats, "Ode on a Grecian Urn," rpt. in The Norton Anthology of Poetry, ed. Arthur M. Eastman (New York: W. W. Norton and Co., 1970), p. 698.
[^5] Gerard Manley Hopkins, "God's Grandeur," rpt. in The Norton Anthology of Poetry, ed. Arthur M. Eastman (New York: W. W. Norton and Co., 1970), p. 887.
[^6] Elouise Bell, professor of English and associate dean of general and honors education at Brigham Young University, has served as a member of the Young Women general board. She is the author of Only When I Laugh, a collection of essays, and Aunt Patty Remembers, a one-woman show, which she also performs, that is based on the journals of Mormon pioneer midwife Patty Bartlett Sessions.
