Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

VOICES FROM NAUVOO

We must cherish one another, watch over one another, and gain instruction, that we may all sit down in heaven together.

—Lucy Mack Smith

The sacred spirituality that graced the Nauvoo Relief Society is still our birthright.

—Maureen Ursenbach Beecher

Voices of the Sisters

SUSAN ELIZABETH HOWE [^1]

The following dramatic reading was presented in the opening session of the 1991 Women's Conference to inaugurate the sesquicentennial celebration of the founding of Relief Society.

NARRATOR: March 17, 1992, will mark 150 years since the formation of the Relief Society. Today we inaugurate a celebration of that society, of the good it has done, by remembering the women of the Church, their trials, their strength, the legacy of love and achievement they have left us.

(Lights on audience go down. To a musical background, a series of slides appear on a large screen, slides featuring women in many different situations: of various ages, races, and occupations, in Church and home life, at work and play. The slides are arranged in reverse chronological order, so that the times featured become earlier and earlier. The last three slides are pictures of Eliza R. Snow, Sarah Kimball, and Emma Smith, and these slides remain on the screen. A spotlight comes up on Eliza, Sarah, and Emma, dressed in costumes of their day and standing around a podium.)

EMMA (looking at the audience around her): My, my, my. All these ladies are members? Sisters, we are overjoyed at the growth of our Society. What an impressive group.

ELIZA: Though I must say, Sister Emma, I take exception to their manner of dress. (Eliza particularly turns to the women seated on the stand—the Relief Society general presidency and the Women's Conference officials.) The styles you sisters have succumbed to are highly immodest. I am surprised that no one has urged you to retrench.

EMMA: Now, Eliza, we must remember this is a different age. We are not qualified to sit in judgment on customs so far removed from our own time.

ELIZA: We are always qualified to stand for the highest morality.

EMMA: But when judging others, we are not always qualified to know what the highest morality is.

ELIZA (showing some agitation): It is most uncomfortable to have you lecture me about judging others. There was a time when you were quite willing to judge me.

EMMA: Your behavior certainly warranted—

SARAH (breaking in, gently scolding): Sisters, this discussion is not exactly to the point. Remember why we have come? To join in celebrating the one hundred fiftieth anniversary of our Female Relief Society?

EMMA (addressing audience): Oh, yes, please excuse us.

ELIZA: Emma and I are much more reconciled now than we have been in the past.

EMMA: Though we still have our differences.

SARAH (hurriedly, again cutting in): And we are so pleased to be here with you, in this, this—Now what in the world is this facility for? It seems cavernous and distant for a Society meeting. Why would the sisters choose to assemble here?

ELIZA: Perhaps we can ask. (They turn to the narrator, who rises from her seat.)

NARRATOR: This is a sports facility.

SARAH: A sports facility? For races and wrestling? You have devoted so many resources to gentlemen's recreation?

NARRATOR: This facility is used for basketball, a game you may not know of. And actually, sports are activities many women also value. We are holding our conference here at Brigham Young University because the buildings are large enough to accommodate—

EMMA (breaking in): Brigham Young University? Wouldn't a gathering of our society be more appropriately convened at a university named after Joseph?

SARAH (keeping the others on track): Sister Emma, as you see, there are thousands of women before us, and I assume they would like to hear what we might tell them about the formation of our Society.

ELIZA: And perhaps they could tell us about the state of the Society today.

EMMA: I, too, would be interested in knowing what they have done with the Female Relief Society, how it benefits the Church and the world, what it will contribute in the future. (To audience) You see, Sister Eliza and I do agree entirely on some things. (Emma and Eliza nod to each other.)

ELIZA: In our time there was much good done by the Society—both in Nauvoo and in our lovely Deseret.

SARAH: The Female Relief Society of Nauvoo was a benevolent, charitable organization, providing help for many poor, as well as contributing much to the comfort of the workers who built the temple. We were very proud of the Society in our day.

ELIZA: As we were of those established later, through the years. By means of the Relief Societies, the ladies have made remarkable contributions to the Church.

SARAH: What no one could do alone, we could accomplish together because of our commitment to the gospel of Jesus Christ as restored by the prophet Joseph.

EMMA: Often the work has been done at personal sacrifice or as women have borne great sorrow.

ELIZA: Sisters, before we begin interrupting each other and confusing our listeners, perhaps we should each take a turn at the pulpit, saying what we have to say. (Emma and Sarah nod agreement.)

EMMA: And Sarah, as you were the first to suggest that we organize, we must defer to you. You speak now, and Sister Eliza and I will follow.

SARAH: Thank you.

(A musical interlude begins as Emma and Eliza are seated and Sarah begins to speak. The spotlight continues on Sarah; the slide becomes Sarah alone.)

SARAH: I like to think that our society arose from our own initiative, our own desires to serve. You see, Miss Cook, a maiden lady, was living in my home and working as a seamstress, and one day she said, "I should like to help the temple workers, but I have nothing to give them." I had a bolt of cloth, so I told her I would furnish the material if she would make some shirts for the workmen. Then we wondered if some of our neighbors might wish to combine their means and efforts with ours, so we met together in my parlor and decided to organize. We asked Sister Eliza Snow (she nods to Eliza) to prepare a constitution and bylaws, which she did and showed to the prophet. He said they were the best he had ever seen, but that he had something better for us. "I will organize the sisters," he told us, "under the priesthood, after a pattern of the priesthood." So we met above Brother Joseph's store the following Thursday and were organized. He proposed that we elect a presiding officer and that she should choose two counselors to assist her. We chose Sister Emma Smith as our president, and she chose Sarah Cleveland and Mother Elizabeth Ann Whitney as counselors. Brother Joseph was very proud of his beautiful wife. He said, "Let these women preside over this society just as the Presidency presides over the Church." And he offered to instruct us from time to time.

After some discussion, Sister Eliza, whom we naturally selected as our secretary, suggested that the name of our organization be The Female Relief Society of Nauvoo, and that motion was unanimously carried. You see, our name became our purpose—to provide relief from want and suffering. We accepted donations from those who had enough and to spare and offered what we collected to anyone in need. It was Brother Joseph who made the first donation—the considerable sum of five dollars. He told us, "All I shall have to give to the poor, I shall give to this society." He had great faith in us, and we did not let him down. We collected everything from food, flax, and wool to soap, bedding, even jewelry, and distributed our goods to those in need. I remember our providing for a Brother Henderson, a worthy widower with nine children. And once Sister Sessions offered two pairs of pantaloons and a shirt to an unknown man whose appearance revealed how little he had. Sister Woolley gave the red yarn she had been saving for a carpet to make mittens for the temple workers. And we once paid the fare for a destitute sister who had to get to New Orleans. As Sister Peck said in one of our meetings, "We have not said 'be ye warmed and clothed' without trying to do it."

Sisters, do you still remember that the purpose of this society is to care for those in need? Surely there are as many needy in your day as there were in our own. Open your hearts to the Spirit, who will teach you what you can give and how you can give it. Learn to hear how sisters throughout our history have received and given help. [^2] (Near the end of Sarah's speech, a musical background begins. When she finishes speaking, the spotlight dims. Then, accompanied by slides, the following taped voices are heard.)

ELLEN DOUGLAS [^3] (with English accent): In 1842 my family and I came from England to be with the saints, but by April of 1844 my husband was dead, and my children and I were very ill. After I'd begun to get well I went down into the city on a visit. A kindly woman where I was staying asked me to make application to the Female Relief Society for some clothing. I refused, but she said I needed something because I had been so long sick, and if I would not go myself, she would do it for me. At last I agreed and we went to one of the sisters. She asked me what I needed most. I told her that I needed many things. While I was sick my children had worn out their clothes because I could not mend them. She said she would do the best she could for me. They came over in a few days with a wagon and fetched me such a present as I have never before received in the world.

CONTEMPORARY SISTER 1 [^4]: The Christmas after my divorce I was out of work and had little for my family. A sister in the ward stopped by and left six hundred dollars—one hundred for each of my five children and a hundred for me. When I came home and found her gift, I was so overcome I couldn't even call her. I cried for hours until I was finally able to thank her with all my heart. —A sister in California

LUCY MESERVE SMITH [^5]: In 1856 I was set apart and blessed to preside over the Relief Society. At October conference news came about the handcart companies. President Young was anxious for fear they would be caught in the snow in the mountains, so we didn't go on with the conference. The sisters stripped off their petticoats, stockings, and everything they could spare, right there in the Tabernacle, and piled the clothing into wagons to send to the saints in the mountains.

That winter we did all we could to comfort the needy as they came in with handcarts. I never took more satisfaction and I might say pleasure in any labor I ever performed in my life, such a unanimity of feeling prevailed. My counselors and I wallowed through the snow until our clothes were wet a foot high to get things together to give. The sisters pieced blocks, carded bats, quilted, and got together I think twenty-seven quilts, besides a great amount of other clothing, in one winter for the needy.

CONTEMPORARY SISTER 2 (South African accent): Our homemaking counselor appealed to us to knit squares and put them together as lap rugs for old age homes. What a sweet, warm response when we distributed these rugs and saw the joy these gifts of love brought into the lives of the aged. One blind soul of eighty-six years made me tell her all the colors in her rug and had me run her fingers over it again and again to get the feel of it. How special for us to feel the tangible love and support of each other as we have performed this work. —A sister in Pretoria, South Africa

(A change in the music as the spotlight again shines on Emma, now at the podium, and a picture of Emma is shown on the screen.)

EMMA: A month before we organized the Relief Society and I became president, I gave birth to and lost a son. What a trial it was to me to lose another child. But one thing my own sorrow taught me was compassion; as I observed others I learned that the life of almost everyone is touched by suffering. We have to love and comfort each other in order to gain the strength to turn our energies to the work of the Lord. There were stories from our own Society of sisters in great need, who, though they wanted to give to others, needed help themselves. I was touched to hear Sister Husted's story. As donations were being accepted, she arose in tears and said she had nothing to give. She spoke of the death of her husband in Missouri, and the trouble she was under to get a living. Counselor Whitney comforted this sorrowing sister, telling her it was not her duty to give but rather she should be helped by the Society. Sisters began to offer her what they could—some flour, a bushel of corn, a calico dress. As our beloved Mother Smith said in one of our early meetings, "We must cherish one another, watch over one another, comfort one another, and gain instruction, that we may all sit down in heaven together."

Sisters, we will never progress as a society until we learn to love each other without reservation. Until each member feels she can speak freely in our meetings of her own sin or sorrow and know that her sisters love her and do not condemn, our power to do good will be circumscribed. We must love with the true love of Christ; we must sorrow with those who sorrow and take on the burdens of each other's hearts. I would have us listen to sisters who speak from their own depths, that we may learn to hear. And so you will know of my own need to grow, listen first to what I have finally been able to understand—Sister Eliza's sorrow at the death of one who was beloved of us both. (During the final part of Emma's speech, a musical background begins. As she stops speaking, the spotlight turns off, and slides appear on the screen, as the following taped voices are heard.)

ELIZA (voice only): After the martyrdom of my husband Joseph, I was prostrate with grief and besought the Lord with all the fervency of my soul to permit me to follow the Prophet at once and not to leave me in so dark and wicked a world. So set was my mind that I could not be comforted, and I could not cease that prayer of my heart. Finally my dear Joseph came to me and told me that I must not continue to supplicate the Lord in that way. Joseph told me that his work upon earth was completed—but mine was not. The Lord desired me, and so did my husband, to live many years and assist in carrying on the great latter-day work. He said I must be of good courage and help to cheer and lighten the burdens of others. And that I must turn my thoughts away from my own loneliness and seek to console our people in their bereavement and sorrow. —Eliza R. Snow

CONTEMPORARY SISTER 3: The greatest struggle I have right now is to breech an estrangement with a son who feels we don't love him and his family as we do our other five children because fourteen years ago he decided to leave the Church and join his wife's church. For the past three years, no matter how we try, he and his wife keep avoiding us or refusing to talk. I've been praying intensely about this sorrow, and my goal is to meet soon and talk through our differences. —A sister in Oregon

MARTHA CRAGUN COX [^6]: January 11, 1871. I received from heaven the gift of a daughter, a mite of a creature weighing seven pounds and eleven ounces. As I looked at the waxen figure beside me on the bed I felt I had all I needed in this life to make up my sum of happiness. Two short days she adorned my life. A lingering difficult birth had done its worst for her and on the morning of the thirteenth the spirit warned me to call the father and family and the elders. They saw no cause for alarm and attributed my uneasiness to the weakened state of my nerves, but to humor me they proceeded to bless and name her. Scarcely was this accomplished when the spirit took its flight. This was my first real sorrow and the bitterest disappointment I had ever known.

CONTEMPORARY SISTER 4: All through my son David's struggle with cancer, Church members helped us in so many ways: with food, visits, phone calls, prayers, the temple prayer roll, hugs. But David's death did not mean an end to love and support. A sister from our ward who had taught David in many of his Primary classes visited us, sometimes two or three times a week, for well over a year. She was so impressed by David's way of handling his illness that she decided to write a book about him. She let us talk and talk, cry and cry, never being judgmental or critical. It was only through her patience and love that we were able to keep our sanity. For many reasons the book was never published, but that isn't important any more. The fact that one person took the time to listen to us and be genuinely concerned for our well-being has left a lasting impression on my husband and me. —Patricia Oparowski, Medford, Massachusetts

ELLIS REYNOLDS SHIPP [^7]: November 10, 1875, two o'clock in the morning. What a strange fatality! This morning I start for Philadelphia to attend the Medical College. Oh, Heavenly Father, give me strength to endure the separation from my loved ones, and power to succeed in my endeavors to gain a knowledge of medicine—that my life may be noble and useful upon the earth. Into thy hands, kind Father, do I commit my treasures.

CONTEMPORARY SISTER 5: Never in all my life did I think I would go to China. And yet the day my husband Elliot received a call from BYU asking us if we would teach English at a Chinese university for a year, I felt that this was something we should do. So just two months after the Tiananmen Square massacre, on our forty-second wedding anniversary, we left for Nanjing Forestry University. I had imagined that the year would be a challenge, but I had no idea of how difficult it would become. The food was a great shock; I lost thirty pounds in two months. I also suffered serious health problems. Soon the weather got cold, and we learned that none of the buildings were heated. We didn't have enough clothes to keep warm, and I became very frightened. And lonely. Hardly anyone at the university spoke English, and Chinese couples both work six days a week. Gradually, as the days went by, I became more and more depressed. I woke up every morning feeling awful, actually sick, hating to face the day. Finally I didn't think I could stand it any longer. The afternoon after my husband had informed everyone of my decision to return home, I again got on my knees to pray while my husband was away teaching his afternoon class. I prayed harder than I ever had before, telling the Lord that I wanted to stay but didn't know how I could. I asked that if he wanted me to stay, he would bless me with a feeling of happiness. Later that day a feeling of calm happiness washed over me, and I knew the Lord wanted me to remain in China. After that things gradually got better, and I even enjoyed the remainder of the year. George Q. Cannon said that after we have passed through trying scenes and endured afflictions, we look back at them and are thankful and say they have been more fruitful to us than any other scenes that we have passed through. So it has been for me: I dearly love the Chinese people. I would not take anything for the experiences I had in China. —Maralyne Howe, Pleasant Grove, Utah

EMMELINE B. WELLS [^8]: Wednesday, September 30, 1874. O how miserable I am in regard to some of my children, almost heart-broken. Every nerve in my whole system is unstrung. All the anguish a mother can feel in seeing her chidren do wrong I feel tonight. My heart is bleeding almost. Misery and darkness, and I have no one to go to for comfort or shelter, no strong arm to lean upon, no bosom bared for me, no protection or comfort in my husband. My little ones are all tenderness—oh, what should I do without them—but they are only weak themselves and need to be nourished by me. O if my husband could only love me even a little and not seem so perfectly indifferent to any sensation of that kind. He cannot know the craving of my nature. He is surrounded with love on every side, and I am cast out. O my poor aching heart. Where shall it rest its burden? Only on the Lord, only to Him can I look. Every other avenue seems closed against me. O help me, Father in Heaven, to overcome and resist temptation in every form or shape.

Thursday, April 1, 1875. Went to the Fast Meeting in the morning. Had an excellent meeting. Went again in the afternoon to our own Relief Society meeting, over which I preside. I feel deeply the great responsibility resting upon me in being called to fill this public office; but hope to be guided and sustained by the Holy Spirit in this calling and duty that I may keep humble and be qualified to do all things that are required of me, and please my husband and gain his good will and favor, as also all with whom I am associated.

CONTEMPORARY SISTER 6: The deep sorrow following my divorce drove me almost to despair. Because of my constant determination to remain active in the Church, I now have the strong conviction that there is no other way than to live the gospel. I have had to overcome the odds of unmerited gossip, my friends not being the same, many ward and stake people not understanding, my children rebelling, having to work full time, and dealing with discouragement and depression and financial difficulty and health problems. But I continued to attend all of my Church meetings, hold down a calling, and attend the temple once a week. In time the negatives began to fade, and I have experienced respect and admiration from my friends and associates. I do not take my children's prob-lems so personally any more. I have less guilt and frustration, more self-confidence and self-esteem. The gospel has become more precious to me and my joy in serving has become greater. —A sister in California

(The slide becomes Eliza alone; a spotlight rises on her standing at the podium; there is a short musical interlude.)

ELIZA: You sisters will not find a greater example of compassion, and the ability to put aside her own sorrows for the needs of others, than in Sister Emma, beloved of our prophet Joseph, the first wife of his heart. In her behavior to me, Sister Emma has taught us today that we may best serve the Lord as we ourselves love and forgive.

Today I, too, would like to bless you, both by instruction and by the example of what has been done. When we arrived in the Valley of the Great Salt Lake and began to establish our homes, the domestic responsibilities of the sisters required most of their attention. But by 1868 the time had come for us to act in a larger sphere. President Brigham Young recognized our potential; he said he saw a great amount of talent, and even statesmanship in the community of ladies. He instructed us that if we would trim our minds, contemplate subjects we were likely to pass over, and exercise the rights and privileges that were legitimately ours, we could have an immense influence in guiding, directing, and controlling human affairs. He asked me to direct all the wards in organizing Relief Societies, to help the sisters expand their capacity to serve. To me it was quite a mission, and I took much pleasure in its performance. I remember in the First Ward in our city of Great Salt Lake, Bishop Henry Moon assembled the sisters in the ward school room. He said they were called to be organized into a Female Relief Society according to the true order as instituted by Joseph Smith the Prophet. As he did not understand the order of the society himself, he requested me to take hold in organizing the sisters in a proper manner. The Female Relief Society was no ordinary thing. Our beloved prophet Joseph taught that the organization of the sisters was necessary for the perfection of the Church of Christ in any dispensation.

But many of the sisters were so unsure of themselves as not even to be able to speak out in our meetings. Once a sister said that if she could talk about house cleaning, she might talk, but I answered, "Do not let your president have to say all. Has not God endowed you with the gift of speech? If you are endowed with the spirit of God, no matter how simple your thoughts may be, they will be edifying to those who hear you." It was deeply gratifying to me to see the sisters grow and expand their usefulness in a wide and extensive sphere. We found ample scope for our every power and capability for doing good. And one of the most successful presidents is here with us today—Sister Sarah Kimball, who became president of the Fifteenth Ward Relief Society. She was the first to build a Relief Society Hall, a place for the sisters to meet. The Relief Society meetings were held on the top floor, while the sisters ran a store on the first floor. They sold goods they had manufactured and used their money to assist the poor. And the compassion of Sister Kimball's society was not limited to the Saints or even to the Valley. After the great fire in Chicago in 1871, the Fifteenth Ward Relief Society directed a wide effort to collect money and goods throughout Deseret. They eventually sent some $14,000 to the relief effort.

Then came the challenge Brigham Young set for us to store wheat. Sister Emmeline B. Wells headed the project. The reason it was given to the sisters was explained by her husband, Elder Daniel H. Wells, counselor to Brigham Young. "The men have been tried for years," he said, "but they have continued to let the grain go. Now we want to see if the sisters will be more successful." Well, the sisters were successful. By October 1877, the Fifteenth Ward Relief Society had completed a fireproof granary built of rock, with a tin roof, a brick floor, and a concrete base. It held a thousand bushels. Throughout our settlements, granaries were raised by the Relief Societies. You can see how our sisters were being enlarged in their capacity to serve.

And the influence of our Relief Societies continued to grow. The silk industry in Utah was mostly developed through the Relief Societies. We began a paper, The Woman's Exponent, that directed its messages to the sisters for over forty years. We also became responsible for health care, opening hospitals and providing for the training of doctors and nurses. Through these years we could see our power to do good expanding along with our ability to serve the Lord.

So sisters, I would advise you of these things. Do not be content with any limitations on your capacity to serve. Develop your talents; develop your means. Open your hearts to comprehend the needs of the world in your own time. Listen to other sisters and take counsel from what they have to say. (During the last section of Eliza's speech, again a musical background begins. As she finishes speaking, the spotlight on her fades, slides appear on the screen, and the following voices are heard.)

EMILY S. RICHARDS [^9]: The first time Aunt Eliza asked me to speak in a meeting, I could not. She said, "Never mind, but when you are asked to speak again, try and have something to say," and I did. I learned to speak with more and more ease until finally, in 1889, I addressed the annual convention of the National Woman Suffrage Association in Washington, D.C. One journalist even wrote that I was "reserved, self-possessed, dignified, as pure and sweet as an angel." She also said this: "It was not the words themselves but the gentle spirit that went with the words and carried winning grace to every heart."

CONTEMPORARY SISTER 7: I'm older (eighty-one), though I don't spend much time thinking about it, for I still expect myself to do as much and as well as the younger ones. I guess I've always expected too much, and because of that attitude, I have not had the best opinion of myself. This morning I was playing the organ in the temple, and instead of agonizing because I'm not as fine an organist as Bonnie Goodliffe, I just sat there being thankful that I could produce beautiful music and that I was doing what the Lord wanted me to do. I realized I was doing the Lord's work as much as very prominent Church leaders, and I began to feel that I am of great worth. —Pauline Atkinson, Provo, Utah

ELIZA R. SNOW (voice only): In August 1878, Mrs. Emmeline B. Wells and I, after attending a conference of the Relief Society in Farmington, Davis County, dined with Mrs. Aurelia Rogers. During our conversation, Mrs. Rogers expressed a desire that something more could be effected for the cultivation and improvement of the children morally and spiritually than was being done through the influence of day and Sunday Schools. After consulting together a few moments, I asked Mrs. Rogers if she was willing to take the responsibility and labor on herself of presiding over the children of that settlement, provided the Bishop of the Ward sanctioned the movement. She replied in the affirmative. —Eliza R. Snow

AURELIA S. ROGERS [^10]: While thinking over what had to be done for the best good of the children, I seemed to be carried away in the spirit, or at least I experienced a feeling of untold happiness which lasted three days and nights. During that time nothing could worry or irritate me; if my little ones were fretful, or the work went wrong, I had patience, could control in kindness, and manage my household affairs easily. This was a testimony to me that what was being done was of God.

CONTEMPORARY SISTER 8: I used to be a visiting teacher to a sister whom I was never successful in reaching. I always felt unwelcome, and that she was annoyed at our intrusion. When I was called as Relief Society president, I assigned her to another set of visiting teachers. Several months had passed when I began having thoughts of her come into my mind, along with the words "Tell my daughter that I love her." This continued for two weeks, and each time I thought it, I dismissed it. I could just imagine the reaction I might receive if I told her such a thing. One Friday afternoon, I was walking into my home with my arms full of groceries, and with a force I can't describe, a picture of her face came to my mind with the words "I told you to tell my daughter I love her!" I set the groceries on the floor, ran to the car, and drove to see her. When I arrived, her house was in great disarray and her two young daughters were cavorting wildly around the living room. The sister was agitated and extremely dejected. With all of the confusion in the house, I asked her if she would walk out to my car with me because I wanted to share something with her. I was afraid! I did not know how this remote, often aggravated sister would react to the message I had for her. I began by saying, "I know you will probably think this is crazy, but I have a message for you from Heavenly Father. He said to tell you that He loves you." This sweet sister started to weep. She cried and I cried, and we held one another. When she could finally speak, she told me that her husband had left her two weeks before. He told her that he didn't love her any more and moved to a distant state. During the following two weeks, she had prayed and prayed for help and none came. She decided that no one loved her, that her mother could be a better mother to her daughters than she could be, and so she had decided to end it all. As we talked that evening and on many future occasions, she was overwhelmed that the Lord loved her, heard her prayers, and sent someone to help. —A sister in Georgia

AMY BROWN LYMAN [^11]: Women have a very acute sense of situations and are often, through this, able to cope successfully with very difficult problems. They have sympathy, imagination, patience, a spontaneous eagerness to help, and a warm good will, all of which are real assets and help them to find their way easily into the hearts of those who suffer.

CONTEMPORARY SISTER 9: Dear President Elaine Jack, my name is Sister Chudyba from Poland. I was at your office in May. At that time I was the Relief Society president in Warsaw. I now have the honor to write to you and let you know that I am in Moscow as a missionary, and that we have Relief Society here in Moscow. Nina Lejontieva is the president. She was baptized this summer. Now we have five baptized women here and every Sunday from twenty to twenty-five new investigators. It is nice to watch people singing hymns in Russian and having the same organization as everywhere. —Sister Chudyba

SUSA YOUNG GATES [^12]: For years we have toiled and joyed together in this glorious work of love and amelioration of suffering which we call Relief Society work. Wherever our people have gone, there have been Relief Society workers gathering up their means from each other's scanty stores to minister to those who were sick or in want, giving encouragement to the weary and heartsick, while warning the wayward and thoughtless. We have nursed the sick of our people, robed the dying for their last resting-place, fed the hungry, visited the orphan, and succored the needy. This, sisters, is, has been, and ever will be the true spirit and genius of this whole organization. We charge you to keep this spirit burning bright in your bosoms.

CONTEMPORARY SISTER 10: My gratitude goes to my Heavenly Father for the opportunity of being a witness to this unique historic day, when the Relief Society in the First Surulere Branch has grown to the stage of organizing a bazaar and social. This occasion makes us reflect on the counsel of our early missionaries, who encouraged us to remember that we are the pioneer sisters in this country, that if the sisters focus their thoughts on the struggles of the pioneer sisters in Nauvoo, remembering that the Relief Society membership, which now runs in millions, was started by a few dedicated sisters, and that if we emulate their actions and work and live like Latter-day Saint women, very soon we will experience a wonderful rapid growth of the Church in this land and the membership of the Relief Society. Today I feel great joy being a witness to the manifestation of that vision. —Cecilia C. Ogbonna, Lagos, Nigeria Mission (Music ends; slide returns to Eliza; spotlight on Eliza at the podium.)

ELIZA [^13]: May I be the voice for the three of us to thank you for letting us come to your gathering today. We leave you our blessings and our love. Let your first business be to perform your duties at home. But, inasmuch as you are wise stewards, you will find time for social duties, because these are incumbent upon us as daughters and mothers in Zion. By seeking to perform every duty you will find that your capacity will increase, and you will be astonished at what you can accomplish. I do not pretend to know where you should devote your efforts, but I assume that your wonderful Relief Society president knows. Listen to her counsel as she speaks to you now. The Lord help us. The Lord is with his Saints, and inasmuch as we continue faithful, we shall be those that will be crowned in the presence of God and the Lamb. You, my sisters, if you are faithful, will become Queens of Queens, and Priestesses unto the Most High God. These are your callings. We have only to discharge our duties. By and by our labors will be past, and our names will be crowned with everlasting honor, and be had in everlasting remembrance among the Saints of the Most High God.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Relief Society history, Women of Covenant: The Story of Relief Society, 1842-1992, forthcoming in 1992 from Deseret Book, was commissioned in 1979 by Relief Society General President Barbara Smith. Its authors are Jill Mulvay Derr, Janath Cannon, and Maureen Ursenbach Beecher.
[^2] That Emma Smith's blessing extends beyond her is clarified in the Prophet's explanation that "not she alone, but others, may attain to the same blessings." Minutes of the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo, 17 March 1842, holograph, LDS Church Archives. This and all other citations from documents housed in the Church Archives are used with permission.
[^3] Riverside Stake Fifteenth Ward Relief Society Minutes, 6 January 1868 to 4 September 1873, 19 February 1870, LDS Church Archives.
[^4] For a full discussion of the significance of women's blessings, see Carol Cornwall Madsen, "Mothers in Israel: Sarah's Legacy," Women of Wisdom and Knowledge, ed. Marie Cornwall and Susan Howe (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1990), pp. 189-91.
[^5] Record of the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo, holograph, LDS Church Archives, 30 March 1842.
[^6] Nauvoo Relief Society Minutes, 28 April 1842.
[^7] Nauvoo Relief Society Minutes, 17 March 1842.
[^8] For a more complete and perceptive discussion of these ideas, see Kathryn H. Shirts, "Priesthood and Salvation: Is D&C 84 a Revelation to Women Too?" Sunstone 15 (September 1991): 20-27.
[^9] Nauvoo Relief Society Minutes, 28 April 1842.
[^10] Other suggestions of Joseph Smith's sense of urgency are developed in Ronald K. Esplin, "Joseph Smith's Mission and Timetable: 'God Will Protect Me Until My Work Is Done,' " The Prophet Joseph: Essays on the Life and Mission of Joseph Smith, ed. Larry C. Porter and Susan Easton Black (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988), pp. 280-319.
[^11] Nauvoo Relief Society Minutes, 28 April 1842.
[^12] Bruce R. McConkie, "The Relief Society and the Keys of the Kingdom," Relief Society Magazine 37 (March 1950): 151.
[^13] Nauvoo Relief Society Minutes, 27 May 1842.
