Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

From Nauvoo: Sisterhood and the Spirit

MAUREEN URSENBACH BEECHER [^1]

Being adult, female, and Latter-day Saint did not always, as it does now, dictate membership in Relief Society; nevertheless those who grew up Mormon have all felt the Society's impact on their lives. Perhaps it was for you, as it was for me, a note warning us kids away from the tempting dessert on the table: "Don't touch! This is for Relief Society." Or the sympathy in our Scottish neighbor's voice as she spotted me playing alone in the yard: "Today's your mother's Relief, is it?" Not until I delved seriously, with Janath Cannon and Jill Mulvay Derr, into the details of Relief Society history did I realize how much a part of that history is me, and how much I am, as are all LDS women, part of that history. [^2]

As were many of you, I was reared under quilt frames. During and following World War II, when there was so much to do not only to support the war effort but to provide relief packages for European Saints, Relief Society mothers would secure their preschoolers in the circle of their chairs to play while the women quilted. Well do I remember that prison of lisle-stockinged knees. I hated Relief Society then. My mother, for as long as I can remember, was president of her ward society and would drag me along on her visiting teaching rounds—she seemed always to have assigned herself the remotest calls, five miles beyond the end of the street car line. War refugees—D.P.'s, we called them, with scorn in our voices for their strange clothing and stranger accents—packed our communities. More than once Mother filled our basement bedroom with whole families. I have no memory of where she put everybody when the Perrys came from Wales—triplets, twins, and a single at each end of the family. I learned through her open heart the route through tolerance to acceptance to love.

The hours Mom spent on the telephone seemed to me a malicious avoidance of my needs; in fact, she was recording blood types and procuring donors for Red Cross clinics, or gathering volunteers to roll bandages, or ascertaining what nursing skills could be mobilized among the women if need arose. After the war, the women's habits of economy and making-do remained: often, of a Saturday morning, on word from the fruit wholesaler, she would call to tell the women that there were peaches, or pears, or some other perishable fruit available at half price. I could always tell at church Sunday which women had sat up half the night canning fruit: their heavy eyelids and stained thumbs gave them away. And the hand-me-downs. Most of my Mormon friends dressed, as I did, in made-overs, not always well tailored. As Mae Turner would say of the ungainly sweaters donated by first-time knitters for shipment to Europe, "We'll accept them all, then press the hell out of them!" Relief Society's history is a latter-day woman's history, and LDS women, wherever they serve, are the Relief Society.

From our combined memories, we could compile a history of Relief Society, at least in this century. But underlying the whole enterprise is a foundation laid before we were born; that undergirding preceded even the 1842 annus mirabilis when the Society took on shape. Its earliest recorded expression may well be the 1830 revelation to Emma Hale Smith, now canonized as Doctrine and Covenants 25, in which the Lord clarified for his daughter, and for all his daughters, their potential as contributing members of his church. Emma was to be set apart "to expound scriptures, and to exhort the church," the Lord instructed, "according as it shall be given thee by my Spirit." (V. 7.) An "elect lady" (v. 3), she was to find fulfillment of this promise in her role as president of the first Relief Society, twelve years later. [^3]

Women of the Restoration were spiritually gifted, as were their brothers, and they were also full voting members of the organized Church of Christ. As Margaret Smoot commented in 1870, "I have always sought to vote in conference, and then I felt I had done all I desired to do." [^4] The sisters' sense of equality with their brethren was reinforced, as Carol Madsen has pointed out, in the texts of patriarchal and other blessings women were given: "Thou shalt be blessed with spiritual gifts," one was promised; "Great wisdom from the Lord to decide the most difficult questions," received another. "Thou shalt have power given unto thee to heal the sick, and to cast out evil spirits, and . . . power to keep the destroyer from thy household," another woman was assured. "The spirit of prophecy and revelation shall rest upon you, and the light of the Lord shall dwell within you and wisdom shall be given unto you to enable you to become perfected in the Lord," was the promise to yet another woman. [^5] In matters of the Spirit, women received with men from the Lord's store of gifts.

By 1842, the exercise of their gifts, spiritual and temporal, for the benefit of all was a commonplace among women, as was the notion that they could be more effective working in tandem than singly. By the time of the founding of Relief Society, American women had been organizing themselves for four decades. That a chance conversation in Sarah Kimball's Nauvoo home should lead towards a sewing society for benevolent purposes reflected the pattern of women in a hundred other American communities. How this organization differed, why it should have persisted a century and a half, and why it is today the largest extant women's organization are serious and complex questions.

For me, however, the question of greatest significance and challenge has been an ecclesiastical one. What is the religious significance of the Relief Society to individual women, and how does its being essentially a religious entity affect the Relief Society?

Eliza R. Snow's request of the Prophet Joseph Smith that he pass judgment on her constitution and bylaws forced him to consider the place of women in the Church's structure. The minutes of the first meeting, held 17 March 1842, record his instructions to the women in procedural matters. That task was easy—they had already recognized the need for statutes and were aware of appropriate organizational deportment. Where their organization would fit into the Churchwide structure of governing quorums of priesthood, however, would evolve more gradually.

The Prophet had said that he hoped the society "might be built up to the Most High in an acceptable manner," that it should "move according to the ancient Priesthood." [^6] By the sixth meeting of the society, held 28 April 1842, he was ready to reveal the place of the newborn entity in that organization. He began that most significant discourse by announcing that he would "make observations respecting the Priesthood, and give instructions for the benefit of the Society." What follows connects the female organization with priesthood quorums in three particulars: doctrine, organization, and practice.

"Let every man stand in his own office, and labor in his own calling," Joseph Smith had charged Church members in 1832. (D&C 84:109.) Now he gave the women "instructions respecting the different offices, and the necessity of every individual acting in the sphere allotted him or her; and filling the several offices to which they were appointed." [^7] Not only would Relief Society have a presidency of three but "he would ordain them to preside over the Society—and let them preside just as the Presidency, preside over the church." The female presidency were to call officers "to carry out the designs of the Institution," and he added that they "be appointed and set apart, as Deacons, Teachers &c. are among us." [^8] It is not surprising that the sisters in the Utah reorganization of Relief Society referred to their order as a quorum.

Joseph also taught the sisters the same doctrines of the priesthood he had taught the priesthood quorums, as recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 84 and 121. [^9] Perhaps the most significant is the familiar injunction from section 121, affirming to priesthood holders that "the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness." That is, he had clarified, "by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned." (D&C 121:35-37.) Joseph now acknowledged to the sisters that it is "natural" for them to have "feelings of charity." He reminded them of "those sympathies which God has planted in [their] bosoms," of their innocence and purity. Then he charged the sisters that "not war, not jangle, not contradiction, but meekness, love, purity, these are the things that should magnify us." "If you live up to these principles," he promised, "how great and glorious!—if you live up to your privilege, the angels cannot be restrain'd from being your associates." [^10]

The principle of authority had long been affirmed to priesthood quorums: both the divine power with which each holder had been ordained, and the right of quorum officers to conduct group business. The same organizational principle was to obtain with the Relief Society: women were to be given certain "keys." In his 28 April 1842 sermon the Prophet approached that topic indirectly. He shared with the sisters his foreboding of his own impending death: "He said as he had this opportunity, he was going to instruct the Society and point out the way for them to conduct, that they might act according to the will of God—that he did not know as he should have many opportunities of teaching them—that they were going to be left to themselves,—they would not long have him to instruct them—that the church would not have his instruction long, and the world would not be troubled with him a great while, and would not have his teachings." In that spirit of urgency which characterized so much of the Prophet's last months, "he spoke of delivering the keys to this Society and to the church—that according to his prayers God had appointed him elsewhere." [^11] He admonished the sisters to sustain their presidency, "to concentrate their faith and prayers for, and place confidence [in] those whom God has appointed to honor, whom God has plac'd at the head to lead." "The keys are about to be given them," he promised, "that they may be able to detect every thing false, as well as to the Elders." "This Society is to get instruction thro' the order which God has established," he reiterated, "thro the medium of those appointed to lead." Then, he emphatically declared, "I now turn the key to you in the name of God." The promise was to follow: "This Society shall rejoice and knowledge and intelligence shall flow down from this time—this is the beginning of better days to this Society." [^12]

Elder Bruce R. McConkie clarified in a 1950 commentary what that key meant and how it would function in the twentieth-century Church. "By turning the key," he wrote, "the Prophet delegated to the duly appointed officers of the new organization a portion of the keys of the kingdom. Under the Priesthood they were now authorized to direct, control, and govern the affairs of the society. They thus became legal administrators holding the keys of presidency. Under this appointment their lawful acts would be recognized by the Lord and he would work with them in the rolling forth of the kingdom in the sphere assigned them." [^13]

What becomes apparent in reflection is how perfectly the inclusion of women within the structure of Church organization reflected the divine pattern of the perfect union of man and woman as seen in temple ordinances. It seems not mere coincidence that the initial impetus for their organization came from the women's desire to assist in the building of the temple. Their craving for the "knowledge and intelligence" promised them by the Prophet would connect them continually with that holy house. That principle of union, of "neither . . . the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord" (1 Corinthians 11:11), would become increasingly clear to the sisters of the Nauvoo Relief Society when the temple ordinances were extended to women in 1843. In a meeting prior to that time, Newel K. Whitney, himself recently endowed, clarified for the sisters their importance in the eternal plan: "In the beginning," he explained, "God created man male and female and bestow'd upon man certain blessings peculiar to a man of God, of which woman partook, so that without the female all things cannot be restor'd to the earth—it takes all to restore the Priesthood." [^14] With the organization of the Relief Society, the Lord had moved women, proven worthy by their faith and obedience, towards that final restoration. Inside the holy temple, as they ministered one to another, they would confirm their righteous receipt of the authority thus restored. On 20 September 1843 Emma Smith became the first woman of this dispensation to receive her endowment; before the Saints left Nauvoo, nearly three thousand women would be so blessed.

The essential element of the Relief Society, the only immutable part, is its spiritual core, maintained by shared sisterhood and confirmed by divine daughterhood. Through 150 years of change, that essence has remained. It is manifest in different ways as Latter-day Saint women have matured in the faith, but its gifts have been felt as women have reached for them. The nineteenth-century practice of women physically blessing each other and blessing their children is seldom seen in our time, but the Spirit that prompted those practices remains. The sisterhood so strengthened by the early practices can be found in the Church now as women find their connections as daughters of eternal parents.

In 1979 Spencer W. Kimball, then president of the Church, prepared a talk for the women of the Church. When time came for its delivery in the second satellite-broadcast women's meetings, he was too ill to deliver it. Perhaps you remember that his wife, Camilla, read the talk. I was struck by a particular parallel, one which I yet ponder. President Kimball wrote then of men "being given the tremendous responsibilities of fatherhood and the priesthood" and women "being given many tremendous responsibilities of motherhood and sisterhood." [^15] His paradigm makes two obvious parallels: motherhood is analogous to fatherhood, and sisterhood is analogous to priesthood. I was struck by the implied importance that parallel gives to sisterhood, to our importance to each other. I am not certain President Kimball interpreted his diagram in exactly the way I did. My experience in Relief Society, however, and my study of its history have led me to believe that there is a great strength in our sisterhood that in our century we have not yet fully tapped. It is there in potential. We see glimmers of it. We feel moments of it. Perhaps study of our history will help us more fully realize the potential power in our sisterhood.

One seemingly unexceptional Nauvoo Relief Society meeting has particular meaning for me. It was an ad hoc gathering; neither Joseph nor Emma Smith was present, and probably few of the members. Zina Diantha Jacobs, recently enrolled, had communicated to her sister Presendia her enthusiasm for the new society. Presendia lived in Lima, about thirty miles from Nauvoo. Despite, or perhaps because of, her discomfort with her disaffected husband and her ill health—she had lost three of her five children, and was again pregnant—she craved the solace of the sisterhood.

Counselor Sarah Cleveland conducted the meeting. She had been the oldest woman present at the organizational meeting, wife to a nonmember husband. She would soon be forced to follow him from Nauvoo, bidding her sisters a poignant farewell, which would close with the endearment, "Yours in the bands of the gospel." [^16] To the women now gathered, she announced that, there being "not much business to be attended to therefore we might spend the time in religious exercises before the Lord," a familiar invitation to testimony bearing. Sister Cleveland first spoke of "the happiness she felt in the present associations of other females." Presendia followed. As the minutes record, she "arose and said she rejoiced in the opportunity, that she considered it a great privilege. She felt that the spirit of the Lord was with the Society, and rejoic'd to become a member altho' residing at a distance and could not attend the meetings."

Sister Durfee then bore testimony to "the great blessing she received when administered to after the close of the last meeting, by Prest. E. Smith & Councillors Cleveland and Whitney." She had never realized more benefit through any administration, she acknowledged, and "that she was heal'd." (Predictably, the administration raised questions among the Nauvoo women not present, but at the next official meeting President Joseph Smith would lay them to rest: "there could be no devils in [women administering] if God gave his sanction by healing," adding, "if he had common sympathies, [he] would rejoice that the sick could be heal'd.") Blessings followed through the course of the current meeting, and the gift of tongues was manifest. "The spirit of the Lord like a purifying stream, refreshed every heart," concluded the minute-taker. [^17]

The sacred spirituality that graced the Nauvoo Relief Society is still our birthright. It is generated among us, in answer to our own needs. In our sisterhood we teach one another, testify to one another, bless one another by our love and our faith.

Relief Society came to an abrupt and deliberate end in Nauvoo. There is a lesson for us in learning why. We have long preferred to believe the organization simply did not survive the move West, but the documents indicate otherwise. The Nauvoo Relief Society was terminated before Joseph Smith was martyred. The circumstances surrounding its demise must have caused both Joseph and Emma great pain. From the time the principle was first introduced, Emma Smith had been an outspoken opponent of plural marriage. In her attempt to prove her faith, she had for one brief time assented to her husband's taking other wives, but the burden had been too heavy. With the most powerful weapon she had, her position as president of the Relief Society, she campaigned against the practice her husband was promoting. In four successive meetings on 9 and 16 March 1844, in veiled references obvious to those who were informed and involved, she disavowed the practice. She "wanted to see a reformation in boath men & women," she insisted. With each presentation, her tirade against plural marriage became more vehement, finally requiring the women to examine "the conduct of the leaders in this society—that you may sit in judgement on their heads." And then, in final argument, she claimed that "if their ever was any Authourity on the Earth she had it—and had yet." [^18]

The seeds of discord were sown, tares among the greening gospel wheat. The misuse of authority signifies the end of that authority. The Society was disbanded, although details of how and by whom are not recorded. The women forgave Emma; Eliza Snow seems even to have exonerated her later by suggesting that she "gave it up so as not to lead the society in erro[r]." [^19] Despite her behavior, Emma Smith's sisters did not vilify her in retrospect. Their forgiveness is exemplary. The most important principle to be learned here, however, is one that Eliza articulated when Brigham Young called her to revive Relief Society in Utah: "Without order we have no claim to the Spirit. We must have the spirit or we cannot remain organized," she taught the sisters then. [^20] Unity in gospel action is essential. "If ye are not one ye are not mine," said the Lord. (D&C 38:27.)

Through the long winter of the Saints' discontent, their expulsion from their city beautiful and their journey towards the western Zion, the women were bereft of their beloved Society. Its organization was proscribed; there were no meetings, no callings, no members to be admitted, none of the familiar apparatus. Even their charity work was taken over by bishops, though women participated individually to meet each other's needs. But the most significant elements remained: sisterhood and the Spirit. And because of those attributes, Eliza Snow, who in August 1846 wrote that "it is a growling, grumbling, devilish, sickly time with us now," would by the following spring record, "This is truly a glorious time with the mothers & daughters in Zion." [^21] As their bodies had weakened in the wilderness, the women had grown in their spirits. They learned to share whatever they had, "dividing" with one another, lending strength to each other, and they practiced the gifts of the Spirit. They blessed one another in whatever ways they could. Wrote one woman of a sister who came to visit: "She possessed such a good influence and asked me if I would sing. I had such a bad cold I could not sing so she arose, came to me and placed her hands upon my head and blessed me. . . . This was a great comfort to me." [^22] The essence of Relief Society remained. Writing later of the Relief Society, Emmeline B. Wells observed, "During all this time the sisters never lost sight of this institution as it had been established, nor of the promises made to them of its further greatness, by the Prophet Joseph Smith." [^23]

Eight years passed while the Saints established themselves safely in the Valley. Their families' basic needs met, a group of sisters gathered one winter afternoon in 1854 to sew clothing for Indian women and children whom they had noticed were poorly clad against the cold. A decade after Relief Society's demise, Matilda Dudley thus brought the Society forth from its own ashes, a phoenix that would not die. President Brigham Young acknowledged the spontaneous regeneration with favor. "We are going to propose to the sisters . . . to make clothes, &c for the Indians," he announced soon after. Under his direction each bishop was to organize the women in his ward. [^24] "It is a laudable undertaking," wrote Wilford Woodruff three years later, as the expanding Relief Society over which his wife Phebe presided met in his Fifteenth Ward home. "There were about 50 present, sewing, knitting, sewing carpet rags, making quilts, &c." Their function soon expanded beyond the temporal and charitable into the added commission the Prophet Joseph had given them: to save souls. While the women worked they listened to guest speakers, in this case Elder Woodruff and Robert Campbell. Another precedent was being set, which would come into full realization with yet another generation of Relief Society.

I have noticed while tracing Relief Society's history that its times of regeneration have occurred during periods of religious reawakening among the people. During such times Relief Society would spring up like volunteer tulips in March. The construction of the temple moving towards completion and Joseph Smith's preparation to introduce the endowment prodded the first incarnation of the Society in Nauvoo. The 1850s Utah societies emerged as prelude to or connected with the spiritual reawakening known to historians as the "Reformation." Latter-day Saints then culminated their self-examination by rebaptism and reconfirmation. But like its Nauvoo precedent, that reborn society also did not last: the dislocation of homes and families at the threatened invasion of Johnston's Army disrupted most of the young societies, and since no central church leadership existed to encourage their continuation once the threat passed, most of them vanished.

With the mid-1860s came another reawakening among the Saints. Wilford Woodruff reflected in his journal the renewing of temple ordinances, and Brigham Young pleaded with the Saints for increased piety in the face of the oncoming Gentile intrusion occasioned by the coming of the railroad. Eliza R. Snow in her autobiography records President Young's calling her then to provide churchwide leadership for yet a third generation of Relief Society. This time, largely because of the energetic and forward-thinking leadership she gave, the organization survived. Her two decades were the halcyon years of Relief Society expansion. Between 1867 and 1887 Relief Society fostered programs still functioning: Young Women, Primary, stake organization, and women's political involvement. Even more programs that evolved under her direction met temporary needs: wheat storage, cooperative stores, sericulture, a centennial celebration fair, a newspaper, medical training and services for women, Relief Society halls and granaries.

"Aunt Eliza," as she was lovingly called, was succeeded by Aunt Zina D. H. Young, then by Aunt Bathsheba W. Smith, and "Aunt Em," Emmeline B. Wells. All these presidents, whose administrations took the Society to 1921, shared the Nauvoo vision of the work. Then in the twentieth century—with the calling of Clarissa Williams, succeeded by Louise Y. Robison, Amy Brown Lyman, and culminating in the nearly thirty-year administration of Belle S. Spafford—Relief Society moved into a new gear. The period known to historians as the Progressive Era turned the "aunts' " mode of intimate leadership into a "presidents' " pattern of business administration. Professionalism and efficiency made it possible for the Society to deal effectively with a Church membership that was growing exponentially. Presidents Barbara B. Smith, Barbara Winder, and now Elaine Jack inherited in their turn a position of administrative complexity that demanded of them understanding beyond the realm of the aunts, or, for that matter, of most women of this or the last century.

Through 150 years of organization, consolidation, refinement, redirection, further expansion, retraction, and correlation, the Relief Society has emerged as we know it. Its present outward form, with the exception of visiting teaching and the testimony segment of Fast Sunday meetings, would be unrecognizable to our Nauvoo foremothers. But where we have nurtured them, the sisterhood and the Spirit have remained, the sturdy, enduring roots of our modern association.

As it was in the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo, so in our ward Relief Societies, diversity among the sisters is characteristic and in some cases predominant. Last year at this conference Karen Lynn Davidson told of her California Relief Society, which included, among others, a nightclub singer who gets up early every morning to teach seminary. "Only in California!" she could hear us say. Cathy Stokes told us a while ago of her Hyde Park, Chicago, ward where 25 percent of the Relief Society members are single mothers who have been in the Church fewer than five years. From Manhattan we hear of a lesson devoted to teaching women how to ride safely on the subway. We listen to Olga Kovarova and Edith Krause tell about our sisters in Czechoslovakia and in Germany, and from Moscow the Relief Society presidency write of their joy in celebrating the sesquicentennial of an organization that until recently had not existed for them. In our diversity, sisterhood, among those who choose to foster it, remains a dominant theme in Relief Society worldwide.

And so also does the Spirit. Relief Society could conceivably continue as a totally secular association, without spiritual direction or affirmation. But when both sisterhood and the Spirit are present, Relief Society becomes an entity unique among women's associations and will fulfill the Prophet Joseph's "promises . . . of its further greatness." [^25] The following account from a contemporary Relief Society president illustrates:

"Ruth was dying of cancer. Her husband Al was staying with her in the hospital, and the family members were visiting daily. I was on my way home one evening and found my car swinging up the hill towards the hospital. It was after visiting hours, but I slipped in anyway, trying to be inconspicuous. I knew there was a 'Family Only' sign on the door, but I wanted to check on Al to see if we could bring a meal by or anything for him. A nurse came out as I approached. 'May I see Mr. Roberts?' I asked. He overheard and signaled me to come in. We visited a bit, and I made my offers of help. He seemed okay. Then we went over to the bed. His wife lay in a light coma. Ruth, who had been so strikingly attractive, now slept with open mouth, teeth removed, hair thin and dull, complexion sallow. As we talked, Al and I rubbed her arms. 'She seems to like that,' he said. Across the room the phone rang. Al went to answer. I stood alone with Ruth, smoothing her hair. I thought of the women of another era who would have given her a blessing, and I wished I felt it appropriate now. As though wish were deed, I felt in my deepest soul the blessing that was Ruth's. It was as though I were the conduit through which the love the Lord had for Ruth was passing. I knew the message: whether Ruth was here with us or had already left us was inconsequential. She was with God, and she was His. Her offering was accepted, and He loved her. I was bathed in the warmth, the indescribable comfort of the Spirit. Though my hand still rested on Ruth's head, I realized that it was not the form that mattered. The Spirit will dictate its own forms. All I needed to do was to be willing and to be there." [^26]

Sisterhood and the Spirit are the timeless legacy of the Nauvoo Relief Society, and all its daughters, to us. May we infuse into our Relief Societies and our lives those two elusive but inestimable qualities, that we may receive the promise uttered by the prophet Joel: "And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions: and also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit." (Joel 2:28-29.)

---
Notas:
[^1] As quoted in Fred Lewis Pattee, The Feminine Fifties (New York: Appleton-Century Co., 1940), p. 110.
[^2] As quoted in Fred Lewis Pattee, The Development of the American Short Story (New York: Harper and Brothers Publishers, 1923), p. 72.
[^3] A book-length study of nineteenth-century female editors is Sherilyn Cox Bennion, Equal to the Occasion, Women Editors of the Nineteenth-Century West (Reno and Las Vegas: University of Nevada Press, 1990).
[^4] Information for this article has been drawn chiefly from Carol Cornwall Madsen, " 'Remember the Women of Zion': A Study of the Editorial Content of the Woman's Exponent, A Mormon Woman's Journal" (M.A. thesis, University of Utah, 1977).
[^5] Lula [Louisa] Greene Richards, "How the Exponent Was Started," Relief Society Magazine 14 (December 1928): 607.
[^6] Emmeline B. Wells, Diary, 18 January 1878, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^7] Salt Lake Herald, 9 April 1872.
[^8] Woman's Exponent 1 (1 June 1872): 4.
[^9] "Work for Women," Woman's Exponent 1 (15 April 1873): 172.
[^10] "Lady Lawyers," Woman's Exponent 1 (1 October 1872): 68.
[^11] "Women's Organizations," Woman's Exponent 8 (15 January 1880): 122.
[^12] "Woman Suffrage Leaflet" (Salt Lake City, January 1892), 3, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah; "A Wonderful Age," Woman's Exponent 27 (1 February 1899): 100.
[^13] "Position and Duties," Woman's Exponent 3 (15 July 1874): 28.
[^14] "Reveries of a Woman," Woman's Exponent 5 (1 May 1877): 180.
[^15] Woman's Exponent 16 (15 September 1887): 63.
[^16] Woman's Exponent 7 (1 December 1878): 102-3.
[^17] "Women Talkers and Women Writers," Woman's Exponent 5 (15 August 1876): 44.
[^18] "A Plea for Utah," Woman's Exponent 10 (1 December 1881): 100.
[^19] "Fear Not for Zion," Woman's Exponent 20 (15 November 1891): 76.
[^20] An earlier expression of the value of united effort is "Bear Ye One Another's Burdens," Woman's Exponent 2 (1 March 1874): 146. For examples of a cross-over in membership of the various clubs, see Woman's Exponent 24 (15 June 1895): 12; 25 (1 June 1896): 18; 25 (15 December 1896): 73.
[^21] "Women's Work and Duty," Woman's Exponent 24 (1 March 1896): 122; 25 (1, 15 November 1896): 69.
[^22] Woman's Exponent 21 (15 November 1892): 74.
[^23] Woman's Exponent 40 (July 1911): 4.
[^24] Ibid.
[^25] "Heartfelt Farewell," Woman's Exponent 41 (February 1914): 100.
[^26] Carol Cornwall Madsen is an associate professor of history and senior research historian with the Joseph Fielding Smith Institute for Church History at Brigham Young University. She is working on a biography of Emmeline B. Wells, suffragist, editor, and fifth general president of the Relief Society. She and her husband, Gordon A. Madsen, are the parents of six children.
