Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

Voices in Print: The Woman's Exponent, 1872-1914

CAROL CORNWALL MADSEN [^1]

In 1855, from his distant but perceptive vantage point in England, American author Nathaniel Hawthorne disdainfully noted the commercial success of a growing contingent of female novelists: "America is now given over to a damned mob of scribbling women, and I should have no chance of success while the public taste is occupied with their trash—and should be ashamed of myself if I did succeed." [^2] Despite his sour grapes, Hawthorne's retreat in the face of this female literary invasion confirmed the strength of women's presence in the American literary field in the nineteenth century. The development of the steam-powered printing press, which corresponded with a rise in literacy among women, initiated an explosion of newspapers, periodicals, and popular fiction, and women not only constituted a major segment of nationwide readers but of literary contributors as well. Publisher Lewis A. Godey of the popular Godey's Lady's Book was one of the first to offer his female contributors more than a forum for their writing. "We were the first to introduce the system of calling forth the slumbering talent of our country by offering an equivalent for the efforts of genius," he claimed in 1840. [^3] With fortune as well as fame in the offing, women were in the literary marketplace to stay.

As early as 1820, women's names began to appear not only as contributors to but as editors of a variety of newspapers and magazines, and by 1850 a substantial number of women's publications had begun to make their appearance in cities across the country, including the far West. [^4] Salt Lake City was one of them. In 1871, Edward L. Sloan, editor of the Salt Lake Herald, meeting resistance to the idea of a woman's column, decided to initiate a woman's paper, for which he felt there was a significant need. [^5] His choice for editor was Louisa (Lula) Greene, a twenty-two-year-old woman from Smithfield, Utah, who had contributed several poems to his paper. Hesitant to accept the offer on her own, Louisa sought the sanction of Eliza R. Snow and the blessing of Brigham Young before finally acquiescing. Early in 1872 she moved to the home of her great-uncle Lorenzo Dow Young in Salt Lake City to assume her new post. A small room in the Young home became the Exponent office, furnished only with a table, writing materials, a few books and magazines, some chairs—and a bed. It was to be home to the Exponent's editor as well. [^6] It was only temporary housing for the Exponent, however, which moved its office more than ten times during its forty-two year history, the office later serving as a meeting room for the Relief Society board and other women's committees. Until 1889 a yearly subscription to the biweekly paper cost two dollars, dropping to one dollar thereafter. Circulation probably did not exceed three or four thousand copies, but its sphere of influence was much broader through an exchange program with other women's newspapers throughout the country.

Aside from a loosely associated network of agents and correspondents who attempted to increase circulation and a brief period in which a "Consulting Committee" met to supervise its publication, the Woman's Exponent never had a formal editorial staff. The editorials, many of the articles, most of the biographical sketches, the poetry, and the fiction were written primarily by the editors themselves, first Louisa Greene, who served until 1877, and then Emmeline B. Wells, who served until the demise of the paper in 1914. In addition, with only occasional help, they handled the financial accounts, the correspondence, and the mailing. "I never supposed when I commenced working on the paper," Emmeline Wells confided to her diary in 1878, "that I would have to do everything for myself. I feel sometimes my burden is too heavy." [^7]

Announcement of the forthcoming paper, composed of eight quarto-sized pages, appeared in the Herald in April 1872: "The women of Utah are today unquestionably more the subject of comment than those of any other portion of the country, or indeed of the world. As they have long exercised the right to think and act for themselves, so they now claim the right to speak for themselves through the potent medium of the types." [^8]

The public practice of polygamy (more correctly, polygyny) was drawing increased attention to Mormons, and the newspaper was intended to provide a forum for articulate LDS women to explain themselves and their beliefs. It was not to be a strident voice for any cause. In fact, the editor promised her readers that there would be no need to promote woman suffrage, since Utah women had been enfranchised in 1870, to contend against any wrongs, or champion any claim. [^9] By the second issue, however, the paper's goal to "speak freely on every topic of current interest to women" elicited articles and editorials strongly endorsing woman suffrage, contending against the discrimination of women in politics, education, and the workplace, and defending and championing Mormonism, especially the practice of plural marriage.

But the paper was not just a polemic. Over its forty-two-year span, the Exponent addressed a wide variety of topics of interest to women. Promising at the outset to include a "brief and graphic summary of current news, local and general," especially anything relating to nontraditional women, it also featured articles on home and family life, religious doctrine, home manufacturing, travel, and cultural events, and included biographical sketches of the "leading sisters" as well as short life sketches and obituaries of lesser-known women. A major feature was the printed reports of the Relief Society, the Primary, and Young Women's associations and minutes of various women's groups such as the Retrenchment Society, the Reapers Club, and the Women's Press Club. Poetry found its way into every issue along with popular moralistic short stories of virtuous women reforming wayward men. Domesticity received less attention, because the paper's mission was to broaden the knowledge and interests of its readers. A categorical breakdown of the editorial content reflects the Exponent's emphasis. More than 20 percent of the editorials addressed the subject of woman's rights, another 20 percent discussed Church and Relief Society news, 10 percent defended polygamy, and 7 percent supported woman suffrage. If nothing else, the Woman's Exponent confirmed the extent to which LDS women were in tune with the dynamics of the broader society of their time and their knowledge of the issues that affected them as women.

Each decade of its forty-two-year run seems to have been characterized by a dominant theme relating to the public, collective experience of Mormon women. The first decade was, in many ways, a golden era for their public expression and contribution. Having been given the vote in 1870, they were proud of their participation in the political process, well before most other American women, and voiced their opinions on the volatile question of women's rights. Editor Richards was convinced that LDS women enjoyed such rights well ahead of their American sisters because of the broad-minded policies of Brigham Young: "President Young," she wrote, "proves himself [the] most genuine, impartial and practical 'Woman's Rights man' upon the American continent, as he has ever done; his counsels, instructions and advice to women being always directed toward their progress and advancement in usefulness and the possession of valuable knowledge." [^10] Utah women did indeed enjoy not only political rights but educational and vocational opportunities, Utah being among the earliest territories or states, for example, to admit women to practice law. That fact elicited another exuberant comment from the editor: "Here in Utah, decried, abused and maligned as it has been, women enjoy more of what is contended for as woman's rights than they do in any State in the Federal Union; and that they appreciate their position and are seeking to qualify themselves for spheres of usefulness to which their sisters in other parts of the country can only yet look in prospective." [^11]

One avenue of qualification was the Relief Society, through which their abilities, talents, and public interests could be expressed and developed. "The organization of the Relief Society . . . ," wrote Emmeline Wells, "has given to woman, in its rise and progress, influence on almost all subjects that pertain to her welfare and happiness, and opportunities for expressing her own thoughts, views and opinions; all of which has had a tendency to make her intelligent in regard to matters which before were considered incompatible with 'woman's sphere,' and unintelligible to her 'weaker' mind." [^12] Charter member Sarah Kimball agreed and further believed that "the sure foundations of the suffrage cause were deeply and permanently laid" at the organization of the Relief Society. Editor Wells opined that when Joseph "turned the key to women," men no longer "had the same absolute sway." [^13]

Because they participated in politics and managed and controlled numerous economic projects assigned them through the Relief Society, LDS women had reason to feel that Mormonism, through both its theology and temporal enterprises, offered them broader opportunities for advancement and individual achievement than were available to women outside the Church. A heightened self-image developed from these social and religious concepts, fervently expressed by Eliza R. Snow, who often reminded her LDS sisters that they occupied "a more important position than is occupied by any other women on the earth. Associated, as they are, with apostles and prophets . . . —with them sharing in the gifts and powers of the holy Priesthood . . . —participating in those sacred ordinances, without which we could never be prepared to dwell in the presence of the Holy Ones." [^14]

Louisa Greene endorsed this sentiment. "There is no greater freedom than the Gospel gives to woman," she wrote. "And it is this that makes Mormon women conscious of their power. They have suffered and become strong; experience has matured them, and given them a higher order of attainment than a mere mental education." [^15] An anonymous writer claimed that no where else "in all the broad land do women enjoy such freedom" as do Mormon women. "Where are they looked upon by their husbands as their equal?" she asked. "How beautiful to contemplate the restitution of all things in these the last days. The Gospel breaks the fetters wherewith woman is bound, takes her by the hand and says, 'Woman, know thyself.' " [^16]

When the next decade broke with all its anti-polygamy fury upon the lives of Mormon women, this elevated self-image helped sustain them against repeated federal and societal assault. The eighties became a time for "circling the wagons," closing in to meet the attack, sometimes with defiance, other times with pleas for understanding, and finally with resignation. Their defiant posture was provoked by the organization in 1878 in Salt Lake City of the Anti-Polygamy Society, whose agenda was immediate prohibition of polygamy. Rallying to their own defense, Mormon women met the challenge with assurance and conviction. "We never thought that woman could rise up against woman," declared Emmeline Wells in astonishment at this female attack on their religious rights. "The time has come when we can no longer be silent, as we are assailed, and that too by our own sex. . . .

" . . . we must meet it [the challenge]; and we intend to meet it with all the energy and fortitude we possess, and it will be 'diamond cut diamond' rest assured." [^17]

While men were arguing the politics of continued practice, women argued the moral and feminist implications of it. "The world says Polygamy makes women inferior to men—we think differently," asserted one editorial. "Polygamy, gives women more time for thought, for mental culture, more freedom of action, a broader field of labor, inculcates liberality and generosity, develops more fully the spiritual elements of life, fosters purity of thought and gives wider scope to benevolence." [^18] Affirming its benefits, another article claimed that LDS women "by self-sacrifice, or say by laying aside selfishness and becoming endowed with that nobility of character, which will grasp the higher good for the larger number, . . . have shown themselves equal to the effort [required of the practice]." [^19]

By the time the federal anti-polygamy Edmunds-Tucker Act became law in 1887, escheating Church property and crippling its economic base as well as disenfranchising polygamists and all Utah women, many Saints had become disheartened and apprehensive. In response, the Exponent attempted to rally the spirits of its readers, reminding them that "again and again in ancient and modern revelation has the Lord said He would have a tried people." It cautioned them "that the Lord's ways are not as man's ways, and that great things never come about as even wise men anticipate." Thus, it advised, "the Saints should not murmur as did ancient Israel lest they lose sight of 'the prize of the high calling.' " [^20]

Whatever the manner individual women chose to use to respond to the 1890 Manifesto suspending the practice of plural marriage, the Woman's Exponent by its third decade seemed eager to lay aside past differences and support efforts to unite LDS and gentile women under the common rubric of "Utah women." Linking leadership and resources, many women from both camps decided it was time for Utah women, in a decade-long spirit of detente, to replicate the community action of their American sisters. Celebrating a commingling of LDS and non-LDS women in the local federation of women's clubs, organized in 1892, the Woman's Exponent reported its annual meetings and public works, including lobbying for libraries, playgrounds, and recreation centers in Utah towns and cities, all public enterprises of mutual benefit. [^21]

Detente, the theme of this conciliatory era of the Woman's Exponent, also surfaced in the area of education. With Protestant denominational schools vying for recruits from the LDS "ward" schools, the establishment of a public school system in 1890 helped to soften the critical edges and separatist attitudes of the earlier systems. It also paved the way for cooperative action to achieve mutual educational goals. One of these was establishing a kindergarten, an educational goal of that time, which became a major catalyst for Mormon-Gentile unity when the two groups merged their independent associations into a single Utah State Kindergarten Association in 1896. The Exponent enthusiastically reported its achievements. Their cooperative efforts, supported by the lobbying committee of the state federation of women's clubs, resulted in passage of a bill in 1903 providing that at least one kindergarten be opened and maintained in every Utah town of 2500 inhabitants, a major achievement of Utah women.

Although the nation as a whole did not yet consider politics appropriate for women's participation, in Utah, where women had had the vote from 1870 to 1887, politics were high on women's public agenda and were followed closely by the Woman's Exponent. Utah politics dramatically changed when preparation for statehood, attained in 1896, required a new configuration of alliances as Utah residents dissolved their local, religiously defined political parties to adopt the national two-party system. LDS and gentile women refranchised at statehood found that new political allegiances could transcend religious differences as they declared themselves Democrats or Republicans and actively supported candidates based on political rather than religious preference. [^22]

The most dramatic evidence of the spirit of detente that found detailed coverage in the Woman's Exponent was the great Columbian Exhibition and World's Fair held in Chicago in 1893. A national Board of Lady Managers was appointed to head a Woman's Commission, with a local board in each state to supervise a monumental display of the industrial, artistic, and domestic talents of the women of America. The Utah Board of Lady Managers consisted of both Mormon and non-Mormon women, and Utah's representation in the Woman's Building reflected more than a combined physical and organizational effort. It was a union of hearts and spirits in a single cause: to show the world that Utah women were as advanced, as cul-tured, as educated, and as talented as women anywhere else. Moreover, Utah women gained something themselves from the experience: a newly forged sisterhood that had somehow weathered the bitterness of earlier times and found a comfortable peace in promoting women's culture. Proud of this achievement, territorial manager Emily Richards reported to the Exponent: "While this work is divided between the territory, county and individual, it will all go to make one great whole and will be looked upon by visitors at the World's Fair as an exhibit from the women of Utah." [^23] Though coming midway in the decade, the Columbian Exhibition was a pinnacle of achievement for the entire decade, uniting women in a fragile but valued bond of common purpose.

At the turn of the century, the Exponent entered its fourth and final phase. Interest had waned, circulation had dropped, the editions were becoming sporadic, editor Emmeline B. Wells had turned her attention to the Relief Society, which she then headed, and the causes that had breathed life and purpose into its pages gradually passed into history. With many volatile issues laid to rest, editor Wells, urged by Brigham Young years earlier to record the lives of LDS women, used this period of relative quiescence to complete that charge. In her thirty-seven years as editor, she wrote or edited 319 biographical sketches, twenty-five major life stories, and many collective biographies (women in music, literature, journalism, etc.) as well as brief obituaries for scores of LDS women. "The Woman's Exponent," she wrote in a late issue, "will furnish good material for future historians who will, it is ardently hoped, remember the women of Zion when compiling the history of this Western land." [^24]

Though generally ignored by most historians until recently, the Exponent is a major source of Mormon women's history. Not only has it preserved the lives of individual women but it has also preserved a record of their organizations and contributions through the reports of their organizations, their clubs and societies, and their individual achievements.

To twentieth-century readers, the Woman's Exponent is like a window framing a forty-two-year spectrum of views into another life and time. It chronicles the intellectual, religious, economic, and social history of LDS women during a dynamic period of Mormonism, covering a third of its history and registering women's responses to the events that defined their lives. For forty-two years, women had a forum, free of authoritative or formal constraints, to explain themselves to the world and to express their own ideas and feelings on issues important to them. It provided a network for LDS women, linking them together through the unifying strands of their lives while allowing for the diversity of experience and thought each one represented. Through their concentrated efforts to present themselves favorably to the world through the medium of the Exponent, Mormon women reinforced their own faith in themselves and their commitment to their beliefs. This unity of effort and common conviction offset the demoralizing effects of the anti-Mormon crusade and developed a strength in that unity that helped preserve an instrumental self-concept.

Moreover, the Woman's Exponent proved to be a continuing connection for LDS women with the forces of the woman's movement of that time, to which they were vitally and imperatively attached. All of the principal issues of the "woman question" of the nineteenth century interfaced to an appreciable extent with Mormonism, and even the most apathetic woman could hardly escape the consequences of that connection.

Finally, by its own account, the Woman's Exponent preserved a segment of LDS history little noted and never studied until recently. "There has been no great work during these years commenced by women," editor Wells claimed in 1911, "that has not been considered and helped by this little paper." [^25] Indeed, for LDS women's history, the Woman's Exponent is a pearl of great price. In a final editorial, Emmeline Wells appraised its worth for its own time and for ours: "For women, it [the Woman's Exponent] has been a standard bearer, proclaiming their worth and just claims throughout the long years of its existence. . . . It has surely performed a mission in the midst of Zion for the women of Zion, holding as it does within its leaves the history of their work." [^26] Through the Woman's Exponent LDS women have a claim on their past. It is a voice from that past that echoes resoundingly today.

---
Notas:
[^1] Relief Society Magazine 3 (March 1969): 162. All subsequent references are to the Relief Society Magazine.
[^2] 12 (December 1970): 894-95.
[^3] 11 (November 1970): 817.
[^4] 1 (January 1915): 38.
[^5] 1 (January 1922): 49.
[^6] 1 (January 1915): 22.
[^7] 5 (May 1940): 352.
[^8] 2 (February 1918): 101.
[^9] 3 (March 1949): 148.
[^10] 2 (February 1949): 75-76.
[^11] 9 (September 1940): 626.
[^12] 6 (June 1952): 409.
[^13] Carol L. Clark has served as a member of the Relief Society general board and as administrative assistant to the general presidency of the Relief Society. She has held prominent positions in business, education, and government and has written and edited several books, including The Relief Society Magazine: A Legacy Remembered.
[^14] "Reveries of a Woman," Woman's Exponent 5 (1 May 1877): 180.
[^15] Woman's Exponent 16 (15 September 1887): 63.
[^16] Woman's Exponent 7 (1 December 1878): 102-3.
[^17] "Women Talkers and Women Writers," Woman's Exponent 5 (15 August 1876): 44.
[^18] "A Plea for Utah," Woman's Exponent 10 (1 December 1881): 100.
[^19] "Fear Not for Zion," Woman's Exponent 20 (15 November 1891): 76.
[^20] An earlier expression of the value of united effort is "Bear Ye One Another's Burdens," Woman's Exponent 2 (1 March 1874): 146. For examples of a cross-over in membership of the various clubs, see Woman's Exponent 24 (15 June 1895): 12; 25 (1 June 1896): 18; 25 (15 December 1896): 73.
[^21] "Women's Work and Duty," Woman's Exponent 24 (1 March 1896): 122; 25 (1, 15 November 1896): 69.
[^22] Woman's Exponent 21 (15 November 1892): 74.
[^23] Woman's Exponent 40 (July 1911): 4.
[^24] Ibid.
[^25] "Heartfelt Farewell," Woman's Exponent 41 (February 1914): 100.
[^26] Carol Cornwall Madsen is an associate professor of history and senior research historian with the Joseph Fielding Smith Institute for Church History at Brigham Young University. She is working on a biography of Emmeline B. Wells, suffragist, editor, and fifth general president of the Relief Society. She and her husband, Gordon A. Madsen, are the parents of six children.
