Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

The Relief Society Magazine, 1914-1970

CAROL L. CLARK [^1]

In December 1970, after a fifty-seven-year history, publication of the Relief Society Magazine came to an end. Although many of the subscribers looked forward to the inauguration of the Ensign, there were those who could not help but look back. The Relief Society Magazine had been an outgrowth of the Woman's Exponent, and together they had spanned a period of nearly one hundred years. Such a tradition for women did not end without a measure of sadness. One eighty-four-year-old woman unknowingly expressed the feelings of many Relief Society sisters when she bade the magazine farewell for reasons of her own early in 1969: "Dear Relief Society Magazine: It is with regret and tears that I must say good-bye. My sight is so bad and no repairs can be given it, so I cannot read you any more. For thirty years and more I have enjoyed you, but now I am unable to read the wonderful stories and articles. Good-bye Magazine. I hate so to see you go." [^2]

Marianne Clark Sharp, the Magazine's editor in 1970 wrote, "Changing times have brought the end of the journey to the Relief Society Magazine. The times were different when it began in 1914—and that time was the end of the journey for the Woman's Exponent. . . . Everyone has worked unselfishly for its [the Magazine's] success, which is attested by the subscription numbers of 301,000 as of August 1970, which would have been greatly increased by the end of the year had the Magazine continued." [^3]

In the November issue, Relief Society general president Belle Spafford said: "We must remember . . . that with the growth and expansion of the Church, changes must be anticipated, accepted, and adjustments to new ways and new programs made with willingness and faith in the inspiration that guides our leaders." [^4]

Surely but reluctantly, Relief Society leaders closed the last page of their beloved magazine.

The Relief Society Magazine is still to be loved, for it celebrates the promise and legacy of Relief Society. It is perhaps the single best barometer of the temperaments and attitudes, joys and woes of generations of Mormon women in this century. It was the repository of the articulation of Relief Society's goals, modus operandi, and developing curriculum.

Originally the Magazine's major purpose was to provide a forum for lessons. In 1914 the Relief Society Guide and Relief Society Bulletin introduced the first uniform Relief Society "guide" lessons written at Church headquarters. Interestingly, the lessons are reminiscent of Church lessons today—short outlines.

The curricula were published in the Magazine throughout its history, but the Magazine's purposes expanded as did its circulation. When it formally began in January 1915, Emmeline B. Wells was the general president of the Relief Society. She was the literal link with the past, and having lived through the Nauvoo period, she provided much of the continuity and ballast needed as the fledgling Relief Society Magazine embarked. Susa Young Gates, Brigham Young's daughter and the first editor of the Magazine, brought fresh energy to the Magazine. In the first issue she wrote: "It is impossible for us to be sure what any child of ours may become. How much more impossible, then, to forecast what shall be the future, the final character, of this literary infant, newly-born. . . . We [wish to] make of this magazine a beacon light of hope, beauty, and charity. . . . It is, therefore, the spirit and genius of the Gospel which we would like to develop and expound brightly, attractively, cheerfully, and hopefully, to the readers of the Relief Society Magazine." [^5]

The Magazine did bring much hope and cheer to its readers, although it seldom contained much fine-quality literature. But then it was never intended to. In 1922 editor Gates explained: "As between a cold, spiritless, finished story, and a halting, crudely-told tale, breathing a testimony of the gospel from start to finish, we choose the inspired story." [^6]

And Relief Society leaders did publish much that represented the conscience of thousands of Latter-day Saint women. The Magazine became a forum, a place where Latter-day Saint women could publish their poetry and articles, receive credit for their good works, read serialized stories (such as the "Prince of Ur" by Homespun), feel part of their sisterhood, and learn gospel truths.

The Relief Society Magazine bonded the sisters, in part because it was often contemporary and spoke knowingly to many issues, fashion among them. Evidence comes from the first issue, in " 'Clothing for the Woman Past Forty,' by the Two Sarahs": "When we are approaching the autumn of life, greater care and attention should be given to our appearance than ever before. . . . Dark greens, greys, purples, navy blue, and seal brown are appropriate shades for the woman of forty. . . . Avoid black, when possible, as it is trying at this time of life." [^7]

Amusing as that 1915 passage might sound to us now, the Magazine still speaks vitally to today's readers, for the women at the helm of the Magazine believed theirs was a divine mission and the Magazine should reflect timeless truths. This sense of mission is evident in the articles, poems, and lessons, which were meant to be teaching tools and sources of inspiration for the sisters.

To read the Relief Society Magazine is to watch the sisters expand Relief Society into education. We must remember that Relief Society was not established as an educational organization. It was a charitable organization. The general board struggled for years with the Society's educational identity. They may not have clearly defined it, but they stood for the value of education, both secular and religious, and they let the curriculum evolve according to the knowledge and interests of the time.

An example of how Latter-day Saint women brought the best of secular and religious instruction together is found in the story of the first Relief Society lessons developed at Church headquarters. Ida Smoot Dusenberry, the driving force behind Mother Education lessons, demonstrates how one person's knowledge and expertise can change Church policy. In fact, her formative influence on Relief Society education makes her perhaps the most important educational leader Relief Society has ever had. An instructor at Brigham Young Academy, she was also second counselor in the Relief Society general presidency from 1901 to 1910. Her Relief Society position allowed her to help move Relief Society into a new role as a formal educator of its members.

Sister Dusenberry's significance to Relief Society began in 1892 when Colonel Francis Parker visited Provo to lecture on the Quincy System, a new child-centered method of teaching children. She became an avid supporter of kindergartens, not then part of the public education system, after she heard Parker's lectures, and her involvement with the movement went beyond the Academy and into state, national, and international levels. Her great interest in the education of young children led her to Boston and New York, where she studied with John Dewey and other national educational leaders. Sister Dusenberry carried her zeal for early childhood education into the Mother's Classes—the first formalized Relief Society curriculum.

A woman of vision and ability, Ida Smoot Dusenberry did more, perhaps, than anyone else to move Relief Society into a Churchwide curriculum. In 1915 the Relief Society Magazine began including lessons that were written for the Church as a whole. These Relief Society lessons exhibit wonderful variety, particularly in the teens and twenties of this century:

SOCIETY LESSON TITLES 1915 First MeetingWork and Business

Meeting and Testimony (Orson F. Whitney's Gospel Themes)

Meeting (Genealogical Society of Utah lesson book)

Meeting Ethics (Alice M. Horne's Devotees and Their Shrines)

1925 First MeetingTheology and Testimony (dispensations when the gospel was on the earth)

Meeting and Business

Meeting (American)

Meeting Service (a variety of topics including problem children and social aspects of education)

the educational curriculum developed, other regular features grew, too. Through the years the Relief Society Magazine published countless stories and poems. Women received special encouragement to write creatively through the Magazine's competitions. In fact, the Relief Society poem contest, which began in 1923 as the Eliza R. Snow Memorial poem contest, is the oldest writing competition in the Church. The Magazine's poems generally dealt with matters of testimony and relationships, especially motherhood. A sample poem is "Discrimination," by Olive McHugh:

"Your mother is a lovely rose," I hear my neighbor say. She senses not variety; My mother is a choice bouquet. [^8]

"Notes to the Field" was a regular column in which the general board instructed sisters in various aspects of Relief Society work. Even after the Magazine's demise, "Notes to the Field" were sent to Relief Society workers for several years. Instructions might include policy decisions, as this notable item from World War I: "No Knitting During Meetings":

"The recent decision of the General Board was that knitting shall not be done during our meeting hours except at the regular work meetings. The inattention which is an accompaniment of active fingers is not polite to the speaker or class teacher, nor does it permit the members to get the most out of their lesson work. Our sisters will have plenty of time at home and in the work meetings to do all the knitting for which they can obtain yarn and thus assist the Red Cross cause." [^9]

The Magazine also regularly featured reports of Relief Society Conference addresses, where Relief Society and priesthood leaders testified, counseled, and advised. Readers might hear from their president, in this instance, Belle S. Spafford: "There is within this society a great life-giving element—a spirit which reaches out to women . . . of all nationalities into a great sisterhood, unifying them in purpose and impelling them on to worthy accomplishment. This life-giving spirit is the spirit of the gospel; it is this which makes Relief Society different from other women's organizations the world over. It is this that gives to Relief Society its strength as well as its heart and soul." [^10]

Or from priesthood leaders, such as Bishop LeGrand Richards: "I say, If you want anything done give it to the Relief Society. They never fail." [^11]

More than any other section of the Magazine, "Notes from the Field," which ran from the first to the last issue, demonstrated that "charity never faileth" was more than a motto to thousands of Relief Society women. In the throes of depression and war, in the midst of abundance and peace, in struggling branches and burgeoning wards, Relief Society work went forward. Sometimes humorous, sometimes tragic, the accounts in "Notes from the Field," sent to Church headquarters by sisters, focused attention on the bazaars, visiting teaching, quilting, homemaking, singing mothers, socials, and compassionate service that were so much a part of Relief Society.

From the Netherlands Mission, 1940: "[Sister Zippro, president of the Relief Society in Holland] says she has never seen so many men marching, so many tanks, airplanes, and tractors, which caused a tremendous destruction of life. . . . She found many families in Rotterdam who had had their homes, furniture, and all earthly belongings completely destroyed and had gone to live with other members temporarily. The old hall in Rotterdam had been completely destroyed, but the new chapel over-mass was still intact, and the members were planning to hold Sunday School there." [^12]

And from the East German Mission, Leipzig District, 1952: "Sister Lena Glaus, President, East German Mission Relief Society, reports the many problems and opportunities for service in the East German Mission: 'We think our mission is the best mission in the whole Church. Do you know why? Because no other mission has as many problems as we have.' " [^13]

Relief Society did expand many a woman's sphere. The column entitled "Woman's Sphere," which appeared in the last decades of the Magazine, included selections that spoke to numerous areas in which women make positive contributions. Relief Society sisters felt it a privilege as well as a duty to contribute by making their homes and communities better places to live. Articles recount Relief Society's struggles against disease, fight for the vote, sponsorship of health and sanitation legislation, efforts for the Red Cross, and shipment of carloads of clothing to war-torn Europe.

While Latter-day Saint women looked forward in their community activities, they also looked back. Early on, the Magazine told stories of yesterday's women in a biographical series based on the lives of well-known Relief Society leaders. In later years the Magazine added tributes to lesser-known women whose private lives were filled with faith and courage.

How-to homemaking tips were also found in every issue of the Magazine, often a combination of the practical and the spiritual. The common themes included dedication to principles of providence, love of culture, and devotion to children.

Committed, thoughtful women wrote for the Relief Society Magazine. Their insights and inspirations on subjects ranging from gardening to dealing with stress show clearly that woman's sphere is indeed limitless and that Latter-day Saint women showed their faith through their works. Those who loved and tended the Magazine felt well rewarded for what it added to the lives of generations of Latter-day Saint women.

---
Notas:
[^1] For an in-depth commentary on the Genesis Adam and Eve story, see Jolene Edmunds Rockwood, "The Redemption of Eve" in Sisters in Spirit, ed. Maureen Ursenbach Beecher and Lavina Fielding Anderson (Urbana and Chicago, Illinois: University of Illinois Press, 1987), pp. 3-36, or Rockwood, "Eve's Role in the Creation and the Fall to Mortality" in Women Steadfast in Christ: To See Life Steadily and See It Whole, ed. Dawn Hall Anderson and Marie Cornwall (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book Co., 1991), pp. 49-68.
[^2] Ber 24a and Meg 23a, Talmud, as cited in Constance F. Parvey, "The Theology and Leadership of Women" in Religion and Sexism: Images of Women in the Jewish and Christian Traditions, ed. Rosemary Radford Ruether (New York: Simon and Schuster, Touchstone, 1974), p. 129.
[^3] Louis Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews, 12th ed., 7 vols. (1909; Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America, 1937) 1:67.
[^4] Ibid.
[^5] A. Cohen, Everyman's Talmud (New York: Schocken Books, 1975), pp. 160, 179.
[^6] Ibid., p. 161.
[^7] Ginzberg, 1:66.
[^8] Ibid., 1:68.
[^9] Ibid., 1:67
[^10] Cohen, p. 171.
[^11] Ibid., p. 172
[^12] Ibid.
[^13] Bruce R. McConkie, The Mortal Messiah (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book Co., 1979), 1:223.
