Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

Choosing the Good Part: Women from Christ to Paul

JOLENE EDMUNDS ROCKWOOD [^1]

There is an interesting story in Luke 10:38-42. Jesus has gone to Bethany, to the home of Mary, Martha, and Lazarus, whom Jesus later would raise from the dead. Mary is sitting with Jesus, listening to his word, when Martha, cumbered about with much serving, comes to him and says, "Lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? Bid her therefore that she help me." And Jesus answers her and says, "Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: but one thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her."

This story has powerful implications for us as women, for in speaking as he did, Christ departed from the role of women in the Judaic tradition, and in so doing set Christian precedents that are as relevant to us today as they were when they were first uttered.

What was the role of a woman in the society in which Jesus was born and grew up? The Midrash and the Talmud, early Jewish writings dating from about 400 b.c. to the latter part of the first Christian century, indicate that Jews at this time believed that Eve was solely responsible for the transgression in Eden and that, because of her role in the Fall, all women were subject to and inferior to men. Also, because Eve was formed from Adam's rib, women were regarded as a secondary creation. [^2] Although in Judaism a woman was highly honored in her role as mother, she had no role in public worship. In the synagogues, men and women were separated during worship to prevent the women from "distracting" the men, a tradition referring back to the image of Eve as temptress. As woman was the cause of Adam's fall, so also a woman's voice in a religious meeting would tempt a man away from higher worship. [^3] It was the woman's duty to listen and not to respond or be seen.

Even some of the religious rituals a woman conducted in the home became her responsibility because of Eve's actions in the Garden of Eden. The woman, for example, was to light the candles to begin the Sabbath observance because it was woman who originally "extinguished the light of man's soul." [^4] When she kneaded dough, it was her responsibility to separate out a "heave" offering (the best portions of the sacrificial animal which historically were set aside for Yahweh and the priests before the sacrifice was made) to make amends for Eve's defiling Adam, who was "the heave offering of the world." [^5]

A woman "acquired merit" by encouraging her husband and sons to study the Torah, but "whoever teaches his daughter Torah is as though he taught her obscenity." Jews were to "let the words of the Torah rather be destroyed by fire than imparted to women," because "a woman has no learning except in the use of the spindle." [^6]

The men were encouraged to leave their wives at home and "go into the marketplace and learn intelligence from other men," because women, by nature of their creation, were intellectually and physically inferior to men. [^7] The Midrash records that God deliberated long in deciding which part of the body he would use to make the wife of Adam, but "in spite of the great caution used, woman has all the faults God tried to obviate"—including haughtiness, eavesdropping, wantonness, and jealousy. These characteristics were seen as evident not only in Eve but also in Sarah, "an eavesdropper in her own tent"; Miriam, "a talebearer" who accused Moses; Rachel, who was "envious" of Leah; and Dinah, who was a "gadabout." [^8] At their first meeting Adam perceived these pernicious qualities in Eve and knew she would "seek to carry her point with man either by entreaties and tears, or flattery and caresses." [^9]

The Midrash also derives other qualities of women from that primeval rib. For example, women need to use perfumes and men do not because "dust of the ground remains the same no matter how long it is kept; flesh, however, requires salt to keep it in good condition." Women's voices are high and "shrill" and men's are not because "when soft viands are cooked, no sound is heard, but let a bone be put in a pot, and at once it crackles." Women are rigid and not easily placated, as men are, because "a few drops of water suffice to soften a clod of earth" but "a bone stays hard" and will not soften in water. It is the man who proposes marriage and not the woman because man lost his rib and must find a woman to retrieve it. And finally, "women precede men in a funeral cortege, because it was woman who brought death into the world." [^10]

Jews prayed for sons and celebrated when they were born. No corresponding celebration marked the birth of a daughter. "The world cannot exist without males and females," a rabbinical dictum states, "but happy is he whose children are sons and woe to him whose children are daughters." [^11] "The Lord bless thee with sons and keep thee from daughters" were the words of the priestly benediction. [^12]

According to Israelite law, after childbirth a woman must not touch any sacred vessel or enter any sacred place until she was "purified." If her child was male, this period was forty days; if a daughter, purification required twice as long, eighty days. And, finally, to be born male was itself reason to give thanks daily: "A man is obliged to offer three benedictions daily; that He has made me an Israelite, that He has not made me a woman, that He has not made me a boor." [^13]

Thus in the Jewish writings that emerged between the end of the Old Testament period and the first centuries after Christ, the Genesis Adam and Eve account was used by many commentators to justify cultural practices, explain, or even create, sexual characteristics, and define roles of men and women.

The Midrash, Talmud, and apocryphal and pseudepigraphal literature were all in use by the Jews at the time of Christ and shaped the society into which he was born. Jesus Christ was born into a strict Jewish household. His Judaic lineage, his ancestral line back to David and ultimately to Adam, is listed in two different places in the Gospels. (Matthew 1:1-17; Luke 3:23-38.) There are many indications that Joseph and Mary were strict observers of the law of Moses, as were Mary's cousin Elisabeth and Zacharias, the parents of John the Baptist. Zacharias was a Levite and a priest in the temple. (Luke 1:5.) We know that John the Baptist went through the ritual rite of circumcision after eight days and that an angelic visitor attended the circumcision ceremony and gave John a special blessing. (Luke 1:59; D&C 84:28.) Most certainly, Jesus followed this same route, as did all Jewish boys. (Luke 2:21.)

After the ritual forty-day purification period, Joseph and Mary took the baby Jesus to the temple, in accordance with the law of Moses, to offer a sacrifice and present the child. (Luke 2:22-38.) Jesus' education undoubtedly began as a small child, for all Jewish mothers used the psalms and prayers as lullabies. When little boys were three, their fathers began "to teach them . . . scripture, benedictions, and wise sayings. Formal schooling began at five or six, with the Bible as the text." [^14] A boy, at seventeen, would then go on to rabbinical academies. The four Gospel accounts of his ministry show that Jesus had a thorough knowledge of Jewish literature, not just the Old Testament, but the Midrash, Talmud, and other Jewish rabbinical writings, which he used to teach his disciples and condemn hypocrisy.

"But the educational system imposed upon Jewish children was more, far more, than formal schooling arrangements," notes Elder Bruce R. McConkie in The Mortal Messiah. "It was part and portion of their way of life. . . . [In the home] private prayers were offered both morning and evening. Before every meal they washed and prayed, and after every repast they gave thanks. . . . Every Sabbath was a holy and sanctified day." Jesus Christ was "a product . . . of his environment; and his Father chose to place him in the care and custody, during his formative years, of Jewish Joseph and Jewish Mary and their Jewish home with all its Jewish teachings, practices, and ways of worship." [^15]

When he was twelve, his parents took him to the temple, another custom of the time. All Jewish boys were schooled at the local synagogue in the Torah. At the age of twelve or thirteen, they were presented at the temple to be questioned on their knowledge and then to become "a son of the law," [^16] a process very similar to the present-day bar mitzvah. What a surprise they must have had the day Jesus came, for he not only had the entire body of Jewish literature memorized but he also understood its true meanings so completely that he ended up being questioner and teacher of those learned men who were to examine him. No wonder he either stayed or went back to the temple long after his appointed interview time and missed joining the caravan back to Nazareth. We can only imagine what kind of information he gave the learned men at the temple that would forever change them and prepare them for his future ministry. Surely, from that point on, all Sanhedrin eyes were upon the young boy from Nazareth, if they were not already.

And why didn't his parents understand his question, "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" (Luke 2:49.) When Joseph is called a carpenter in the scriptures, it could mean more than an occupation, for the Hebrew word for carpenter was also used frequently in rabbinic literature to mean "scholar, teacher, builder of men." Could it have been Joseph's business to teach as a scholar, or a carpenter of men's souls? We know Jesus meant his Father in Heaven, but how could Mary and Joseph have missed the obvious meaning to his statement, unless there were two meanings? [^17]

We know Christ progressed "from grace to grace" until he reached the point that he "could not be taught by any man" and "received a fullness" or a full knowledge of his mission. (D&C 93:13; JST Matthew 3:25; D&C 93:12-13.) He was probably taught by heavenly visitors, in addition to attending school and studying the Torah at the local synagogue with the other boys. In all things, he was the ultimate Jew. [^18]

Considering his thorough and complete knowledge of the Law, it is interesting to note not only what the Savior did talk about but also what he omitted in his teachings. In contrast to the Jewish tradition and literature, he did not use the story of Adam and Eve as an explanation for either the origin of sin or the respective roles of men and women. On the contrary, he taught that people were not punished for the previous sins of parents or any ancestors, as we see in the story of the man born blind: "Who did sin?" asked the disciples, "this man, or his parents, that he was born blind?" (John 9:2.) No one's sins were visited on the man, Christ answered. The implications of his answer call into question other Jewish traditions: how, then, could the perceived sin of Eve still be passed on to every Jewish woman?

He demonstrated continually in his actions and words his respect for women as equals to men in the eyes of God. Many women were numbered among his closest associates, including Mary Magdalene, Joanna, Susanna, and others. (Luke 8:1-3.) The disciples referred to them as the "women also of our company." (Luke 24:22.) His relationship with many women was a dear friendship. He loved Martha, Mary, and Lazarus (as it says in John 11:5) and wept openly when he saw the distress of Mary over the death of her brother Lazarus. (John 11:35.)

His gospel was one in which women could fully participate. His doctrines liberated them spiritually, giving them equality. Now let us return to the story of Mary and Martha of Bethany where we see, for the first time, a woman being given full permission to sit at the feet of a rabbi and study the Law. That, remember, was considered heresy in Jewish tradition. And why did Martha appeal to Jesus for help instead of just asking Mary to come and help? Because Jesus was the rabbi, and rabbis didn't teach women. But instead of turning her away, he announced for all to hear that Mary had chosen the good part, that women were to have the same spiritual priorities as men, and that the worldly cares of the world were less important.

When the woman with an issue of blood touched the hem of his garment, according to Jewish laws of purity, he should have rebuked her, for she was unclean and by touching him had made him unclean. (Leviticus 15:19-30.) But instead, he blessed her and healed her and praised her for her great faith. (Mark 5:25-34.) Similarly, it was forbidden to touch the dead body of Jairus's daughter, but Jesus raised her from the dead and blessed her. (Numbers 19:11-22; Mark 5:35-43.) He openly taught the Samaritan woman at the well, despite the rabbinic admonition against a rabbi speaking with a woman in public. "And upon this [scene] came his disciples, and marvelled that he talked with the woman: yet no man said, What seekest thou? or, Why talkest thou with her?" (John 4:27.) Disregarding the Jewish refusal to allow a woman's testimony as a witness in any situation, [^19] Jesus appeared first to women as a resurrected being, entrusting the first witnessing of the world's greatest event to women. "Go to my brethren," he told Mary, and tell them. (John 20:17.) When they ran to the apostles and exclaimed the good news, the women's words "seemed to them as idle tales, and they believed them not." (Luke 24:10-11.)

So too, the first to bear news of the Messiah to the Samaritans was the woman at the well, and the people "believed on him" because of the woman's testimony. (John 4:39-40.) It was a prophetess, Anna, who, along with Simeon, declared the divinity of the newborn Messiah when Mary and Joseph took him to the temple. (Luke 2:36-38.) When some of the apostles murmured against Mary for anointing Jesus with expensive ointment, he chastised them, saying that she was the only one among them that recognized his impending death, "for she hath poured this ointment on my body for my burial. And in this thing that she hath done, she shall be blessed; for verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached in the whole world, this thing that this woman hath done, shall also be told for a memorial of her." (JST Matthew 26:9-10.)

We see throughout the Gospels an intentional attempt to relate the truths he taught equally to men and women. Women are included as models and examples in just as many parables, miracles, and sermons as men. That is most dramatically seen in the pairing of men-women examples in his teachings, as if to make sure that women as well as men saw his teachings as relevant. For example, in Luke 15:3-7, a male shepherd leaves the ninety and nine to find a lost sheep and, in verses 8-10, a woman loses a coin and searches her home until she finds it. Both rejoice in the finding. The point of both stories is the same: the worth of every individual, male or female, is great, and heaven rejoices over one sinner that repents. Yet they are told sequentially in the text, emphasizing that these truths apply equally to men and women. Another example is found in Luke 7:2-15. Christ heals the centurion's servant and immediately afterward raises the widow's son—one miracle for a man, and the next for a woman. In Matthew 13:31-33 he likens the kingdom of heaven, first, to a grain of mustard seed that a man plants in his garden and, second, to some leaven that a woman puts in her dough, both parables told sequentially and yet having exactly the same message. In Luke 13:10-16, the Savior heals a woman on the Sabbath; in 14:2-6, he heals a man on the Sabbath. In Luke 17:35-36, one man shall be taken from two who are in the field, and one woman shall be taken from two who are grinding. Jesus heals a Gentile's daughter and then a deaf man in Mark 7:24-37, and in Matthew 9:20-30 he heals a woman, raises a girl from the dead, and heals two blind men.

Two examples of great faith are told sequentially in Matthew 9:18-26. The first tells of a ruler whose daughter was dead. He came to Jesus and said in faith, "Come and lay thy hand upon her, and she shall live," as the woman two verses later also said in faith, "If I may but touch his garment, I shall be whole." "Daughter, be of good comfort; thy faith hath made thee whole," he said to her. Other examples of pairing are found throughout the four Gospels; Luke, more than the other evangelists, groups them together, but all the Gospel writers relate numerous examples of healings, parables, and exhortations involving women equally with men. [^20]

Christian doctrine that made women full participants in worship must have caused problems for the early converts to the young Church Christ left behind at his death, for all the first converts to Christianity were Jewish, presumably burdened with the traditional attitudes about women. Judaism and Christianity were so intertwined that in the beginning of the missionary effort after Christ's death, the twelve apostles proselyted only among the Jews and did not think that a Gentile should be baptized into the Church.

The Lord gave Peter direct revelation, instructing him that the time had come to baptize non-Jewish Christians. Cornelius, a Roman centurion who was converted to Christ, was told by a heavenly messenger to send for Peter in Joppa. Before Cornelius's men arrived, Peter, while praying, saw the heavens open and all manner of animals descending unto him, animals that were unclean and forbidden according to the Law of Moses. A voice told Peter to kill and eat the animals. "Not so, Lord," he replied, "for I have never eaten anything that is common or unclean." The voice answered, "What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common." When the servants of Cornelius arrived, then, he was prepared to go with them, and when he met Cornelius, he said, "Ye know . . . it is an unlawful thing [according to the Jewish Law] for a man that is a Jew to keep company, or come unto one of another nation; but God hath shewed me [using traditional Jewish symbols that he would understand] that I should not call any man common or unclean." (Acts 10:14, 15, 28.)

With the conversion of non-Jews to Christianity came the necessity of determining which of the traditions of the past were compatible with the new faith and which were not. An example of that is seen in Acts 15. A dissension arose in Antioch among the Jews about whether or not a male Gentile convert to the Church had to be circumcised and keep the law of Moses. The apostles gathered in Jerusalem to determine Church policy on the subject. We can only imagine how many of these types of issues must have come up when Gentile converts began joining the Church. As members of the Latter-day Church in this dispensation, we ourselves have had similar challenges in sorting out doctrine and culture, as we have evolved into an international church and taken the gospel message to underdeveloped nations, where Church programs often need to be eliminated or heavily adapted to local situations.

The apostle Paul was particularly sympathetic to the problems involved in separating Jewish culture from Christian doctrine. He was "all things to all" people, that he "might by all means save some." (1 Corinthians 9:22.) Specifically, "unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews. . . . to the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak." (1 Corinthians 9:20, 22.) Very often Paul had to walk a fine line between Jewish customs and Christian principles. He often used references to the law of Moses and traditions to demonstrate a principle or prove a point to the Jews.

Paul had been a devout defender of Judaism against Christianity. Reared a Pharisee, he had been trained under the renowned Jewish scholar Gamaliel and was, by his own description, a "zealous" observer of the Jewish law. (Acts 22:3.) He was present at the stoning of the Christian disciple Stephen and "was consenting unto his death." (Acts 7:58; 8:1.) Paul was prevented by a miraculous conversion from further persecuting the Christians. (Acts 22.) By the time he wrote those epistles now preserved in the New Testament, he knew both Judaism and Christianity thoroughly.

It is in the epistles of Paul or in letters attributed to him that the status and conduct of women are most discussed. These communications with various units of the Church contained advice, doctrine, and answers to questions that had caused conflicts within individual units of the Church. Before examining these passages, we need to remind ourselves of some things. First, these passages represent a very small portion of Paul's total writings, and so not only must we look at Paul's message as a whole to see how these smaller segments fit in but we also must not let a few passages color the rest of the tremendous doctrinal wisdom and teachings of Paul that include both men and women.

Second, we need to remember that these epistles were answers to specific questions and problems that were troubling the small units of the Church throughout the Christian world. These groups were living far away from the center of the Church in Jerusalem. Eventually they became even more isolated as the leaders of the Church were killed, Christians became openly and viciously persecuted, and Jerusalem's prominence as Church headquarters decreased.

Third, the early converts to the Church brought with them all kinds of baggage from previous beliefs, particularly the Jews who had a totally different view of women's role in worship. That is why we often find Paul referring first to the Law, meaning the law of Moses or the Torah, and then stating a Christian principle to support or refute it. As the Church spread throughout the Roman Empire, Paul also had to deal with influences of Roman and Greek traditions which often stood in contrast to Jewish law.

And fourth, other evidence in the book of Acts and elsewhere in the New Testament clearly indicates that, in general, women were fully participating in the gospel of Christ. There are references to women praying, prophesying, speaking in tongues, and exercising all manner of spiritual gifts along with the men. (1 Corinthians 11:5; 12:8-10.) All (both men and women) were filled with the Holy Ghost on the Day of Pentecost. (Acts 2:1-4, 11.) "Quench not the Spirit. Despise not prophesyings" of any member, male or female, the Saints are told in 1 Thessalonians 5:19-20. The four daughters of Philip the evangelist "did prophesy." (Acts 21:9.) Priscilla and her husband, Aquila, are Paul's companions whom he refers to as "my helpers in Christ Jesus: who have for my life laid down their own necks." (Romans 16:3-4.) They taught Apollos, "an eloquent man, and mighty in the scriptures . . . whom when Aquila and Priscilla had heard, they took him unto them, and expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly." (Acts 18:24-26.) Paul's missionary efforts in Thessalonica included a great multitude of devout Greeks, including "of the chief women not a few." The order is reversed a few verses later: "Therefore many of them believed; also of honorable women which were Greeks, and of men, not a few." (Acts 17:4, 12.) Tabitha (or Dorcas), a leading member of the Church in Joppa and a woman filled with good works, died and was raised from the dead by Peter. (Acts 9:36.) In his letter to the Romans, Paul commends Phebe, "our sister" who is a "servant of the church" at Cenchrea, and asks that they receive her and assist her in her business. (Romans 16:1-2.) Many commentators have speculated that because of Phebe's official business, she may have held the office of Deaconess. [^21] He also greets "Mary, who bestowed much labour on us," and many other men and women of the local church. (Romans 16:6.) When the Sanhedrin gives Saul letters authorizing the arrests of Christian Jews in Damascus, he states that he is seeking men and women. (Acts 9:1, 2.) He subsequently notes "binding and delivering into prisons both men and women." (Acts 22:4.) It seems very clear that women are playing an important and esteemed role in the gospel in the early Church.

Let us now look at some of the specific passages concerning women that have been problematic. Several of these are found in 1 Corinthians. This letter was written to address problems of the newly formed church in Corinth, a Greek city near Athens. Paul begins his epistle with pleas for unity. "I beseech you, " he says, to "all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind." (1:10.) Apparently the Corinthians' problems were originating from contention and lack of unity: some were followers of Paul, others Apollos, others of Cephas, others of Christ. "Is Christ divided?" he asks. "The Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom: But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks foolishness." (1:13, 22, 23.)

In the following chapter Paul then describes what constitutes a true follower of Christ. He talks about the role of the Holy Ghost in revealing truth, the need for the natural man to become spiritual. (2:10-15.) He has fed the Corinthians "with milk, and not with meat," for they are as yet spiritually immature. (3:2.) He chastises them for tolerating sinful practices among the members, including marital infidelity and changing the ordinances of the gospel. (1 Corinthians 5-7, 10.) He returns again and again to his plea for unity among them, using symbols of all members being part of the body of the Church, different, yet working together for the whole. (12:12-31.) Many have interpreted Paul's discussion in chapter 7 of marital fidelity to mean he was advocating celibacy as a higher state than marriage. The Joseph Smith Translation, however, makes an important change that indicates Paul is actually speaking of celibacy for men and women serving missions, not as a general rule. (JST 1 Corinthians 7:29-33.)

Paul's advice involving women was usually a mixture of Jewish customs and Christian doctrine. In 1 Corinthians 11, he responds to a contention among the Corinthians relating to whether a woman should be veiled during worship. It probably represented a conflict between the traditional Judaizers, whose women always wore veils during worship, and the new Hellenistic converts who never wore veils. He tells the Corinthians that he approves of women praying and prophesying in the Church (Christian principle) as long as they cover their heads (Jewish tradition). Paul recites the traditional Jewish interpretation of the Adam and Eve story to make his case: man "is the image and glory of God: but the woman is the glory of the man. For the man is not of the woman; but the woman of the man. Neither was the man created for the woman; but the woman for the man" and, for this reason, "ought the woman to have power [also translated as veil] on her head because of the angels." (Vv. 7-10.)

To the Jews, a veil or head-covering served as a sign upon all women of the shame of Eve for bringing sin into the world, and it also protected women, with their weaker wills, from the influence of evil angels. It was also worn by women in synagogues to keep their presence from distracting the men from their worship. [^22] Thus Paul presents the classic Jewish interpretation of the rib story in Genesis 2.

Paul then changes the direction of his argument, going beyond Jewish tradition to state a Christian truth: "Nevertheless," he concludes, "[the true principle here is that] neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord. For as the woman is of the man, [as Eve was of Adam], even so is the man also by the woman [as Christ was by Mary]; but all things of God." (1 Corinthians 11:11-12.) Having thus stated both Jewish and Christian viewpoints, he then seems to throw the question back to the askers to answer for themselves: "Judge in yourselves: is it comely that a woman pray unto God uncovered? Doth not even nature itself teach you, that, if a man have long hair, it is a shame unto him? But if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her: for her hair is given her for a covering." (Vv. 13-15.) But without additional information to help them avoid interpreting the question from within their culture, the questions would, more than likely, simply be heard as rhetorical. He has taken the question and relegated it to the area of etiquette and good taste rather than of doctrine. "If any man seem to be contentious [over this issue], we [the Jews] have no such custom [anymore], neither the [new Christian] churches of God," he concludes. (V. 16.)

The important point here, somewhat obscured by the veil question, is that the women were praying and prophesying in worship services alongside the men, a far cry from the traditional Jewish practice, and that in the Christian Church "neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord." Paul then proceeds to another issue, calling the first a division, but the next one a heresy: changing ordinances and partaking of the sacrament unworthily. (Vv. 19-34.)

Paul continues with his plea for unity in chapters 12, 13, and 14, where he lists the gifts of the Spirit, stressing that each gift is a part of the whole, as each person is a part of the whole body of Christ, or the Church. "For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles,. . . bond or free; . . . for the body is not one member, but many." (1 Corinthians 12:13-14.) All are necessary, including the feeble and the less comely. "That there should be no schism" in the body, the greatest of all spiritual gifts is charity, the pure love of Christ which "never faileth." (1 Corinthians 12:23-25; 13:8.)

Then, in chapter 14, Paul interrupts his lengthy discourse on unity and gifts of the Spirit with a startling and uncharacteristic exclamation: "Let your women keep silence in the churches: for it is not permitted unto them to speak; but they are commanded to be under obedience, as also saith the law. And if they will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home: for it is a shame for women to speak in the church." (Vv. 34-35.) These two verses are omitted from official Church lesson manuals, never quoted in Church meetings, and left unexplained in commentaries. These verses are problematic because we know from latter-day revelation that this doctrine is not part of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Women learn, as do the men, in church. They teach as do the men, they participate fully in the gospel, and, while they are at liberty to ask their husbands doctrinal questions at home, they are fully capable of learning at church as well. Second, these verses disagree with and reverse other doctrinal statements appearing in Paul's writings, such as 1 Corinthians 11, where he states that women could pray and prophesy as long as they had their heads covered (vv. 5-15), or 1 Corinthians 14, where he affirms that all [women and men] should speak in tongues, all should prophesy, and all should let the gifts of the Spirit flow freely (vv. 5, 24, 31, 39). It also contradicts his earlier pleas for unity and equality among the members of the "body" of the Church. (1 Corinthians 12.) Has Paul completely reversed his stand? Was all his talk about unity and equality in the previous chapters to be undone in two verses? Many New Testament scholars, noting how out of place the verses seem in their context, have concluded that they were not the words of Paul but were inserted later through some scribal error. But, once again, the Joseph Smith Translation clarifies things, for it changes the word speak to rule, thus putting the issue into the realm of priesthood authority. The question then becomes one of who will preside in the Church. (JST 1 Corinthians 14:34.)

Another explanation for 1 Corinthians 14:34-35 is the possiblity that Paul was quoting, for emphasis, directly from the letter he had received, his intent being to contrast the Corinthian Saints' attitudes with the unity and equality which should be sought among the Church members. [^23] If so, the passage in chapter 14 could read thus: "How is it then, brethren? when ye come together, every one of you hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a revelation, hath an interpretation. Let all things be done unto the edifying [of the whole]. . . . For ye may all prophesy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted. . . . [Now some of you have said] let your women keep silence in the churches: for it is not permitted unto them to speak; but they are commanded to be under obedience, as also saith the law. And if they will learn anything, let them ask their husbands at home: for it is a shame for women to speak in the church. [But I say to you] What? came the word of God out from you? or came it unto you only? If any man think himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things that I write unto you [that all may prophesy] are the commandments of the Lord. But if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant. Wherefore, brethren, covet to prophesy, and forbid not [anyone, man or woman] to speak with tongues." (1 Corinthians 14:26, 31, 34-39.) Read this way, the passage makes a lot more sense in its context.

There is other evidence to support regarding these two verses as a quotation. First, ancient Greek used no punctuation or quotation marks, so it was up to others—translators, later readers, and commentators—to determine which passages were quoted and which were not. Unless a statement began with a phrase such as "as it has been said" or "as it was written," a quotation might be overlooked. There are a number of quotations not only in 1 Corinthians but in other epistles as well, so it is very likely that the epistles would refer to or even quote parts of the correspondence the epistles are replying to. [^24]

Second, verses 34 and 35 could also have been direct quotations from rabbinic literature. There are many similar statements in the Midrash and Talmud: "the law" referred to in verse 34 is the rabbinic oral law, which did totally silence women in the synagogue. While men usually engaged in questioning and commenting on the text of the rabbi's address, women were in absolute silence. [^25] In rabbinic literature the word shameful is often used to describe a woman's demeanor and reflects directly back to Eve's shameful sin in Eden.

Third, from the context, the verses that follow 34 and 35 sound like an irritated response to them: "What? Came the word of God out from you?" he exclaims. His reply is one of chastisement. He is shocked at the deviation from Christian principles that he had previously put in place, and he almost dismisses the deviation in a frivolous manner as nonsense, calling the precipitator of such dogma ignorant. "What? Came the word of God out from you? or came it unto you only? [So, now you are claiming to receive direction for the Church?] If any man think himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things that I write unto you are the commandments of the Lord. But if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant! [If you are truly a man of God, you will know by the Spirit that these things I have written are from the Lord.]" He then concludes the thought and brings in the theme of the previous chapters: "Wherefore . . . covet to prophesy, and forbid not [anyone, men or women] to speak with tongues. Let all things be done decently and in order."

Paul ends the epistle with a powerful chapter on the atonement of Christ, and a further plea to stand fast in the faith and do all things with charity. (1 Corinthians 16.) Paul was exceptionally well suited for his difficult mission of helping to integrate the Gentile converts into a new religion where all the first members were Jewish. He was a perfectly trained Jew, a Roman citizen, and a Christian, tutored by the Savior himself. His overall message was the same as Jesus Christ's, one of unity and oneness, and it can be summed up in his message to the Galatians: "For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus." (3:27-28.)

It is my sincere hope that in our struggles to find a comfortable place as women in our Church and our society, we will catch the vision of Paul and feel a unity not only with our fellow sisters but also with our brothers as well. May we seek always to accept the liberating doctrine of Jesus Christ and choose the good part in all areas of our lives, focusing on the spiritual needs first and filling ourselves with charity, the pure love of Christ. If we will do that as a first priority, everything else will fall into place and bring us true and everlasting joy. "And Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou art worried and troubled about many things: but one thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her." (Luke 10:41-42.)

---
Notas:
[^1] For an in-depth commentary on the Genesis Adam and Eve story, see Jolene Edmunds Rockwood, "The Redemption of Eve" in Sisters in Spirit, ed. Maureen Ursenbach Beecher and Lavina Fielding Anderson (Urbana and Chicago, Illinois: University of Illinois Press, 1987), pp. 3-36, or Rockwood, "Eve's Role in the Creation and the Fall to Mortality" in Women Steadfast in Christ: To See Life Steadily and See It Whole, ed. Dawn Hall Anderson and Marie Cornwall (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book Co., 1991), pp. 49-68.
[^2] Ber 24a and Meg 23a, Talmud, as cited in Constance F. Parvey, "The Theology and Leadership of Women" in Religion and Sexism: Images of Women in the Jewish and Christian Traditions, ed. Rosemary Radford Ruether (New York: Simon and Schuster, Touchstone, 1974), p. 129.
[^3] Louis Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews, 12th ed., 7 vols. (1909; Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America, 1937) 1:67.
[^4] Ibid.
[^5] A. Cohen, Everyman's Talmud (New York: Schocken Books, 1975), pp. 160, 179.
[^6] Ibid., p. 161.
[^7] Ginzberg, 1:66.
[^8] Ibid., 1:68.
[^9] Ibid., 1:67
[^10] Cohen, p. 171.
[^11] Ibid., p. 172
[^12] Ibid.
[^13] Bruce R. McConkie, The Mortal Messiah (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book Co., 1979), 1:223.
[^14] Ibid., pp. 224, 221.
[^15] Ibid., p. 375.
[^16] Geza Vermas, Jesus the Jew: A Historian's Reading of the Gospels (New York: Macmillan, 1973), pp. 21-22.
[^17] McConkie, 1:196, 296.
[^18] Melodie Moench Charles, "Precedents for Mormon Women from Scriptures," in Sisters in Spirit, p. 53.
[^19] For more information on pairing see Parvey, "Theology and Leadership," pp. 138-42.
[^20] Charles, "Precedents for Mormon Women," p. 54.
[^21] Ginzberg, 1:67; Parvey, p. 126.
[^22] Laurence R. Iannaccone, "Let the Women Be Silent," Sunstone (May-June, 1982): 39-45.
[^23] Ibid., pp. 43-44.
[^24] Ibid., p. 43.
[^25] Jolene Edmunds Rockwood holds a master's degree in theological studies from the Harvard Divinity School and is a widely known lecturer and author on the subject of women and religion. The founder of the Rural Alliance for the Arts in Indiana, Sister Rockwood is a homemaker. She resides with her husband, Fred, and their six children in Indiana.
