Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

Old Testament Insights: Women, Wit, Wisdom

AILEEN HALES CLYDE [^1]

I was drawn to the poetry of the Old Testament by my literate mother, who often chose to read to me when I was a child, from Genesis, Psalms, 1 Samuel, 1 Kings, and Isaiah. The more common Bible stories were introduced to me not at home but in Sunday School or Primary. Before I could read, I had heard many times, "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. . . . And God said, Let there be light: and there was light. And God saw the light, that it was good: and God divided the light from the darkness. . . . And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land appear: and it was so. And God called the dry land Earth; and the gathering together of the waters called he Seas: and God saw that it was good." (Genesis 1:1, 3, 9-10.) And so on through the Creation, with the assurance in each case, "And God saw that it was good." I would hear my mother's voice asserting and confirming as I sat on her lap and sometimes drifted off to sleep, "And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them. . . . And God saw everything that he had made, and, behold, it was very good."(Genesis 1:26-27, 31.)

That still strikes me as a good beginning. And as a child it impressed upon me that God was my creator and that he saw his work as good. What I heard from the Bible when I was very young rings in my ears still and provided a dependable buttress against the difficult paradoxes that I later discovered abounded in scriptures and also in life.

The household where I grew up included three brothers, no sisters, and parents who encouraged wide-ranging discussions of what was, what should be, and how we each had a part in figuring things out. My identity as a person sprang from these discussions. By the time I was through adolescence and was reading scriptures seriously on my own, I had noted that in the Old Testament a woman's worth was tied to her marital status and that her father was usually the broker in that important arrangement. Women were possessions of their fathers or their husbands. The tenth commandment does not even give the wife first priority in a man's listed possessions. "Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour's." (Exodus 20:17.) I saw that fertility had very different consequences for women and for men. Childbirth was the key to a woman's worth. Stories of Rachel, Sarah, Samson's mother, and Hannah, all manifest the stigma and disgrace associated with barrenness. As a young woman, this impressed me as very sad and very unfair.

Old Testament references to women are limited, but they provide rich glimpses into female ways. In Genesis 21, for example, after Sarah has weaned her miracle baby Isaac, she tells Abraham to send Hagar and her son Ishmael away. Abraham is deeply grieved until God tells him that Ishmael, too, will lead a great nation. Thus assured that the child will survive, Abraham gives Hagar a bottle of water and some bread and sends her and the child into the wilderness of Beersheba. In the Beersheba desert, dehydration comes quickly. Poor Hagar had been expelled before, but this would be much worse because of the child. After the water is long gone, Hagar, who cannot bear to see her child die, places him under a shrub for some particle of shade and goes "a good way off, as it were a bowshot" in distance, and weeps. (V. 16.) An angel of God "call[s] to Hagar out of heaven" (v. 17) and tells her that God has heard the cries of her son. That detail is more important than I ever before knew. An angel heard Hagar, but God heard the child. For over a year now, I have worked on a state task force on child abuse. In this connection, I have heard harrowing reports of the ritual abuse of children. Some of those small children, who never met one another, independently report that they had help from angels and that despite their pain they had felt God's love. In the case of Ishmael, God opens Hagar's eyes and she sees a well of water. She refills the bottle, gives the lad a drink, and he lives. (Genesis 21:14-20.) In seven short verses we are caused to contemplate banishment, thirst, mother's love, miraculous water, relief, and God's love. This brief passage still evokes various responses from me. I feel the pain of empathy for Hagar, earlier proud and fulfilled, now low and desperate. Then, in a wondrous turn, God's power works in her and she can act and deliver again her son. I feel elation and relief. The wonder in such scripture is the more I look, the more I see.

Having been raised on Bible stories, I appreciate the need to forewarn as well as invite people to search the scriptures. The Old Testament, particularly the book of Genesis, is not for the faint-hearted. As the incident with Hagar suggests, these are families who are capable of harshness, deception, violence, and self-serving.

The story of Jacob reveals an entire family whose members constantly deceive one another. The men do it, and the women do it. There is no gender bias in deception. Jacob, with his mother Rebekah's help, deceives his brother Esau and his father Isaac in order to secure for himself the coveted birthright and its blessing. Later, Jacob's uncle Laban deceives Jacob by substituting Laban's elder daughter Leah for the younger daughter Rachel, whom Jacob loved so much. I find Genesis 29:20 perhaps the loveliest verse in the Old Testament: "And Jacob served seven years for Rachel; and they seemed unto him but a few days, for the love he had to her." Jacob, in turn, deceives Laban over ownership of their livestock. Rachel deceives her father, Laban, over possession of his beloved family icons. Much later, Jacob's own sons deceive him about their younger brother Joseph's disappearance. Jacob's sons, Simeon and Levi, deceive the people of Shechem over the defiling of their sister Dinah, "which thing [the defiling] ought not to be done." (Genesis 34:7.) But what the brothers did, after their father's peaceful negotiation with the people of Shechem, was to roar into the city, brandishing swords. They killed every man, "and all their little ones, and their wives took they captive." (Genesis 34:29.) This in no way restored Dinah's honor. The violence was self-serving and ego-raising. Jacob's son Judah deceives his widowed daughter-in-law Tamar by reneging on his promise to let her marry his last son. Tamar, in turn, deceives her father-in-law Judah to expose his wrongful deception.

In reminding you of these imperfect people, I spared you Sodom and Gomorrah, also in Genesis. When I hear people bemoaning the awful state of the world, implying that things are worse than ever before, I think, "They are not readers of the Old Testament." The Old Testament writers are quite willing to expose their characters' imperfections. This is no white-washed history. And we should take comfort that while we have not eliminated all their transgressions, most of us know better and do better, much of the time.

Among the Old Testament women are some who were initiators of action and decisions that blessed Israel and bless us, their spiritual descendants. Shiphrah and Puah in Exodus are known to us by their names and also by their occupation. The Egyptian king, fearing a slave revolution, ordered the Hebrew midwives to kill all male babies at birth, "but the midwives feared God, and did not as the king of Egypt commanded them, but saved the men children alive." (Exodus 1:17.) When confronted by the king, they explained that "the Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian women" (v. 19) and are so vigorous in birthing that they and the babies were gone before the midwives arrived to assist. This prevarication was a combination of civil disobedience and divine obedience. Their yes to God's command required a no to the king's command. Their own safety seemed to be of no consideration to them. They dealt with their dilemma and stood accountable before God and the king.

In Judges 11 is a gem of a story that I never heard in church. I still remember the impact that it had when I first read it privately and carefully. It is an account in forty verses of a remarkable young woman, acted upon but also capable of acting. She is known to us as Jephthah's daughter. Her father was "the son of an harlot" (v. 1), surely one of the ten ugliest and most biased labels in any language. Jephthah bore the stigma of that label. Banished not only from his father Gilead's house but from Israel, he lives in Tob, where he becomes known as a man of valor. When the Ammonites make war against Israel, the elders of Gilead seek Jephthah to lead the Israelite army, and he bargains with them to be instated as head of his father's house if he wins. Then he makes what is both an unnecessary and disastrous vow. "And Jephthah vowed a vow unto the Lord, and said, If thou shalt without fail deliver the children of Ammon into mine hands, Then it shall be, that whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my house to meet me, when I return in peace from the children of Ammon, shall surely be the Lord's, and I will offer it up for a burnt offering." (Vv. 30-31.) The vow was unnecessary, because the spirit of the Lord had already come upon him, and he knew he would be aided to victory. It was clearly disastrous because anyone coming from his home to meet him would be someone whom he loved and who loved him.

After a great slaughter, the children of Ammon were "subdued before the children of Israel." (V. 33.) And who comes out "with timbrels and with dances" (v. 34) to meet her victorious father on his return from battle? Jephthah's daughter, his only child! Now this great warrior, full of victory and power, does not berate himself for this state of affairs. Instead he berates his daughter. "When he saw her, . . . he rent his clothes, and said, Alas, my daughter! thou hast brought me very low, and thou art one of them that trouble me: for I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I cannot go back." (V. 35.) In contrast, with remarkable equanimity, she sees what must be and offers herself so that her father can fulfill his vow. We have no record of her fear or of any need for pity or for apology from her father. The record does tell us, though, that she asks for time—time to "bewail her virginity" (v. 37), time to grieve for the family she will not have, two month's time to go into the mountains with her friends before she yields herself as her father's sacrifice. There was no substitution this time. God had not required this act, but Jephthah's daughter submitted herself for her father's honor. That she took comfort with companions suggests strongly to me the importance of and strength in sisterhood. Much later, in Hebrews 11:32-33, the rash Jephthah is remembered for his faith, but I remember his nameless daughter for her courage and for her strength in her friends. Her friends remembered her, too. Judges 11 concludes, "And it was a custom in Israel, that the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite four days in a year." (Vv. 39-40.)

Tucked immediately after the book of Judges is the short but familiar book of Ruth. The story of Ruth has come to represent for me a remarkable story of conversion. The Moabitess, whose husband, father-in-law, and brother-in-law have died, chooses to follow her mother-in-law to Israel, where she would be exiled in a culture that hated Moabites and where a woman's survival depended on a husband, father, or brother. But she knows God and loves her mother-in-law. Her words in this beautiful Hebraic passage testify of her loyalty to both. "And Ruth said, Intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following after thee: for whither thou goest, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God: where thou diest, will I die, and there will I be buried: the Lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and me." (Ruth 1:16-17.)

When Naomi herself, realistic and wise, saw Ruth's steadfastness, she "left speaking unto her" (v. 18), which does not mean she stopped talking to her but that she quit trying to convince her of the difficulties they would face in Israel. "So Naomi returned, and Ruth the Moabitess, her daughter in law with her, which returned out of the country of Moab: and they came to Beth-lehem in the beginning of barley harvest." (Ruth 1:22.) But barley was not all they harvested.

Those two became a great team. The last three of the four chapters in the book are very adult reading. Boaz, a kinsman of Naomi's husband, allowed Ruth to glean in his field. He was quite quickly stricken by her. "And when she was risen up to glean, Boaz commanded his young men, saying, Let her glean even among the sheaves, and reproach her not: and let fall also some of the handfuls of purpose for her, and leave them, that she may glean them, and rebuke her not." (Ruth 2:15-16.)

A careful reading indicates how greatly complicated it could be for a righteous Israelite man to marry the widow of his kinsman's son, recently from Moab. But Naomi and Ruth helped, and Boaz never quite knew what hit him. "So Boaz took Ruth, and she was his wife: and when he went in unto her, the Lord gave her conception, and she bare a son. And the women said unto Naomi, Blessed be the Lord . . . for thy daughter in law, which loveth thee, which is better to thee than seven sons, hath born [a son]. And Naomi took the child, and laid it in her bosom, and became nurse unto it. And the women her neighbours gave it a name, saying, There is a son born to Naomi; and they called his name Obed: he is the father of Jesse, the father of David." (Ruth 4:13-14.)

In a culture hostile to the leadership of women, these women worked toward an end the writer carefully emphasizes. Obed is the father of Jesse, the father of David, through whose line—carefully detailed for us in the first chapter of Matthew—came Jesus, who is called Christ.

Following Ruth in the Old Testament is 1 Samuel, which actually predates the book of Ruth by five hundred years. The story of Hannah, a favored wife of Elkanah, is full of detail and marvelous glimpses of human striving to reach and serve God. Elkanah had two wives: Hannah, who was barren, and Peninnah, who was fertile. Once a year Elkanah took his family to the city of Shiloh to worship and to offer "sacrifice unto the Lord of hosts." "And when the time was that Elkanah offered, he gave to Peninnah his wife, and to all her sons and her daughters, portions: But unto Hannah he gave a worthy portion; for he loved Hannah: but the Lord had shut up her womb." And this troubled Hannah greatly, so that she wept and often did not eat. "Then said Elkanah her husband to her, Hannah, why weepest thou? and why eatest thou not? and why is thy heart grieved? am not I better to thee than ten sons?" (1 Samuel 1:2-8.)

One time when they were at Shiloh to make their offering, Hannah waited until all had eaten and drunk and then returned to the temple alone. Eli the priest was seated "by a post of the temple" (v. 9), apparently unnoticed by Hannah. He had his own problems. His two sons, the Priests Phinehas and Hophni, who were supposed to serve the Lord, were "vile" and he knew it. (1 Samuel 3:13.)

"Now Eli was very old, and heard all that his sons did unto all Israel; and how they lay with the women that assembled at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. And he said unto them, Why do ye such things? for I hear of your evil dealings by all this people. Nay, my sons; for it is no good report that I hear: ye make the Lord's people to transgress." He expressed concern not only for their pernicious example but also for their own souls—to no avail. "If one man sin against another, the judge shall judge him: but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall intreat for him? Notwithstanding they harkened not unto the voice of their father."(1 Samuel 2:22-25.) So perhaps Eli had also come to the temple at a quiet hour with a private grief and petition.

Hannah had returned to this special place of worship to beseech the Lord to hear her prayers for a child. She vowed that if the Lord would give her a son, she would in turn "give him unto the Lord all the days of his life. And it came to pass, as she continued praying before the Lord," we are told, "Eli marked her mouth. Now Hannah, she spake in her heart; only her lips moved, but her voice was not heard: therefore Eli thought she had been drunken." (1 Samuel 1:11-13.)

Here is a biblical case where a priesthood leader misunderstands a woman, and she, in dignity, yet with respect, clarifies for him. "And Hannah answered and said, No, my lord, I am a woman of a sorrowful spirit: I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but have poured out my soul before the Lord. Count not thine handmaid for a daughter of Belial: for out of the abundance of my complaint and grief have I spoken." And in a record all too brief, but wonderful nevertheless, Eli hears and understands. Then, exercising the office he is called to, he says, "Go in peace: and the God of Israel grant thee thy petition that thou has asked of him." (1 Samuel 1:15-17.)

Hannah responds with grace and full composure. No doubt Eli's words were full of bright promise, but she seemed immediately restored from sorrow by power beyond both her own hopes and the priest's words. "So the woman went her way, and did eat, and her countenance was no more sad." (1 Samuel 1:18.) Eli's blessing must have been confirmed to Hannah by the Spirit's witness. Later she sings a song of faith and strength, not well enough known by the latter-day daughters of Zion. "There is none holy as the Lord: for there is none beside thee: neither is there any rock like our God. . . . He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among princes, and to make them inherit the throne of glory: for the pillars of the earth are the Lord's, and he hath set the world upon them." (1 Samuel 2:2, 8.)

Too often Hannah is remembered for bargaining with God and then giving her son Samuel to serve in the temple. Her faith and capacity for love and sacrifice deserve more of our emphasis. And surely she could represent an ideal to priesthood leaders who occasionally misread the obvious signs and would delight in clarification as evenhanded and reasonable as Hannah's.

These books are what I call religious. They teach me not only about the people but about God and faith. Other books have other emphases, and as our eighth Article of Faith suggests, we need to read the scriptures to discern such differences. The Prophet Joseph wrote the Articles of Faith in response to a request for a brief history of the Church from a Chicago newspaper editor, John Wentworth. Joseph included in his reply thirteen statements of belief that distinguished some of the similarities and differences between Latter-day Saint doctrine and that of other religions. The eighth article begins, "We believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly." This qualification—"as far as it is translated correctly"—suggests to me a certain attitude toward scripture. I am not to distrust or dismiss whatever I may find hard to understand or sympathize with; rather, I am to read prayerfully, deeply, and thoughtfully, as did Joseph Smith. I am to read with all my wits about me. I am to ponder and question in order to learn.

Often in scripture we are to learn by negative examples as well as positive ones—and rarely do we encounter characters who are flawless. That is true of Esther and her cousin Mordecai in the book of Esther as well as the more obvious villain Haman, the determined enemy of the Jewish people then scattered and under Persian rule. The author of the book of Esther unfolds the tale of Esther and Mordecai's loyalty to their people with an emphasis that is not primarily religious. The book opens with details of a lavish royal celebration lasting seven days. The men and women are separated during the festivities and on the seventh day when the king Ahasuerus is "merry with wine," he sends his chamberlains to fetch his queen, Vashti, so all can see her beauty—and she refuses to come. The chamberlains who have to report the affront are enraged, and the king is "very wroth, and his anger burn[s] in him." No doubt the liquor lent significantly to the riling, for the offense quickly takes on cataclysmic proportions. A drunk chamberlain offers his own opinion that "Vashti the queen hath not done wrong to the king only, but also to all the princes and to all the people" in all the provinces of Ahasuerus's vast kingdom. (Esther 1:16.) He was sure that when the report of Vashti's refusal got abroad that all women would show disrespect for their husbands. And thus it was decided that Vashti would come before the king no more, that her royal estate would be given to another, and that a decree would be sent throughout the empire commanding that all wives should give their husbands honor. This mandate would also go to every province, translated into the various languages, proclaiming that "every man should bear rule in his own house."

The only verse of even minimal human tenderness in the whole book of Esther begins the next chapter. We see the king and he has sobered up. "After these things, when the wrath of king Ahasuerus was appeased, he remembered Vashti, and what she had done, and what was decreed against her." This hint of a sad morning-after memory is as close to regret as this story of vanity and court intrigue will come. In brief, Esther is rounded up at the behest of her cousin Mordecai for the beauty contest held to replace Vashti. She gains the approval of the king, and, in a tale intricately woven, she becomes the queen. There is much intrigue and much danger in the story, involving Esther, Mordecai, and Haman, an enemy of the Jews. Yet I find it significant that after Esther becomes the queen, and as soon as she gains power, she, who has so recently faced death herself, requires the death of the sons of Haman. "Let Haman's ten sons be hanged upon the gallows," she says. (Esther 9:13.)

Not only has the anti-Semite Haman been defeated in this tale, but no sons will be left to resume his vendetta against the Jews. We can see on close and careful reading what is seldom derived from passages selected without context: the purpose of the book of Esther is mainly to intensify the Jewish people's loyalty to their traditions and religion at a time when they are being threatened by the invasion of Hellenism and national disintegration. The author's message in this book is clearly not religious. God's name appears nowhere in it. There is no mention of prayer. Devotion to one's race takes the place of genuine religious feeling. The vividly drawn characters are all, except perhaps for Vashti, notably designing, revengeful, even cruel.

My growing affinity for life and its diversity in my time is enriched by the human variety and divine connections so memorably recorded in the Old Testament. Reading there for personal meaning is an adventure that has never disappointed me. I have discovered in those books all kinds of lives, and they have taught me much about mine.

---
Notas:
[^1] "Music from the Tabernacle," Time, 19 Sept. 1955, p. 55.
