Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

Fruits of Faithfulness: The Saints of Czechoslovakia

OLGA KOVAROVA CAMPORA

Introduction by Carol Cornwall Madsen

In September 1955, after a month of performances on its first European tour, the Mormon Tabernacle Choir reached the city of West Berlin. At the end of a long, tense day of traveling through Russian-occupied East Germany, Choir members were relieved to arrive in the Allied sector of Berlin. As they descended the huge stairs of the railroad station, tired and apprehensive, they were startled to hear the strains of a familiar hymn. As Time Magazine reported, waiting for the Choir on the station steps was a large group of German people who, upon seeing the Americans, "burst into the great Mormon hymn, 'Come, Come, Ye Saints.' The Americans joined in," English merging with German, "to thunder the final phrase, 'All is well! all is well!' " [^1] Tears of joy and love were their common language.

Many of those singers were refugees, fleeing from the escalating restrictions imposed by Communist rulers, which were dramatically enforced six years later by the construction of the Berlin Wall. Turning an afternoon rehearsal into a free concert, the Tabernacle Choir sang to a hall filled with refugees and Church members who had been permitted to leave East Berlin temporarily. Emotions ran high as the Choir sang well beyond the allotted rehearsal time, closing with the hymn that had welcomed them. "This was not only music," reported the Berlin Telegraf, "it was the building of a human bridge." [^2]

A hundred years after it was written, William Clayton's hymn bridged those years and spoke its message of hope to another dispossessed people, not only in Germany but throughout Eastern Europe. Like their latter-day forebears, East European Saints relied on their faith and the promises of the gospel to support their commitment to the Church during forty years of isolation. For those beleaguered Saints, the words rang true: "Gird up your loins, fresh courage take, Our God will never us forsake."

As this simple Mormon hymn reflected the spirit and endurance of Latter-day Saints long denied religious liberty, so music would also eloquently express the joy of liberation forty years later. On Christmas morning, 1989, in Berlin, culminating a three-day celebration that began with the actual and symbolic opening of the Brandenburg Gate, Leonard Bernstein conducted an international choir and orchestra in a performance of Beethoven's stirring Ninth Symphony before an audience that spilled out of the concert hall into every available space surrounding it. In this majestic musical setting, the powerful poetic expression of universal love, "Ode to Joy," penned by German poet Friedrich von Schiller, magnificently conveyed the significance of that great moment in history. Impulsively changing the word Freude ("joy") to Freiheit ("freedom") in the chorus, Bernstein declared that "this heaven-sent moment" excused his poetic license because both words expressed the exuberance of the thousands who listened to this celebration of the irrepressible human spirit. As von Schiller had written in his "Ode":

Millions, bravely sorrow bearing, Suffer for a better time!

See, above the starry clime, God a great reward preparing. . . .

Joy [freedom], of flame celestial fashioned, Daughter of ElysiumEvery man a brother plighted, Where thy gentle wings are spread. [^3]

Can anyone forget the joyful expressions on the faces of those who crossed unchecked through the openings in the Berlin Wall or stood shoulder to shoulder in Prague's famed Wenceslas Square to celebrate their country's freedom that miraculous winter?

Dr. Olga Kovarova shared in the miracle of those events. She had experienced the debilitating bonds of political oppression and had given meaning to the phrase "a steadfastness in Christ" by transcending those bonds and advancing His work in a Communist nation. Shortly after her baptism into the Church nine years ago, while still a doctoral student of education and pedagogy in Brno, Czechoslovakia, Olga Kovarova faced a dilemma. She had been taught the gospel of Jesus Christ in secret, she had been baptized under cover of night to avoid detection, and she had met each week with the handful of Saints in her hometown at great risk. Now, she had an opportunity to continue her studies in the free society of Austria, where she had relatives, but she also felt a commitment to remain in her native country. After weeks of prayer, fasting, and counsel with Church leaders, who wisely left the decision to her, she chose to finish her schooling at home.

What an inspired choice that was! Since receiving her Ph.D. in education, Olga has been determined to fill the ethical void in Communist ideology by teaching ethics and morality in her university classes in Brno and introducing such concepts as love and joy and the meaning of life to hundreds of young people at the yoga camps she conducts each summer. To keep those principles alive for her students, she started a newspaper, which she called "The Art of Living," a unique and dangerous venture for this young woman so continually under the scrutiny of Communist censors. "Czechoslovakia is ethically sick and it needs to be made ethically well," she boldly wrote in an early issue and then introduced Christian principles as guides to a better life. But to write about God's love without mentioning his name and to elaborate the theme of her newspaper, "Men are that they might have joy," within the framework of Marxist-Leninist ideology were sometimes, she admits, beyond her powers. She was successful enough, however, to have many readers say to her, "Olga, you must be very happy, because you write such joyful things." Since the 1989 revolution, she has seen her ideas incorporated into a textbook for high school teachers, Self-Education in Ethics and Morality, which has been adopted by universities throughout her country.

Her search for a higher moral purpose brought Olga into the Church. The branch she joined was small, its members mainly those faithful ones who had joined before the war. Olga was the first young woman baptized in more than forty years. She decided the branch needed revitalization. Eight years and forty-seven converts later, including her own family, the branch is vigorous, youthful, and growing. It is not difficult to see how that happened. Olga is literally a Latter-day Saint. From her deep-rooted faith to her childlike humility, she radiates the spirit of the gospel. One who knows that best is Elder Martin Pilka, one of her converts and the first missionary from Czechoslovakia in recent times. "Olga," he wrote to me in his hesitant English, "is a very good sister but for most members she is also authority, because she is clean and full of love. I know that God chose her. Through Olga and Otakar Vojk; (whom Olga calls her spiritual father) was the Church restored in a big part of our country. Through Olga came to the Church a lot of young people and through Olga and this people the Church is living today." Indeed it is—in Czechoslovakia and throughout the world.

Dear sisters, brothers, and friends, I open my heart in faith to share with you experiences I have had living in East Central Europe in the beautiful country of Czechoslovakia. Until the end of 1989, life in Czechoslovakia was under full Communist control that had lasted forty years. I want to explain what living in these circumstances has meant to me. I believe that among people there is only one language that helps us to understand each other fully: it is the language of our heart, which is the language of love and of the Spirit of God. I am grateful that I can open my heart to you in this love.

Let me begin with an analogy. An Austrian scientist studied the life of crayfish. They, like lobsters, have at the base of their antennae small pockets where sand is deposited. The sand helps give these creatures their sense of equilibrium. If the sand is removed, they become disoriented until it is replaced.

In our bodies, we have a similar need for equilibrium, which comes from filling our hearts with the Spirit of God. If we do not keep that Spirit, we lose our spiritual balance.

In Communist-dominated life, I saw that people lost their individuality, their personality. They became dependent—literally—upon the Communists in all aspects of their lives. Someone was always watching what they did. People came to depend so much upon the leaders of the Communist party that they were reluctant to express their feelings openly. They became incapable of being happy. Only occasionally with trusted family and trusted friends would they show feelings. The Communists taught people to be honest, to be chaste, to work hard, and to be unselfish. They even had special schools to teach Communists how to influence people to live this way. But the Communist leaders were not honest with their people. They had privileges that were denied others, they did not live moral lives, and therefore they could not be models for non-Communists. The younger generations saw that hypocrisy and became very cynical. As a result, all people learned to lead two lives: one a private life, and the other a public life. In the Book of Mormon is a description that fits very well the majority of Communist leaders:

"And it came to pass that they did have their signs, yea, their secret signs, and their secret words; and this that they might distinguish a brother who had entered into the covenant, that whatsoever wickedness his brother should do he should not be injured by his brother, nor by those who did belong to his band, who had taken this covenant.

"And thus they might murder, and plunder, and steal, and commit whoredoms and all manner of wickedness, contrary to the laws of their country and also the laws of their God." (Helaman 6:22-23.)

Heavenly Father has allowed people to have experiences under rulers who not only govern without God's laws but who impose laws contrary to God's laws. Most Czechs grew up without a sense of direction. Nor could they find one. Communists do not believe that the way a person thinks about reality is important. The Marxist-Leninist philosophy places the highest value on material things. For that reason, those living under this ideology found their lives impoverished, lacking spiritual and higher cultural values. Albert Einstein said that the goal of material welfare is the same goal that a drove of pigs has. Our people longed for higher goals.

One year before our revolution, the movie depicting the life of Mahatma Gandhi was shown in Czechoslovakia. I noticed that most young people sat through this film not just once but two or three times. Although Gandhi's ideas are spiritual and most young people in my country do not believe in God, they were touched by Gandhi's idea of nonviolence. During our revolution, I saw in some Czech shop windows displays of nonviolence featuring Jesus Christ and Gandhi. Gandhi was quoted as saying: "Always, whenever I felt despair, I would realize that in the end truth and love always prevail." The Czech hunger for a spiritual and cultural life beyond Communist materialism was clear.

Among the leaders of the Czechoslovak Revolution in 1989 were university students. I find it very meaningful that it was called a Velvet Revolution. I will always remember the two students, very good friends, who came to my office. "Olga," they shouted, "we are bringing excellent news. The mills of the gods have started to grind again." We looked at each other and without another word, tears came to our eyes and we hugged. Two days later our nation came together: in Brno about one hundred thousand people gathered on the main square. We held hands and sang our national anthem. I felt the love of God among all the people so strongly: their hearts began a new beat, their souls began to live, life again had meaning for them. After forty years of an alien history, a history imposed on us by another nation, the history of the Czech people resumed. Then I recalled, in Paul's words: "Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty." (2 Corinthians 3:17.)

I know that the Velvet Revolution was a miracle of God. The French author Antoine de St. Exupery in his book, The Little Prince, wrote: "What is essential is invisible to the [human] eye." [^4] In America many have told me: "We prayed many years for freedom in your country." Brothers and sisters, I thank you for this gentle yet powerful help and influence. Our Czech youth were the embodiment of God's miracle, for as it is written in Ether 4:12, "Whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do good is of me; for good cometh of none save it be of me."

In many ways God has been persuading men and women toward good in our country. The Czechoslovak Mission was organized in 1929 by Elder John A. Widtsoe, the president of the European Mission. A young elder from the German-Austrian Mission, Arthur Gaeth, was chosen to preside over the mission. He was succeeded by Wallace Toronto, also one of the first missionaries. He and the elders had to leave when the Nazis occupied the country. After World War II, President Toronto returned with a larger number of missionaries, including our current president, Richard W. Winder, and Edwin B. Morrell, later president of the Austria Vienna East Mission. But by 1950, two years after the Communists had come to power, the mission was closed and would not be reopened until July 1990.

During the years of Communism, the Church could not exist publicly, even though a lot of other churches could. The Czech Latter-day Saints could not preach, hold meetings, baptize, or ordain members to the priesthood. The penalty for breaking that Communist law was prison for three to seven years.

Nevertheless, the LDS Church continued to exist. About fifty members were active to the extent that they were in contact one with another. These members—despite Communist repressions and the fear of imprisonment—were faithful, never betraying their innermost ideals. Mostly older members, they gathered from time to time in their own homes because it was dangerous to meet every Sunday.

I joined the Church eight years ago, during this dark period under Communism. In Brno, the second largest city in Czechoslovakia, where I attended the Masaryk University, I met the Vojk family. They had belonged to the Church for more than thirty years, yet that was a well-kept secret. I came in contact with them through my interest in yoga. A schoolmate who knew that I was interested in yoga told me one day, "Olga, I traveled last Sunday to my parents, and I met on the train a wonderful man. He is about seventy-five, and he is an expert in yoga." She had taken his address, so I visited this man. He appeared to me seventy-five in his age but in his heart nearer eighteen and full of joy. This was so unusual in Czechoslovakia at that time of cynicism. We started to speak of life, and I saw that he was not only educated but knew how to live joyfully. I became very good friends with him and with his whole family. The family consisted of the elder Mr. Otakar Vojk, his son, Gad, daughter-in-law, Magda, and their two children, Gad and Miriam, ages fifteen and thirteen. We had many discussions over many months.

The spirit in the Vojk family was something very different for me. When at one point I asked the elder Mr. Vojk about the meaning of their lives, he answered with a single sentence: "God sent us to the earth to sow joy, life, and love into souls and flowers." With this sentence a door opened for me into a different life—a life I had never imagined. I wondered where he learned this philosophy of life. One day I told them, "I have looked for many of the things you tell me in the New Testament, but I do not find them. Where do you read these things?" "Yes, it is true," they admitted. "They are not in the New Testament. We have a different book." They then gave me A Skeptic Discovers Mormonism, [^5] translated into Czech. Overnight I read the entire book. I returned the next day to the family. Not certain that they were Mormons, I asked them if they knew how I could contact these people, the Mormons, and if I could get a copy of the Book of Mormon. They then gave me a Book of Mormon in Czech. I noted on the binding "Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," so later that day I checked in the encyclopedia to find out about this church. There I read about Joseph Smith and how he was a crazy man—not normal, the article said—and I read there many other bad things about this church. Full of curiosity, I began to read the book anyway, but although I felt a strong spirit in the book, I did not read far. When I met with the Vojk family again, I told them, "I could not read all this book because I read one page and I felt questions." They told me, "It's okay, Olga. It is good that you have questions." So began a time of questions and learning the gospel.

Let me share my first clearly spiritual experience. Again it concerned my search for a higher purpose than materialism. While reading the Book of Mormon, I came to 2 Nephi 2:25 and read, "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy." I felt as if I had discovered a lost but important understanding for which I had been searching over many years. Yes, women and men are that we might have joy! That night I suddenly awoke, sat up and saw around me a light, and felt the same light in my heart. I realized that no longer did I just believe in God; I knew that Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ exist. I felt their love, not only for me, not only for good people, but for all people.

After my conversion, I had to wait half a year to be baptized. It was 1983 and because we had no baptismal font, we needed to wait until summer when we could be in the woods and not be noticed. The police would not be expecting a religious activity in the dark; however, as we neared the reservoir near Brno at about ten on the evening of my baptism, we noticed many fishermen. We waited, and the time dragged on—fifteen minutes, then thirty, then forty-five. I felt very disappointed and sad, wondering if this unexpected setback meant I was not sufficiently repentant. I silently questioned Heavenly Father: "Perhaps I am not well enough prepared, perhaps my testimony is not strong enough?" Yet, I felt a great desire to be baptized. Finally, a brother who had been baptized a year or so earlier suggested, "I think we must pray and ask Heavenly Father to make it possible for Olga to be baptized." This was my first miracle with a priesthood prayer. Within a few minutes of our quiet prayer, most of the fishermen left the river's edge, and the three who remained were some distance away. You can imagine my feelings of joy as I came up out of the water.

Then an older brother asked me, "Do you know why there were many fishermen by the water tonight?"

"Yes," I answered, "so that I would better realize my responsibility for my sins."

"Of course," he answered, "but also remember that Jesus, as he walked by the Sea of Galilee, said to Simon Peter and Andrew, who were casting a net into the sea, 'Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.' " (Matthew 4:19.) I felt his meaning was that I should soon be an instrument in God's hands to bring young people into the Church. In the confirmation blessing the elder Vojk, who had not overheard this conversation, also said that I was the first young woman convert in almost forty years and that through me many people would come to the Church.

I soon realized that I had become one new link in the chain of women who have been significant among Latter-day Saints in Czechoslovakia. In the 1920s, after World War I, the Brodilova family—a mother and two daughters—lived the gospel and prayed for the missionaries to come to Czechoslovakia. Others also became role models for me: Miloslava Krejci, baptized in the 1930s and ever active in genealogical research, was one of the Brno Branch stalwarts. Olga Snederflerova, wife of our district president in Prague, shared her quiet, steady faith since joining the Church in the late 1940s. In the early 1980s, Norma Toronto Morrell, wife of President Edwin Morrell and sister of Wallace Toronto, shared her love with us during frequent, supportive visits from Vienna with her husband, who presided over the Czechoslovak and neighboring Latter-day Saints. Four years ago, Barbara Woodhead Winder, then general president of the Relief Society, visited our branches and helped us to feel a part of the greater Church. Now she presides as companion to President Richard W. Winder since the re-opening of the Czechoslovak Mission in July 1990. All these women who preceded me are strong examples of love and patience.

At first, however, I did not know of them, and I was surprised to find at my first Sunday meeting that our Church group consisted of seven old people. They smiled at me with kindness, but I asked myself, "How special is this Church? It is only for old people." In time I would understand the reason. Most young members had escaped Czechoslovakia because all members were persecuted. Brother Vojk, for instance, was questioned many times in secret places. In government documents, it was written of him, "Be careful. This man has a great influence on young people." In these days the Church had, of course, no missionaries. Latter-day Saint families had long been persecuted, questioned by the police, and warned not to teach their children about God and not to baptize them, even out of the country. Therefore, we dared to meet only in the evenings, at first once a month, and later once a week, when it was already dark outside and the neighbors were occupied with doing something other than being interested in people gathering. The blinds were pulled down, the windows had to stay closed, and we did not sing hymns for fear of being overheard. In these meetings, however, we strongly felt the spirit of the Holy Ghost. At first we were only seven; by 1989, we were about sixty in this one room. We had only one Book of Mormon among us; it was over forty years old, from before the time of Communism. The neighbors, noticing the many visitors, wondered why their elderly neighbor Mr. Vojk had so many young friends. One neighbor asked him, "Mr. Vojk, what do you celebrate each Sunday? So many young people are coming to your house." He answered simply, "We learn to be happy." After the revolution, this neighbor returned to say, "I think that I too need your school of life."

So, before the revolution, every Sabbath was for me the happiest day of the week, because I could partake of the sacrament and learn more about the gospel, which would help me during the whole coming week. A few months after my baptism, a friend of mine also joined the Church, and we started to pray and discuss with the Vojk family how we might do member-missionary work. We decided to invite our many university friends to a School of Wisdom, prior to our Sunday meetings, where we would teach the youth about the gospel, about Jesus Christ, and about Heavenly Father.

During those eight years before the Velvet Revolution, there were baptized about fifty young people and a few older people, including my parents, whom I had been afraid to tell about my belief in God. My parents had been Protestants, but in our home we were not spiritually awakened. There was no LDS church in Uherske Hradiste, the town where I was born, and at the Masaryk University, atheism was required. Belief in God was not permitted. Sometime after my conversion, I began yoga lectures in my hometown. At my invitation, my parents attended. After visiting three times, as we sat together at home that day, they asked me, "Olga, what are you doing? This is so special. Where did you learn such wonderful things about life? We didn't tell you anything like this." Then I had the courage to bring out the Book of Mormon and speak to them about the gospel and the Church. My father is now a branch president in Uherske Hradiste, where we now have eighty-two members and four missionaries after only two years of missionary work.

To think this miracle began with something so simple as our School of Wisdom classes—Brother Vojk and a few young members offering gospel education to Czech atheistic youth. We knew that some of those attending the seminars were from the secret police, and before the Velvet Revolution, we could not openly talk about God or Jesus Christ, or even about love. So we taught university students seven ideas: first, admiration for good things in life; second, self-respect; third, being interested in living; fourth, finding joy in living; fifth, expressing gratitude; sixth, loving others (as Jesus intended); and seventh, enthusiasm—finding the burning within. The purpose of these principles was to help the youth build meaningful relationships with others and to bring them to a more spiritual life. We taught through examples, stories, and Bible parables. I was many times questioned by the secret police, but they were kind to me. Sometimes I could tell by their special questions that they knew I was a Church member, but since we did not organize or teach against our government, I was probably safe.

The Vojk family were also experts in yoga. To help youth experience these seven gospel ideas to find spirituality and joy in life, we arranged yoga summer camps where they exercised outdoors, ate well, and learned to live happily together. There were about eighty people at each one-week camp. Even during one week at a camp, a participant's behavior was often changed for the better. We didn't pray or mention Heavenly Father, but we held hands before eating our food and expressed gratitude for being together.

For eight years now, we have held six or seven weeks of camp each summer. Our young LDS members taught at the camp, as if they were full-time missionaries. I am now teaching at the Missionary Training Center in Provo, Utah, and I receive letters from newly baptized LDS youth in Czechoslovakia who tell me how these seven ideas and other associations with us led them from being atheists to becoming believers in God. Each year we taught five to six hundred youth and middle-aged people from all over Czechoslovakia. We see that these people are already partially prepared to receive the new missionaries.

I am so grateful to Heavenly Father that the Czech Mission has been opened once again. We have six branches, and others are soon to be organized. Thirty-six missionaries are at present serving in Czechoslovakia, and eight more are studying at the MTC, among them four sister missionaries and one couple.

Missionary work will help the Czechoslovak people come to a new morality, based upon the eternal principles of the gospel. There is a great need for a new moral order. The president of Czechoslovakia, Vaclav Havel, speaking on New Year's Day, 1991, said: "Freedom surprisingly opened doors upon undesirable characteristics and showed the depth of moral decay afflicting our souls." Many Czech people are looking for a life full of truth. Who can be better examples of such a life than LDS missionaries? Czechs who seek a better life see the missionaries as positive examples of spiritually minded youth. Czechs also need strong families based upon prayer. We may have freedom, but without spiritual understanding, freedom leads people astray. Austria Vienna East Mission President Dennis Neuenschwander, now a member of the Second Quorum of the Seventy, wrote in a Christmas letter to family and friends in 1990: "Through the gospel, faith in Jesus Christ springs forth where there has been emptiness. Hope abounds where once there was despair. Charity is replacing destructive cynicism. Lives are changed as the light of the gospel penetrates the darkness."

We need more young elders, more sister missionaries to provide positive examples of young women living the Gospel, and more older couples as examples for our families and to help build the branches.

Brothers and sisters, we love you and we need you. To you in America I want to say, as did the Lord, "Arise and shine forth, that thy light may be a standard for the nations." (D&C 115:5.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Ashley Montagu, in "Want Health and Wealth? Experts Prescribe Large Doses of Laughter and Play," Deseret News, 20 Mar. 1987, p. A-3.
[^2] Boyd K. Packer, Teach Ye Diligently, rev. ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975), p. 249.
[^3] Richard L. Evans, "The Spoken Word," Improvement Era, Feb. 1968, p. 71.
[^4] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Live the Gospel," Ensign, Nov. 1984, p. 86.
[^5] Brigham Young, 7 June 1863, Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards, 1855-86), 10:205.
