Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

She Who Laughs, Lasts

MARY ELLEN EDMUNDS [^1]

The thing that makes this presentation difficult is that for me humor is mostly spontaneous . . . so I didn't prepare anything. Well, that's not entirely true. The truth is, I don't know how to start or end, but I've got a few good ideas for the middle. Here they are: She who laughs, lasts! She lasts through paper cuts and budget cuts, dark and stormy nights, losing at Monopoly and losing at love, weight gains and labor pains, braces and glasses, and falling down on the ice in front of a hundred people, and traffic jams and divorce and cancer and single parenthood and everything.

If you can survive all this, you have what's known as a "sense of humor." I like this kind of humor because it is gentle and kind. It breaks the ice and brings down the walls that divide us from each other.

I've cut a lot of articles out of newspapers and magazines about humor and laughter. I'd like to share some of them with you. In 1987 anthropologist Ashley Montagu advised people to "rediscover the childlike playfulness they once enjoyed. People should," he advised, "avoid hardening of the attitudes." [^2] Good point.

Other studies show that when people laugh hard, the heart rate speeds up, the circulatory system is stimulated, and the muscles go limp. The body's immune system is stimulated, and more endorphins—which are natural pain-relieving substances in the brain—are produced during laughter.

So much for the science and body chemistry of it. Now for life. In my life, humor has helped me cut down on competition and envy.

Humor increases peace.

Humor for me is two parts love and three parts courage.

"Be of good cheer" is a commandment, not a suggestion. I work at the Missionary Training Center as an associate director of training. I work with welfare and visitors center missionaries, Southeast Asian languages, and senior missionaries.

Sometimes missionaries come to the MTC almost afraid to smile. How unattractive! Who would want to know more about a religion that turns people into unsmiling, unhappy salespeople?

Elder M. Russell Ballard, speaking to the missionaries at the MTC in September 1985, noted that "lightmindedness offends," but, he added, "if we said you couldn't have a sense of humor, all the Brethren would be in jeopardy."

I receive a lot of letters from missionaries in the field. This one came from Elder and Sister Jankowski, serving in Nigeria, West Africa:

"The only light in our house deep in the rain forest of Nigeria at 4:00 a.m. was a small glow at the end of the hall from an under-powered 40-watt light bulb. As I lay there in my bed, a black object in the hallway caught my eye. To my horror, there—only twelve feet from our bed—was the dreaded Giant Wild African Black Cockroach! Should I wake my faithful, brave husband? I decided I would attempt to rid our house of the menace myself. Each step I took I could feel the terror building inside me. It was too late to turn back now as I could see clearly his huge, three-inch body and his two fangs in the subdued light.

"During what seemed an eternity, I found my way to the kitchen. There on the shelf was the only help I could count on to rid us of this menace: RAID! As I held the can I could feel its power waiting to strike.

"Now I was only three feet away from the black nemesis of the night. My finger shook as I pressed down on the trigger. Like a cobra striking, the spray found the mark again and again. I unleashed the deadly spray until I could see the poison dripping off his two fangs. No black African wild cockroach had ever been given such a deadly, personal, one-on-one dose of RAID!

"I moved quickly to the light switch, and with one single motion I flipped on the lights. There, only six inches away from the electrical outlet, lay a dead three-inch black plug adapter, the two electric prongs dripping RAID profusely."

I believe that "Men are, that they might have joy." They might not, too. (2 Nephi 2:25.) And don't forget women!

It's wholesome and healthy to be cheerful and happy. Alma, in speaking to his son Corianton, said that when men and women are "in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity" they are in a state "contrary to the nature of God; therefore, they are in a state contrary to the nature of happiness." (Alma 41:11.)

Having a good sense of humor means having the ability to know how to be sensitive to situations and to others' feelings. Humor is laughing with people, but never at them. Humor is learning to laugh at ourselves, but never at that which is sacred.

Humor is a way to deal with life's inconsistencies.

Are you ready for more clippings yet?

Elder Boyd K. Packer said, "A good sense of humor is a characteristic of a well-balanced person. It has always been apparent that the prophets were men with very alert and pleasing senses of humor." [^3]

Elder Richard L. Evans shared the thought that "humor is essential to a full and happy life. It is a reliever and relaxer of pressure and tension, and the saving element in many situations." [^4]

During general conference in 1984, President Gordon B. Hinckley encouraged us, "Enjoy your membership in the Church. Where else in all the world can you find such a society? Enjoy your activity. . . .

"Be happy in that which you do. Cultivate a spirit of gladness in your homes. . . . Let the light of the gospel shine in your faces wherever you go and in whatever you do." [^5]

Think of someone you enjoy being around. Is he or she a happy person? Someone who lifts your spirits? So often we just need to be silly together. Some friends and I have fun remembering our Primary graduation. We especially enjoy repeating the opening remarks of our leader: "You sweet young girls on the threshold of eternity, keep your standards high! Lower your skirts and raise your standards!"

We need to laugh at ourselves. All I have to do for a good laugh is get out my yearbooks.

A friend shared this wonderful piece of silliness with me recently. "The Fourteenth Article of Faith: We believe in meetings—all that have been scheduled, all that are now scheduled, and we believe that there will yet be scheduled many more great and important meetings. We have endured many meetings and hope to be able to endure all meetings. Indeed, we may say that if there is a meeting, we seek after it."

Humor has tied our family closer together.

In our family is a wonderful soul whom we call "Aunt Florence," although I think she's actually my father's second cousin. Aunt Florence, when she was eighty-four, got a letter from a company inviting her to come and see their presentation about condominiums, telling her she'd receive a free gift—a choice between a beautiful twenty-piece set of china or a Homelite XEL chain saw. This was her response (with help from me and my mom):

"Dear Mr. Johnston: I just received your marvelous letter about the unique condominiums that you have in Park City and Hawaii. Living as I do in a nursing home, you can imagine how delighted I'd be to live in Park City or Hawaii instead. I don't know how I was lucky enough to get on your mailing list, but what a thrill!

"One thing I'm very excited about is the Homelite XEL chain saw. It's just what I need here at the nursing home when we work on crafts. Maybe they'll let me start coming again when they realize I've got such a nice saw; I had to quit going because I wasn't participating. I've missed it.

"Another thing I need to mention is that when you fly me over to Hawaii, I'll have to go first class. I've had several strokes, and I just can't seem to hold my knees together anymore, so I'll need the extra space.

"Thanks again for thinking of me here in the nursing home. I think that's great! Owning something 'for the rest of my life' (as you put it) sounds terrific since I'm only 84!"

Some months after Florence passed away, a letter from the IRS arrived, saying she hadn't paid her taxes for 1979. Unless she had reasonable cause for delay, she might be liable for penalties. They invited, "If you believe you had reasonable cause for filing late and for paying late, please explain. We have enclosed an envelope for your use. Thank you for your cooperation."

Well, that most certainly deserved a reply, and as our family prepared one, we could hear Florence hooting:

Under the "I did not file the form because," we checked the "Business was closed" box.

In the "Remarks" section we wrote: "Yes, business was closed permanently on 9 June 1980. I'd not had an income for quite some years prior to that because I was in a nursing home. I know this is unusual to be getting a letter from me now that I'm dead, but I didn't want to mess up your records. I know how important that is to you. It was only with very special permission that I was able to send this note from the Other Side. I must say it's a lot more fun here where there aren't any taxes, but despite that I do wish you well in your work. I know a lot of people don't fully appreciate what you do, but now that I've got a new perspective (as they say) I know you work hard. By the way, in case anyone there is interested, everything they say is true—you've got to work there for what you get here, if you know what I mean. Tell the guys in the office to get with it. Thanks again for your inquiry and for providing the envelope."

I love sitting around the dinner table with my family and having someone start a "Remember when . . . ," and then we laugh. Sometimes we only have to say a phrase or a word, and everyone cracks up.

During the years I worked as a nurse, I found it was essential and often helpful to cultivate a sense of humor. One day when I'd been working with a particularly surly and uncooperative patient, I went to his bedside, determined to speak my mind. I said cheerfully, "I know you really like me but have a hard time expressing it." As I said, humor is two parts love, three parts sheer courage. We both started laughing, and we ended up good friends.

Humor has a way of leveling—of helping us experience equality. When the same thing touches or amuses two people, it reaches across a lot of artificial walls and even cuts through language and other communication barriers.

Laughing together is similar to crying or weeping together: it's unifying, it's a tenderizer, and I believe it helps us be more real with each other.

There is a time to laugh, to be hilarious, just as there is a time to weep, to be tender and sorry and comforting. Balance seems critical to me. We need to feel many things, and not just one emotion all the time. People who are constantly happy make me uneasy or nervous. If they never crash or have a hard day, they don't seem real.

Many people I know who are considered funny are also weepy, as I am. Perhaps we use humor to cover the tears and prop up the tenderness. I know I don't feel as lighthearted as I used to be before I lived in Africa and Asia and came face to face and heart to heart with a lot of suffering and pain, incredible unfairness and inequity. There is much in life that is simply not at all funny.

Yet when people say humor is the opposite of spirituality and "seriousness," they are dead wrong. That's like saying faith is the opposite of hope. No, the opposite of good humor is contention. The opposite of happiness is misery. The opposite of cheerfulness is gloom. The opposite of optimism is negativism.

Humor is not the opposite of serious spirituality. It is the opposite of anger, contention, envy, and self-centeredness. A humorless heart is too often a hard heart. The devil wants us to be miserable, and so he tries to take away genuine humor, changing it from good humor to something vulgar, crude, and often cruel.

Good humor is never cruel. In fact, I find that humor is often a way to focus on others rather than on yourself. You want to make them laugh, even at the expense of forgetting how hassled or stressed or oh-woe-is-me you may feel.

Wait. I feel another clipping coming on.

It's Brigham Young. "Let us make ourselves capable of doing at least a little good, and this will occupy our minds upon something that is indeed profitable to others, and will somewhat divert our attention from worshipping ourselves and blaming everybody that does not do the same!" [^6] He's right: humor helps us cast off self-importance.

Articles, cartoons, books—watch for things that are genuinely funny and share them with others. So often things are even funnier when they're shared with just the right person at just the right time. Humor definitely reduces stress. I've watched this magic over and over. When you find something that would lift someone's spirits, share it. Listen to these great book titles:

How to Be Miserable for the Rest of the Century

Raging Hormones: The Unofficial PMS Survival Guide

Chocolate—The Consuming Passion

Even the titles bring a smile. Share books, articles, and ads—nonsense and sense—with each other.

"Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid," the scriptures tell us. We sing songs that have phrases like "Born this happy morning" and "Hallelujah!" not "Oh dear me, I'm bored and angry and depressed and discouraged today." Don't make your theme song "Hang down your head, Tom Dooley."

Declarations such as "Joy to the world!" and "Rejoice! the Lord is King" are for all of us, not just a few shepherds on a beautiful night listening to angels sing. The message is for each of us every day.

I hear Brother Joseph: "Happiness is the object and design of our existence." [^7] And Moroni: "He that is happy shall be happy still." (Mormon 9:14.) Be happy now so you can be happy forever! There is a way!

May we bring happiness to each other. May your humor be good and kind. God bless you to find good humor amidst all that is troubling you today and all that we'll all face alone and together as the time steadily approaches when Jesus Christ will come again and we will finally rest from all that isn't good and kind. "And then may God grant unto you that your burdens may be light, through the joy of his Son. And even all this can ye do if ye will." (Alma 33:23.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Jacob 2:13-19; Mosiah 4:16-18, 21-23; Alma 1:26-32; 4:6-15; 5:53-56; 16:16, 21; 31:24-30; 34:28-29, 40; Helaman 3:33-36; 4:11-12; 7:20-21; 13:21-22; 3 Nephi 6:10-15; 24:5; 26:19; 4 Nephi 1:3, 24-26, 43; D&C 6:7; 11:7; 49:19-20; 70:14; 105:3.
[^2] Richard E. Johnson, "Socioeconomic Inequality: The Haves and the Have-nots," BYU Today, Sept. 1990, pp. 46-58. (Excerpts reprinted with permission.)
[^3] Richard E. Johnson is an associate professor of sociology at Brigham Young University. He and his wife, Deborah, are the parents of six children.
[^4] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Live the Gospel," Ensign, Nov. 1984, p. 86.
[^5] Brigham Young, 7 June 1863, Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards, 1855-86), 10:205.
[^6] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), p. 255.
[^7] Mary Ellen Edmunds has served as an associate director of training at the Missionary Training Center in Provo, Utah, and as a member of the Relief Society general board. She has taught nursing at Brigham Young University, coordinated the work of health missionaries for the Church, and directed a health project for children in Nigeria. She has also served as a missionary in Taiwan, Hong Kong, the Philippines, and Indonesia.
