Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

No Poor among Us?

RICHARD E. JOHNSON [^1]

Every semester several students in my social problems course at BYU propose that the extent or seriousness of certain social problems represents a sign that the world is about to end and the Millennium is near. Their common conclusion is based on a set of three shared beliefs or perceptions. First, they believe that the "last days" will be characterized by unprecedented displays of sin and evil. Second, they see the traditional and highly publicized problems of crime, violence, drug abuse, and sexual deviance as the primary indicators of sin and evil. And third, they perceive America as now experiencing unprecedented levels of crime, violence, drug abuse, and sexual deviance.

Two aspects of this line of thought strike me as rather narrow-minded. First, it seems both narrow and presumptuous for Americans to evaluate the condition of the entire human race and the fate of the planet on the basis of their perceptions of America's social problems and moral climate. It seems possible that events or morality in the rest of the world just might also have something to do with the timing of the Millennium. Second, the criteria for judging the "badness" of American society (sex, drugs, crime, and violence) are rather narrow.

It seems to me that if we are serious about contemplating the moral state of contemporary American society, we might gain valuable insight by broadening the measure of morality beyond the traditional sins to include such variables as poverty, homelessness, and socioeconomic inequality. Perhaps the central moral problem of our time is primarily economic or materialistic, involving behavior that is more often than not perfectly legal and socially acceptable. It also seems that any speculation about "the signs of the last days" must be based on observation of conditions both within and beyond the borders of the United States.

Moral self-assessment, though often a difficult and ambiguous task, is absolutely vital to societal and individual integrity and well-being. I certainly claim no right to judge the moral quality of American society, but I feel an obligation to try. I freely admit to applying a very personal and biased "moral measuring rod" to American society. My measuring rod is based on my personal interpretation of LDS scriptures. In short, I cannot be objective, and I freely admit that I may be way off base.

It seems to me, however, that the most powerful and consistent scriptural warnings given to those who live in the "last days" (as found particularly in the Book of Mormon) center on a single set of interwoven evils—the evils of materialism, consumerism, worldly vanity, and socioeconomic inequality. These traits and conditions are unequivocally condemned throughout the Book of Mormon. [^2] Moreover, they are generally described as the root from which other "sins" take nourishment and as the ultimate cause of both personal and social destruction. In short, the prevalence of selfish striving for the "life-styles of the rich and famous" (by both those who succeed and those who fail), and the consequent inequality that results, appear to be appropriate criteria for assessing a society's moral climate.

Judging from the responses of my students (who are typically "active LDS" from relatively comfortable socioeconomic backgrounds), these are not common measures of immorality or evil. Many, in fact, are shocked by the suggestion that morality could have anything to do with either (a) the seeking or obtaining of a high standard of living, or (b) the presence of grossly unequal standards of living. Those who agree that a "high" standard of material comfort may, in fact, be a form of selfishness or oppression are quick to define "high" as well above their own level. My response is that I, too, am both confused and disquieted by the whole question, but that I cannot ignore it given my interpretation of the scriptures. Furthermore, I cannot have confidence that my "modest" American life-style is safely below a selfishly "high" level of comfort and convenience, given what I know about inequality and destitution in my own society or in the world.

It is certainly understandable that mainstream American Mormons (such as those who read this volume of essays, myself included) are more inclined to condemn the behavior of "traditional sinners" (thieves, addicts, abusers, etc.) than to condemn the behavior of materialistic consumers of legal goods obtained by legal means. Traditional sinners are clearly self-indulgent, satisfying their whims and appetites for comfort or pleasure through sexual, chemical, or violent means. It is also clear that innocent others often suffer because of the self-indulgence of these sinners. We law-abiding, high-living consumers, on the other hand, satisfy our self-indulgent whims and appetites for comfort or pleasure through clearly superior means—we buy goodies, ranging from mansions to microchips. In the process, we ignore King Benjamin and countless other prophets and tell ourselves that we "earn" or "deserve" the goodies that give us comfort and pleasure, and we fail to note any consequent suffering by anyone. I simply cannot shake off the nagging thought that our traditional definitions of morality—our division of the world into the "good guys" and the "bad guys"—is based on convenience and rationalization, as well as on some truth.

Whether or not materialism and inequality are key signs of the moral battles that are to mark the last days, or even whether or not they are evil at all, the fact is that poverty and inequality are flourishing in America today. There is general agreement that three clear trends have occurred in America during the 1980s.

First, inequality in both income and wealth has increased. The rich have gotten richer and the poor have become poorer—not merely poorer relative to the increasing income of the rich, but literally and absolutely poorer: less able to sustain life. The Census Bureau reports that the richest one-fifth of American households now receive almost ten times the average income of the poorest one-fifth, which is the highest ratio of inequality since they began keeping records following World War II. America's inequality ratio is also the highest among Western industrial nations.

Income inequality represents more than mere differences in the sizes of the piles of goodies that families can afford. For millions of families at the bottom of the distribution (perhaps the 10 percent with total yearly family incomes averaging $3,157), we are talking about malnutrition, literal starvation, little or no access to health care or education, homelessness, and utter hopelessness.

Second, there have been significant increases and changes in the distribution of American poverty, which is rapidly becoming a more common condition for women and children. One-fourth of all American children are now in poverty, and if current trends continue, the number will be one-third by the end of the decade.

Third, we have experienced rising rates of homelessness, along with changes in the characteristics of the homeless. The homeless population today includes an increasing proportion of mentally disturbed people, of families (especially single-mother families), and of working people. The lack of low-cost housing is becoming so acute that even some full-time workers simply cannot find a place they can afford to buy or rent.

Let me repeat that the growing inequality and poverty are not simply a matter of some folks having fewer goodies than others. We are talking about basic shelter, malnutrition, and little or no access to health care or education. We are talking about millions of Americans, many of whom are children, who simply have no concept of what it means to have a "brightness of hope."

I think many of us are ignorant of what is going on and prefer to remain so. Few of us realize that infant mortality rates among America's poor exceed those in many Third World countries and greatly surpass the rates in other Western democracies. All of this occurs in the midst of wealth almost unimaginable to the vast majority of the planet's past or present inhabitants; all of this occurs while the rich get richer. I cannot divorce this reality from my concept of morality. I am ashamed to be a part of it.

There are numerous reasons for these conditions. I have listed nine in a related article on the subject. [^3] Let me focus on the last, and most important, which is public stereotypes and attitudes about wealth, poverty, and welfare. Frankly, I am continually amazed at the strength and harshness of the antipoor attitudes exhibited by some of my students and at their unwillingness to reconsider their views on the basis of clear contradictory evidence. Antipoor attitudes come in a wide variety of hues, but the predominant theme is that the poor have earned their lot in life because they are lazy, stupid, and/or satisfied with their way of life—that they "deserve" to be poor.

Numerous studies show that the poor as a group have the same goals, desires, work ethic, and work habits of the nonpoor as a group. Obviously, you are going to find "slackers" in any group, but there doesn't seem to be a systematic correlation between poverty and work habits.

Consider the case of Eugene Lang, a millionaire who grew up in a now dilapidated area of New York. He was asked to come back and speak to his alma mater at a grade school graduation. He had planned to deliver a traditional "rah, rah, work hard, this is the land of opportunity" speech, but when he looked around, he saw that his originally working-class East Harlem neighborhood had changed. The audience consisted of poor minority kids, and he didn't think they actually had much of a chance. So, on the spur of the moment he promised them, "All of you who stay out of trouble—who stay in school and graduate from high school—I am going to fund your college education." The dropout rates of that school were normally 60 to 70 percent. Of the group to whom he offered a college education, the dropout rate fell to about 10 percent. That is called making a permanent difference in someone's life. It wasn't that he gave them money. They didn't see a penny for a long time. What he gave them was hope and respect and opportunity. To some people those words seem just jargon, empty cliches, but I believe that if we give people respect and hope—which may or may not cost money—we will see that the poor are no more lazy, stupid, or satisfied with remaining in poverty than the rest of us.

The missing ingredient in the lives of Mr. Lang's recipients had not been the desire or willingness to work. It was hope. Most college students I meet have long taken for granted that college was an expectation or at least a realistic option for them. Are they—we—to be particularly admired for simply following the most reasonable path to socioeconomic success, while others "fail" because they see no realistic hope of even getting on the path?

Today, more poor and minority high school seniors than ever before report that they want to and plan to go to college, yet fewer and fewer of them are enrolling. By far the leading reason for their "change of mind" is reported to be the high cost of school and the absence of financial assistance programs that were much more available in the 1970s.

Work ethic, hours worked, ambition, and IQ are very poor statistical predictors of adult socioeconomic attainment in the United States. By far the best predictor is the socioeconomic position of one's parents. In short, poor Americans of any age are poor primarily because they were born poor. And the second major reason of poverty is similarly unrelated to individual character: The poor have often "landed" in an unfavorable macroeconomic setting. Not unlike victims of earthquakes or hurricanes, victims of structural economic depression often have little control over their fate.

It makes just as much sense to blame the current poverty on individual laziness as it does to attribute the Great Depression of the 1930s to an outbreak of a "lazy-bum virus." Certainly, some poor folks should heed the traditional advice to "get a job." (As, by the way, should some rich folks.) However, well over 90 percent of all poverty-stricken Americans fall into one or more of the following categories: under 18 or over 65 years old, disabled, working (for poverty pay), or rearing infants or small children. Evidence is clear that when the disadvantaged are given real opportunities to succeed, the vast majority work hard and take advantage of those opportunities.

In spite of massive evidence to the contrary, many still cling to the notion that America is the land of equal opportunity. That belief, in turn, makes a convenient basis for the conclusion that the "haves" deserve their goodies and are not obligated to assist the "have-nots." My response to this conclusion is twofold. First, LDS scriptures state clearly that the obligation to assist the poor remains intact whether or not the poor are judged to be deserving. Second, how can one reasonably view the growing millions of poor children as blameworthy, no matter what one thinks of their parents?

The President's Commission on Children recently called the poverty and despair facing many American children "a staggering national tragedy." Happily, yet sadly, the resources needed to save America's children are readily available, at an affordable cost. The price tag would amount to relatively small sacrifices of time and slight reductions in our consumption of goods and services. How can anyone in a position to help, including Latter-day Saints, simply sit back and enjoy a life of ease? Is not the lack of social action in this regard an indictment of American society?

It matters not whether remedial action is private or public, Republican or Democrat. I have absolutely no particular partisan or political agenda in mind: I am simply advocating action. What matters is that inaction is both moral and social suicide. Because of our selfish and short-sighted desires for immediate materialistic self-indulgence, mainstream America is nurturing the growth of a subpopulation within society that will have little or no ability or desire to participate in conventional social or economic life. The prospects for a productive economy in years to come are thereby reduced. The prospects for flourishing drug and crime problems are thereby increased. Everyone's quality of life will be affected by the current neglect of our children.

I would like to believe that my material living standard is not a moral issue as long as I am a "good person" in other ways. I really would like to believe that. I would be so much happier. Given the national picture, however—not to mention the world picture, which is much worse in deprivation and inequality—such a belief strikes me as wishful fantasy. The evidence is simply too clear that a great deal of the evil and suffering in our land can be traced to the individualistic and materialistic pursuit of happiness and to the tremendous socioeconomic inequality that follows. Unfortunately, I do not believe these attitudes are absent from the LDS subculture.

On the positive side, it is not impossible for the recipient of a high income to live a modest life-style and use the money to benefit others. In fact, the world needs many more of those kinds of people. But as the scriptures repeatedly remind us, a high income represents a temptation that very few can withstand. Moreover, the definition of modest can easily be stretched beyond all recognition. A major point from the parable of the widow's mite seems to be that moral judgment over the use of money is based not on how much we give but on how much we keep for ourselves.

Whether or not we are witnessing signs of the last days, we are certainly witnessing global trends and events unprecedented in world history. Never before have scientific and political developments allowed so many hundreds of millions of people to realistically seek the "good life" of physical ease and comfort already enjoyed by the American middle class. The materialistic "good life" is fast becoming a global aspiration. Recent events in Eastern Europe, for example, represent not only the unshackling of political and religious bonds but the unleashing of materialistic striving.

Could not the great and unprecedented battle between good and evil that seems to be predicted for the end of the world refer to the dual evils of insatiable materialism and unspeakable inequality? Certainly, opportunities for engaging in economic selfishness are expanding rapidly. There may be more people alive today exercising substantial political and economic agency—facing real choices between personal luxury and Christian charity—than there have been in all previous centuries combined. How will they handle their "opportunity" to engage in direct or indirect oppression, their choice to hoard or to share? How are we handling ours?

It is no longer possible even to pretend that material acquisitiveness can be morally neutral. Never before has it been so clear that the earth's capacity to sustain life is limited. Never before did humankind realize that a high standard of living must be purchased at the cost of depletion of finite resources and pollution of a fragile environment.

The inescapable conclusion is that when one person lives a life of luxury in a society or a world of limited and finite resources, others are forced to have less. Many, in fact, have so much less that they will suffer and die but only after watching their loved ones suffer and die. Increasingly, the dying—and the injustice— are becoming more difficult to ignore. Modern communications systems continue to shrink the world, bringing into greater light and clearer focus the juxtaposition of unprecedented abundance and unprecedented suffering. The rich have run out of excuses. What happens when the poor run out of patience?

Whether we become more willing to sacrifice and share out of fear, economic self-interest, or charity, it seems that the time has come to do so or face the consequences. How long can we ignore the scriptural description of socioeconomic inequality as evil? How long will we be guided by the "traditions of our fathers" instead of the Savior of humanity? How long will Church members join mainstream America in not only condoning but promoting and admiring materialistic self-aggrandizement? Might not the great lesson for the last days be that in order for there to be a world of peace or a Zion with "no poor among [them]" (Moses 7:18) that there must also be no rich among them? (See 4 Nephi 1:3.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Jacob 2:13-19; Mosiah 4:16-18, 21-23; Alma 1:26-32; 4:6-15; 5:53-56; 16:16, 21; 31:24-30; 34:28-29, 40; Helaman 3:33-36; 4:11-12; 7:20-21; 13:21-22; 3 Nephi 6:10-15; 24:5; 26:19; 4 Nephi 1:3, 24-26, 43; D&C 6:7; 11:7; 49:19-20; 70:14; 105:3.
[^2] Richard E. Johnson, "Socioeconomic Inequality: The Haves and the Have-nots," BYU Today, Sept. 1990, pp. 46-58. (Excerpts reprinted with permission.)
[^3] Richard E. Johnson is an associate professor of sociology at Brigham Young University. He and his wife, Deborah, are the parents of six children.
