Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

WHERE HAS GREED GOTTEN US?

"Why do ye adorn yourselves with that which hath no life, and yet suffer the hungry, and the needy, and the naked, and sick and the afflicted to pass by you, and notice them not?"

—Mormon 8:39

The Ethics of I Want

MARY ANN RASMUSSEN [^1]

I grew up in Salt Lake City and graduated from the University of Utah. I married Scott Rasmussen in 1979, and we moved to New York City, where we both graduated from Columbia Law School. After graduation I took a job with a Wall Street law firm, which I greatly enjoyed but which required a number of significant sacrifices.

After six years of practice, during which time our first child was born, my husband and I came to the conclusion that, as much as we enjoyed the excitement, diversity, and vitality of living in New York City, our demanding work schedules and the daily two-hour commutes were not conducive to the type of family life we wanted.

We decided to simplify our lives, and so we moved back to Utah. I am currently a member of the Utah State Bar and practice my specialty, trusts and estates law, on a limited basis. I have restructured my life so that I can spend the bulk of my time with our two children, which has been the most rewarding and enjoyable consequence of our quest for simplification.

Another advantage of this simplification process relates to what we have learned about the emphasis our society places on materialism. As our family dropped from two incomes down to one, and as we voluntarily restricted our ability to acquire things, we became more acutely aware that one of the few things that can be said with certainty about our society is that it is extremely materialistic. As we drive or walk along urban streets, we often see T-shirts and bumper stickers proclaiming slogans such as "Shop until you drop," "When the going gets tough, the tough go shopping," "Whoever dies with the most toys wins," or one slogan that probably makes the philosopher Descartes turn over in his grave, "I shop, therefore I am."

All too many people derive their self-images and judge others on the basis of the clothes they wear, the homes they live in, and the furniture and the automobiles they own. Too frequently we gauge our self-worth and that of others based upon material success or lack of it.

When we reflect on the decade of the 1980s, the operative word was greed. The insider-trading scandals involving Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, and numerous others; the tax fraud schemes of Leona Helmsley, who lived and was tried by her motto of "Only the little people pay taxes"; the HUD scandals and the savings and loan debacles consumed headlines throughout much of the decade. The selfishness and greediness of these people has wreaked havoc on the American economy and social structure. And the attitudes from which their actions sprang will affect us for decades to come.

Enough is never enough. Human nature always wants more. No matter what circles we travel in, we will always encounter people who have more than we do. Ivana Trump is a quintessential example of this principle. When the Trumps first announced their separation, Ivana was offered a ten-million-dollar divorce settlement—which she summarily rejected as too paltry. Across the country, most Americans thought, "Hey, I could be quite content with ten million dollars." Yet, to Ivana, having only ten million dollars would cramp the style of living to which she has become accustomed.

Just as it is important to remind ourselves that clothes, homes, and automobiles do not make the individual, we must learn to distinguish between needs and wants, and we must teach our children to do the same. We must help our children develop strong, positive self-images so that they do not feel they have to have the latest in clothes, toys, and sports equipment in order to be liked and accepted by their peers. Children need to learn the value of money and the importance of saving for goals. If a child is desperate to own a hot item—such as roller-blades—the child will value the item more and will probably take better care of it if he or she earns the money to purchase it by doing jobs around the house, baby-sitting, and saving allowance money. Children need to realize that just as parents work to earn a living, children should work to earn the things they want. Children who learn to manage money at an early age will be better prepared to live within a budget when they are off at college, on missions, or as newlyweds. One of our great responsibilities as parents is rearing children to be independent and financially responsible.

In Saul Bellow's Henderson the Rain King, Henderson, the protagonist, experienced an insatiable little voice inside his head that continually cried, "I want. I want. I want." No matter what Henderson did or acquired, it wasn't sufficient. How many of us are like Henderson in this regard? Do we purchase things in order to feel good about ourselves? Do we spend hours shopping as a means to alleviate boredom and depression or as a means of recreation or entertainment? Do we use possessions to hide our inadequacies and insecurities? Or perhaps to bolster a weak self-image or to validate our lives: "If I live in a beautiful house, dress stylishly, and drive a nice car, then I must be OK."

It is sobering to note that in studies comparing the charitable contributions of different income groups, the percentage of gross income donated to charitable causes actually decreases as a person's gross income increases.

An annual Sub for Santa project carried out by a Salt Lake City law firm illustrates these studies. Each Christmas this firm acts as a Sub for Santa for three or four needy families. It is instructive, and perhaps disappointing, to analyze the generosity of different groups within the firm. The pattern of giving has remained the same year after year. The secretaries, who make the least money, are by far the most generous. They donate beautiful gifts and contribute substantial amounts of cash. The young associate lawyers, whose incomes are significantly higher than those of the secretaries, are considerably less generous. The most parsimonious and penurious group are the senior partners, whose annual incomes exceed $100,000.

Greed not only keeps us from giving of our economic resources but may also start corrupting our sense of honesty. We may come to value money to the exclusion of integrity. I am reminded of a New York attorney who was married to a Wall Street investment banker. Their combined annual income easily exceeded half a million dollars. This couple was at a store purchasing a case of baby formula in the days before electronic scanners, and the clerk inadvertently transposed the numbers on the price sticker, ringing up $29 on the cash register instead of the correct price of $92. The clerk then commented that it was amazing that people could buy all that formula for only $29. The wife looked at the husband and the husband looked at the wife. They both knew the correct price, but neither of them said anything. Later, in telling me this story, the wife claimed that she felt absolutely no obligation to call the mistake to the clerk's attention, rationalizing that store clerks often overcharge customers and concluding that her failure to tell the truth merely served to even the score.

Richard Johnson, a Brigham Young University sociology professor, has noted that those of his students who thought that "a 'high' standard of material comfort may, in fact, be a form of selfishness or oppression are quick to define 'high' as well beyond their own levels" [^2]—whatever those levels might be. Because Scott and I have scaled down our standard of living to manage on one income, am I now safely out of the "high" income bracket? I lead a comfortable middle-class existence. I have to ask myself, how much is necessary for a happy life? Where do I draw the line between adequacy and excess?

In the October 1990 general conference, Elder Joseph Wirthlin said that one of the obstacles to achieving spiritual salvation is, "placing improper emphasis on the obtaining of material possessions. For example, we may build a beautiful, spacious home that is far larger than we need. We may spend far too much to decorate, furnish, and landscape it. And even if we are blessed enough to afford such luxury, we may be misdirecting resources that could be better used to build the kingdom of God or to feed and clothe our needy brothers and sisters." [^3]

On March 26, 1991, the Salt Lake Tribune published a survey which indicated that 1 in 9 children under the age of 12 in Utah go to bed hungry each night and that nationally at least 1 in 8 children under the age of 12, or approximately 5.5 million children, are not adequately fed. The study found that poverty-stricken families spend so much of their income on housing that they can afford an average of just 68 cents per person per meal. If children are malnourished, they cannot achieve their full potential. It is a terrible indictment that a country as wealthy as ours is not willing to take care of innocent children.

The latest infant-mortality statistics available indicate that, in 1989, the United States's infant-mortality rate leveled off at 9.7 deaths per 1,000 births. It now stands at twice the rate of Japan and below that of 23 other countries, including such poor countries as Singapore and Spain. Also troubling is that in the United States twice as many black babies will die within the first year of life as will white babies. [^4]

Our purpose in this panel discussion is perhaps to prick our individual and collective consciences so that each of us might analyze our attitudes towards obtaining material goods and achieving a comfortable life. There is a great danger for an individual who has done well materially to think that if another person is poor, it is because that person is lazy and therefore deserves to be poor. While that may be true in some instances, it does not hold true for most of the people who live in poverty. Most of the people who are poor were born to poor parents. With the recession and changes in a global economy, thousands of people have lost their jobs and, consequently, their homes. Many of these people are now living with their families in shelters for the homeless.

If we visit any poor section of any city or town in the United States, we will encounter people who are malnourished, ill-clothed, ill-housed or homeless, unemployed with no hope for the future, and some spaced out on drugs or alcohol to try to blot out their dreary existences. We will find teenage girls, who look no older than seventeen, who have a baby in their arms and a toddler in tow. People hang out in the streets, sitting on steps with nothing to do and nowhere to go. The enormity of the problem is overwhelming, and we feel helpless because we know that only a minute fraction of the children growing up in these environments will have the education or vocational opportunities and the role models that will help them break out of the pernicious cycle of poverty.

Neighborhoods are economically defined. If we are middle class or higher, it is easy to insulate ourselves from those people who are trying to eke out a subsistence level of life on the earth. We can go about our lives and avoid witnessing human suffering and poverty. We can pretend that it does not exist and not notice that it is getting worse.

With the ever-widening gap between the "haves" and the "have-nots," those of us in the middle need to be doing more. There are no comfortable, easy solutions to determining how much to give. I have a video camera; the divorcee down the street can scarcely afford a decent pair of shoes. It was intended that we struggle over these questions—that we struggle, think, and pray, asking for guidance in determining what we should do with our material means. Even a small increase, if all of us resolve to give a little more, can make a difference. It is said that if you are not in the habit of saving, you can establish that habit simply by saving a dollar a week. I think that this principle also applies to helping other people; if we stretch a little bit more than we think we can, somehow we will find the money and the time to help more people more often.

I have no doubt that each of us knows that ultimately God will judge us on how well we have used our time and resources, including our economic resources, to help our fellowmen. I know that I need to become much more selfless and more generous with my time and money.

Greed can become an invasive cancer that will kill our souls if it is not checked. Greed is the antithesis of the gospel of Jesus Christ. If we will take the time to analyze our attitudes and the importance we place on obtaining the ephemeral things of this world, we can change our behavior so that our lives are more compatible with the teachings of Christ.

---
Notas:
[^1] Brigham Young, 14 August 1853, Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards, 1855-86) 1:272-73; italics added.
[^2] Richard A. Cohen, Face to Face with Levinas (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1986), p. 24.
[^3] Reared in California, Susan Lillywhite Warner has also lived in Connecticut and England. After graduating from Brigham Young University, she taught elementary school for two years. She and her husband, BYU professor Terry Warner, are the parents of ten children. She has served on PTA boards and as president of her ward Relief Society and Young Women organizations.
[^4] Mary Ann Rasmussen practiced law for six years with large New York City firms. She and her husband, Scott, returned to Salt Lake City, where she has practiced her specialty in trusts and estates law on a limited basis so that she can spend more time with their two children.
