Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

That Which Hath No Life

SUSAN LILLYWHITE WARNER [^1]

"Mom, Mom, you've got to get up and help me make a treat for my class today." As I struggle to open my tired eyes, memory returns like neural static: Mitchell's third-grade class, the contest, losing team brings treats for winning team, Mitchell's turn, my turn. Mitchell is reminding me now—urgently, insistently—that it can't be just any treat: it has to be a bigger and better treat than the one provided last week. I can see how important it is to him to take not merely an acceptable treat but, if at all possible, a truly spectacular one.

We had barely begun making the treat when Jenny, who is eleven, announced that she needed two card tables and an easel to display her science fair project.

"Are you sure you need tables? What are the other children using for their displays?"

"Mom—nobody wins if they don't have tables and easels."

"Well, I'm certain every child is not bringing tables and easels."

"That's what I'm trying to explain to you—you can't win without them. Everybody doesn't win."

As I was directing Jenny to the possible location of the card tables, Carrie, who is a freshman in high school, reminded me to pick up the suckers she wanted to sell to earn money for her school choir tour. "Be sure to get them today, or I won't have time to earn my money," Carrie warned me.

"Are all the kids in the choir earning two hundred dollars to go on tour?"

"You can't go unless you can come up with the money."

"Is everybody in the choir going to be able to go?" I asked.

"I think there will be a few who can't go."

"Is anything being done to help them?"

"Mom, everyone is having a hard enough time coming up with their own money."

One need not be a social scientist to observe and record attitudes that characterize our materialistic society. We are possessive, acquisitive, competitive, self-centered, opportunistic, and selfish. In the first forty-five minutes of a typical school day I found evidence of each of these attitudes in my own home.

I have been exceptionally sensitive to these attitudes lately because I have been reading and thinking about the plight of the hungry and homeless in this country and around the world, and the wide discrepancy between the "haves" and the "have-nots" has been very much on my mind. I seldom polish my furniture, but last week my son asked to film a scene in our living room for a movie he is making in his efforts to get started in that business. I decided I'd better give the furniture in that room a "once over lightly." As I polished the legs on the piano, I couldn't help reflecting on whether we really need a piano in our home. We love music—it is an important part of our family life—but I wondered how we could justify owning a lovely piano so that we can enjoy the luxury of making music, when children all over the world, including hundreds in our own state, go to school hungry every morning or to bed without dinner at night. After some thought about the piano, I expressed my concerns at the dinner table. My family thought I was slipping over the edge. "Mother's really losing it now!" "This is definitely the wrong topic for her to be speaking on." "Let's hope the conference is over soon."

Fourteen-year-old Carrie spoke up. "What are you proposing, Mother? Do you want to sell the piano and buy McDonald's Happy Meals to drop from an airplane?" She didn't want to take me seriously, but I could tell that deep down all of them sensed it was an important issue.

As I thought about my family's response, I had to ask myself, What is my responsibility in this? As a parent, do I bear responsibility for the attitudes of my children? If so, I need to ask myself these questions:

As a result of living in my home, are my children more caring and compassionate or are they more selfish and competitive?

Is looking out for Number One an accepted attitude in our family?

Do we dismiss the misfortunes of others with unfeeling comments such as "That's how the ball bounces" and "You get what you deserve in this life"?

Do the people in our family learn from the atmosphere in our home that things are more important than people?

Is it evident to them that happiness comes from the kind of people we are and not what we have?

Are we making a conscious effort to live in such a way that we can share our abundance with those who have less?

Some of us think materialism can be a temporary expedient to a higher end. We think we need to compete, make our place in society, and watch out for ourselves, supposing that sometime in the future, when we "arrive" socially and economically and also at last have some free time, we will pay attention to spiritual matters, give to the poor, and devote more time to caring about other people. This is a terrible mistake. The means by which we live will, without our realizing it, become our ends. They will take over our affections. They become habits—our very way of life.

When my husband and I were in graduate school in the East, we belonged to a struggling branch of Saints. For the branch to operate, every member was needed. But many felt that while in school their main concern should be their formal education. For the time being, they would leave Church service to others so that they could prepare for an eventual greater contribution to Church and society. Predictably, they never realized their plans. In later years, they continued to focus on career and worldly pursuits. On the other hand, those who served while going to school continued serving after completing their degrees.

Brigham Young said, "Why do the children of men set their hearts upon earthly things? . . . [The] moment that men seek to build up themselves, in preference to the kingdom of God, and seek to hoard up riches, while the widow and the fatherless, the sick and afflicted, around them, are in poverty and want, it proves that their hearts are weaned from their God; and their riches will perish in their fingers, and they with them." [^2]

If we concentrate on "getting ahead" and are preoccupied with material goals, we may say that doing so is a means to a higher end, but we communicate to our children that material goals are the ends worth living for. I have been greatly disturbed to observe the attitudes of school children. They are often preoccupied, almost obsessed, with establishing a social identity, which includes maintaining a socially approved physical appearance and material possessions: Guess jeans, Polo shirts, Air-Jordan Nike basketball shoes. The impressive brand names are difficult to keep up with because they change from year to year. I can remember when an alligator emblem on a shirt was a must; now our children wouldn't be caught dead with a "crocodile" on their pocket. All too often we and our children are self-centered and alarmingly calloused towards the feelings of those who do not possess the material qualifications for social approval. We, the "haves," think only about how we feel, with little regard for the feelings we may be evoking in the hearts of the "have-nots."

Moroni speaks of our day when he says, "And I know that ye do walk in the pride of your hearts; and there are none save a few only who do not lift themselves up in the pride of their hearts, unto the wearing of very fine apparel. . . . For behold, ye do love money, and your substance, and your fine apparel . . . more than ye love the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted. . . . Why do ye adorn yourselves with that which hath no life, and yet suffer the hungry, and the needy, and the naked, and the sick and the afflicted to pass by you, and notice them not?" (Mormon 8:36-37, 39; italics added.)

I fear that too often these attitudes in children reflect the values of the parents. Indeed, sometimes parents push their children to succeed, as if our worth and happiness were somehow predicated upon a favorable comparison with others. Some parents even believe their own value and happiness is closely linked to the social acceptability and achievements of their children. As I said before, though such parents think of material achievement as a means to happiness, the children will come to equate possessions and worldly success with happiness.

Rather than focus on the problem of materialism in our homes and society, let us press forward to seek some solutions. Let us raise these issues not to cast blame but to help one another combat this menacing trait in our society.

Clearly, to make changes in our homes and children, we must change ourselves. We change by trying right now to live the way of life which we hope will be ours forever. And when we change, we will teach our children the right values. Changing oneself is the most powerful way any individual can combat the menace of materialism in her daily walk.

My neighbor who was approached about making sandwiches for the homeless thought, "How do I have time to do this? I barely have time to make lunches for my own children." But she decided to try. She was amazed to find she was able, with the help of her family, to work out a system so that she could efficiently accomplish this task each week. And her good example has inspired others. Hearing of her efforts, the Young Women have begun making dinners for the homeless shelter. Service can be a fun family project—many of us have missed working together as families on the stake welfare farms. Another friend is active in Project Read, teaching adults who for some reason have not yet learned to read. A retired couple on our street are helping handicapped people learn skills so they can be productively employed.

Sometimes we need to help our families develop the habits that bring lasting joy rather than fleeting pleasure. Driving home from Salt Lake, I saw a billboard, "If saving money is your favorite sport—shop at University Mall." I had to chuckle. The ad was a clever twist on the fact that in our society we shop as often for recreation as for necessity. Shopping has become a sport.

How many children and teenagers do you know who love to "walk the mall" on Saturday and feel unfulfilled if they return home empty-handed? Perhaps such activities could be replaced with service projects involving friends. I know some boys who collect surplus papers on Saturday mornings for their Scout troop—they seem to be having a good time piling the papers in the back of an old trailer. I see many young people involved in service projects, socializing while also giving their time and energy for the good of someone else. These are habits worth our fostering in young people.

I asked one of these service-oriented teenagers how she got started. After thinking, she said, "I guess it started when I was very young. Our family used to sing carols at rest homes at Christmastime. I could see the light come into those lonely faces as we sang, and it made me happy." Very early in her life someone provided an experience that helped this young woman learn that she could make a difference.

Though important, it is not enough to talk about materialism, publish arguments, and work for legislation. We each must do something personally. We must decide to spend some of our own time and resources, to sacrifice some of our pleasures and perhaps even people's good opinion of us as we swim against the current. Otherwise, the way we spend our time, the subjects of our daily conversations, will become not just the style but the substance of our lives. Our means will become our ends. And to our disappointment, our children, learning from us by mimicking us, will grow up preoccupied with shallow values and selfish concerns. Not only will these children hurt others by their failure to share, but the children themselves will become petty and empty people. Materialism is pride, pride is sin, and sin destroys. Though all suffer, materialism destroys the souls of the "haves" more than the souls of the "have-nots."

The modern philosopher Emmanuel Levinas quotes a Jewish proverb: "The other's material needs are my spiritual needs." [^3] Often when we feel unhappy or unfulfilled, we try to fill our own need in the world's way—by buying, acquiring, spending time and energy in indulgent activities. But Levinas is right: our spiritual need is satisfied when we lift the burdens of others. We live in a time when electronic media allow us to know of the lives and needs of our brothers and sisters all over the world. It is our spiritual need not only to know but to choose to help. The Savior has told us, "It is not given that one man should possess that which is above another, wherefore the world lieth in sin." (D&C 49:20.) If it is our desire to bless the lives of others, he will help us give up that which hath no life and open the way for us, in turn, to help those who need that which giveth life.

---
Notas:
[^1] Eugenia Collier, "Marigolds," Negro Digest (n.p.: Johnson Publishing Co., 1969), pp. 166-67.
[^2] Ram Dass and Paul Gorman, How Can I Help? (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1985), pp. 18-19.
[^3] Ibid., p. 28.
