Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

The Miracles of Service

MARY B. JOHNSTON [^1]

My interest in service began the summer of my junior year in college. I was a camp counselor in rural New Jersey for New York City kids from disadvantaged homes. During the two-week training session, I learned that many of the children were on welfare, came from single-parent homes, had been abused, and had certainly never spent much time in the outdoors. Once the children arrived, the other counselors and I dedicated ourselves to teaching and loving them. Among other things, we taught them how to build shelters, cook food outdoors, wash and sanitize their dishes, swim, and plan and go on hikes. Though ten and eleven years old, many still wet their beds at night. So we took turns waking them up in the middle of the night to take them to the latrine, often in the rain. I did not sleep much that summer and had no time to read and philosophize—two of my favorite pastimes in college. During the stressful and loving hours of that summer, I learned the joy of abandoning my concerns and dedicating myself to the welfare of others. But it was overwhelming to hear one sad story after another about neglect, abuse, and poverty. Dealing with innumerable discipline problems and constantly attending to physical and emotional needs threw me down from my intellectual tower and brought me to a new place full of sorrow, struggle, and love.

In her short story "Marigolds," Eugenia Collier writes about Lizabeth, a fourteen-year-old girl whose vision of the world is changed. At first she is aware only of her own feelings and thoughts; after an act of impulsive, destructive anger, she finally sees into another person's heart. Disheartened and angry about her own poverty and her father's recent humiliating layoff, Lizabeth runs off in the middle of the night to the only bright and hopeful spot in her neighborhood, Mrs. Lottie's "brilliant splash of sunny yellow marigolds." Unleashing her anger on Mrs. Lottie, an old, lonely, and impoverished woman, Lizabeth furiously uproots all the flowers. After the garden is ruined, the fourteen-year-old girl looks up to see Mrs. Lottie and regrets her act. "Whatever verve there was left in [Mrs. Lottie], whatever was of love and beauty and joy that had not been squeezed out by life, had been there in the marigolds which she had so tenderly cared for." The narrator continues, "I know that the moment [I realized this] marked the end of innocence. Innocence involves an unseeing acceptance of things at face value, an ignorance of the area below the surface. In that humiliating moment, I looked beyond myself and into the depths of another person. This was the beginning of compassion, and one cannot have both compassion and innocence." [^2]

The innocence that the narrator describes clearly does not refer to sinlessness or purity but to a self-involved, naive view of the world that prevents her from understanding and caring about another person's experience. Losing my own innocence during those hot summer days of camp was the time I began to see into the depths of those children's hearts. Since then my desire has grown and taken me to shelters, hospitals, food banks, impoverished neighborhoods in America and in Eastern Europe—all to be closer to the mystery, pain, and beauty of the human heart. Inside these moments of compassion, magic happens. We discover the deep love we have for other people and that others have for us. But most importantly, we get a glimpse of Christ's and Heavenly Father's unfathomable love for mankind.

During his ministry, Christ lived inside of these moments and as a result transformed people's lives. In the four Gospels, the apostles record that when the blind and the lepers came to Jesus to be helped, he had compassion on them and healed them. Matthew writes, "And Jesus stood still, and called them, and said, What will ye that I shall do unto you? They say unto him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened. So Jesus had compassion on them, and touched their eyes: and immediately their eyes received sight, and they followed him." (Matthew 20:32-34.)

Nephi, the son of Helaman, writes that during Christ's visit to the Americas, Christ said, "Behold, my bowels are filled with compassion towards you. Have ye any that are sick among you? Bring them hither. Have ye any that are lame, or blind, or halt, or maimed, or leprous, or that are withered, or that are deaf, or that are afflicted in any manner? Bring them hither and I will heal them, for I have compassion upon you; my bowels are filled with mercy." (3 Nephi 17:6-7.)

During his ministry, Christ showed his godly power and his love for humanity not only through teaching divine principles but also through performing physical and spiritual healings. Serving one another is a divine experience that fills us with the love of God and enables us, through heavenly powers, to accomplish miracles. My notion of miracles has changed since I began serving in the community. I have never seen any physical healing or heard people speak in tongues, but I have seen my high school students grow to love homeless people whom they once feared. I have seen them change their focus from caring primarily for themselves to sacrificing social opportunities on weekends and study time on school nights to run fund-raisers for our sponsor child, play cards at a shelter with a recovering drug addict, or take children who live in shelters to the Aquarium.

Compassion—a wind that blows down walls, whispers away prejudice, and cools anger. Compassion—a magic alloy that builds bridges and creates inseparable bonds. Think of all the forces that have had the power to separate us from each other: religion, race, class, age, political persuasion, nationality. The list is painfully long. With compassion, these differences do not need to separate or threaten us but instead can provide an opportunity to feel the love of God fill our bowels.

Let me tell you a story. A few years ago eight high school girls and I were invited to be a part of an education project about abuse. After attending eight training sessions, the students were to give a presentation to high school students informing the audience what to do about current or potential abuse. For our first session, we visited a shelter where we spent two hours with four women who had been severely battered. Before we began talking, I was very nervous. On one side of the room sat a row of white, upper-middle class, well-educated girls, none of whom had been abused; opposite them sat one white and three black women, none of whom had graduated from high school or ever known any kind of plenty. They had been abused as children and as adults. I was worried that the students would not be sensitive and that the women would be angry about our intruding into their lives. How could these two groups possibly find a common ground? The experience that followed was one among many that have built the foundation of my spiritual faith. The Spirit of God was in that room. The students asked very personal questions in a caring manner, and these women—strangers to us only minutes before—freely told us their stories. And though we were discussing violence, there was no hatred in the room, not even towards the men who had so severely hurt the sheltered women. In addition, there was little sense of division among us because we all had a common goal: to eliminate abuse. Had we concentrated on what separated us, we all would have been convinced that people with disparate backgrounds should avoid each other and have reason to fear one another. Such decisions are unfortunate because they reinforce stereotypes and prevent social change.

Let me tell you about another miracle. Julie, a student of mine, had a series of very poor relationships with men and had not been doing particularly well in school. She also had serious health problems and was not getting along with her parents. Despite her low confidence, she signed up to be a hospice volunteer. After attending six two-hour sessions, she began taking care of a ninety-year-old man who had terminal cancer. He had only three months to live. At first she visited him a few times a week and then every day. Spending time with this man in need blessed his last days with comfort and warmth and blessed her with a sense of personal worth. Their differences—his blindness and her sight, his age and her youth—united rather than separated them. They found the grace of compassion. Now a senior in college, Julie says her time with this man was among the most important experiences in her life.

Perhaps the most difficult and powerful moments of service come within our own families. A woman whose father had cancer tells of flying in to visit him, entering his room, and not recognizing her own father. This pale, hairless, thin man who breathed with great gasps could not be her father. She explains, "I had to look through him and find something besides this astonishing appearance of a father I could barely recognize physically. . . . Suddenly this thought came to me, words of Mother Teresa, describing lepers she cared for as 'Christ in all his distressing disguises.' I never had any real relationship to Christ at all, and I can't say that I did at that moment. But what came through to me was a feeling for my father's identity . . . as a child of God. That was who he was behind the 'distressing disguise.' And, it was my identity, too, I felt. I felt a great bond with him which wasn't anything like what I had felt as father and daughter." [^3] When we see each person as a child of God and see that within each person is goodness or at least potential for goodness, we are empowered with a faith that can lift another person to see her or his own power. With this faith we are less likely to become a part of a helping relationship that initiates or perpetuates dependency. Ram Dass and Paul Gormon, the authors of the wonderful book on service How Can I Serve? explain, "The more you think of yourself as a 'therapist,' the more pressure there is on someone to be a 'patient.' The more you identify yourself as a 'philanthropist,' the more compelled someone feels to be 'supplicant.' The more you see yourself as a 'helper,' the more need for people to play the passive 'helped.' You're buying into . . . what people who are suffering want to be rid of: limitation, dependency, helplessness, and separateness." [^4]

The last two Christmases my ward in Boston learned a great deal about separateness. A Spanish branch and my ward meet in the same building. Once the service committee became aware that many of the Spanish branch families did not have enough money to buy their children presents, we decided to fill Santa's sack with gifts. The Spanish branch was thrilled and invited all of us to come to their Christmas party. Though the party was publicized, no one came except me. Yes, we had helped the Spanish kids, but we remained the distant donors, not fellow Christmas celebrators. This year Kristine, a woman on my ward's service committee, suggested that the two congregations have a party together. We still gave the presents, and the Spanish-speaking branch did what they had wanted to do the year before: treat us to their traditional Christmas meal of hot tamales. The Portuguese branch joined in with a Brazilian fruit drink and Primary children acted out the story of Christ's birth in their native Portuguese. The evening culminated in a dance that included Spanish, Portuguese, and American music. By sharing we found a way to bless each other rather than creating dependency and separation.

The most effective community service programs involve not only sharing but also taking responsibility. Habitat for Humanity volunteers work side by side with the people who will be living in the house that is being built. [^5] The beneficiaries are required to help build. They lack the funds to have a home but gain a sense of pride and dignity as they help build the foundation and structure of a more stable and secure life. In my favorite New Testament story, Christ teaches us the importance not only of loving and serving people but also of helping them take responsibility. When the adulteress's accusers are eager to stone her, Christ challenges them, saying, "He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her." (John 8:7.) Christ finds a way to teach her neighbors not to judge and a way to protect her. But to empower her and help her find a better life, he admonishes her to sin no more. (John 8:10-11.) Christ believes that both He and she could change her life. May we find this delicate balance in our own efforts to help each other.

So far all of the stories I have told have mentioned little struggle or doubt about serving in our families and communities. From my experience, the ratio of confusion and doubt to miracles is high. Letting go of our own agenda and interests to extend ourselves to other people can be very difficult. It takes energy to enter someone else's world and imagine what they are experiencing, to figure out what might be helpful, and to suspend judgement. We might be unable to do these things if we are confronting an unfamiliar situation.

When students of mine return from their first visit to the homeless shelter, many of them are deeply disturbed by what they have seen and are paralyzed by their questions. "How do these people become homeless? Where are their families? Are they in the shelter because of low motivation, mental illness, or drug addiction? Will they ever be able to start another life? Am I doing any good by serving a meal and playing cards with them, or am I somehow perpetuating the problem?" The questions go on and on.

Anytime we enter an unfamiliar situation, we will have questions, and unless we find a way to sort through them, our doubts and confusion could very well prevent us from being effective or even continuing our work. We need to have people with whom we can confer. Volunteering with a friend or family member helps. Relying on people within the Church who may be more familiar with the difficulties you see could be useful. Perhaps your visiting teaching supervisor or a member of the Relief Society presidency may be able to help you sort through your questions. In addition, speaking with professionals in the field can help put the situation in context.

I remember a time last year when I had real difficulty going to the shelter with my students every Thursday night. I was so troubled by what I saw there that I could not answer my student's questions. I had so many misgivings that I felt hypocritical even sponsoring the activity. I was especially troubled when one evening I brought a sweater to a Romanian friend, and she yelled at me about presuming that I could understand what she was going through. She said the sweater that I had brought was ugly and insisted I take it back and leave. This, among other experiences made me wonder what I was doing there and think about other, perhaps more effective, ways or places I might choose to serve. Finally, I called the shelter's volunteer coordinator, a woman who had worked with the homeless for five years, and told her what was bothering me. She helped me understand the embittering experiences those people have before they talk to me. And, really, my purpose there is not for me to be comforted, but to show them a kind of patience and unconditional love that they don't experience during the day on the street. After I spoke with her and attended several different workshops about mental health and homelessness, and spent many hours with my students sorting through our experiences, I returned to the shelters and soup kitchens with a more realistic perspective about what I was looking at, and with more patience and love.

As we enter unfamiliar situations, it is important to get training. Programs such as Hospice will include training sessions which are informative and reassuring. It is also important to choose mentors in the community who have blazed trails that we want to blaze ourselves someday. We can ask them about how they endured because anyone who has entered this kind of work has gone through struggles and has stayed in it for very good and powerful reasons.

Equally important to understanding the dynamics of a problem is assessing our own interests and talents. A few years ago, several of my students volunteered in a local public library. Most of them found the work tedious and often did not fulfill their commitment. However, one intellectual senior, who had always found difficulty fitting in socially, made dramatic contributions and won the hearts of all the librarians. For the first time in his life, he felt accepted and valued for who he was. In order for our service to become part of our spiritual and intellectual growth, we should—whenever possible—try to get involved in ways that will allow us to use our talents and training and to develop our interests.

I have left the very most important counsel for last. As we serve our families, communities, and fellow Church members, we will need wisdom, patience, and insight. Nothing brings all of these gifts in greater abundance than a prayerful relationship with God. We are letting the Lord teach us how to see divine potential not only in those whom we serve but also in ourselves. When we extend ourselves to others, we are inviting Christ to teach us about the principles of service and compassion that were the heartbeat of his ministry and the power of his atonement. That can only happen if we regularly consecrate our lives to the welfare of others and believe in God's power to act through us. If we do, miracles will happen.

---
Notas:
[^1] Eugenia Collier, "Marigolds," Negro Digest (n.p.: Johnson Publishing Co., 1969), pp. 166-67.
[^2] Ram Dass and Paul Gorman, How Can I Help? (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1985), pp. 18-19.
[^3] Ibid., p. 28.
[^4] Habitat for Humanity is an international volunteer organization that helps build houses for the poor.
[^5] Mary B. Johnston received her bachelor's degree in English from Brigham Young University and her master's from Middlebury College in Vermont. She has taught junior high and high school English at several private schools. Interested in helping her students become aware of needs in their communities, she has spent the last five years building volunteer programs for high school students.
