Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

SEASONS OF FAITH

I came to believe that . . . faith too has different seasons. It has its warm, sun-filled days of spring and summer, and its long, dark, bitter winters. . . . God will not remove our winters, for through winter comes spring.

—Lisa Johnson Boswell

A Fertile Faith

LISA JOHNSON BOSWELL [^1]

In the scriptures, faith is often referred to as a plant; for instance, we speak of planting the seed of testimony and watching it grow, we speak of the fruits of faith, and we speak of faith like a grain of mustard seed. I have come to believe that faith is spoken of in these terms because like plants, faith too has different seasons. It has its warm, sun-filled days of spring and summer, and its long, dark, bitter winters. I first heard this idea from a woman who talked with me after a Relief Society lesson I gave on personal testimony several years ago. She told me that she had recently entered a winter of faith, a time when her own faith seemed as dead and without the chance of regeneration as barren trees seem in December, but she looked forward steadfastly to spring, believing that like plants, her faith too would be regenerated.

I have often thought of this woman as I have faced my own adversities. Through years of infertility tests, I have at times experienced my own Alaskan winter of faith. In fact, when asked to speak on the subject of faith through adversity, I replied that I might more honestly label my remarks "Faithless through Adversity." I certainly do not purport to have had unwavering faith during my infertility. It is not easy to be infertile in the Mormon community, as I discovered not only from my own experience but from interviewing other infertile LDS women and men for a book on that topic.

Infertility, like many other adversities, is at the core a dream killer. The dream of having children is one of the most basic human desires. Yet for approximately 15 percent of married couples, this dream is either never realized or bought with great pain.

Having no control over one's ability to procreate can have a devastating impact on self-image. One woman I interviewed mentioned that she had come to view herself as a third gender. There were males, females, and then her. In some instances infertile wives and husbands have suggested divorce so that their spouses could remarry and have children.

Infertility affects the entire family. It affects the parents of infertile couples who long for grandchildren. It affects the children who are finally conceived by couples with infertility problems. My daughter used to come home from kindergarten and implore me, "Mom, I'm the only kid in my class who doesn't have a brother or a sister. Can't you get me one? I don't want to be an only child." Hence infertility can mean feeling that besides losing your own dream, you have prevented loved ones from realizing their dreams as well.

The problem goes far beyond not being called Mom or Dad. Infertility colors many aspects of our lives. Being infertile means not having any good reason to buy a minivan, even if it is on sale. It means being able to buy a house with a small backyard because there won't be children to play in it. It means trying hard to act pleased when one's old college roommate happily announces her third pregnancy.

Infertility not only colors the present but it also clouds the future. A twenty-eight-year-old woman I interviewed confessed that she had already worried about becoming a burden to her brothers and sisters, nieces and nephews, in her old age. Another couple wondered who they would pass their photo albums on to. They wondered if anyone would want them or value them.

Infertility, then, would be hard for anyone, but for infertile Mormons, the pain of this adversity is often even more acute. Ideally, church is where our trials melt away for awhile, where we can come for renewal and leave better able to face life's difficulties. But sadly, church meetings are where many infertile Mormons are most reminded of their loss.

Being an infertile Mormon can mean hearing in a Relief Society lesson that a woman's crowning glory is to bear children. Being infertile may mean listening to someone in testimony meeting testify she knows there is a God because her prayers have been answered and then wondering, "So what does it mean if my prayers are not answered? Does that mean there is no God?" Being infertile often means coming in late to fast and testimony meeting so you miss the blessing of the babies and then leaving early during an earnest man's testimony that he knows that in the premortal existence his eight children all individually chose to come to his earthly home.

Being an infertile Mormon woman means going to a Relief Society dinner and trying to find a table where the discussion won't be centered on pregnancy, childbirth, or the PTA. It means accepting a call in the Primary because, as the bishop assures you, there are many ways to mother. Sooner or later it will mean a day when you go home and cry because your heart grieves for children of your own. You want to mother your own children, not everyone else's.

Unfortunately, being an infertile Mormon can also mean coping with unfair judgments from members who assume that your childlessness is by choice rather than necessity. Infertility in the Mormon community can be unusually difficult. Yet within the gospel are the truths that make adversities easier to bear. Many infertile couples worked through their winters of faith as they came to understand these gospel truths.

Young infertile couples question whether their adversity has been brought on because of unworthiness. They acknowledge scriptures that remind us that rain falls on both "the just and on the unjust," or "whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth." (Matthew 5:45; Hebrews 12:6.) So they recognize that adversity comes to good people, but they also remember Doctrine and Covenants 130:20-21: "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." When their prayers seem to go unanswered, they can't help wondering if their infertility is a punishment for having disobeyed a law.

Such feelings can be exacerbated by the misguided comments of others. One woman's mother-in-law, for instance, called her monthly to ask if she had yet found the sin in her life that was keeping her from being able to conceive. Another woman told me of a visiting teacher who urged, "If you will just put your house in order, you will surely conceive."

Fortunately, as the months and years pass, most couples recognize that their adversity is not a God-given punishment but simply a natural consequence of physical limitations. They are not infertile because they have displeased God, but because their ability to conceive is affected by endometriosis, or a low sperm count, or difficulty ovulating.

Despite this reconciliation to the physical causes of infertility, many still experience spiritual struggles, especially with their understanding of faith. Believing wholeheartedly in the power of faith and in the scriptural promise that those who pray with true faith can work miracles and move mountains, they reason: "Why should a moment of fertility be out of reach?" But when their inability to bear children is not removed, some wonder if it is a sign that their faith is weak—even though their life histories often show remarkable faith. For example, one woman I interviewed had endured fourteen miscarriages, losing the babies between the fourth and the fifth month. Another woman had given birth twice and then suffered eight miscarriages, during two of which she almost hemorrhaged to death. Certainly these women had exercised great faith as they continually placed their lives and emotions in jeopardy to bring about the miracle they so desperately wanted. Similarly, I have interviewed couples who have gone to various infertility experts for well over ten years, subjecting themselves to extremely intrusive, expensive, and sometimes painful infertility tests, having the faith that eventually someone could help them conceive. Without strong faith, these couples would not have struggled so many years.

Ultimately the question for many couples becomes, "If faith doesn't mean being able to get what I want, what does faith mean?" The answer to that question is not the same for everyone. One infertile woman said that her crisis of faith had been healed by the example of the Savior. She had wanted her faithful prayers to heal her infertility. She had tried not to doubt God or his power to heal, and she sought to live the kind of life that she felt merited her Heavenly Father's help. She believed that her faith could remove this mountain of frustrated dreams. Yet her infertility persisted. Finally she realized that Christ, whose perfect faith had healed lepers, given vision to the blind, and raised the dead—and who had pleaded that his bitter cup be removed if possible—had finally been spared neither the agony of Gethsemane nor the pain of the Crucifixion. Christ's perfect faith had not altered Gethsemane but rather helped him to endure it. This woman came to see her faith in a different light—not as an imperfect faith that had been insufficient to remove her trials but as a vibrant faith that could help her endure them. Not faith to remove mountains but faith to climb them.

It is common for people to experience a variety of spiritual doubts during different phases of their infertility. Yet most individuals confide these doubts very apologetically, as if convinced it is morally wrong to doubt God's goodness or question God's existence. They are ashamed of their doubts. One notable exception was a paralyzed man who told me very honestly that doubts were good. In fact, he said, the deeper the doubt, the better. I was surprised by his comments, for I too had doubted and felt ashamed of my doubts. I felt they were a sign of my weakness. He, however, saw doubts differently. He claimed that only through questioning his views of God, only through crying out at midnight from the depths of his soul, had he come to a more profound understanding and love for God than he had known before his trials. His conviction that God was loving, merciful, and just had come about not despite his doubts but because of them. He saw his doubts as catalysts for understanding rather than obstacles. The winter of his faith was a natural predecessor to the spring. He knew God better, he explained, from having grappled with questions not easily resolved.

During my interviews, I have marveled at the fruits of faith that I have seen in this man and in the lives of other infertile Mormons. Ultimately, everyone I interviewed wanted the opportunity to bear and love children. Some received that opportunity. Others did not. Yet their faith had also borne fruit.

One infertile woman was, ironically, a social worker who worked with pregnant teens. As she sat in her office watching these young unmarried girls come and go, she found it impossible not to feel bitter towards them. She thought, "Why in the world are they pregnant and not me? It just isn't fair." But, she endured. And slowly, faithfully, she worked through her bitter feelings. She came to view infertility as her handicap. She could see, she could hear, she could walk, but she could not bear children. And she asked herself, if I were blind, would I hate everyone who could see a sunset? Would it help to hate everyone who could hear a symphony, if I could not? She realized that bitter feelings would not produce the quality of life she wanted. The struggle of faith produced an insight, and this insight helped her to be more loving and accepting. She later had great need for those qualities when she became a mother to five older, adopted children.

Another infertile woman told me that instead of letting her infertility distance her from other women, she let it form a common bond between them. She explained that her infertility had been the loss of a dream. Losing her dream helped her empathize with all women who had experienced loss—whether visible losses, such as the loss of a loved one or of health, or less obvious losses, such as the loss of self-esteem or the loss of hope. The fruit of this woman's faith was not fertility but compassion. Her life would not be filled with many children, but it would be a life filled with love.

One woman who had felt very marginalized in the Church told me that she felt like a blind person who was a member of a church that worshipped sight. She often left church meetings feeling that without children her life was less meaningful. At one point she was considering leaving the Church because its emphasis on families caused her such pain. It took years for this woman to work through her feelings about being an infertile Mormon woman. Finally she told me that in the intervening time she had come to realize that this was her church and that she didn't want to leave it. Although she might not find a place for herself within the Church, she determined that she could make a place for herself. She explained that when members always speak of love in terms of either maternal or married love, they don't realize that unmarried, divorced, or infertile women often feel left out. So she had decided that her place would be to remind others of Mormons who do not fit standard patterns. She would seek occasions to encourage understanding and sensitivity to the needs of Church members struggling with unfamiliar problems. This woman's faith did not cure her infertility nor take away all her pain, but it enabled her to endure until she had learned the lesson that Christ's inn has room for all.

From one couple who experienced unusual hardship in their struggles for a family, I learned one final lesson about the spring that can follow long, hard winters. Six times their hopes for a baby ended in miscarriage. The seventh time the woman carried the baby into the sixth month. The child was born, lived eleven days, and then died. After that, the couple decided to try adoption through LDS Social Services. After filling out the paperwork, writing their autobiographies, and obtaining an evaluation of health from their family physician, they were disheartened. The wife had recently been diagnosed with lupus, an autoimmune disease that can be disabling or in extreme cases even fatal. Knowing that birthparents participate in the selection of adoptive parents from nonidentifying files, they feared that the wife's health problems would probably discourage a birthparent from choosing to place a child with them. Yet after waiting a few years (not an unusually long period to wait for adoption through LDS Social Services), this family received a phone call informing them that they could come and pick up a beautiful baby boy.

Then they learned how their child's birthmother had arrived at her decision to choose their file. First, the birthmother had grown up in a family sensitive to the needs of those with health disabilities, for her own mother was legally blind. Second, when she did at one point waver—after her social worker conscientiously pointed out that a health condition such as lupus might limit the adoptive mother's ability to care for the child—the birthmother called a close friend for advice. When she asked her friend if she knew anything about the disease lupus, her friend replied, "I have lupus." Reassured, the birthmother decided to place her child with the family. Despite all odds, this family received a child, and now, although they still struggle with infertility and with health problems, they see the love of God in the eyes of a son.

While faith doesn't guarantee us the realization of dreams, a fertile faith can give us the ability to build new dreams, quite literally from the ashes of the old. For this couple the death of one dream—biological children—allowed the birth of another dream—sharing their lives with an adopted child.

Yet, the process of spiritual regeneration will bear many different types of fruit. The hoped-for conception or the long-awaited adoption is not the only sign of God's love. For some couples, spring brings new dreams of sharing their time, talents, and love with their fellow men and women through fulfilling careers or compassionate service. That is the wonderful thing about faith. It helps us to find peace in a myriad of different circumstances according to the individual needs of each daughter or son of God.

During my interviews I have seen the hand of God moving quietly in the lives of sorely tried individuals. This hand does not remove all pain or trial, for the seed of faith needs both rain and sun to grow. But I have learned that as our Father heeds even the fall of a sparrow, he also knows what we need to bear our trials—and faith can eventually lead us to God's answers. (Matthew 10:29-31.)

God will not remove our winters, for through winter comes spring. And through adversity and doubt can come a stronger and more meaningful faith.

---
Notas:
[^1] Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith by His Mother, ed. Preston Nibley (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1979), p. 314.
