Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

Finding Lightness in Our Burdens

CHIEKO N. OKAZAKI [^1]

In Matthew 11:29 is one of the loveliest promises in the New Testament, the promise that those who take upon them the yoke of Christ "shall find rest unto [their] souls." This promise is embedded in a chapter of questions, warnings, and chastisements; and I think that context is important. Some of John the Baptist's disciples had come to Jesus, questioning whether he could be, in fact, the promised Messiah. Jesus did not answer them directly but instead told them to observe his works.

After they departed satisfied, Jesus spoke to the multitude through indirection and paradox. Once he warned, significantly, "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear." Once he prayed, thanking the Father "because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes." (Matthew 11:15, 25.) He "upbraid[ed]" the cities that had not believed his "mighty works" and "repented." (Vv. 20, 21.) In other words, Jesus dealt with three or four different kinds of disbelief or lack of understanding, teaching with chastisement, paradox, and riddles. Then he gave this promise:

"Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." (Matthew 11:28-30.)

This promise also appears paradoxical. If we are already burdened, how will taking yet another burden—a heavy yoke upon us—give us rest? And how can his burden be "light"?

These are important questions. Sometimes we feel that we should not have burdens—that there is something wrong with us if we have problems in our lives. That is not the case. Burdens are a part of life, and we all struggle with burdens that are grievous to be borne. There is nothing reproachful about having burdens, and there is nothing wicked in the struggle.

In fact, I am so sure burdens are part of life that just before this meeting started, I asked the ushers to hand a note to four sisters asking them to share with us a burden they are struggling with and tell us what, if anything, seems to lighten that burden and give them moments of rest. Each of the four agreed, and I am very grateful to these sisters for their willingness to speak to us.

SISTER 1: "One burden that has been troubling me lately is loneliness. I was married a year ago, and my husband is still going to school plus working full time. We moved into a new ward and new neighborhood, and I am at home in a very lonely house a lot of the time. I don't like being alone. Being alone is especially hard for me because I get very depressed. Sometimes at night when I am starting to feel lonely and depressed, prayer helps. If I can get on my knees and talk to Heavenly Father, he assures me that I am not alone but that he is there with me. I also like to read, but unless I have a prayer I remain lonely."

SISTER 2: "My husband and I have been married for about fifteen years, but we have no children. About two years ago we started the process of adoption from Mexico, but we are still waiting. My burden is not knowing if all these delays mean that what we are attempting to do is not what Heavenly Father wants us to do or if recurring bureaucratic problems are typical. We have spent many hours in prayer and can't seem to get a definitive answer to this question. The doors keep closing, leading us over and over again to wonder, 'If the doors keep closing, then maybe that is our answer.' Yet we really want children, so we persevere. I feel that Heavenly Father loves me and wants me to be happy and I feel that being a parent will make me happy. So we persevere, even though we don't seem to get answers to our prayers—at least not the answers we are looking for. Ward members and family comfort me, but the greatest comfort is from my husband, because he shares and understands the whole situation."

SISTER 3: "I am ashamed to confess I have sometimes wished I didn't have any children. I have been blessed with four daughters. Through them I have learned that my burdens are in fact painful blessings. I have three daughters who please me and make me happy. I have one daughter who keeps me humble. She has chosen on her own to scorn Church values, leave us, and leave the Church. It is painful to raise four daughters, teaching them all the same principles, sharing together all the same family and Church traditions—and have one choose a different road. But because of her I have learned humility. I have learned to love my Father in Heaven and daily to ask on my knees for his help. How can I consistently ask him for help and protection of this girl who has removed herself from us if I don't do all he has asked of me?

"What am I doing to relieve my burden? Temple attendance, tithing, church service: I am trying to live the commandments because I am asking for a blessing in hope. And I am able to 'press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope' (2 Nephi 31:20) because of something I have learned through this hard lesson. One day, weighted with the heavy burden of care and worry over this child, I was bending down picking up clothes, and the Spirit—it must have been the Holy Spirit because it spoke from my heart—said to me, 'She is your daughter, but she is my daughter, too, and you are to love her regardless of what she does.' Thereafter my heart took hope and my burden was lighter."

SISTER 4: "In January of 1990, I was diagnosed with a seven-centimeter tumor in the center of my brain. A human brain is only about fourteen centimeters by fourteen, so this tumor took up almost half of my brain. Last January—even before I knew of the tumor—I was so depressed and discouraged about other trials and marital problems I was facing in my life that I actually prayed either to die or to have my life miraculously healed in some way. The Lord answers our prayers not always as we expect: I did not find myself dead; instead I found myself with a brain tumor, no husband, and four little children to continue rearing. I was in despair until I received a blessing from a very spiritual man who told me it was the Lord's will for me to live. That was confusing because only hours before the doctors had insisted my tumor was probably inoperable because of its location in the center of my brain. Yet in the blessing I was assured that I would learn many things that would help me carry out my purpose on earth.

"The first thing I learned was that I need the will to live. No matter what storms we face, we need to have the will to live. The tumor is now in remission. I have had radiation therapy, and we are waiting to see what will happen. The second essential lesson I learned through this ordeal came to me while I was on my knees in prayer looking at a picture of the Savior. In anguish I asked, 'How can you let me go through this? I am a good daughter. I am faithful. I strive to be righteous. I take care of my children. I attend church. Why is this happening to me?' Then I suddenly remembered a day a few years ago, when I had prepared a lunch for my children who were playing outside in the sprinklers. I had made a very healthful lunch: carrot and celery sticks and tuna on whole wheat bread. I called the children in from playing, putting my all into being a wonderful mother. But they looked at this lunch in disgust and said, 'Mom, you are the worst mother in the world. This is gross. I can't believe you make us eat this junk. Aunt Becky up the street gives her kids Oreo cookies and Kool-aid for lunch every day. In fact, they have Oreo cookies and Kool-aid picnics every Sunday.' I wanted to boot them outside, and say, 'All right, go hungry. Go over to Aunt Becky's and play. I'll eat it.' But instead I crouched down before them on my knees and tried to explain, 'I give you this kind of food and these vegetables because I love you. These are the foods you need to grow big and strong, and you will need strong bodies to get you through this life.' With this memory, a peace and a calmness came over me as I realized that the storms and burdens that come to us are burdens that make us healthy and strong. They will prepare us for the steps that still remain as we become what we want to become."

Thank you, sisters, for your courage in sharing your burdens with us.

These sisters' situations remind us that all of us have burdens and that what might be easy for one person is an ultimate test for another. We cannot judge the heaviness of another's burden until we have borne it ourselves, nor can we easily prescribe what will work to ease another's burdens. Yet our challenges and burdens are not meant to crush us but to strengthen us. Note the double promise: "I will give you rest" (Matthew 11:28), says the Savior, and also "ye shall find rest unto your souls" (Matthew 11:29). In some cases, the promised rest will be his gift; in others, it will be something he helps us find ourselves.

I would like to explore now three ideas drawn from my own experience about how we can receive the promised rest: first, the resources of survivorship in each of us; second, the ability to identify blessings in disguise; and third, the power to choose our response to adversity.

Being a Survivor

I am convinced that we are all survivors. In all of us, there is a toughness that we can capitalize on. Our hope in Christ and our faith in his gospel provide us with an enormous resource of resilience and courage to call upon. Think of the Apostle Paul, cheering the Roman Saints by acknowledging the genuine afflictions and persecutions they were suffering and then triumphantly asserting, "We are more than conquerors through him that loved us." (Romans 8:37.)

I am a survivor of cancer. On Tuesday morning, 3 March 1973, when I was a teacher in a school near Denver, I woke up with a pain in my side and found a lump in my breast. I called my doctor. He had a specialist waiting, and we made the surgical appointment for Friday. My husband and I signed the consent forms for the biopsy to be performed and analyzed on the spot; if it proved malignant, a mastectomy would be performed as part of the same operation. After Ed's priesthood blessing and with him beside me, I lay quietly and let the anesthetic take effect, falling asleep, as it were, with a question. When I woke up, with Ed still beside me, I knew what the answer had been.

Counseling was available at the hospital plus a support group in the community for women who had had similar operations. My doctor was also very helpful and encouraging as I went through the prescribed course of radiation, which seems to have been successful. I am in remission. But I also know that this cancer could recur at any time or that another cancer could develop. The operation was an event to be dealt with and to be put behind me. The cause of the operation—cancer—is something that I have to live with every day as a possibility; and of course, I live with the effects of the operation as well.

I do not feel frightened or discouraged. Ed and I are both cheerful, optimistic people; and he was a great strength to me while I was recuperating from the operation and the radiation therapy. Since the exact cause of breast cancer is unknown, I cannot take specific steps to avoid a recurrence. I can take general precautions—such as eating a healthy diet, exercising, getting enough sleep, and watching for the danger signals of cancer. But the rest of it is simply out of my hands.

Making that clear—what I could and could not do—was an important step. It was as if a great weight rolled away. I have never mistaken worry for action, and I did not fool myself now that worrying about this condition was the same as doing something about it. So I just laughed and said, "I have survived cancer! What's next?" You see, I'm sure there will be something else, but my best prevention and also my best preparation is to lead a life that, besides being physically healthy, is spiritually and emotionally healthy as well.

I remember seeing a television special about women who had been sexually abused as children. The therapists and others who worked with them referred to them as "incest survivors," or "abuse survivors" rather than "incest victims" or "victims of sexual abuse." To me, there is a world of difference between these terms. One leaves you passive, helpless, dependent. The other communicates toughness, resilience, and self-reliance. We are all here today, and we have arrived by many paths. Not one of those paths has been free from chuckholes, washouts, and even avalanches—but we have survived the journey up till now. Let's give ourselves credit for that. We can call ourselves not victims but survivors. And Paul gives us the right to call ourselves not just survivors but conquerors. That should lift our hearts!

I love Mother Lucy Mack Smith for this very quality. What a great lady she was! She had a tender and loving heart—and a tough backbone. She suffered under repeated blows of fate, but she did not give up despite losing their farm, Alvin's unnecessary death, their repeated financial reverses, the scorn and contempt of neighbors who mocked Joseph's vision, relentless persecution, and the Church's moves from one community to another. All of these adversities could have broken a woman of less resilient spirit, but she did not give up. When her cherished companion, Joseph Smith, Sr., died soon after the Saints were driven out of Missouri, she wrote: "I returned to my desolate home; and I then thought that the greatest grief which it was possible for me to feel had fallen upon me in the death of my beloved husband. Although that portion of my life which lay before me, seemed to be a lonesome, trackless waste, yet I did not think that I could possibly find, in traveling over it, a sorrow more searching, or a calamity more dreadful, than the present." [^2]

What awaited her still, of course, were the deaths of four of her sons: the fatal illness of Don Carlos in Nauvoo, the assassinations of her two noble sons Joseph and Hyrum in Carthage, and the almost immediate death of Samuel as a result of being pursued by a mob. When Joseph's and Hyrum's bodies were brought home, washed, and dressed, she wrote this moving account:

"I had for a long time braced every nerve, roused every energy of my soul and called upon God to strengthen me, but when I entered the room and saw my murdered sons extended both at once before my eyes . . . it was too much; I sank back, crying to the Lord in the agony of my soul, 'My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken this family!' A voice replied, 'I have taken them to myself, that they might have rest.' " [^3]

This promise of rest is the promise that the Savior made, as we have seen, coupled with warnings that we would have to have eyes to see and ears to hear before we could understand his meaning and also that these things were hidden from the wise.

Surely Mother Smith must have wondered if there were no other way and whether this "rest" could not have been purchased in a less grievously burdensome way. She continues: "I was swallowed up in the depths of my afflictions. . . . As I looked upon their peaceful, smiling countenances, I seemed almost to hear them say, 'Mother, weep not for us, we have overcome the world by love; we carried to them the gospel, that their souls might be saved; they slew us for our testimony, and thus placed us beyond their power; their ascendancy is for a moment, ours is an eternal triumph.' " [^4]

After Samuel's death, William, her sole surviving son, brought his dying wife to Nauvoo early in 1845. Her fatal condition was a result of the persecutions in Missouri, "which makes the sum of martyrs in our family no less than six in number," wrote Mother Smith in great sorrow. But she ends her narrative, not with grief but with gratitude and with her ringing testimony: "The testimony which I have given is true, and will stand forever; and the same will be my testimony in the day of God Almighty, when I shall meet them, concerning whom I have testified, before angels, and the spirits of the just made perfect." [^5]

Mother Smith lived for many more years. In those years, she did not find it necessary to revise a syllable of the testimony she had uttered with such firmness and conviction. Old age bowed her down, but not bitterness. Death finally conquered her, but not despair. She was a survivor, and we can all manifest the same kind of courage through our pains and losses.

I also think of a wonderful Hawaiian woman I know, Winifred Watanabe Chinen. Her husband is not a member of the Church and has poor health. He allows her to attend her meetings but insists that she not accept any callings. Knowing his feelings, the bishop does not ask Sister Chinen to accept any callings. Sister Chinen might well feel downcast and discouraged by her situation, but instead, she says: "I've decided that I do not need any calling. I volunteer for whatever I can do, in whatever capacity I can be of use in our Relief Society to relieve the president of any mundane responsibilities." Happily she cares for the sacrament cloths, brings flowers for the chapel, does visiting teaching, and renders compassionate service. "Being there and helping" at any Relief Society function is her calling. Her very countenance radiates a "brightness of hope." Instead of dwelling on the things she cannot do, she focuses on what she can do, attends her meetings with real gratitude, and constantly seeks out others in her neighborhood to help them. I would wager that she does as much good as any so-called fully active Latter-day Saint in Hawaii.

Recognizing Blessings in Disguise

The second gospel principle that helps us lighten our bur- and find the rest promised by Christ is the ability to recognize blessings in disguise. I have always loved the scripture in Hebrews that tells us to "entertain strangers: for thereby some have entertained angels unawares." (Hebrew 13:2.) Many times, experiences that we would not seek voluntarily and that come to us in bitter guises turn out to be blessings in disguise.

Ed was called to preside over the Japan Okinawa Mission in 1968, and one of the first things we did when we reached Japan was to visit all of the cities in our mission. We had never been there before, and we knew that it was important for us to understand as much about Japan, the Japanese people, and their culture as we could. When we went to a city for the first time, we would try to take a quick tour so that we would understand its physical layout and some of its important public areas, and we did that also in Hiroshima. We went to the Memorial Shrine, built at ground zero, and then visited the Atomic Age Museum, which documented the damage and preserved relics from that strange and destructive energy. The photographs helped us understand what the statistics meant. The bomb, which exploded about 1800 feet in the air, destroyed 4.7 square miles of the city. More than 92,000 people were dead or missing. We were filled with the sorrow of that event—the enormous destruction, the tragic loss of lives, the terrifying vision of what could happen to our planet if nuclear weapons were used again. It was very sobering for Ed and me, for we stood on both sides of that long-ago deed. It was our country, the United States of America, that had made the decision to use that bomb against Japan, the homeland of our ancestors. We grieved equally for those who had done the deed and for those who had suffered from it.

Our burden was lifted by the Saints in Hiroshima when we falteringly tried to express our confused and sorrowful feelings. "Yes, it was a terrible thing," they said, "but it was a blessing in disguise. You must not dwell on anything but the blessing." Brother and Sister Nishihara, whose son is now president of the Japan Osaka Mission in which they serve as a couple, said, "How could we have accepted the gospel if we had still been trying to believe in the divinity of the emperor? Or how could our country have moved forward economically if all of our energies and ambitions were being channeled into military purposes? It took this terrible blow to free us from the paths of the past and let us choose a new direction."

Thanks to them and to the other Saints of Hiroshima, we gained a new perspective on what had happened. We came out of the museum with our minds filled with images of devastation and destruction; but the reality of Hiroshima is that it is a thriving, lively city. There are no ruins, no shattered buildings. The city has been rebuilt. The many survivors of the bomb have gone on with their lives, just as Ed, who was wounded in Italy fighting with the 442nd Infantry in the U.S. Army, went on with his life. No one would have chosen such a devastating thing—and whether the decision to drop the bomb was right or not is something that lies beyond my wisdom—but I do know that in choosing to interpret it as a blessing, the Saints and the other residents of Hiroshima made the right decision.

I feel very strongly that we must never allow ourselves to linger in "what if's" or "if only's." Possibilities that seem more desirable to us but that are not possible sap the strength from our hands and the courage from our hearts. They become a snare to our feet so that we stumble and lose our way. All we can do is our best. We cannot control how things turn out. We cannot control the circumstances that life hands us.

In 1987, I retired from my job as principal, and Ed and I decided to move to Salt Lake City. In August 1988, Ed and I were invited to an interview with the Missionary Committee, and we suspected that it might be a mission call. Ed had an appointment for a physical already scheduled with his doctor, so at the end of the examination, he mentioned that we might like to think about going on another mission.

The doctor shook his head firmly. "You should be very careful about any strenuous activity, and you absolutely must not leave the country. Any other questions?" It turned out that Ed had a rare heart condition in which the muscle in one part of his heart had atrophied and was not working. The doctor told us later that he had not expected Ed to live out the year.

The Missionary Committee asked us if we would accept a calling to head the Missionary Training Center in Tokyo, and Ed had to tell them what the doctor had said. We were both bitterly disappointed that the calling could not be extended to us; but now, two years later, we see that it also was a blessing in disguise. I know my husband. He would not have spared himself, even if he had felt ill. He would have pushed himself beyond his strength in working with the missionaries and staff, interviewing missionaries until late at night, and working with the members. I think it is literally true that he would not have survived the year.

Instead, by following his medical plan consistently and working with the doctors, he has experienced a remarkable regeneration and renewed strength. Furthermore, I was here to accept a calling to the Primary general board and then, in March 1990, my current calling to the Relief Society general presidency. It has been a great blessing to both of us. I rely on Ed's constant support, his cheerfulness, his lively interest, and his intelligent analysis of my assignments. He truly companions me and is my partner as I have been his companion and partner in his callings. How foolish we would have been to think of the calling that could not be extended to us with disappointment or to feel that we had somehow been inadequate!

Choosing to Choose

In choosing to call ourselves survivors, not victims, and seeing the blessing behind the disquise, we exercise our precious gift of moral agency. Choosing to choose lightens our burdens and helps us find rest. One of the most powerful promises in the scriptures is in 2 Nephi 10:23: "Therefore, cheer up your hearts, and remember that ye are free to act for yourselves—to choose the way of everlasting death or the way of eternal life." That is a message of cheer and bright hope!

While I was going to high school, I had to live away from home and put myself through school by working as a maid. I was only fourteen, and I spent many nights feeling weepy, anxious, and frightened. What I had to do seemed so hard, and three years seemed so long. Then I discovered a wonderful fact. If I concentrated on how I was feeling, I only felt worse. But if I chose to behave cheerfully, resourcefully, and calmly, my mood changed. In other words, if I concentrated on how I wanted to behave, my feelings changed to match my behavior. The wonderful thing about choosing, for me, was that I didn't have to believe it would work. I just had to choose.

For example, when I would get up at 5:30 in the morning with a long list of household tasks to be accomplished before leaving for school and a long list afterwards, it was easy to feel overwhelmed, alone, and discouraged. Where could I find time to be happy? Where was there time to cheer myself up? But I was making it too hard. If I simply came into the school with a smile on my face and said, "Oh, good morning, Mr. Chuck," to my vice principal, he would look up, smile warmly back, and say, "Oh, Chieko, it's good to see you. How are things going? Are you doing all right with your schoolwork? Have you heard from your family?" In the ten minutes before the bell rang, my spirits would lift as if by a miracle. I felt consoled by Harry Chuck's concern and bolstered by his obvious confidence in my ability to handle both schoolwork and a demanding job. My teachers were equally supportive and kind. If I had decided instead that I felt too sad to talk to Mr. Chuck and had skulked past with my head down, I would have paralyzed myself with my own bad mood.

The important point is that I did not wait until I felt like smiling and saying hello. I chose to smile and say hello, and then my mood changed. I'm not saying that we should cover up serious emotional problems or try to deal with severe depression by pretending that everything is all right. Mental and physical problems need professional help and appropriate medical care. But where we can choose, I think it is incumbent upon us to exercise our agency.

What motivated me all through high school and college was an overwhelming desire to be a teacher. I was greatly inspired by my sixth-grade teacher, Mrs. Yuriko Nishimoto, who truly loved children and was the kind of person I wanted to be. I chose not only to get an education, which was what my parents also wanted for me, but to be an educator as my life's work. I carried that vision in my heart and in my mind. I measured my daily decisions against that vision. Was this what a teacher did? How she spoke? What she knew? How she behaved? What did I need to do to reach my goal? Would this activity help me reach that goal? If not, then what should I do instead?

I had not realized how powerful those cumulative choices had become; but when I was a senior in high school, Benjamin Wist, the dean of the Teachers College at the University of Hawaii came to visit our school. In the afternoon, the teachers held a tea for him, and I was invited to attend and help serve. In mingling and conversing with the teachers in the room, he at one point noticed me. "And what grade do you teach?" he asked, inviting conversation.

I stared back at him in astonished delight. "Do I look like a teacher?" I remember exclaiming.

"Yes, you do," he responded.

I felt as if I had just been crowned queen. "Thank you very much," I said proudly. "I want to be a teacher, and next year I hope to be entering your college."

He looked at me keenly and smiled kindly. "I will remember you," he said.

And he did. How I cherished that compliment! I realize now that he was seeing, manifested on the outside, the inner vision of myself that I had nurtured and labored for. It was the sum total of my choices up to that point, and those cumulative choices carried me through my college education and through the many challenges and opportunities that came to me later.

Another story from later in my life illustrates the power of our choices to alter adverse circumstances. When we moved to Utah, I was the first exchange teacher from Hawaii to teach at Uintah Elementary School in Salt Lake City. Ed was going to the University of Utah, working on his master's degree in social work. I had taught elementary school for three years in Hawaii and loved it thoroughly. I knew I could be a successful teacher. But still, I felt twinges of apprehension. Utah was a new place, new people, new customs. It had not been all that long since the end of World War II, and we were braced for some racism.

So I was not really surprised when Edith Ryberg, my principal, called me into the office a few days before school started. I could tell instantly that something was wrong. Hesitantly, she said, "I'm very sorry to say that three of the mothers of students assigned to your second grade have requested transfers to a different room. They don't want their children to have a Japanese teacher."

Her face was so sad; I hastened to lift her burden. "Oh, no problem!" I said cheerfully. "Don't worry about it. It's fine with me to make the switch. I came here to serve the children; and if the parents feel that way, I wouldn't be able to teach their children very successfully, even if they stayed in the classroom. I will love whoever comes into my class, so assign whoever will feel comfortable."

She looked at me in amazement, then breathed "Ooof!" in great relief. "This was so hard for me to do." When I told Ed about the incident that night, I still was not tempted to feel hurt and rejected. I threw back my shoulders, laughed, and said, "Well, three out of thirty-five isn't bad! I have thirty-two students who want me, and three more who are going to have that chance. And they're going to be lucky students to get me for their teacher! In fact, I feel sorry for those three whose parents want them in a different class."

Then I poured all my efforts into making that first day a great success. In those days of limited and expensive travel, Hawaii was pretty exotic; and I was Japanese-American from Hawaii. That made me pretty exotic, too, so I resolved to be exotic! I sewed a fuschia-colored dress that showed off my skin and black hair and tucked a fuschia flower behind my ear. I was the most vivid thing in the whole school that first day!

The custom at that time was for each teacher to meet her children on the playground, call the roll so that each child would know where to line up, and then lead her children into their new classroom. The other two second-grade teachers, as a courtesy to me, the new teacher, said, "Would you like to assemble your class first?" I was absolutely delighted. It was exactly what I had hoped for.

I knew there was a lot of curiosity about me because many second-grade mothers were there with their children. In a neighborhood school, mothers would bring a kindergarten child for the first day, and maybe even a first-grader, but not a second-grader unless there was some special situation. Well, I was that special situation, and there they all were—including mothers of second-graders assigned to the other rooms. It could have been a threatening situation. I could have chosen to feel frightened and let the children and parents register that fear. Or I could have chosen to be ultra stern and rigidly professional to cover my anxiety. But what I wanted the children to feel was my own joy and excitement.

I still remember opening the roll book, calling each child's name clearly, looking directly at each child as he or she came into line, smiling, and making some comment. "James Backman—what a nice name!" (He came and stood before me and said, "My dad is the president of the Salt Lake Board of Education.") "Beth Benson—how carefully you've tied your hair ribbons!" (And she said, "My dad is an apostle in the Church!") I could have felt just a little intimidated. But when I led them off, I could feel their anticipation.

That very afternoon, the principal took me aside, smiling a little. "Chieko," she said, "I just wanted you to know that those three mothers—you know, the ones who wanted their children in the other classrooms?—have come and asked if their children can be transferred back to you. I told them opportunity knocks only once." She laughed, "Can you imagine how furious the other mothers would be if I tried to talk them into transferring their children out of your room?"

I was smiling a little myself. That was one of many experiences I had in choosing my attitude and my mood, choosing how I would respond instead of letting circumstances respond for me.

These three principles of the gospel have been great resources to me in dealing with adversity: first, seeing myself as a survivor, as one of those who are "more than conquerors through him that loved us" (Romans 8:37); second, recognizing blessings, even when they come in disguise, so that we can entertain "angels unawares" (Hebrews 13:2); and third, deliberately exercising the power to choose and consistently choosing "the way of eternal life" rather than "the way of everlasting death." (2 Nephi 10:23.)

When our burdens are grievous to be borne, when we face a world in which it seems that there is only struggle and no rest, I hope we can remember the immense strength of our sisterhood, the reservoirs that we have within us, and the unfailing wellspring of the Savior's love for us, even in the midst of adversity.

For me, choosing to view burdens "lightly," so to speak, and exercising the divine gift of our free agency in this way is what brings us from hope to faith. I love Nephi's words, "Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all [people]. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life." (2 Nephi 31:20; italics added.) What I love about this scripture is that nearly every element in it lies within our choice: whether we feel like it or not, we can choose to "press forward"; we can choose to be "steadfast in Christ"; we can choose to "feast upon the word of Christ"; and we can choose to "endure to the end." It is my testimony, proved through many experiences, that when we make choices like these, we are choosing to act in hope, and when we do, I believe that the Lord supplies the "brightness" for us.

We have, as well, a remarkable degree of choice about "having . . . a love of God and of all [people]," also a part of this scripture. Yet we also know that the pure love of God, or charity, is the gift of the Father, for Moroni urges us: "Wherefore, my beloved brethren [and sisters], pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love, which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ." (Moroni 7:48.) So again the reciprocal dynamic holds: if we choose to act in love, the gift of pure love will be given us.

There are many scriptures of comfort and consolation. This one from the Old Testament possibly refers to the Millennium, but it can also be seen as true for us in this life whenever we turn to the Savior with our burdens: "Do not fear, O Zion.. . . The Lord your God is with you, he is mighty to save. He will take great delight in you, he will quiet you with his love, he will rejoice over you with singing." (New International Version Zephaniah 3:16-17; see also KJV.) May we feel the stillness of that love and hear the rejoicing in that song and remember his promise: "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." (Matthew 11:28.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Susan Elizabeth Howe, assistant professor of English at Brigham Young University, has been the editor of Exponent II and managing editor of The Denver Quarterly. Her play Burdens of Earth has been performed at BYU, and her poems have appeared in The New Yorker, Shenandoah, Tar River Poetry, Prairie Schooner, and other journals.
[^2] Ibid., p. 324.
[^3] Ibid., p. 325.
[^4] Ibid., p. 327.
[^5] Chieko N. Okazaki was born in Hawaii, where she joined the Church at age fifteen. She has served as a member of general boards of the Young Women and the Primary and as first counselor in the Relief Society general presidency. She taught for twenty-three years in the public schools of Hawaii, Utah, and Colorado and served for ten years as a school principal. Sister Okazaki and her husband, Edward Y. Okazaki, are the parents of two sons.
