Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

Getting Somewhere

SUSAN ELIZABETH HOWE [^1]

As I stop to think about where my life's journey has brought me, I am astonished, stunned. These are some of the labels that identify me: I am a single woman, forty-one years old; I am an assistant professor of English and a doctor of philosophy; I am a poet and playwright and the author of a few stories; I am a daughter, sister, aunt, and Merrie Miss teacher; I am also a tennis player, skier, traveler, and theatergoer. My labels show that I participate in many interesting and rewarding activities, but this is not the life I would have chosen for myself.

I remember, as a teenager, being on a seminary panel that considered marriage. When all the other panel members said they would probably marry quite soon after graduating from high school, I countered, "Well, I think I'll be older when I marry." But by older, I meant nineteen! The life I had planned for myself included marriage at the end of my junior year of college. (I would have been nineteen; I started at BYU just after I turned seventeen.) Then I thought I would graduate the following year, have a baby almost immediately, and spend the rest of my life as a wife and mother. That was the ideal life for good Mormon girls, and because I was a good Mormon girl, that was the life plan I wanted.

The years passed; I became a junior at BYU, and I wasn't even dating. I had senior panic that year, so you can imagine my emotional state when I was a senior. And then it happened—the worst possible fate: I graduated from college, and I wasn't married. And because marriage after college was the only plan I had considered, I had no idea what to do with my life. I was plumb out of goals.

So after BYU I didn't make any major life decisions for a long time—four years, actually. I stayed in Provo. I continued attending BYU student wards, hoping to run into the man of my dreams. I was hired by Provo School District, so I taught junior high for two years. (I had not taken seriously the possibility of a career, so I hadn't really considered what work I might enjoy for all the years of my life.) I next considered a mission, but my bishop advised me not to go. Because I had already resigned from my job, I had to find other employment; I worked as an assistant in the BYU law library. All around me were young men—and several young women—studying hard, working towards interesting, financially rewarding careers while I was making $3.25 an hour and marking time.

I coasted for several reasons. For one, I did not know there were any fulfilling, interesting roles a Mormon woman could play except the supposedly all-encompassing role of wife and mother. Marriage was the only life plan the culture—including my church leaders, my peers, and my family—presented to me as acceptable and worthy. And I can't express how much pain I have suffered between then and now because I did not marry. I wish that someone had taught me that my marital status had nothing to do with my value as a person or my potential to be a worthwhile human being. I wish I had been open to more possibilities for my future, so I could have felt that, even as I longed for a happy marriage, my life could always be interesting and exciting. But I was taught that only one option was desirable, that without it I would be a failure. So after college, my life essentially stopped as I waited to get married.

Another reason I didn't formulate new goals was the strong disapproval I felt from those around me for women who pursued professional degrees. I was warned by bishops, by friends, by intelligent, interesting young Mormon men I wanted to date, and by Fascinating Womanhood that if I became too educated, too smart, I would be threatening and no one would want to marry me. Marriage or a career was presented to me as an either/or dilemma. The only thing I wanted in life was to get married, so I wasn't about to pursue any goals that might ruin my chances. For years, I hid my intellectual interests and capacities, as if they were a shameful secret.

Besides, there was a voice in my head telling me I couldn't succeed. Academic options seemed out of reach. Camille DeLong, a wonderful family therapist, helped me to understand how my own fears limited me. She said that we each have a voice in our head censoring us, stopping us. This voice comes as we internalize the criticism of parents, teachers, peers—anyone who is a severe and harsh judge. After hearing our-selves berated again and again, we eventually begin to criticize ourselves in the same way, with the same harshness. Camille asked me to consider how I felt about my body, my intelligence. She said, "Think of the things in your life you have told yourself you can't do because of your body or your mind."

Her challenge took me back to college. I wanted to be on the ballroom dance team because I am a very good dancer, and I wanted to act because I felt I had—at the time—a talent that could have been developed. But I didn't try either activity because I thought I was too tall. I thought I was too tall for any part in any play, even though—I've since learned—both Vanessa Redgrave and Sigourney Weaver are as tall as I am. And I thought I was too tall to have a partner on the ballroom dance team, so I didn't even try out. I'll never know if I could have "made it" in acting or as a ballroom dancer because I didn't even try. So I missed two enriching and satisfying experiences.

Even more serious for me, I have always had a voice in my head telling me, "You aren't very intelligent. You really shouldn't go back to school because you aren't smart enough to do well. You're just not an academician." Well, I now have two advanced degrees, so I guess I have been able to get over at least some of the obstacles that were before me. The journey to where I am now has not been direct, because it was not carefully planned. I lived in Washington, D.C., Salt Lake City, Cambridge, Denver, and San Francisco before returning to Provo to teach at BYU. In addition to teaching junior high and working as a library assistant, I have been a secretary, legislative aide, technical writer, editor, consultant, and college instructor. Often I have moved to a new place, accepted a different job, or started a graduate program simply because it felt like the right thing to do at the moment, not because I understood where I was going and could fit this next move into my life plan. After graduating from college unmarried, I no longer had a life plan.

But I have to say that, as I look over my life, I'm pretty happy with it. If I consider it as an offering to the Lord, I've done the best I could with the circumstances I have been given. I've tried to grow. I've tried to be a whole person. I've tried to use my talents to serve. I have made some mistakes, but I've also made some significant contributions. And so I ask myself what things helped me to achieve despite my own fears and the limitations the culture set for me.

First, I eventually realized that I had to do something, that marking time and waiting to get married were not healthy. My life was going on whether I did or not. When I finally decided to get a master's degree, I remember thinking, "In the next two years, I may or may not marry—I don't have much control over that. But in those two years, I can get a master's degree. At the end of that time, I can either look back and say, 'Two more years have gone,' or I can say, 'In this time, I've earned a degree.' Which would I rather say?" I've always thought that since I have only one life, I want to do the best with it I can, so I went after the degree.

What helped me ignore my self-doubts was that I have always valued learning. When I got out of college, I made a list of twenty books I had wanted to read but hadn't had time for. I had always wanted to study art, so I bought some art books and began visiting museums. Learning became important enough to me that I looked for opportunities, which eventually led me to graduate school. Had I been in other circumstances, I could have used libraries, evening courses, and community classes as avenues for education. The important thing to me has always been the chance to learn, not necessarily the desire to get another degree. But my circumstances made graduate programs a good choice for me.

In the process of learning, I came to understand what work I really love, what fields of study are intellectually exciting to me. I have always been moved very deeply by literature. Certain novels—Dandelion Wine, East of Eden, and All the King's Men, for example—have opened whole worlds to me and helped me to understand life much more deeply. I soon realized that literature is incredibly important to me. I love reading it, teaching it, writing it. Literature became a focus; as often as I could in my very random life experience, I have directed myself towards the study and writing of literature. My route toward a doctorate and a university teaching job was circuitous, but since I always involved myself with reading and writing literature, when opportunities for in-depth study came up, I was ready to take advantage of them. For example, I did quite well on the advanced literature test of the Graduate Records Examination, even though I had been out of school for six years because I had been reading literature during all that time.

The next thing I had to do was learn to take risks. I remember swimming lessons at the Scera pool in Orem when I was about seven. Through each of the nine lessons, I dreaded the last week, the tenth, because that was when we would have to jump into the deep end of the pool. That awful day finally came. Before I knew it, I was the child at the front of the line, standing skinny and terrified with my toes on the concrete rim. As I looked into the sparkly blue water, I thought that if I jumped in I would die. I could vividly imagine myself sinking to the bottom of the pool, choking and panicking and thrashing around until I went unconscious. I thought that if I jumped, I would drown—and I jumped.

Adults, having developed areas of expertise within which they are relatively proficient, make the world comfortable by staying away from really difficult challenges in new areas where they might—to continue my swimming metaphor—drown. But that kind of terror is the cost, I think, of almost any significant learning experience, because learning that matters comes only when you push yourself beyond your known limits, when you risk a great deal.

I remember the first time I had the chance of having a public audience for my own play. I lived in Boston, and the Association for Mormon Letters was sponsoring a symposium in Charlottesville, Virginia, for Mormon scholars interested in presenting their works to other Mormon scholars. The conference chair asked me to participate. I didn't immediately refuse his invitation, but I didn't accept, either. I told him I'd think about it. What I thought was that maybe my play was awful and I was just too close to it to tell. Maybe a reading would bore the audience, and they'd all go away thinking to themselves that I was stupid to imagine I had any talent.

Then in a conversation one evening, a friend—a woman I had always considered articulate and intelligent and self-assured—said, "Whatever I've tried to do, I've always doubted that I could succeed. Some of us will never have confidence. We'll just have to go on guts." Her attitude helped me to learn that I could be courageous even if I couldn't be confident. She gave me the courage and spunk to try: to call up the chair and accept his invitation, to ask friends to read the parts, to travel to the symposium and present a reading of my play. And actually, everyone who spoke to me after the reading was gracious and supportive. I learned that the play had some problems but that people found it interesting. It had a great deal of potential for improvement, and so did I. Because I risked, I discovered that I did have talent as a writer, and that knowledge gave me tremendous excitement and enthusiasm to continue writing. The more I have worked, the more I have improved, so the risks I have taken have definitely been worthwhile.

Not that I've always experienced success. I remember one nationally renowned poet saying, after he read my poem aloud in class, "This doesn't sound like it was written during this century. It's a throwback to the 1800s." And I also remember him saying of the next student's poem, "Much better. We've really upped the ante with this poem." His comments almost made me give up poetry altogether, thinking I just didn't have any talent.

But years later, in another poetry writing class, another well-known poet (and, incidentally, a former student of the first), said something that helped me continue writing poems, despite my perceived limitations: "Anything worth doing is worth doing poorly." Of course my early poems weren't very good. I was learning to write; I didn't just emerge from some cocoon as a full-blown poet. But I never would have become better if I hadn't written those first poems. And I never would have become better if I had let myself be discouraged and quit because my first poems were awful. I have had to work very hard for years and years, writing poem after poem after poem, to become a poet. But because I have written poems again and again and again, I have finally developed some expertise. And now I have confidence that I can, on occasion, write a good poem. And I know that if I keep working, I will get better.

Along with confidence in my abilities, I have had to learn that I am a valuable person, as valuable as anyone else. For a long time I felt that the Lord didn't want me to have anything that I wanted. I felt that I was being punished—or ignored—for something I didn't understand. But over the years I have come to realize that what I desire has to do with my unique, individual talents and that discovering what those talents are and developing them are probably the best gift I can give. In many ways our culture teaches women they must take care of everyone else's needs before their own. But I don't think God would put the constraints on me that the culture has. God would not say, "Stop. Don't develop your mind. Limit yourself and ignore your potential. There's only one thing a woman can do, and if you can't do that, you're worthless. Give up your own joys and devote yourself to others. They are more important than you."

Married women with families often feel they have to accommodate their family's and their husband's schedule, carving out a space for themselves only after having provided what family members want and getting them where they need to be. Too often there is almost no time left to do anything for themselves. And because everyone else's needs take priority over her own, the mother often feels of less worth than everyone else—feels worthless. But a mother is as valuable as any member of her family. So if she is not in at least some ways getting to discover and work toward her dreams, then some adjustments within the family need to be made.

I myself have felt and acted as if everyone else's needs are more important than my own. Particularly as I have begun working as a professor, I have had trouble balancing my professional responsibilities with my own goals. I want to please everyone; I want both my colleagues and my students to like me; I want to do well. So I have felt considerable pressure to accept every assignment, and several tasks I accepted this past year fell through the cracks. Furthermore, I find that I am finishing everything in a haphazard fashion at the last minute and that I am very unhappy, both because I'm not doing well and because I have no time for myself. These failures have taught me to be more cautious about accepting assignments. And I am trying to learn—and this is still excruciating for me—to say no when I have to.

I am also learning to value my own work and personal needs as much as I value those of others. No one else can do my writing. If I don't give myself the time to write, the gift I might have given will be lost. So I must make a commitment to myself to write at least an hour every day, and I must take that commitment seriously. I see this as a step in learning to respect myself as much as I respect others. To break promises is a sign of very slight regard—for oneself as surely as for others.

My life has certainly not resolved itself into the neat, orderly plan I had originally set forth. And while I have not traveled the path I had intended and I'm not at all sure where the rest of my journey will take me, I believe I am getting somewhere. I imagine that my future will be as challenging, difficult, and rewarding as my past has been, but I would not even venture to guess where it might lead. Wherever that is, I'm sure it will be interesting.

And actually, I don't think my life is so different from most women's. Women have always had to be flexible about their plans, their goals, their aspirations, because women care so deeply about relationships and are sensitive to the ways in which their lives affect those close to them. Sometimes a woman will defer her own dreams or move toward them more slowly than she might otherwise, but she should feel that those dreams are important.

In the television documentary series The Power of Myth, Joseph Campbell said that if you "follow your bliss," opportunities will open for you in ways you can't believe. Each of us needs to discover her own value, her unique gifts. It is essential to be in contact with God about the direction of our lives, to change that direction from time to time as we grow and our situations change. Within the circumference of our lives, each of us has obligations we have agreed to perform and people we love and are responsible to. But we must place ourselves at the center: each woman needs to know that she is unique and that she is of immense worth. And that what she is working towards at any time of her life is of great worth to her and to God.

---
Notas:
[^1] Claudia W. Harris received her doctorate in Irish studies and dramatic literature from Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia, where she lived until joining the English faculty at Brigham Young University in 1990. As a freelance journalist and theater critic, she has developed an abiding interest in Ireland, which takes her there nearly every year. She is a widow and the mother of three.
