Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

Finding Peace and Purpose in the Valley

CLAUDIA W. HARRIS [^1]

This past summer I thoroughly surprised myself by leaving a comfortable existence in Atlanta, Georgia, and moving twenty-six thousand pounds of household goods across the country to Provo, Utah. As I drove by myself across Wyoming in a car filled with what I had believed might not survive the moving van, I thought of my ancestors crossing the same terrain in handcart companies and yearned for the simplicity of their lives. Ostensibly, the reason for my difficult move was to accept a position in the English Department at Brigham Young University, but I know the actual reasons are not so easily stated. Perhaps my natural curiosity about my varied life and my discussion here of my own particular decisions will lead to a better understanding of life choices in general.

I was not aware of it at the time, but my move to Utah began one Friday afternoon, two years after my husband's death, as I stood by the side of a freeway in south Georgia looking down a steep hill at a clump of flattened weeds growing in a small stream. I had stopped on my way back to Atlanta after teaching all week at the Marine Corps Logistics Base in Albany, Georgia. I'd stopped that afternoon to see where I'd gone off the road the previous Monday morning, nearly killing myself. On Monday, 14 November 1988, I'd caught myself falling asleep as I drove south about 6 a.m. I awoke with a start just as I was about to go off a bridge, but then over corrected, spun once and a half around, went backward across the grassy median, backward across the opposite two lanes of the highway, and backward down the steep embankment on the other side. I finally remembered to brake, disengaging the cruise control, which had been set at 60 mph.

Sitting in the stalled car at the bottom of the hill, I laughed and started the engine and drove up the hill—all the time marveling at how well my sports car was responding. When I got to the top, I began to turn right so I would be going the appropriate direction on the freeway but then shrugged and drove straight across both lanes and the median and then south again. After all, I'd traveled this odd route backwards just moments before. Twenty minutes later, I stopped the car and walked around it; as I stood there looking at my grassy but undamaged car, I wondered why it had all been such a ho-hum experience. I certainly felt no fear and wasn't even shaky; I felt nothing. I realized then that I didn't care if I lived or died. Telling people that week about my near mishap, I laughed and treated it like a lark—like a funny thing that had happened to me on the way to work. My response was completely inappropriate.

But that Friday afternoon as I stood in my depressed state looking down the hill for the first time, I saw from the tire tracks and the flattened weeds that my car had been sitting in a stream; I felt a chill as I realized that if I had gotten out of my car that Monday morning I would have been standing knee-deep in water. I did not know how I had been able to drive out of that stream and up the steep hill. The thought then came strongly into my mind—"You may not think there is purpose to your life anymore, but apparently there is, and you must discover what it is for yourself." What turned out to be almost an inevitable move to BYU began with that thought.

In a strange way, this near accident emphasized my lack of purpose. My husband of thirty years was dead; my three children were married, living good, productive lives, and nurturing their own children well. So all of my previous reasons for finding joy in living were either gone or fulfilled. And I cried to myself over and over—"Is this all there is?" My children now tell me that I worried unnecessarily about becoming a burden. But then life weighed heavily. I should count someday all of the times I wrote in my journal—"Life is too hard." Throughout this period, misleadingly, I appeared to be almost upbeat; however, when friends would comment admiringly about my life—my annual trips to Ireland for fun and research, my glitzy condo—when friends seemed to covet my freedom, I would usually say, "My life may look good on paper, but living it isn't much fun." The meaning, the heart, the vitality, the passion had disappeared.

So standing there by the side of the freeway, looking down into that stream, I took charge of my life again. I decided right then that I wanted to feel better. If I was going to live—and I knew I was not going to do anything deliberately to end my life—I wanted to be happier, to enjoy life again. So I prayed. It seems like such a simple solution. But considering that I had been angry at God for two years by then, my decision to pray for help was an extremely important step up out of that deep ravine I'd slid into. After all, God had not saved my good husband; God had not answered my fervent prayers on his behalf the way I had wanted; God had not taken me up on any of my pleas or desperate bargaining. So to repent of my irrational anger and to thank God sincerely for my blessings, blessings I knew I was receiving whether I asked for them or not, and then to ask humbly to feel better—this for me was a giant step forward.

Immediately, old and new friends began to reach out to me in unique and surprising ways. For instance, several ward members spontaneously offered to help me decorate for Christmas, and I was asked to speak in church for the first time since my husband's death. I'm sure my demeanor changed dramatically, but every special kindness that I received during this time cannot be accounted for only by my increased approachability. I started writing steadily on my dissertation for the first time since my husband's cancer had been diagnosed four years before. Miraculously, I did feel better—stronger and more confident. But it was my attitude that changed, not life events.

I had foolishly hoped that maybe my children and I would be free of further pain, but the world doesn't work that way. The fall of 1989 I went to Ireland again and to London to visit my son Mitch, my daughter-in-law Lorelei, and my sweet little granddaughter Fiona, who at nine months old had just suffered a stroke. Every bit of news about Fiona seems worse than the last. When I'm here away from her and unable to enjoy her smiles and hold her sturdy little body, I despair that we'll be able to keep her with us for very long. We've been worried about her ever since she was born with hemangeomas covering the right side of her face and her vocal cords. She has had great difficulty breathing, especially when she tries to sleep. There was also at the beginning the threat that she might have Sturg-Webber Syndrome, which could cause blindness in the affected eye, epilepsy, and progressive retardation. But with the stroke we learned that she has fibromuscular dysplasia which means, in her case, that all of the arteries to her brain are severely malformed. She would not be alive at all if her body had not developed an alternative blood supply, a supply which apparently failed her in July 1989, thus causing the massive stroke that destroyed a large part of the left hemisphere of her brain, in particular the speech center, and has left her with a partially paralyzed right hand. Pretty grim, isn't it. But I have never known a happier child. I was there for her first birthday and could enjoy her laughter and the zest with which she approaches everything. I thought then that when we are told to be as little children, it must mean that we should approach life with a Fiona-like joy. Watching her, I decided to do better at appreciating my own chance to live, to stop acting as if I were serving a life sentence, and to recognize instead my opportunities for joy.

But along with my desire to live more fully, not just to survive, came the growing realization that I needed to change my lonely life. My work caused me to be alone on the road much of the time. And although I was paid well, my consulting didn't gratify my other, more altruistic needs. I also questioned whether I was fulfilling my potential. Then, amazingly, on 14 November 1989 I was nearly killed on the freeway driving to Birmingham, Alabama. It was 6 a.m. and very dark and rainy. I was singing along with my tape player when a truck jackknifed right in front of me. I moved instantly to the right across three lanes, dodging other cars, and out onto the shoulder around the back of the truck. I was still going 45 mph at that point because whenever I'd tried to slow, I'd skidded. If anyone questions whether or not I can drive, that miraculous morning should provide the conclusive answer. But what was truly wonderful was that I felt weak-kneed, sick to my stomach, and very happy to be alive—all the appropriate emotions. I was euphoric all day and that feeling, in part, has stayed with me.

Later, when I was writing to my friend Lavina about the experience, I looked in my journal and realized that these two mishaps took place at exactly the same time of day just one year apart. Certainly, these near accidents may have been entirely my own doing, but the eerie coincidence makes me wonder. Even though I admit that I have the usual human need to divine some larger meaning in the events of my life—to create a novelization of my life—I cannot deny the dramatic change in my feelings. My reaction to the second incident was completely the opposite of my bizarre reaction to the first. In that year, I had been given back my life, and I continue to express gratitude to God for the lesson I relearned those early mornings on lonely southern roads: God does love me, bless me, care about me—personally.

Now, lest you misunderstand what I'm saying, let me reassure you that all during this three-year period after the death of my husband I was actively keeping the commandments, serving others, praying regularly, studying the scriptures, teaching the Gospel Doctrine class and the Primary inservice lessons, and working in the Atlanta Temple each Saturday. I don't believe anyone who knew me would have called me to repentance. And I never questioned the reality or power of God or of Jesus Christ. I could never deny what had been manifested to me so clearly.

On 30 June 1985, just two days after my husband learned he had cancer, I was looking into his face during the sacrament as he sat next to me in fast meeting, and I was feeling a level of anxiety I had never before experienced, when suddenly a sure knowledge of Christ's overwhelming love for my husband permeated my entire being. It was not my love for Chet that filled me, but Christ's. This was an outside force unlike anything I had ever felt before. Following immediately, Christ's deep sadness for what we were about to suffer washed over me; then instantly, Christ's strength lifted me above my anxiety. So you see, from that three-fold experience that helped sustain me throughout the difficult time that followed, I had personal knowledge of the power that was at my disposal, and I called upon it often. But nonetheless, I later felt deserted. And I deeply mourned the loss both of my husband and of the spiritual support.

About a month after my second near accident, I ran into Susan Howe at the Modern Language Association meeting in Washington, D.C.; neither of us expected to see the other there. Susan pulled me out of a crowd of twelve thousand English teachers in the huge Sheraton Hotel; she told me she was in Washington helping to interview candidates for openings in the English Department at BYU. I asked her why BYU was not interviewing me, verbalizing for the first time the change I wanted to make in my life. Later that evening at dinner, I told a non-Mormon friend the reasons why teaching at BYU would be good for me. Months later when Elder de Jager interviewed me for the job here, he told me I should come and, to support his opinion, he amazingly listed all of my own reasons, those I'd given my friend in Washington. Elder de Jager, of course, also assured me that I'd have to decide for myself, but when I walked out of his office and down onto the parking ramp, I started to cry because I knew I should come but didn't want to. It was too risky, too hard, too much to ask of myself—no, no, I couldn't do it. Leave a city like Atlanta where I'd lived for twenty years, where I'd raised my children, where I'd buried my husband. No, I couldn't; it would cost too much—move away from my children and grandchildren, take a cut in pay, lose my new house. No, it was too much to ask of anyone.

Choice is hard—unlimited choice is even harder. So we limit ourselves; we tell ourselves not to cross the line we draw; we place rigid parameters. Reasonable parameters are helpful, but those we place out of fear limit our progression. When I am depressed and monitor what I'm saying to myself, I find, inevitably, that I'm telling myself I can't do something, either that it's beyond my powers or that I'm now too old or stupid or silly to do it anymore. Can't—a powerful word. Once I recognize what I'm telling myself, once I hear that word can't, I work to turn it around into can. From experience, I know I can change my thinking; I can identify what it is I'd like to do; and then I can empower myself to make an intelligent choice. What I want to do is usually good for me or even admirable, but it is also often fearful or difficult. So I can remove my depressed feelings by doing whatever I'd like to do or by deciding that it is not worth the risk. Deciding either to go ahead or to forget it, invariably, frees me of my depressed feelings.

Despite this self-knowledge, however, I'm still shaking my head in surprise over this massive change in my life; I'm still asking myself how I managed to move from a comfortable place, where I had such a good life, to Utah to begin a new career at my advanced age. When my incredulous Atlanta friends challenged me this past summer to explain my planned move, I jokingly told them that it was easy to understand: I was moving from the garden to the lone and dreary world. But returning to my favorite mountain has eased my longing for place; no matter where I've lived or traveled, Utah has always felt like home. Each day now as I look at Mount Timpanogos, I can tell in its many aspects how my day will go. That splendid mountain was the anchor of my early years, and it blesses me again with its beauty and solid presence. Nowhere else lately have I felt on such sure ground. But I am not deluded; I know that place is relatively unimportant; I can be happy anywhere if I choose to be.

And I am happy. I've titled this paper "Finding Peace and Purpose in the Valley" because I believe that is what I've found. I don't have to whip myself up anymore into a falsely upbeat state just so I can get out of bed and get through the day; I don't have to manufacture any particular feeling. Instead, now I feel authentic, grateful to be alive, and blessed by my opportunity to teach at BYU. I truly feel a Fiona-like joy. I have a compelling need to be useful, to be a change agent, to make a difference in the lives of my students. What I have learned about needing to live on the brink, to feel passion about ideas and people and the gospel can make me a better teacher because I can help students to be open to experience, to question, and to seek the virtuous and the lovely and the praiseworthy. Because of my climb out of that ravine, because of my commitment to find purpose in life again, I can help students to be happy in their own quest, to feel contented with their choices, and to be passionate in their efforts to lead righteous lives.

At this very moment, I realize with amazement how few regrets I have about my major decisions in life. For someone who struggles over which orange to pick from the pile of identical plump juicy oranges, I have made incredibly quick and decisive major choices. One technique that has helped me is to try to step into the future, imagining what it would be like for me to have chosen or not to have chosen a particular path. I knew at eighteen that I was too young to marry, but I also knew I didn't want to miss being married to my husband. That decision turned out to be a very good one. When we went to Western Samoa for three years with three small children, I was only twenty-three; I got on a plane for the first time in my life for that trip. And I had never expected to live anywhere but Utah Valley. Choosing to continue my education and graduating just ten years late, getting two master's degrees in six years taking one evening class each quarter while teaching full-time, and then deciding to get a Ph.D. and using as my research focus the relationship between theater and politics in Northern Ireland—all of these are risky choices that I'd readily make again. Even returning to Utah—perhaps my riskiest choice—is turning out to be one of my best. True, no other decision in my life required that I be slammed down into a gully before realizing I needed to take another path. But I'm especially grateful for that graphic message. I don't have time anymore to ask the pitiful question—"Is this all there is?" I'm having too much fun. I had forgotten how wonderful it is to really enjoy your work. Thanks to my students and co-workers, my life again has meaning, heart, vitality, passion.

Of course, I still have heartsinking moments, especially when I go home to a silent house, wishing Chet were there to share my day. Recently I was savoring a particularly lovely memory of my husband when unbidden came the thought of how much I will enjoy being with him again. But then I heard the clear message in my mind—"So why don't you allow yourself to take comfort in the gospel then? Why don't you let yourself feel the peace that the promise of eternity offers you?" At that moment, I realized how aloof I've needed to be from the promise of the next life; I've been holding myself aloof because at any thought of reunion I've wanted to be there, not just with my husband but with all of the loved ones I've lost recently—my mothers, my grandmother, my nephew Dale, my niece LeAnn, my sister Mary, her husband, and both of her sons. To think of the glory of the next life and not yearn to step over into it had been too hard. But now that I know what purpose my life still holds, I can allow myself to be comforted by that blessed, peaceful promise of what is to come. So I have found peace and purpose in the valley, and I thank God for that blessing.

---
Notas:
[^1] I am indebted to Kathleen S. Bahr, assistant professor of family sciences at BYU, for defining these two paradigms. Her writings on the value of family work as ritual are central to my comments, although she is not responsible for my interpretations. She describes two contrasting patterns: "the world" (the non-kin-sphere) and "the family" (the kin-sphere). In Bahr's model, the non-kin-sphere is governed by individualism and focuses on profits and products. The kin-sphere is governed by altruistic love and focuses on fostering growth. Non-kin-sphere activities prioritize management and control of resources; they are linear and prioritize reason. Kin-sphere activities prioritize stewardship and respect for individual agency; they are synchronous and prioritize caring.
