Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

Making a Paradigm Shift: The Cranky, Creaky, Perilous, and Absolutely Crucial Process

SHARON LEE SWENSON [^1]

Let me tell you about morning at my house. This morning. First, you have to visualize our house. Any real estate agent could tell you that it's a modest, two-story, yellow-brick bungalow in Salt Lake City on First South. Even from the outside, you can tell that it's a family house. There's a garden hose tied around a major branch of the tree in the front yard. This is where Jonathan, our nine-year-old, plays Tarzan. There are a couple of bikes kicked up against the porch. It's obvious that home repairs are going on—the front steps are new, unpainted wood, and the railing isn't up yet. In fact, if you look closely, you could see that that unpainted wood is starting to weather, so maybe the home repairs have been in process for some time. There seems to be an unusual number of telephone wires going into the upstairs bedroom window. That's where our thirteen-year-old daughter, Caitlin, single-handedly holds together the entire social structure of her junior high. There's a cat sitting in the front window. And if you open the front door, our blond, blue-eyed dog will leap forward and embrace you.

And what is that delicious odor wafting from the kitchen? Whole wheat toast with homemade jelly? No, more like pop-'em-in-the-toaster Eggo waffles. And who's this, charging out the door in a dressed-for-success suit carrying a briefcase? It's not Dad, it's Mom. Well, what's going on at the Swenson house? I'll tell you: it's a living, breathing, hands-on laboratory experiment in the construction and refinement of paradigms.

A paradigm is the way we see the world—an image or a model that includes rules about how things operate. If you're an ancient Hawaiian, then your paradigm explains volcanos: Pele, goddess of fire, is going to get furious and spit lava all over the island every so often if a virgin princess doesn't drop a black rooster into the caldera. If you're a modern Hawaiian, you still have a paradigm that explains volcanos, but this time it includes plate tectonics and sea-floor rifts. And even though you would cheerfully sacrifice any number of virgin tourists, the lava's gonna flow where the lava's gonna flow until the vent closes again.

Well, we're not ancient Hawaiians but modern American LDS women, for the most part. And we have paradigms that explain our families and our marriages. I want to define two of them—two paradigms that are often in conflict and that often leave us confused and bewildered because the universal rules that come with our models just don't seem to work. These two paradigms are kin-value and market-value. [^2]

I played off your sense of the LDS paradigm when I described our house—a single-family dwelling in a modest residential neighborhood where children play and relate to their friends and are fed breakfast every morning. This is the kin-value paradigm. It says that the family is the most important unit of society, that no success can compensate for failure in the home, that the best way to make human beings is in loving, nurturing, value-clear families, that children need to be raised with a full-time, breadwinning dad and a full-time, breadmaking mom and family home evening every Monday night. And if they do, this paradigm continues, those children will grow up to be solid citizens, good mothers and fathers themselves, the kind of women and men who will become Primary presidents and Scoutmasters and a light on the hill to the heathen nations.

Well, we all believe this, don't we? We see models of these families in the Ensign every month and hear about them on Mother's Day and at general conference. Some of us grew up in those kinds of homes. If we didn't, we wish we did. Some of us have those kinds of homes. And if we don't, we wish we did.

The second kind of paradigm, which I'll call the market-value paradigm, comes to us mostly from our society. It says that the most important unit of society is the individual—that each individual has inalienable rights, that each one of us has the right to try and make as much of our lives as we can, that we exchange our skills and abilities and time for the highest possible rate of cash return, which we then have a right to use in any way we want that isn't illegal. These individuals can be organized into families and care about each other, but they don't have to be, because our society deals with them as individuals. The schools exist to teach individual children. The economy is geared to contracting with individual workers. And our society works best when each individual has as much freedom and as many options as possible.

Well, we also believe this, don't we? We get expensive college educations so that we can get better jobs. We know we're succeeding at work because we get a fatter pay check. When we have a headache, we want a choice between two different strengths of ibuprofen, either in capsule or in tablet form. We know that we're teaching our children correct principles when we intone, "The idler shall not eat the bread nor wear the clothes of the laborer, and you're not getting your allowance until you clean your room, and that includes vacuuming up that three-year's supply of dust bunnies under the bed." We get terribly outraged if our seven-year-old slouches home and says, "I'm not going to learn multiplication. It's boring." We paint a terrifying picture of long-term penury and social disadvantage; and the next time we drive past someone sleeping on a bus bench, we say, "Look, Jonathan. Somebody who didn't learn his times tables. Do you want this to happen to you? Your dad and I aren't going to be around forever, you know." And we also remind ourselves that each individual needs a healthy testimony, that we can't be saved with borrowed light, and that nobody is going to ride into heaven on her husband's coattails or—and in my heart of hearts, I have trouble believing this—on his mother's apron strings.

So we have these two paradigms—kinship-value and market-value. We see evidence in our lives that both of them work. The rules really do explain how our world operates. They both make sense. The problem is that they're mutually exclusive in some ways.

Now, let's go back to the Swenson household this morning. There's something else you need to understand about this modest family dwelling on First South. It has experienced some very dramatic changes in the last three years. Shortly after I received my appointment at BYU—and that was not long after I was called to be my ward's Relief Society president—my husband left his job. He has now been free-lancing for about three years. So four or five times a week I drive to Provo to work, and Paul is home with the children. He carpools to school. He co-ops in the classroom. He manages his work in the pieces of time when the children are at school. He shops, he launders, he cooks—not all of it, but quite a lot of it.

I get up early to put dinner in the Crock-Pot before I leave. On the way home, I plot how to have quality time around the supper table, teaching moments doing homework, and families-are-forever bonding at bedtime. But the inevitable happens. I get home and see that the Crock-Pot didn't get plugged in this morning. So we go out to McDonald's and the kids fight over whose drink has the most ice in it. Or I have a day I can barely crawl home from, and our evening of intensive and creative bonding consists in watching cable TV on the bed until the dog's snoring wakes us all up.

I know that no success can compensate for failure in the home—I mean, I know that. It's one of the cornerstones of my universe. But I'm a logical person. Doesn't that also mean that success outside the home has to be purchased at the price of failure in the home? Now I didn't expect to enjoy work. I expected to do a good job and be a responsible, competent, and conscientious faculty member. But I didn't expect to love it, to be wildly excited about my teaching, to even relish faculty and committee meetings. I go to work willingly, even joyously. I like spending time at BYU. My teaching is rewarding. People respect me. I have an assistant who answers my phone, takes messages, and handles routine things for me. Students may whine a little when they come into the office, but they don't lie down on the floor and have tantrums. They don't whimper, "Everybody else in the class gets to turn papers in late." They don't ask me, "Where did you put my backpack?" And every month, the university gives me a very respectable check, and the janitors clean my office every night. I feel respected, valued, appreciated. This is the market-value paradigm, and boy! does it work for me!

But back to this morning at the Swenson household. I was getting ready to leave. It was late. I was frantically charging around. I went thundering into the basement to yank my blouse off the clothesline—feeling proud because I was doing it myself instead of making someone else do it for me—and yelling up the stairs, "You guys are just going to have to have cereal this morning. I don't have time to fix you breakfast." The breakfast I had in mind, the Real Breakfast made by all Real Mothers, was a dainty dish of kiwi-fruit and orange slices, hot oat bran muffins and mother love, with a scrambled egg and a cheery song. Clearly I couldn't pull that off this morning and these kids should recognize it and just be grateful they've got a mother who has a job at BYU.

Then my husband, who is popping the Eggo waffles into the toaster, mutters to my son, "I wish she'd hush up. We're just fine." And my son chased me all the way to the car to say, "Do you know what Dad just said about you?" And he told me!

Well, I peeled away from the house with a good head of steam; but by the time I got on the freeway, I was crying. I cried halfway here. What did he mean, "We're just fine"? How dare he? How can they be just fine without me? I'm the mother. Aren't my kids damaged psychically if they have Eggo waffles instead of kiwi and orange slices? So there I was, plowing through the traffic, tears pouring down my cheeks—until I realized something.

The kin-value paradigm had turned into a club I was beating myself with. It's wonderful that this morning my husband was the nurturing parent who got breakfast on and that I was the parent who got in the car with a briefcase full of work. Neither one of us is a bad person or a bad parent. Our children have two full-time parents. Both of us work and both of us nurture. Caitlin and Jonathan are learning great lessons about what it means to be women and men.

But if I say to myself—and this is what I was doing out of the kin-value paradigm—"I am a loving wife and mother and that means the kids can't leave the house without me," then I've destroyed myself as both a mother and a worker. I've destroyed my husband as a nurturer. And I've turned our children into dependent, whining, helpless little twerps that nobody, not even a mother, could love.

So, the first point I want to make, my dear sisters, is that we need to identify the paradigm we're operating from and recognize its limitations. We don't have the luxury in our culture of having one simple paradigm that explains everything. We do not live in an environment that allows us to uncomplicatedly subscribe to one of these paradigms and ignore the other. We have, as a minimum, these two; and they frequently conflict with each. Each paradigm contains within it excesses that can be deadly, if taken to extremes.

For example, one of the excesses of the market-value paradigm that we are saturated with today is the equation between commercial products and personal happiness. You know the assumption behind the ads: "Buy Pledge and you, too, will have gorgeous antique furniture. Not only that, but your hair will suddenly be fantastic and you'll lose twenty pounds and see your cheekbones again." Or think about modeling your family after the Cosbys. If you had to parent for only thirty minutes a day, your family might look like the Cosbys, too. But your family and my family lasts twenty-three and a half hours longer every day than the Cosbys.

Now, let me give you a parallel example about the excesses of the kin-value paradigm, a trap that I think Mormon women are particularly susceptible to. Sometimes we feel that the gospel tells us to sacrifice the self—that attention to the self is selfish. Well, we all know that isn't so. You can't have a healthy family if you don't have healthy individuals—individuals with a strong sense of self—in that family. But you have to be sure that everyone in the family has it—including you. I am very good at respecting the individualism of my husband and my children. Hey, I'm great at respecting the individualism of the dog. But I don't respect my own individuality very much. I've struggled with the challenge of finding my self and taking care of that self in ways that are neither self-indulgent nor self-obliterating.

I don't think Mormon women are self-indulgent, but I think we sometimes suffer from a syndrome of pathological sacrifice. Now, in a strict market-value paradigm, sacrifice is just stupid. It doesn't make sense to give up any advantage you have to anyone else—whether it's your mother or your child. And in a pure kin-value paradigm, sacrifice is truly ideal. But we don't live in pure models of either. We have to work out a more complicated way of relating to this ideal. We have a martyr tradition in our family—my grandmother, my mother, and myself. I've seen it early enough that I'm trying to head it off in my daughter, but there is no doubt about it. She'll have it, too. And the other day, I heard Jonathan grumbling, "I do everything in this house." He's nine years old, and already he's convinced that he suffers more and works harder than anyone else.

The danger connected to pathological sacrifice is great. Women should not be the only ones practicing kin-value while the rest of the world and the rest of the family are operating from a market-value paradigm. I was very good at doing things for my kids until I found out that they didn't like it and it made them uncomfortable. Now, you have to understand that my children are normal. They don't like being asked to do things, either; but I prefer the kind of human being they are when they're learning to do things for themselves, so that's a discomfort I'm willing to tolerate, and it's a discomfort that I'm willing to help them tolerate.

The second point I want to make is logically connected to the first. After we identify the paradigm we're operating from and become aware of its dangers, we should work for intelligent change, not simply swap one paradigm with its excesses for another. Beware of setting up an either-or dichotomy—of saying, "Well, the kin-value paradigm is real-reality and the market-value paradigm is pseudo-reality," and then trying to run our lives according to only one paradigm.

It just won't work. Parts of both are true all the time. Parts of both are false some of the time. Different parts are true at different seasons of our lives. Whatever private paradigm we construct from these larger social paradigms, we have to build in flexibility, avoid rigid categories, and be willing to look at our own changing needs.

For example, the kin-value paradigm prizes togetherness, insists that we exist best and most fully in families, that we discover who we are only in relationships. The market-value paradigm exalts the lonely individual, defines groups as competition, and says that you discover who you are best by struggling against the obdurate and hostile personalities of others. Where does reality lie? Obviously between them both, but the exact point of reality is different for each individual. Maybe you're one of those people who need a lot of personal space. I like carpooling to BYU, but I also like driving alone. I like the feeling of just spending time with me, between leaving intensive family relationships and jumping into equally intensive work relationships. I love bustling around the house on Saturday with the kids and two or three of their friends, organizing projects and parties. But I also like to get up at five in the morning and cook by myself. It's kind of soothing. You clank around the kitchen and whip eggs and mutter. Capitalize on your extrovert strengths, but don't deny your introvert needs. Kin-value needs to accommodate that range of personalities and meet those different needs.

Let me give you another example. At the university, you'd think I operate strictly from the market-value paradigm. Students exchange tuition for classes, time for knowledge, and tests for grades. As a teacher, I see different classes every semester: same desks, different faces, same papers, same grades. Right? Yes, all of that happens, but the explanation is too simple. I love my students. They're almost my children. I have a caring relationship with them. They're not just a series of faces, rotating through my office, my grade book, my classroom. They're individuals that I care about, think about, sometimes pray for. So, it's natural for me to apply the kin-value paradigm in my work.

But it wouldn't work—this is the either-or trap I was mentioning— if I tried to apply only kin values at work. For example, one of my students came in and told me how very much he wanted to make a film. He's a beautiful young man, a charming fellow from a very talented family. But he just hadn't done his homework, and he wasn't prepared. He didn't know what was involved in making a film. He didn't have the technical skills. He didn't have the financial skills. He didn't have the writing skills. Now, as a teacher, I had some choices. I could say to him, "In the market-value paradigm, which is what we use in this university, you haven't taken the right classes, acquired the right experience, or done the preliminary projects. Get out of my office and don't come back until you have." I could be rigid and punishing. Or I could take the kin-value approach and pat his hand and say, "Oh, Ned, dear, I really wish you'd taken those classes the catalogue says you have to take. I really am sorry. I know how disappointed you must be."

Either-or won't work. This situation calls for a combination of paradigms. The reality is that he's not prepared, no matter how much I like him or want to help him. He needs to face that reality, but maybe the way I explain the parameters and the reasons for them can help him understand not only his individual preference and desires, his personal dreams, but also the dynamics of our film program and the students involved. He hasn't been there. He hasn't made their kind of commitment and connection. Obviously he has a paradigm of the inspired young artist triumphing over all odds—Luke Skywalker as filmmaker. Well, he needs to change that paradigm and see himself as an intelligent, hard-working apprentice first.

I've had to learn how to see standards and apply them as a teacher in a market-value setting; and that's been very good for me. Basically I'm a cozy, let's-all-hug, motherly type. I think we should be happy all the time, and I've had to learn how to say, "No, that won't work, and here's why." It's been a hard skill for me to learn, but an important one, and I find myself being a better parent because of it. I used to think the most important thing was for us to be happy all the time as a family. Well, if people aren't doing their fair share and learning the basic skills it takes to survive as a human being, happiness pretty much depends on being able to deny reality. And nobody gets to do that very long.

As a consequence, I'm a real proponent of avoiding either-or dichotomies. Instead I'm an advocate of transferring tools from one paradigm to another and finding ways to combine the values of both. Let me give you another example. Sometimes we think that the gospel is telling us to reject the material world and the market-value paradigm that interprets it. That's not so. I think the gospel tells us rather how to relate to the material world in a kin-value way. One of the faculty members on this campus is Joe Bennion, a potter. He gets glossy reviews in national magazines about his pots. He gets invited to exhibit in the Soviet Union. In the pottery world, Joe is right up there. He's married to a portrait painter, Lee. She has received state art awards and has exhibits in important regional galleries. Her portraits command spiffy prices, and critics write perceptive and profound essays about her technique. Joe and Lee have three daughters and live in Spring City, Utah. They grow a big garden, and Joe usually has dirt under his fingernails from crawling down the rows thinning lettuce with his girls. Lee has her easel set up where the steam from canning tomatoes and applesauce won't wreck the canvas.

My point is that they're both pretty high rollers in the national and international art world; but they live in a small Utah town, raise a lot of their own food, and are full-time parents to three very active and demanding youngsters. They don't have a cash relationship with their world. They have a personal relationship. They have transferred kinship values to the earth. They're making a synthesis of the best parts of creative and productive paradigms. Sometimes we're tempted just to reject the material world. Well, that's the either-or trap again. Do not reject the material but revise your relationship to it.

My third point is that change is necessary but very, very hard. After we identify the paradigm that we're using, after we've learned about its limitations, after we see how to modify our paradigm by subtracting parts of it and adding parts from other paradigms that fit our situation better—after we see all that, we'd still better be braced for a long, hard process of change.

We get extremely uncomfortable when we try to change our behavior to match the more workable paradigms. Let's understand that these paradigms are deeply inbred patterns. We learned them at our mother's and father's knees. We've practiced them. We hear them from authority figures like parents, teachers, and church leaders. We literally see the world through them. What happens in our skulls shapes what happens to us in the world. Sometimes we have to bump up against our own experience pretty painfully before we realize that the map in our head is leading us into a brick wall.

But when we try to avoid the brick wall—when we begin to make changes—it will still hurt. We will become uncomfortable. Other people will be uncomfortable. We get a lot of negative messages, and what do we say to ourselves? "I guess this is the wrong thing. The Spirit is telling me not to do it." Now, the Spirit may, in fact, be telling us not to do it; but I want you to promise me to actually work on finding out if the discomfort is coming from the Spirit or from the paradigm shift. If it's really paradigm shift discomfort, the Spirit will say, "Go ahead." If it's the Spirit saying, "Whoops! It isn't the right time," then you can stop. But don't let the fact that it doesn't feel right stop you from examining your existing paradigm and working on changing it. It won't feel right when you start, and it will keep on feeling uncomfortable for a long time.

Let me give you an example of how deeply entrenched these paradigms can be. Before I started working for BYU, I always did the shopping. This is what a good mom does, right? When you send a man to the supermarket with thirty dollars, what have you got to eat? You have a bunch of Twinkies and boxes of Cap'n Crunch.

"How did this happen?" you ask in disbelief.

"Er, I had the kids along."

"Ah, that explains it."

And then he virtuously adds, "I didn't get the Cap'n Crunch with the crunch berries. I want them to be healthy."

"Oh, good."

Well, the good-mom-as-shopper behavior is a part of the kin-value paradigm that has long ago bitten the dust at our house. But when I was called as the Relief Society president, I was bustling down the aisles in the supermarket, full of the spirit of my calling, and I saw my hand reach out and pick up the quart-size can of yeast and put it in the cart. I wheeled that yeast to the check-out counter and I paid for it. Then I took it home and put it on my shelf. And it didn't hit me until later how crazy that was. Now, every fall, I buy yeast in those little triple-envelope packs, and every spring I throw away two of them. My mother was a bread baker. I love the smell of that fresh-baked stuff. But until the market economy allows me to buy one of those bread machines where you put everything in, set the timer, go to bed, and take it out of the oven in the morning when you wake up, I am not going to be a bread baker. So when I picked up the biggest yeast container known to woman, I was clearly making a symbolic gesture. I was acting on a paradigm about Relief Society presidents that I didn't even know I had.

Watch out for the internalized models you get from television, family, and movies. They will sabotage you quicker than anything else. My mother is a great mother. I thought I would become my mother when I had children. Well, it didn't happen and hasn't happened yet. I'm me. Learning to adjust that paradigm labeled "mother" so that it fits the real me is a job I work on every day.

In conclusion, sisters, I think we're here on earth during a kind of historic confrontation between paradigms. We are all struggling to match paradigms that were created in time by time-bound creatures to eternal principles. It's true that work is love made visible. In order to give the miraculous love that expresses kin-value, we have to work—and work very hard. But in the work itself we feel and express the love.

---
Notas:
[^1] I am indebted to Kathleen S. Bahr, assistant professor of family sciences at BYU, for defining these two paradigms. Her writings on the value of family work as ritual are central to my comments, although she is not responsible for my interpretations. She describes two contrasting patterns: "the world" (the non-kin-sphere) and "the family" (the kin-sphere). In Bahr's model, the non-kin-sphere is governed by individualism and focuses on profits and products. The kin-sphere is governed by altruistic love and focuses on fostering growth. Non-kin-sphere activities prioritize management and control of resources; they are linear and prioritize reason. Kin-sphere activities prioritize stewardship and respect for individual agency; they are synchronous and prioritize caring.
[^2] Sharon Lee Swenson, assistant professor of theater and film, has served as the film program administrator at Brigham Young University. She focuses on critical studies in film theory and is interested in gender and family in film. Sister Swensen has served as Relief Society president and has taught the Gospel Doctrine class in her Salt Lake City ward. She and her husband, Paul, are the parents of two children.
