Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

BOUNDARIES OF BELONGING

Nothing pleases God more than to have his children seek greater light and knowledge.

—Hugh Nibley

of putting us on the defensive, questions ought to encourage us to talk with one another more, to acknowledge that we as people have a lot to learn.

—Kate L. Kirkham

Dilemmas of Stewardship: Being in Charge and Being One

KATE L. KIRKHAM [^1]

"I say unto you, be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine." (D&C 38:27.) We all experience systems of governance. As citizens involved in politics, as volunteers in the PTA, as workers in Primary, Young Women, or Relief Society, as employees and employers, as parents and children, all of us have numerous occasions to observe authority, influence, power, and leadership in secular as well as family and church settings. The scriptural injunction that we "be one" seems to pose a dilemma: how may we be in charge and be one? Or to put the question in more pragmatic terms, as we come together in our callings, as we interact in the congregation, what principles and skills might we learn that would help us work more effectively together?

The Apostle Paul addresses this question in his epistle to the saints at Ephesus: "Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners," he instructs them, "but fellowcitizens with the saints, and of the household of God; and are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone; in whom all the building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord: in whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit." (Ephesians 2:19-22.) So as a congregation, as fellow citizens, we are fitted together in our many callings and capacities and we are "builded together"—a wonderful verb. We are builded together in order that we might grow into something more: in fact, into an habitation worthy of God through the Spirit. That ideal should be the context for our work together in the congregation and for our effort to be together as a community.

How we image authority is the cornerstone of becoming "builded together." I want to discuss how we define authority and how we experience it in our interactions with others. What is your image of what is going on as women and men work together in their callings? What is your vision of what is happening and of what each contributes?

Of all the images that affect our work within a congregation, the most crucial are those that reveal our ideas about authority. Influence, leadership, stewardship, priesthood: all of these flow from our understanding of authority as a religious concept and from personal experiences, which shape our attitudes about people in authority positions. Our images of authority differ widely.

Two opposed images of authority are illustrated by two separate experiences I have had. One image comes from an experience I had in Washington, D.C., when I was called up for jury duty. This call to civic duty came at a most inopportune time. (I know many people say that about jury duty, but it did.) I had spent the preceding four months working with the local Girl Scout unit to prepare a national conference in which I played a central role. There was no second-in-command. No one was prepared to take over my responsibilities. When I went to the court to explain my situation, the clerk said, "Well, if you want to be excused from jury duty, you have to go before The Judge." I had forty-five minutes to wait to see him, which meant forty-five minutes to explain my situation to the others waiting or working there. Every time I mentioned his name, people would say, "Oh!" Shaking their heads sympathetically, they would explain, "The Judge rarely excuses anyone from jury duty. And you will have to stand in front of everyone to tell why you want to be excused." Then they would shake their heads again, sorry for me, anticipating my experience. Forty-five minutes of waiting with people shaking their heads, "Oh." As I became more and more intimidated, I thought, "I'll never be able to stand up and state my request. This person has absolute authority over me. He can intimidate me, make fun of me, ridicule me."

When I was finally ushered into the room, sure enough, I was one of a very sizable crowd of people petitioning to be excused from jury duty. When my name was called, I stood up and said, "I am working with the Girl Scouts, and I really need to be absent to finish a national conference we have been planning."

Everything fit the image—the stern face, the glasses, the double chins, the black robe. He looked at me and growled, "Can you get me Girl Scout cookies?"

I answered cautiously, "Yes—if that's appropriate."

To everyone's amazement, I was excused. He would excuse me, he explained, because of the community rather than the personal interest of my request and because of his interest in fostering what Girl Scouting was accomplishing. People around me were again shaking their heads, this time muttering, "I don't believe it."

Had I not gone to that authority to make that petition, I would not, of course, have had the opportunity to finish my responsibilities with Girl Scouting. In one way, the outcome was favorable, but that intimidating image of The Judge has stayed with me: the absolute authority of the person who is inaccessible, the person who is arbitrary. Many of us have a similar image of authority.

A very different image of authority comes from an experience I had a few years ago. I was in the Lion House during conference time having a conversation with a general authority, a member of an area presidency in the British Isles. The time was short before the next session, and he was interested in the insights about race and gender issues that I could offer from my training in organizational behavior. At one point he remarked in obvious frustration, "I wish we could follow up on this conversation." I offered, "Well, it just so happens I'm going to Europe for a conference." He was pleased. "Could you drop by our area offices?" he asked. I agreed to do so. Several weeks later I wandered into the area office not really having any official invitation, or appointment. The office staff wasn't sure what to do. No appointment, I wasn't a visiting dignitary, I could only state my name and home ward and that I wanted to complete a conversation that had started in Salt Lake.

What interests me about this experience is how totally inviting and approachable this general authority was. He invited me into his office, invited me to talk openly about the difficult issues of race and gender and how we might understand them in a Church context. Both at lunch in the Lion House and in his London office, our exchange was the most accepting conversation with a person in authority that I have ever had.

So here are the extremes: on the one hand, the most inviting, clear, and wonderful spirit and, on the other hand, the distant, intimidating authority. Authority is necessary and exists in every organization. It is inextricably meshed with responsibility. My concern is with how each of us relates to it. How do our experiences with authority influence how we relate to the next person in authority? What images of authority do I have that will affect my working with someone in authority? If I thought of everyone in authority as The Judge, my expectations would be both inaccurate and counterproductive. Yet, if I expect everyone to be as warm and inviting as that member of the area presidency, I will be disappointed. Each of us must investigate and clarify our day-to-day expectations of authority.

Our image of authority is also formed by our definition. In the behavioral science literature, authority is generally discussed as legitimate power. Legitimate power is power that an individual acquires because she or he fills a position within a structured, role-defined organization, such as a government, a corporation, or an institutionalized church. This legitimate power is actually conferred upon a person by subordinates who accept the organizationally defined value that persons in certain positions should have authority. For example, when I meet with students in the classroom they recognize that I have authority to grade their performance.

In a church setting, God is the ultimate source of authority; however, we have the somewhat unusual opportunity to enhance the authority of church leaders: we do not confer authority on others; we sustain authority. We are in relationship with that authority and legitimize a person's power by sustaining him or her in a church position. So there is, in the Church, a consistent type of authority that does not depend on us to be conferred and yet very much depends upon us to be sustained and legitimized.

The distinction is profoundly important. In secular organizations I may be totally dependent on a person's authority. She or he could hire, fire, encourage, or mistreat me, and even determine my worth to others in the organization. But in church settings, I am both independent and dependent. To understand this requires "bifocal ability." Let me explain. I used to wear contact lenses. Because I have aged, the opthalmologist discussed with me the option of correcting the vision in each eye separately, adjusting one eye for distance and the other eye for close-up. After a period of adjustment, this division of tasks allows the contacts wearer to see both close up and far away without having to shut one eye or consciously shift from one or the other eye to do so. My understanding of authority resembles a type of bifocal vision because, on the one hand, I believe in the absolute authority of the priesthood of God. I believe that my worthiness is very much connected to my sustaining that power and authority from God. At the same time, I believe in my absolute worth as a daughter of God, and I believe that nothing about differences in our individual authority as members makes me less valuable to the Lord. So, I define authority with one lens focused on my absolute worth and another lens focused on the fact of the absolute authority of God. So, to say that I sustain authority is not to imply that I am submissive or of less value or have no right to petition. It is to say that I am of absolute, paramount worth, irrespective of any office I may or may not hold in the kingdom, yet also to say that there is an orderliness in the authority of God's priesthood that makes offices of authority beneficial and necessary. Both these statements are congruent. This bifocal vision is basic to my understanding of how we are meant to be "fitly framed together" as a congregation.

For one thing, the orderliness that authority implies is very important. For most of my life, I have been directed by authority. Only lately—a side benefit of age and maturity, I suppose—am I on occasion "in charge" some place. From being in charge, I have acquired a different view of authority. At present, I am directing a major organizational change project. Twelve people report to me as the project manager. People react to my being the authority in that program in different ways. Some people don't share anything with me. If I contact them for information about decisions they have made, they say, "Oh, I thought you wouldn't be interested in that, Kate," or "I didn't think you needed to know that." In essence, they act as if I have no authority in my role as project manager. They have no use for a director. Others will say, "I think I could do that, but I'd like to check with Kate first." And, of course, I feel better about that. Ego aside, I simply feel the support of people who will make sure I know what's going on. My experiences as project manager have led me to wonder, "Maybe this is how some of the men and women that I have worked with in the Church have felt. As I have reported to them, maybe this is what they wanted: more of my alignment with their authority. They didn't want to be authoritarian personalities; they simply wanted me to join with them and share information—to acknowledge in an orderly way who had what responsibilities and what was being done. Their wish to be informed leaders did not mean that they wanted to be dominant, in control, or acknowledged as more important than me. (Of course, there are some who may want something else—to gain personally at the expense of others, to exercise dominion over the lives of others. We can learn to distinguish differences in the uses of authority.) I now better realize the need for authority and the value of orderliness as we coordinate responsibilities in a way which will allow us to be "builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit."

Another insight about authority that I have found useful is that there is a difference between one's heart and one's style. I have worked with some men and women in the Church who have very odd styles but very pure hearts. We ought not to confuse the two. We should take care not to assume that a man or a woman with a poor communication style or an uninviting manner is being arbitrary or distant in his or her exercise of authority. Often their hearts are in the right place, but they don't yet have some important skills of talking and working with others. If we are generous in our sustaining, we can look to their hearts and relate warmly to these less inviting personalities in authority.

There is an interesting paradox in group dynamics related to authority. The science of group dynamics [^2] includes the study of authority in groups. As a group matures it will begin to authorize its members to do different tasks without having those assignments be experienced as de-authorizing someone else. In other words, in the beginning people in a group are often intimidated by authority and rarely act creatively and autonomously; furthermore, those in authority may fear loss of control or the misguided actions of group members. But as the common purpose of the group develops, more people can and do act autonomously to achieve group goals without anyone regarding this as taking away from someone else's authority. We can see this in congregations. As we gain maturity in our callings, we can take more initiative, take more action, without it registering with anyone as de-authorizing someone else or encroaching on their authority. Instead, we are seen as acting with the authority of our calling and our capacity in the congregation. We are "builded together," having a common purpose but different roles and responsibilities. But finding that mature balance is part of the dilemma. When is it appropriate to feel authorized to do your own work, and when are actions viewed as de-authorizing somebody else because you are seen as taking away activities or leadership others associate with their authority or stewardship?

In this context, consider our interactions, especially when women interact with those who hold priesthood authority. Many people feel uncomfortable with this topic because some views of feminism are interpreted as critical of all male authority. However, we should welcome questions. As Mormon scholar Hugh Nibley observes, "Nothing pleases God more than to have his children seek greater light and knowledge." [^3] He goes on to say that in many ways he observes Latter-day Saints not petitioning enough, not trying to seek more knowledge. He encourages us to investigate and seek wisdom and knowledge, quoting from Nephi, "And because that I have spoken one word ye need not suppose that I cannot speak another; for my work is not yet finished; neither shall it be until the end of man." (2 Nephi 29:8-9.) We should continue to expect more insight and light and knowledge. So when I am asked, "How do you explain the differences between men and women?" or "Why do women in your church not hold the priesthood?" I am not discomfited by the question, because I believe that a sincere attempt to understand is, in fact, a petition to God for greater knowledge. Instead of putting us on the defensive, questions ought to encourage us to talk with one another more, to acknowledge that we as people have a lot to learn. As women, we can investigate what it means to men to hold the priesthood, to sustain it, and to experience ourselves in relationship to it. As women we can also learn what it is like to serve in callings authorized by the power of God and to experience how our leadership affects other women and men.

Conversely, priesthood holders have much to learn from women because women can mirror to men in priesthood positions how they affect women. If I were a man holding the priesthood and I had the task of being able to exercise power "only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned; by kindness, and pure knowledge" (D&C 121:41-42), who might perceive how I am doing? Those who do not have the priesthood. So as I attempt to understand how we might work together as men and women—with men holding priesthood and women having callings and authority but not holding the priesthood as men do—I make sense of the situation in this way: it is the ideal condition for oneness. What makes it ideal? To put it in very simple terms, because each has something the other lacks. If you combine people who have some attribute or experience with people who don't, you have the basis for a strong, vital, working relationship. If all have the same experiences or gifts, there is less likely to be growth in the relationship.

For an individual to exercise the priesthood in righteousness, then, the view of those who do not hold the priesthood is very important. Part of sustaining priesthood, I believe, is to volunteer a lot of information to priesthood leaders about their interactions with us. Of course, awkward moments will arise if you announce to someone, "Excuse me, this is not love unfeigned!" Styles of communication can make a difference.

The Church as a vehicle for bringing women and men together in organized effort, then, provides a very important learning relationship for both. Men—having the opportunity to exercise authority—more often must personally learn the capacity to yield, to be gentle, to be long-suffering; and women—having more often been schooled in gentleness and long-suffering—must learn to claim personal authority, to petition, to ask and enquire, to be met as an equal. In a relationship, then, each must learn from the other's experiences and nature. Such a state of inherent difference is the perfect condition for oneness. In my mind and heart, nothing about our male-female differences equates with subordination or with diminished value of either gender. Instead, our gender differences and our authority differences offer the greatest opportunity to learn what Christ is trying to teach us through his gospel: that charity and oneness are available to us; that the pursuit of our individual salvation is inextricably linked to others'; that this life is a time of opportunities to teach and learn from one another.

Now let's investigate some interactions and skills that would enable us to grow toward that holy community of oneness described by the Apostle Paul. We can do a lot to create a spirit in which learning can take place by using what organizational behaviorists call "third-party" roles. The third party is someone who observes a relationship but is less directly involved. For example, a bishop's counselor is in a good position to observe how the Relief Society president relates to her bishop. Third-party information is invaluable. We ought to ask people more often about what they are perceiving. We should ask questions, explore, and discuss so that we can benefit from their observations. Once you establish the third-party role, you can ask about how you are working with someone. "Am I coming across as too submissive?" "Am I too rigid or authoritarian?" "Do I appear to be irritable?" Generally a third party has fewer vested interests, so opinions can be more accurate. Strengthen those third-party roles and take advantage of this useful source of feedback.

Of course, sometimes feedback can be painful. What should you do when you are in a position to give feedback that is potentially painful? First of all, we need to distinguish between two types of criticism. Elder Dallin H. Oaks, in an LDSSA fireside about criticism, said, "I do not refer to the kind of criticism the dictionary defines as 'the act of passing judgment as to the merits of anything.' " Instead, he was referring to criticism that has another meaning, which is "the act of passing severe judgment; censure; faultfinding." Faultfinding involves pointing out faults, especially "faults of a petty nature." [^4]

In interactions our first responsibility should be to examine our own hearts. After some experience, I have become a little clearer on knowing when I am being appropriately critical: when I have information or an observation I want to offer, and when I have worked to develop a relationship where I can say to that person, "I don't know why you did that," expecting a laugh and an explanation. When I am, on the other hand, backbiting or faultfinding, I am generally feeling not so much puzzled by their behavior as superior. I am feeling, "If he had only asked me, he would have shown better judgment," implying a more perfect knowledge. So, there is, I am afraid, a not very subtle difference between being critical and giving helpful feedback. Yet we often mask, even to ourselves, fault-finding as constructive criticism. Tone and attitude usually determine whether or not you will be perceived as sustaining and contributing or as seeking to "counsel the brethren."

When we go to someone in authority with a problem to be solved, we should think through what it is we are hoping he or she will do. At times, for instance, when I have felt very excluded or alienated in a ward, I have gone to a bishop, hoping he would make me feel more comfortable. If I had thought more realistically about the bishop's position, I would have realized that he could, of course, provide sympathy and spiritual comfort, but to solve my problem permanently I should have been approaching those in the congregation with whom I hoped to improve relations. At other times, I have gone to a priesthood authority hoping for understanding that I should have been seeking from someone I had wronged. So we should clarify what it is we are seeking when we approach a person in authority. Is this something we should be working on more autonomously? If not, then our next step should be to identify what we expect or hope the authority will do. We can go prepared to say, "I want more elderly sisters to work in Primary so we can benefit from their experience and break down the Relief Society/Primary age barrier. I was hoping you might call Sister Cromar to be a Merrie Miss teacher. She helped teach a class on short notice and remarked how much she enjoyed the opportunity." Be as clear as you can: here is what I'd like to have happen and this is what I hoped you might do to make it happen. Then invite some discussion of your hopes.

I am convinced that as a Church congregation we are moving steadily forward toward Joseph's counsel of teaching principles and allowing people to govern themselves. [^5] As we do so, fewer programs will come from a central Church headquarters. More and more often, principles will be emphasized and application will devolve on local initiative and inspiration. As Elaine L. Jack, general president of Relief Society, explained in a 1990 open house to Relief Society leaders: "You are the harbor pilots. We are bringing you the ship of Relief Society, and we know that you have the ability and you have the inspiration to take the program of Relief Society to your sisters because you know the local conditions, you know their special needs. We want Relief Society to bless the sisters." [^6] Because of increasing emphasis on local initiative and inspiration, we must strengthen our skills in interaction within our congregations. We will require more interaction and more occasions to discuss and engage in dialogue to understand principles as they relate to the needs of the people that we work with.

If our image of authority is that of The Judge and if we assume that those who hold callings don't want to hear our comments or our concerns, we may miss opportunities to learn and bless the lives of others. For instance, as the visiting teaching supervisor, I may have ideas to offer both my Relief Society president and my bishop about how to serve ward members with this specific Relief Society program, given the people currently in the ward.

It will also become more important to understand what sustaining means. Some of us think that sustaining the priesthood or sustaining a calling means that you agree with that person and that you don't give them too much "grief" while they are in that position. Yet the definition of priesthood authority specifies that it is exercised only under conditions of long-suffering, gentleness, and meekness. If so, then what you are sustaining is someone's opportunity to have those experiences. Each of us sustains that potential in our leaders. At times, my sense of self-worth necessitates that I raise questions and encourage others to share their viewpoints. At other times, my sense of worthiness necessitates my compliance with direction or decisions made by those in authority over me.

How can we sustain our leaders if we never give them the chance to enlarge their souls by being honest and open in our interactions with them? Elder Dean L. Larsen said, "The Savior attempted to impress his questioners with the fact that the real power in the kingdom of God is not represented in outwardly observable things. Its strength is in the quality of the lives of its members. It is in the depth of their purity, their charity, their faith, their integrity, and their devotion to truth." [^7] If we keep that vision alive when we work with one another, we will in fact be builded together as a congregation and be a place the Spirit of God can inhabit.

---
Notas:
[^1] Elaine L. Jack, "These Things Are Manifested unto Us Plainly," Ensign, Nov. 1990, pp. 88, 90.
[^2] Alice Miller, The Drama of the Gifted Child (New York: Basic Books, 1981), p. 45.
[^3] Donna Lee Bowen, associate professor of political science at Brigham Young University, has served as associate director of the BYU Women's Research Institute. Interested in the intersection of family issues and govenment policy, she has conducted extensive fieldwork in the Middle East and North Africa and is coeditor of the forthcoming book Everyday Life in the Middle East.
[^4] Joseph Smith, as quoted in John Taylor, "The Organization of the Church," Millenial Star, 15 Nov. 1851, p. 339.
[^5] Elaine L. Jack, "The Mission of Relief Society," open house address, 27 Sept. 1990, unpublished manuscript on file in Relief Society Offices, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^6] Dean L. Larsen, "The Strength of the Kingdom Is Within," Ensign, Nov. 1981, p. 25.
[^7] Kate L. Kirkham, associate professor of organizational behavior at Brigham Young University, has served on the general board of the Relief Society. Her research has focused on race and gender diversity in organizations. She has written educational materials on institutional racism and discrimination and has been a consultant to government, education, volunteer, and business organizations.
