Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

Real Women

DONNA LEE BOWEN [^1]

A few years ago I spoke at women's conference about power and spirituality within the gospel. At one point, using as an example my two-year-old divorce, I shared the events that had led up to the death of the marriage. The audience listened receptively, and I felt that some of my points connected.

That year, the conference evaluations included a number of comments that expressed the following wish: We want to hear from "real women," not from all these M.A.s and Ph.D.s—women with letters after their names. My heart was pierced, for I had exposed myself in my talk. I had taken a chance and trusted the audience with my sorrows and the faith that pulled me through. Did the letters after my name (which represented more discipline than I thought I had, more work than I thought I could ever do, and abilities I wasn't always sure I had) mean that I was not a real woman? These questions still echo in my mind.

A few weeks ago, in conversation with a group of friends, one woman, Nancy, spoke with devastating honesty about the isolation she had felt when she was raising her children. She had felt that she was no longer a "real person any more" but was just filling various roles: mother, wife, Primary president. Then, after my ears had perked up at that word real, she went on to explain how badly she had longed at that time to hear from real women in Women's Conference. She said, "I wanted a real woman, not one with a degree but a woman who had experiences like me: home, kids, isolation, doubts, a need for greater self-value. I wanted to hear from women like my everyday neighbors, women who have confronted these problems and found some answers." (Note that she said she didn't feel "real" and then turned right around and defined "real women" as ones like her.)

Why is this issue important? The cutting question here for me is whether I am a "real woman" as judged by other women whose lives have taken turns different from mine. Underlying the adjective real is another word—valuable. If I am not a real woman, then do I have any value? Do other women consider me a valuable sister—or, by not conforming in some way, am I irrelevant, disposable, a person who doesn't matter to her sisters? Nancy was voicing the same question, only from another point of view: I'm a mother; I've been staying home with no adults to talk to all day; I'm lonely; I'm isolated. Am I real? Do I have any value? Is my life worthwhile?

Opposites: Real and False

The need to feel valued poses a great temptation for each of us to find an example to copy. Although we all need ex-amples as models to guide us in our growth, making ourselves over to fit an already existing model can be counterproductive. If we lose sight of who we are—our individuality and the unique strengths we have to offer in service—we may simply, in wholesale pursuit of our chosen model, become what we think others want us to be.

Another great temptation is to characterize others according to one model or another. We label, we stereotype: she is a doctor, she is a psychologist, she is a mother of ten, she is a beauty queen. That is helpful information, but partial: one aspect, not the whole person. To see the whole person, we must integrate all the pieces that make an individual uniquely her.

That is difficult to do, for generalization is both necessary and easy. Proceeding upon bits of information is part of our imperfect social universe. But when these pieces are believed to be the whole person, divisiveness and pain often result.

Rachel, a Korean-American BYU student in one of my courses, told me last year of her frustration that her race always seems to be an issue in relationships. "I'm Korean, but I don't think I look different. In my California high school no one treated me as different; however, here at BYU no one has got to the point where they see me, not my Asian features. I am one of 'those people,' Oriental. This was a shock to me, because I wasn't aware that I was different."

Melani, a student from Hawaii, spoke vehemently about how her family's wealth and other superficial characteristics affect the way people treat her. "What counts is how much my father makes, if I attend a fancy school, what my ACT scores are, if I am Mormon or not, if my clothes are expensive, fashionable, or ordinary, whether I wear the right T-shirt, if inside my shirt is the right label. My looks matter: if I have zits, if I am fat, what my hair looks like. They treat me differently if I am driving my dad's Mercedes or my sister's ten-year-old Subaru. They don't care that the Subaru gets you where you are going. They care about appearances."

Both Rachel and Melani dislike being defined by characteristics that are superficial and at best only a partial reflection of who they are. Another way to characterize these social interactions is as false opposites. Rachel is Oriental; I am not. Melani has high ACT scores; Janene doesn't. To concentrate on one particular aspect of a person's life, a label or a stereotype, allows us to conveniently pigeonhole and relate to that person. Stereotypes are easy to deal with, whereas people may not be. We are seeing ourselves and them in terms of opposition rather than in terms of connections. We remain divided from each other, seldom trusting, easily threatened.

A second false opposition may exist within ourselves. If we attempt to emulate a model, if we try to become what we think our friends, our workplace, the Church, or our families want us to be—rather than what we really are—then we create an opposition within ourselves. Divided within, we may pit one part of our identity against another, creating confused and conflicting feelings.

How many of you at one time or another have compared yourself to the Mormon stereotype and felt chastened if you didn't quilt, bottle, bake, cook, do crafts, give birth to congregations of children? General Relief Society president Elaine L. Jack, concerned that "sisters compare themselves to others," said at the women's broadcast that there is no single template for the perfect Mormon woman. "If I could have the desire of my heart for you, it would be that you feel valued for your own goodness," she said. We are each, with all our individual differences, "a typical Relief Society woman." [^2]

In the Book of Mormon, Lehi teaches the need for opposition in all things. (2 Nephi 2:11.) Life stems from genuine opposites: life and death, good and evil, joy and grief, pain and pleasure, chaos and calm, peace and turmoil. The existence of opposites precedes the ability to choose—the priceless gift of agency.

The true doctrine of opposition allows us to grow, to change, to develop in the light of God. Opposition is not meant to be divisive, to isolate, to alienate one person from another. Opposition between individuals is a false dualism, for the only duality God ordains is that between good and evil, truth and falsehood. Individuals are not good or evil, true or false; rather we are capable of doing good or evil, speaking truth or falsehood.

We each—like a cut diamond—have multiple facets to our personalities; we respond to different situations as the diamond reflects different lights. The trick is to recognize and value the combination of facets in each of us and not judge ourselves, or others, by only one facet of personality.

A Reintroduction Experiment

All of us are uncomfortable with one-faceted descriptions ourselves, yet we are far too easily content to label others in monochromatic stereotypes. Let me pose two questions to illustrate my point: First, how do you describe yourself to others? If I asked who you are, what would you say?

Second, when you are introduced to another, what questions do you pose in your mind about them? Do you check out their clothes? Their hair? Their professions? Do you need some signal about what they do or how they fit into society or what their husband does in order to know how to relate to them?

I have for two years been on the women's conference planning committee. The committee spends hours debating the brief program blurbs that introduce the participants each year. How can we describe each other? Should we omit the descriptions? If we do, will the audience decide that they have no reason to listen to a speaker, for she seemingly has no expertise? It is a difficult problem to furnish necessary information and yet not alienate those who read it. A blurb that notes that I am an associate professor of political science, for instance, separates us more than it pulls us together.

So let me reintroduce myself. As an experiment let me try to show all the pieces that make up my whole in terms of what I think really matters about me. Of course, I remember my failures and pain longer than my triumphs. Most achievements mean more to me when I am working toward them; once achieved, they decline in importance. Failure, however, registers for a long time, because I have developed the ability to dwell upon it properly.

You know already that I am a professor. I enjoy teaching; at times I enjoy writing. I never enjoy grading papers.

I read murder mysteries—piles and piles of them. I once inadvertently disconcerted my Cultural Refinement leader, who had invited me to share books that I loved with the other Relief Society sisters. I turned up with a stack of murder mysteries and spent ten minutes telling sisters of the joys of Dorothy Sayers and Elizabeth Peters as escapist reading.

I am an oldest child. I feel responsible for the whole world, not just my brothers and sisters.

I always weigh at least ten pounds too much. Always.

I have been divorced; I watched a marriage formed with high hopes and purpose die.

I love my friends.

I love my family and have difficulty telling them how much.

I have breast cancer. Two years ago, I had a breast removed and a new one built.

I was not invited to join the pep club in high school.

I was forced to withdraw from a lifesaving class because the men were too heavy in the water for me to drag across the pool.

I am married, for a second time, and in this marriage I gained three stepdaughters; I worked at learning to love when I feared I was not loved, and I have been rewarded with relationships that mean more to me than I can say.

I have had only miscarriages, no children.

I don't exercise enough.

I need to be in the mountains from time to time to look at the tops of the trees.

I don't always listen to what goes on. I daydream.

I seldom find Sunday School interesting.

I love working in the soil, even if I forget to weed what I plant.

I procrastinate. Always.

I can work very hard with great concentration.

I love my husband but find marriage to be one of the most challenging jobs I've undertaken; to respond to those challenges requires new parts of me that I was not conscious of before.

When I look at myself, I see few successes. I see isolation, self-doubt, fear, attempts to keep valuing myself, to understand how I fit into God's world.

My greatest successes keep coming through the hardest times: getting a Ph.D. in a hostile environment; getting through the divorce; surviving breast cancer; working on my marriage.

Does knowing more about me diminish the space between us? Can I now be a real woman to you?

I have done most of my fieldwork and research overseas in the Middle East. I often find women in the villages surprisingly easy to know and care about, although we have little in common. They are often illiterate and can't share my favorite books or discuss world politics, but we share other things. We can share small vanities of fingernail polish, scarves, and eye makeup. We can talk about food and cooking, about menstrual cramps, about our husbands, about divorce, about children, and about our beliefs in God.

Given that we have an ability to relate to most people on several grounds, why do we use labels and stereotypes to defend ourselves from closeness?

And why do we set up images of ourselves and then try to conform to them at the risk of losing sight of the more integrated whole person we really are?

Fear and Our Hidden Selves

In living our lives and relating to others around us, we protectively draw false distinctions, sometimes between ourselves and others, sometimes between different parts of the self, but all the same with devastating results: the pain of separation—our personal separation from members of our community, our community's separation from all others, and most of all, our own separation, or alienation, from other parts of ourselves, and the concomitant confusion over which part of us is real. In doing so, we negate the type of community Christ teaches us to create—a society that is one in Christ.

So why, instead of seeking ways to connect, do we prefer to maintain distance by stereotyping each other and ourselves by profession, by clothing, by education, by income, by appearance, or by some other factor of the whole self? I believe many of the reasons boil down to fear: fear of intimacy, fear of being rejected, fear of showing weakness or emotion.

Putting each other into pigeonholes serves to keep others away from us by defining our own place as somehow different, somehow superior. We feel safer keeping others at a distance. What lies behind our strong aversion to intimacy?

Part of our discomfort may result from the fact that we automatically associate the word intimacy with sexuality. If we are truly intimate, we trust others with knowledge of and access to our most sensitive selves, our feelings, and—in the marriage relationship—our bodies. In the United States, as in many cultures, we are unfamiliar and not totally comfortable with our bodies. So, even in same-sex relationships, some people fear and avoid close, intimate friendships because of the strong social taboos against physical intimacy. Fearing the one, they avoid the other. It is easier to keep one's distance than to take a chance. There are good reasons for caution, but I believe we worry too much that a sexual relationship may evolve from intimacy and hesitate to show affection and trust freely, even among friends.

Another inhibitor of openness and intimacy is the new ethic of professionalism in business, which defines women and men in terms of their functions: secretary, teacher, physician, patient, executive. This practice maximizes efficiency, promotes profits, and observes the civil rights and equal protection statutes, but it is also somewhat dehumanizing. To comply, part of our essential being, our sexuality and legitimate gender differences, must be buried.

But even outside professional settings, we avoid intimacy when it would be appropriate and healthy. What are the fears that keep women from getting close to each other?

Ask yourself, are there times when you do not call your best friend even though you are troubled and need to talk? Why not? Perhaps you do not trust your friend enough to risk sharing this information that would be too potentially harmful, too precious to trust to her. You may worry, "What if she misused it? What if she betrayed me in some way? I could not bear that."

Or perhaps we are afraid of disapproval or disagreement? Intimacy with spouse, family members, or friends can turn threatening if that closeness does not spell agreement on all issues. Yet often closeness will trigger dissent because it exposes our natural lack of consensus on issues—some of them fundamental. If we dare to speak our minds, tempers may flare, and we may disagree. Many of us fear anger, aggression, or a show of real emotions, so we shun closeness to protect ourselves from the pain that can be engendered by conflict.

Our willingness to take that risk is, however, a matter of deepest integrity. How can we be truly honest with another person when we refuse to take the chance of being angry, hurt, or conflictual?

Another reason for maintaining emotional distance may be that we are reluctant to admit we have problems. We prefer to keep our all-is-well mask firmly in place. After all, much of what we do in life is directed at garnering admiration from those around us. Admiration, however, is usually at odds with love. If we seek to be admired, we seek an audience. An audience lacks the close involvement that generates love. In wanting admiration, we want to be perfect. Love, however, tolerates and even welcomes imperfections. My mother tells me that we love those who need us. Seemingly flawless people are hard to relate to, much less love. Our hearts go out to those who struggle and honestly admit it. So although we try to hide our messy houses and infested gardens, the burnt cookies and the imperfect Sunday School lessons, such failings make us human and unite us.

Underlying many of our actions is another self-defeating supposition. In his movie Annie Hall, the fretful, pessimistic Woody Allen character quotes an old Groucho Marx joke, "I would never want to belong to any club that would have me for a member." Putting another spin on the line, we get: "If you really knew me, you wouldn't like me." The logic proceeds conversely, "So if I don't let you know me, then you will like me." We fear letting people get close enough to the real "me"—a me that gets angry, that has inappropriate thoughts, that makes mistakes, that doesn't have all the answers. In our attempts to control other people's reactions to us, then, we deny them access to who we really are. We assume, "Since you won't like the real me, I'll give you a label or a stereotype that you will relate to much better, and I'll keep this stereotype sufficiently distant so that our relationship won't be endangered by reality."

Wholeness in Christ

The most serious consequences of hiding thoughts and censoring feelings is that we will lose touch with them ourselves. Psychologist Alice Miller has said: "Depression can be understood as the loss of the self and consists of a denial of one's own emotional reactions and feelings." [^3] According to her analysis, depression is a result of suppressing authentic emotions—emotions that may not always be pleasant, but emotions that are real. If we can recognize authentic emotions—admitting we are sad when we grieve, fearful when frightened, angry when furious, as well as joyful when happy—we stop hiding from ourselves and admit what is real to us at a fundamental level. This sounds simple, but it is tremendously difficult because it implies understanding ourselves, including seeing what underlies our own suppositions about ourselves and analyzing our own labels and discerning what we use those labels for.

This is a life work. Know yourself. "To your own self be true"—such easy-sounding advice, until we begin. And then it is as perilous as the most dangerous course strewn with dragon's teeth. For we don't always follow what is in our best interests.

These matters frighten me; perhaps they do some of you. They challenge my identity: whether I am a real person or not, and if I am real, to whom am I real? To whom do I reveal my authentic self in all its complexity and imperfection?

Consider these preliminary questions: Who can I be a real person with?

Myself? Can I admit who I am and how I really feel about matters? Or do I live behind labels, deceiving myself about what really bothers me?

My spouse? Friends? Family? Can I afford to let them know who I am and how I really feel? Or do I live behind labels, quietly ordering my relationships with others into proper or appropriate boxes so that I keep all the facades well-maintained?

Does anyone know who I really am? Do I know? Do I fool myself into ignoring what is most important to me? Do I ignore the treasures that I have and run after others that appear more exciting or more valuable from a distance? Knowing oneself, a difficult task, is one of the fundamental purposes of mortality.

The traits that really matter, that determine who we are— spirituality, access to the Lord through prayer, humility, obedience, patience, charity—are traits that are largely invisible to the outsider. Only as we reach out to a person in love do we discern those traits.

In the gospel we have no ranks, no hierarchies. We all serve each other as we are best suited to serve. I believe this sense of community without hierarchies is both the essence of humility and basic to the self-love and wholeness we are expected to have as a starting point in the gospel.

The wholeness we seek is founded on the ideal of a community in Christ. If we recognize Christ's greatness and what he does for us, we can only respond in humility, hoping to deal with others with the same Christlike generosity. When we approach Christ, we can use no facades, no stereotypes, no labels, for we approach him as his sisters, as children of God.

Lehi taught us about the real opposition that Eve bought for us with a high price. It is by recognizing these real oppositions—by experiencing joy and sadness, by shunning evil, by embracing the good, by working to substitute calm for turmoil, peace for warfare—that we become authentically ourselves. We defeat depression because nothing is suppressed; we embrace our feelings and emotions and find that we can gain strength by sharing them with others. We—you and I—are united in our work, and in our lives, sometimes in joy and sometimes in grief, but together, not divided against each other or against ourselves.

Life is essentially a process, not a product: we will take from our lives what we have learned and have become as a result of all we do and experience. We learn from each step in the process. But we cannot learn if we deal only in falseness—if we get caught in false oppositions and refuse to recognize the importance of the real ones.

The most damaging result of defining ourselves in terms of false oppositions is that we only own and develop a piece of ourselves—for me, a professor or a researcher, instead of Donna Lee, who has experienced so much. If I set up opposition to myself, then I lose who I really am to inessentials. If we keep essentials bright in front of us, and use hope to press forward, then we are united in ourselves, in our sisterhood, in the body of Christ, and we cannot be defeated.

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1956), p. 240.
[^2] Ibid.
[^3] A convert to the Church, Hattie M. Soil has served as Relief Society president of the Hyde Park Ward in Chicago, Illinois. She is employed as human resources assistant for the City Colleges of Chicago, and she volunteers assistance to minority students seeking and applying for college grants. She and her husband, Victor, are the parents of six children.
