Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

A View from the Inner City

HATTIE M. SOIL [^1]

The first step in the process of knowing and serving others is discovering one's self. I must discover myself and my personal proclivities in order to recognize and value the uniqueness of others. I am a distinct individual with my own needs, ideals, and priorities—in part, a result of my background.

Let me sketch my background. I was born in rural Mississippi to parents who were sharecroppers. A sharecropper is a farmer who cultivates a part of another's land. This practice was popular in the thirties, forties, and fifties. In return for the use of the land, the sharecropper must share his crops, usually on a fifty-fifty basis, with the landowner. In the South, sharecroppers were almost universally poor—and we were no exception.

My parents moved to Memphis, Tennessee. After their eleventh child, my mother became tired of the constant burden of giving birth and my father's drinking, so she put him out. His drinking problem had caused a number of embarrassing moments for the family, and my mother felt that life would be easier without him. After he left, his financial contributions to the family stopped, and Mother had to work long hours trying to make ends meet.

She did not believe in welfare, so that was not an option for her. Mother's two jobs and long hours kept her away from home, and lack of adult supervision kept us in trouble with the authorities. Some of us were arrested for loitering, fighting, and disturbing the peace. Some of us had problems with morality, and I was a mother at seventeen.

We lived in dilapidated dwellings in neighborhoods that were rated so poorly that most policemen hated to answer calls from them. My mother decided that she was working too hard and not making economic progress, so she decided to move her large family up north.

We moved to Chicago, Illinois, and found life easier. There were plenty of jobs for us as well as for Mother. Because she could not read nor write, she found a job as a cook in a nursing home. Life was better in Chicago. We were fed and clothed properly. I started to enjoy life.

I married at age eighteen and was divorced with three small boys by age twenty. I had no high school diploma and no skills. At age twenty-five, I married Victor, who had a bachelor's degree in criminal justice. I complained to him of how ashamed I was for not finishing high school. He works for the board of education and one Christmas, the school faculties and staffs had a party. I told Victor that I could not attend that party with him because I wouldn't feel comfortable. He said, "You are just as smart as those people there, and I want you to attend this party with me." I did, and we had a good time. After that party, he encouraged me to get my G.E.D., and I did. He then encouraged me to enroll in a junior college, and two years later I received an associate of arts degree. I next enrolled in a university and earned a bachelor's degree.

As I have considered my background, I see how my past has influenced my life and attitudes. For example, I don't care to visit the South because it brings back memories of my childhood. I never drank, probably because my father was an alcoholic. I have a strong testimony of the law of chastity because of the pain and embarrassment that I suffered as an unwed teenage mother (I have stressed to my children almost since birth the importance of chastity). I know how important a good education is because my mother never received one (I have seen that even though education will not solve all problems, it will often ease them).

My experiences and my background shaped my outlook on life and my personality. Others from different backgrounds have been shaped by different circumstances.

Let me illustrate my point. When my family and I first joined the Church a number of years ago, our branch was composed of students from the University of Chicago. My husband and I used to sit in amazement and listen to their stories of hardship. Their idea of a hard time was struggling with their studies or living in an area other than what they were used to. My husband and I, with three young sons, often wondered what these university students would do if they had to struggle for their next meal or worry about their children surviving from day to day in a gang-infested neighborhood or in the Chicago public school system. It was years before I began to realize that their problems were just as serious to them as mine were to me. When I received that enlightenment, I was on the road to understanding others.

After we acknowledge our own experiences and backgrounds, we can seek to understand others'. I have always found service to be a key to discovering needs and understanding others. People seem to open up to those who serve them and love them.

Several years ago a less-active sister in our ward was seriously ill. When I learned of her illness, I went to visit her. I took along a dinner that I had prepared and some vegetables from my garden. I noticed that her bedroom was in a state of disarray. As I cleaned it up, we began talking, and I mentioned to her how much we loved her and missed her at church. I looked directly into her eyes and asked her why she hadn't been coming to church. She stated that she didn't have "pretty dresses like the rest of the sisters." I was surprised that this sister had been so proud that she hadn't told anyone of her financial problem. I was also gratified that she saw fit to trust me. I told her that the Lord didn't care what she wore to church. Nevertheless, someone anonymously gave this sister two dresses. My husband and another priesthood holder gave her a blessing, and after her health improved, she returned to church.

I visited another less-active sister recently who had been baptized a few weeks previous to my visit. She hadn't been to church since her baptism. My companion and I sat down and began to converse with her. Through the course of our conversation, we learned that she had no food in the house. She hadn't the money to ride the bus to church, and her older son had no shoes. We were able to solve her most immediate problems, and she returned to church the next week and has since attended regularly.

Let me stress the importance of service as the way to discover needs and discover others. Service rendered lovingly works miracles in overcoming the barriers of race and class, such as those in my home ward. As I have mentioned, when I first joined the Church, the Hyde Park branch was essentially a student unit with only about six black members. Of the branch members, 95 percent were students or alumni of the University of Chicago. In classes and in conversation, I soon saw that many members assumed I didn't have the intelligence to understand what they were talking about. They also thought that the most meaningful service I could render was cooking and cleaning. I like to do these things, but I felt I could contribute in other areas just as well. I survived this period with testimony and a truckload of tact. And I even found some humor in the situation. For instance, one day a white sister walked up to me and said, "You know I've always liked you, but today a black person snatched my purse, and now I am afraid of you."

"I know how you feel," I answered, "because for hundreds of years your people held mine in slavery, so I have always been afraid of you." This insight caused her to think, and we later became close friends.

On another occasion, about six years ago when Victor was in the bishopric of our ward, he had just finished conducting a meeting when a white brother visiting from Utah hugged him and said, "You are a credit to your race." I could see that my husband was angered by this remark, but he kept himself under control and replied, "I'm quite average, thank you." On the surface, the visitor's remark may seem inoffensive, but it implies that blacks as a race are somehow inferior. He would have done better to say, "You are a credit to the human race."

These are not rare, isolated incidents. In fact, Afro-American converts in Chicago must learn to cope with a flood of blacks-scare-me-to-death or U-Haul stories, as we call them, in fast and testimony meetings. The speakers, usually white Westerners, relate how they first felt when they drove their U-Haul into Chicago and how afraid they were of blacks until they came to know them. Many blacks are offended by these stories, and some go inactive.

On another Sunday I was introduced to a new sister who had just moved into our ward. I could tell that she had little experience with black people. I introduced myself and extended my hand, and she shook it. Then she inspected her hand. She looked at the front and then the back. I watched her and then told her that my blackness was a skin color and not a paint. She was embarrassed and apologized. Stereotyping is not the Lord's way. And I have been guilty of stereotyping as well.

Our ward is now about 40 percent black, and we had a hundred and fifty baptisms last year. Since the 1978 revelation that all worthy men could receive the priesthood, the Hyde Park Ward in Chicago, Illinois, has been growing rapidly. Blacks, who had before seen the Mormon church as antiblack, have investigated and joined the Church in great numbers. Twenty-two missionaries are assigned to our ward, whose boundaries include more than a million people.

You may wonder why we haven't split into two or more wards. During the last five years only five Melchizedek Priesthood holders have been ordained. The vast majority of new members are women and children. In fact, single women with children are about 47 percent of our new converts. We have a big job serving these sisters. Because of their backgrounds and economic status, the needs of our newly baptized sisters are great and the problems are many. Some of these black, single sisters have been married and divorced, but the majority have never been married. You can see that when we talk about the priesthood being in every home, we must seek inspiration and be creative in the Hyde Park Ward. These sisters must be taught how vital a part the priesthood plays in their salvation and then they must be taught to respect the men that hold the priesthood because most of them have a very low opinion of men. This poor opinion arises naturally from the situation of our many new sisters who are unwed mothers and feel overwhelmed by the responsibilities of parenthood. They resent the fact that they have no male in the home to assist them.

One of the big problems in our ward is retention. We can't seem to keep the sisters that we are baptizing. As Relief Society president, I have visited all the less-active sisters. They give various reasons for leaving the Church. Some have Word of Wisdom problems. Some can't understand the Relief Society lesson. The problem is not intelligence but educational background. They are not familiar with academic or with Church vocabulary. Some find the music not to their liking. Afro-Americans have a rich musical heritage and a love for gospel music because they can easily relate to its subject matter: the story in song of the black experience in America and how they discovered the Lord. Most Afro-Americans find LDS music dull and uninspiring. (Let me note that I personally feel that if a person joins any church for its music, he or she has joined for the wrong reason.) Some have law of chastity problems, and a few claim to have been insulted by more established Church members.

Church manuals and instructional materials address the needs and concerns of rural and suburban areas of the country, rather than inner-city wards struggling with high crime rates, poor housing, poor quality public education, and high unemployment. As a Relief Society president, I could use homemaking lessons on big-city survival training. We need classes that teach both the problem-solving skills and attitudes necessary for independent living, including topics such as how to manage money, rent an apartment, locate and use community resources, how to maintain health as adults as well as safeguard the health of children, and how to understand the many legal and contractual requirements that occur in everyday life. I know these may seem elementary, but believe me, surviving in a big city is not a simple task, and these skills need to be taught. For many new members, knowing that they can work out solutions to their problems may encourage them to take greater responsibility for their lives and to be less vulnerable to the temptations of drug abuse, gambling, and failure to live the law of chastity.

In addition, we must not let the influx of new sisters make us forget or neglect the needs of the more established sisters. That is a real balancing act.

The Prophet Joseph Smith, when he addressed the Relief Society on 9 June 1842, in Nauvoo, Illinois, said: "Christ said he came to call sinners to repentance, to save them. Christ was condemned by the self-righteous Jews because He took sinners into His society; He took them upon the principle that they repented of their sins. It is the object of this society to reform persons, not to take those that are corrupt and foster them in their wickedness; but if they repent, we are bound to take them, and by kindness sanctify and cleanse them from all unrighteousness by our influence in watching over them." [^2]

People are coming into the Church from third-world countries and from the inner cities of this country with major problems. May I be so brash as to suggest some ways of dealing with this situation. First, we need to pray for guidance from our Heavenly Father for the ability to love all of his children despite their diversity. Second, we need to try not to offend anyone through ignorance of their customs or culture. Third, we need to be bold enough before baptism to teach the gospel and communicate the basic requirements for membership in God's kingdom. Missionaries and members must tell new converts before baptism that selling illegal drugs, for instance, is no longer an acceptable way to earn a living. We must be frank and direct in our teaching of the gospel because new members will not understand anything else. Fourth, we should "by kindness sanctify and cleanse them from all unrighteousness by our influence in watching over them."

I thank the Lord that he has provided the principles for dealing with our problems of diversity. These principles work regardless of race, class, or educational level. Joseph Smith said, "Nothing is so much calculated to lead people to forsake sin as to take them by the hand, and watch over them with tenderness. When persons manifest the least kindness and love to me, O what power it has over my mind, while the opposite course has a tendency to harrow up all the harsh feelings and depress the human mind." [^3] If we love each other, serve each other, and are supportive and nonjudgmental, we will be following the teachings of Jesus, especially his admonition to "feed my sheep." (John 21:17.) We should always remember to feed his sheep. We should never forget that we are sheep as well and also need to be fed.

---
Notas:
[^1] Friedrich Nietzsche, as quoted in Irvin D. Yalom, Love's Executioner (New York: Basic Books, 1989), p. 183.
[^2] Irvin D. Yalom, Love's Executioner (New York: Basic Books, 1989), p. 183.
[^3] Gustave Flaubert, Madame Bovary, trans. Mildred Marmur (New York: New American Library, 1964), [Part II, Book XII] p. 188.
