Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

Language and Labeling: Tunes for a Dancing Bear

DELMONT R. OSWALD [^1]

In my high school, I had a classmate called Rosie who was very plain and very overweight. Children in their teens are unusually weight conscious and can be very cruel. Rosie was teased everywhere she went, whether in school or out, even in seminary classes. What began as statements behind her back soon became statements made to her face. At first she cried, and then she stopped. I never said anything directly to Rosie, but I was just as guilty as the rest of the class in inventing new labels. It became a standard joke to say to friends, "Have you got a date with Rosie tonight?" or "Are you taking Rosie to the prom?" And, of course, the teasing didn't stop there. As the dating and weight jokes got stale, sexual innuendos crept in and were shouted down the halls. We had two major labels for Rosie. The spoken label was "You're fat!" The unspoken label was "You're a joke!" Both were believed.

I never really knew Rosie; not very many people did. Most did not want to be seen with her. She had a couple of girlfriends from her neighborhood, but not many and not close.

About five years ago, I met an old high school friend who still lived in my hometown, and as we talked about fellow classmates, Rosie's name came up. He told me she had become one of the town prostitutes. Because of her physical appearance, her clientele was not the most savory, even among the types who solicited these services. Rosie died at about age forty-five from some form of cancer. She never married, never had a family, never had friends, never had joy. She was labeled early in life, and everyone accepted the labels. The worst thing was she accepted them and believed them herself.

We still label people—you and I—but as adults we are much more subtle and educated in the way we do it. Hopefully we are much more caring and Christian. We will continue to label—it is a basic means of communication—but I pray we will learn the destructive power of words and teach it to our children. We all need to be aware of just how dangerous and complex labeling can be.

I wish to dedicate this essay to Rosana for all the guilt I feel for helping to eliminate joy from her life.

Something wonderful happened to me the other day. Usually when I go somewhere and meet someone, they will say, "Didn't you attend BYU?" "Do you have any children?" or "Aren't you the director of the Utah Humanities Council?"—defining me in terms of my position, family, or accomplishments. This time I met a person who said, "Aren't you Sarah Oswald's father?" I proudly said, "Yes, I am." Suddenly I was no longer defining my children; they were defining me. I had assumed a new label, one I was very proud to have. In Japan, mothers are defined by their children, and fathers are defined by the company for whom they work. They are not necessarily bad labels, but because they are so dominant, they become restrictive. Sometimes we are guilty of labeling an acquaintance with a description such as insensitive, homely, funny, divorced, single, etc. When we make the label dominant, it also becomes restrictive.

Labeling is something we all do and something we all have done to us. There are both positive and negative aspects to this act, but because there seems to be no better way of defining people, we need to understand its benefits, dangers, and complexities. Commenting on the human tendency to make snap judgments and never revise them, Friedrich Nietzsche said, "When you first meet someone, you know all about him; on subsequent meetings, you blind yourself to your own wisdom." [^2]

Some modern psychiatrists, interpreting him literally, use this quotation to verify the theory that first impressions are more accurate than later ones. They feel people do not initially put up a strong guard to protect their true selves. [^3] I disagree with both that theory and the interpretation of Nietzsche. Any reader of Nietzsche knows there is considerable sarcasm and cynicism in his writing, especially in his references to women. Futhermore, people are generally more guarded with the unknown than with the known. They may change or adjust their guard as they get to know individuals, but the initial protective device is usually the strongest. Trained psychiatrists may see things differently, but I interpret this quotation from Nietzsche to mean that when you and I—untrained ordinary people—meet someone, we tend to stick with our first impressions. If we allow ourselves to accept more and more truth as we come to know the person better, we might change our judgments. That generally does not happen, because in doing so, we are questioning the original authority—ourselves. We usually prefer to prove ourselves right rather than prove ourselves wrong. We set ourselves up as judges, and we like the role and its power so much that we are usually willing to maintain it at the other's expense.

When we hear the term label, we usually think of it as something negative. If you are labeled, you are tied to a specific image and viewed as that image. If it is a label you like, that is no problem. If it is a label you do not like, then it can be a problem. The system is even more complex, however, because even labels we like, or are comfortable with, can limit us and thus become destructive. Irvin D. Yalom, in his book Love's Executioner, describes three problems we must confront in really knowing someone. First he says, in defining someone we must break down the barrier between image and language. Our minds think in images, which can only be verbalized as labels. To communicate with one another, we have to transform images into thought and thought into language. Those microseconds from image to thought to language are treacherous. Calamity can occur because the texture, depth, emotion, plasticity, and flexibility of image can be lost when it is crammed into language. Great writers and artists often use metaphor or imitation to evoke from their audiences the images they see. We frequently do this in our own minds, but metaphor and imitation are certainly not infallible. The author of Madame Bovary, Gustave Flaubert, best describes the weakness of this process: "No one can ever express the exact measure of his needs, or conceptions, or sorrows. The human language is like a cracked kettle on which we beat out a tune for a dancing bear, when we hope with our music to move the stars." [^4]

Second, to really know others, we must recognize we are judging them only from the information they choose to disclose. We may think we know someone for a period of time and suddenly something that person says or does will change our interpretation or view of that person completely. That happens even in marriages, but undisclosed information is even more likely to be a factor in relating to those we are not as intimate with as a mate.

Third, to know someone, we, the viewer, must reverse any sequence of information given to us: we must translate language back into thought and then into image—the script the mind can read. Because we also have our own bias and our own unique ways of thinking and seeing, it is very doubtful that the receiver's image will ever match exactly the sender's information. Marcel Proust describes this process beautifully when he says: "We pack the physical outline of the creature we see with all the ideas we already formed about him, and in the complete picture of him which we compose in our minds, those ideas have certainly the principal place. In the end they come to fill out so completely the curve of his cheeks, to follow so exactly the line of his nose, they blend so harmoniously in the sound of his voice that these seem to be no more than a transparent envelope, so that each time we see the face or hear the voice it is our own ideas of him which we recognize and to which we listen." [^5] Because we still label, regardless of our lack of accurate information, we need to recognize that a person is many things at one time. If we can allow for the complexities of many roles, then we do not tend to lock someone into one implacable image. If we must label, it is much better to give several labels rather than just one. You are safest when you define or label someone by several categories: accomplishments, physical attributes, spouse, family, money, work, actions, morals, and so forth. Being defined by only one attribute takes away that person's freedom, especially if the label is picked up by others or, even worse, if the person comes to believe exclusively in that label of himself or herself. We have all been told that we are what we eat or what we read or what we think. What we really are, however, is what we believe. What we eat, read, or think is the material we build from. What we believe we are is truly what we become.

More dangerous than labeling from others is labeling ourselves negatively and believing it. There is usually no other authority we accept as readily as ourselves, even God's. To provide ourselves with healthy labels, then, becomes the challenge. We may do that by prioritizing options that we like, from which we may then select and believe. In latter-day scripture we are told that we are daughters and sons of God and sisters and brothers to Christ. I find nothing negative here; in fact, these labels give me self-respect, self-assurance, and confidence. I'm in the very best of company, and what a pedigree. Even though my next prioritized selections may not show me as a perfect being, these first two labels should counterbalance any weaknesses.

Next, I am labeled by my earthly roles: father, son, husband, brother, neighbor, Mormon, priesthood holder, citizen, and so on. Adjectives such as "honest," "good," "better," "great," "ethical," or "moral," are added, as in "good neighbor," "faithful Mormon," and "responsible citizen." When we believe these good or at least credible things about ourselves, we become them. Our confidence and self-respect then leads to positive thinking, and we continue to improve. Now, being honest—one of our high-priority labels—we acknowledge that we have faults, but we should place these less positive labels further down the priority scale. We accept them because they are also real but in a context of "areas for improvement."

When we label others, we should start with the same priorities. Certainly many others may not meet the standards we set for ourselves (remember "humble"), but if we always see them first as a daughter or son of God and a sister or brother to Christ, later judgments on the priority list will be counter-weighted by this understanding.

So what should we look for when we begin to label someone? I recognize what we see and what we look for may be two very different things, but if we have in mind a positive priority of what to look for, our judgments will not be of the "snap" variety. Robert Henri, one of the most prominent American portrait painters from the turn of the century, taught his students how to look—really look—at people in order to convey their spirit as well as their image to a canvas. He says in his work The Art Spirit: "I am looking at each individual with the eager hope of finding there something of the dignity of life, the humor, the humanity, the kindness, something of the order that will rescue the race and the nation. . . . I seek only, wherever I go, for symbols of greatness . . . they may be found in the eyes of a child, in the movement of a gladiator, in the heart of a gypsy. . . . To hold the spirit of greatness is in my mind what the world was created for. The human body is beautiful as this spirit shines through, and art is great as it translates and embodies this spirit." [^6]

I recently had the chance to reread two short works I had read in my early college years, works that proved again to me how important it is for us to look for the true-self instead of the false-self, or at least to recognize the difference. One was Tolstoy's The Death of Ivan Ilyich, the story of a man who never examined his own life until he was confronted with death and what belated reality meant to him. Ilyich leaves this world regretting he had never made his own definition of himself. He had drifted through life living the labels and expectations others had given him. They were not uncomfortable labels, but they were not his selections. He dies with great remorse and anguish because he has found he had given up his freedom of making choices. He dies with the question, "What if my whole entire life, my entire conscious life, simply was not the real thing?" [^7]

The other work is a brief autobiographical essay by George Orwell entitled "Shooting an Elephant." [^8] When Orwell was a young man, he served as a member of the Imperial Police of the British colonial government in Burma. He tells of coming into a rural village just after an elephant had gone "must" (mad) and killed a man and wrecked some huts. Orwell knew he was hated by the villagers as representing an alien government, and he didn't like himself in the position he held because he felt the colonial policies were wrong. In other words, he was not certain about his own true-self, because what he was doing and what he really believed were different. Another interesting complication was that the village was very poor and the elephant was desperately needed for work. Yet the villagers began to egg him on to shoot the elephant because he had a gun and represented authority. There was also a perverse reason for their actions in that they knew he was young and hesitant and they could show power by forcing the issue. When Orwell got to the elephant, the period of madness had ended and the elephant was calmly eating and gently swaying back and forth in the middle of a field. As you might guess, everyone acts out the designated roles: Orwell remains a figure of authority designated to maintain order. Young Orwell shoots a calm elephant and with a terribly pained conscience watches it die.

Both these works illustrate how decisions are often made in complex situations. When we make such decisions, what we really believe within ourselves should be the deciding factor, much more than external labels or expectations.

This strength of self-knowledge and confidence in each of us should mean we are always able to stand up for our own principles and values in ways that would never allow outside influences to coerce us into evil decisions such as wrongful discrimination, or, as an extreme case, a Jewish holocaust.

I will close with one caution especially relevant to you and me as Mormons. We come from a tradition of believing we have absolute truth through the gospel. When we meet and label strangers or those who believe differently from the way we believe, we need to be very careful that we allow their image, the way they see themselves, to be transmitted to us. We must be fair and not label them by only Mormon standards. Labeling them in that way becomes a judgment that separates rather than brings us together. We, in effect, take away their freedom of choice. To maintain communication, we must tolerate diversity and not label unfairly. Also, to maintain humility, we must remember we have been given some of the truth, but not all of the truth. We are to be rewarded with more truth as we are worthy to receive it.

Concerning ourselves and the labels we take on, we can always pray to God for confirmation. We control our own destinies by what we choose to do or say. Observers may interpret our choices differently, and as we make choices, we do have an obligation to carefully think through all the implications concerning other people, but they are our choices. And there will always be other choices. God does not dogmatically label us and then lock us into that definition. To do so would remove all the blessings of agency.

When we label or when we are labeled, we should always look for the true-self—and the true-self, remember, is whatever we actually believe. Whether we want to or not, we must continually examine our labels and be willing to change them, both for ourselves and for others. We should always look for the positive aspects to believe first, then, if there are negative aspects, at least we have given the total a fair hearing and balance. Although others may impose their definitions on us, just as we do on them, what is most important is what we believe about ourselves. When it comes to self-knowledge and self-evaluation, we should be our own key authorities. Our lives are like theater that others watch, and usually we are playing from someone else's script. We should always strive to be more than actors, however, and aim for the role of writer when it comes to our individual life drama.

---
Notas:
[^1] He was smart. Louise Plummer has taught writing at Brigham Young University. She received her master's degree in English literature from the University of Minnesota and is the author of two young-adult novels, The Romantic Obsessions and Humiliations of Annie Sehlmeier and My Name is Sus5an Smith. The Five is Silent, and a book of essays, Thoughts of a Grasshopper. She and her husband, Tom, are the parents of four sons. 1992
[^2] He was kind to the old ladies in our ward.
[^3] He played the piano beautifully.
[^4] He had a perverse sense of humor.
[^5] Robert Henri, The Art Spirit (New York: Harper and Row Publishers, 1984), pp. 149, 148.
[^6] Leo Tolstoy, The Death of Ivan Ilyich, trans. Lynn Solotaroff (New York: Bantam Books, 1981), p. 126.
[^7] George Orwell, "Shooting an Elephant," A Collection of Essays (San Diego: Harcourt, Brace and Jovanovich, 1981), pp. 148-56.
[^8] Delmont R. Oswald has served as executive director of the Utah Humanities Council and as a member of the board of the National Federation of State Humanities Councils. He has taught history at Brigham Young University and at Westminster College in Salt Lake City. He is the author of The Life and Adventures of James P. Beck-worth and is the father of two children.
