Marie Cornwall, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women Steadfast in Christ ( 1992)

Thank You Very Much, Rock Hudson and Doris Day

LOUISE PLUMMER [^1]

I first learned about sex in the sixth grade from Dawn Grow. Dawn, spelled D-A-W-N, was my best friend, and her brother had given her a book that explained "it" using explicit language and very few euphemisms.

I was appalled that the human race procreated by means of such a grotesque act.

But I was thrilled too. It made all of childhood seem boring. Still I was positive that my parents, who by then had six or seven children, would not do anything so disgusting. Dawn Grow and I decided quickly that it must be true (her brother's book seemed so authoritative, after all), but it was something a married couple only had to do once, and then an indiscriminate number of children would appear over the next twenty years.

It wasn't until I was thirteen that sex began to make more sense to me. I sat behind the world's most handsome boy in American History, and I had the strongest urge, a physical urge, to lean forward and kiss the back of his gorgeous neck, which always smelled of Old Spice after-shave.

What was a young girl to do with all this new, hormonal energy?

I received the answer at Mutual at the yearly "Chastity Nights," as my friends and I called them. The answer was that I was to do absolutely nothing until I was married. I was to save "it" for my husband. This was demonstrated with various metaphorical examples: "Would we want to be," the speaker asked, "like a rose that had been passed around the room and examined by curious fingers poking at us, noses sniffling at us, until our petals were limp and discolored, until we were faded before our time? Would we want to present ourselves to our future husbands as toast with all the butter licked off by others?"

For me, in 1956, the answer was a definite no.

So I repeat the question. What was a young woman to do with all this new hormonal energy until she married?

I know what I did. I began to look for a husband at age thirteen. This had its drawbacks, because every attractive boy then became a prospective husband, that is, a prospective sexual partner. The result of this embarrassing dilemma was that I could no longer talk to attractive boys. I became tongue-tied.

I sought help from the only models available to me in l956: Rock Hudson and Doris Day. You will remember that Rock Hudson and Doris Day were the leading box office draws in the fifties. Their romantic comedies showed us how male-female relationships worked, and I studied them religiously.

I thought the two of them were so witty: "I know I've sown a few wild oats," Rock says to Doris at the end of Lover Come Back.

"A few wild oats!" Doris exclaims. "You could apply for a farm loan with the wild oats you've sown."

I loved Rock Hudson, who was handsome as Apollo. He was humorous and a little naughty, but he always ended up committed, if it was the right girl. Doris Day was always the right girl. She was pure and upstanding and pretty—she wore those cute boxy suits with the matching hats designed by "Irene" of Hollywood.

I wanted to be like Doris Day to Rock Hudson: glamorous, witty, rich, and in love. The disparity between my life then and those romantic comedies, that I idolized, was so great that the only choices were suicide or a sense of humor. I chose humor. It was a good choice, because I have since realized that I never was the romantic heroine of my own life. I was never Doris Day. I was Thelma Ritter, her comic maid. I was Eve Arden, Rosalind Russell's quipping friend. I was never Mary Richards, played by Mary Tyler Moore. I was Rhoda Morgenstern. I wasn't even Lucy. I was Ethel. I have always been the sidekick: Sancho Panza, Gabby Hayes, and Jingles, all rolled into one.

To illustrate the disparity of my life and the movies, I will describe the worst date I ever went on. It was a blind date, and it was set up by the sister of my friend Ruth. Three boys needed three dates. Ruth said she would get two of her friends to go along.

I did not want to go. Ruth said it would be fun. I said no, I would not go.

"Please," she said, "it will be fun."

I said, "Don't ask me again. It will be awful."

But Ruth insisted it would be fun. She would be there. Joyce would be there. What was there to worry about?

I don't know how she got me to go. Maybe she said something like, "You don't have to marry him, for pity's sake!" Maybe she said, "Are you going to be one of those girls who just plays volleyball all of your life?" In any case, I went.

We waited, the three of us, in Ruth's second-story bedroom, which had a window looking out onto the street. I was tremulous with expectation. There was always a chance, albeit slim, that someone nice looking with a nice personality would show up.

A Chevy with a low-slung back end and an open muffler stopped in front of the house. This did not bode well. Nice boys did not have their mufflers open.

The driver got out first. He was a tall, athletic-looking blond boy wearing a letter jacket from a school across town. He wasn't bad. "He's mine," said Ruth, "I've seen a picture of him."

Then another boy, dark and swarthy, but also not bad, got out. "He's Joyce's," Ruth said with absolute authority.

I waited, holding my breath. Out stepped a short, undernourished boy, his shoulders hunched into a black vinyl jacket, his hair swept up off his neck in an oily ducktail.

"He's awful!" I cried.

"He's yours," said Ruth.

He was, I learned down in the living room, about five inches shorter than I—a fact that I considered catastrophic. His name was Paul, and he was clueless. I handed him my coat, and I could tell from the blank look on his face that he had not an idea in the world of what to do with it. "Could you help me on with my coat?" I prodded. He looked at me blankly. His friend, the blond athelete, nudged him into action.

The six of us went to the all-state high school basketball tournament. My high school was playing, so everyone I knew in the world was there. Everyone in my high school would see me with this little, greasy dork. What I know now, and didn't know then, is that no one was looking. No one cared who I was with. They were all worrying about themselves. But not knowing this important fact then, I was miserable.

The basketball game was exciting, and we were on our feet most of the time. While we were standing, Ruth elbowed me. Nodding toward Paul, my date, she whispered out of the side of her mouth, "Look, he's standing on his toes."

Sure enough, Paul was standing on his toes, and he remained there for the rest of the night, not just at the basketball game, but later, in downtown Salt Lake, on the way to the Capitol Theater, he still walked on tippy toes. I was mortified. The best part of the date was when he fell asleep during the movie.

Perhaps, somewhere right now, at a man's conference—it might be in a bar—Paul is describing the worst date he ever had, a date with a girl the size of a skyscraper.

I saw the humor of the date afterwards. I stayed the night with Ruth, and we laughed about Tall Paul—a name we coined that night and forever. We laughed about a boy who walked on his toes.

I had enough sense of humor to save my own face, but now I wish I could have saved Paul's face as well.

I wish I'd been nicer to you, Paul. I wish I'd asked you questions like those articles on dating in Seventeen magazine suggested. I wish I'd asked you how many brothers and sisters you had. What was your favorite color, Paul? I never asked you any questions. I never spoke to you at all. I wish I'd poked you in the ribs and made you laugh with a joke:

—Hey Paul, did you know that they're now replacing laboratory rats with lawyers? There are some things a rat just won't do.

—Knock, knock, Paul.

—Who's there?

—Dwayne.

—Dwayne who?

—Dwayne the bathtub, I'm dwowning.

There was a precedent, Paul, for the way you and I looked together. Sophia Loren married Carlo Ponti, who was a whole head shorter than she was. And speaking of Sophia Loren, do you remember that movie with her and Alan Ladd? He was so much shorter than she, that they dug a trench for her to walk in so that he would appear taller on screen.

We should have dug a trench, Paul, you and I, or I could have walked in the gutter while you walked on the curb with your arm slung loosely around my shoulder. We should have laughed together. I never asked your last name. I wish I knew what it was now. I wish I'd been nicer to you, Paul, wherever you are.

I did not marry anyone remotely resembling Rock Hudson or Tall Paul. I married Tom Plummer. We grew up in the same ward, in the same neighborhood, but he was three years older than I, and so we didn't run in the same circles. He went on his mission when I was a junior in high school. I thought about him while he was gone. I was already attracted to him. He appealed to me for four reasons:

Even now, these seem like pretty good criteria for finding a mate.

He gave his missionary homecoming talk on my twentieth birthday. I wore a red paisley dress with a matching belt—it was a dress that made me feel as beautiful as Doris Day. I sat at the far left side of the chapel next to the window about six rows back. Tom's talk was built around the parable of the sower. It was the best missionary homecoming talk I had ever heard. I was smitten.

But I didn't get his attention until almost a year later. It was after Mutual—we still had M-Men and Gleaners then. I knew Tom was in the building, so I asked Harley Busby if he would accompany me while I sang—I often did that. I sang loud. Maybe I sang "Embraceable You" or "Night and Day" or "You're Just Too Marvelous for Words." I sang and knew that Tom would come. And soon he stood in the doorway of the chapel, and I could see that he saw me for the first time. He saw exactly what I wanted him to see: I was one sexy woman.

That Saturday night we went on our first date. We went to the movies at the Tower Theater, which was then in its artsy period—they served coffee in the lobby. We saw an Ingmar Bergman picture, where a woman confronts a priest who is also her lover and says, "You don't love me anymore, do you? It's my eczema, isn't it?" And she holds out her hands, which are covered with an ugly, lumpy rash.

Tom and I snorted and stifled our laughter.

The next day a sister stood up in testimony meeting and said she was grateful to the Lord for curing her eczema.

From the back of the chapel I looked at Tom, who was sitting at the organ, and we shared a silent guffaw. In that moment I knew we would marry.

To have a sense of humor is to see the disparity between fantasy and reality. It means seeing the pretense, the contradictions and imperfections in our lives. It is realizing that unlike Doris Day and Sophia Loren, we have no script to give us clever lines and no direction in italics to tell us how to act. We have no dress rehearsals.

To have a sense of humor is also seeing our sadness. I was sad that I was never as popular, as smart, as articulate, as beautiful as the girl seated in the next aisle. I am sad now that I let opportunities slip by, that I am no longer young, that I am still flawed, and that I too must die.

Laughter is a reaction to being alive in an imperfect and mortal world, a world where even Rock Hudson was not what we thought he was. I am thankful to all those people who forced me to distinguish between fantasy and reality:

—Thank you, Rock Hudson and Doris Day.

—Thank you, Dawn Grow.

—Thank you, handsome boy in American history class.

—Thanks a whole bunch, Ruth.

—Thank you, Tall Paul.

—But especially, thank you, Tom Plummer.

---
Notas:
[^1] He was smart. Louise Plummer has taught writing at Brigham Young University. She received her master's degree in English literature from the University of Minnesota and is the author of two young-adult novels, The Romantic Obsessions and Humiliations of Annie Sehlmeier and My Name is Sus5an Smith. The Five is Silent, and a book of essays, Thoughts of a Grasshopper. She and her husband, Tom, are the parents of four sons. 1992
