After fasting 40 days and nights and being tempted by Satan in the wilderness, Jesus began to call his Twelve Apostles. Walking by the Sea of Galilee, the Savior called to Peter and Andrew, “Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men. And they straightway left their nets, and followed him” (Matt. 4:19–20). After a similar invitation from Jesus, brothers James and John “immediately left the ship and their father, and followed him” (Matt. 4:22).

These disciples changed the course of their lives to follow Jesus Christ. With little knowledge of their future life’s journey with the Lord, they willingly left everything and took the first steps to follow him.

Having the faith to follow the Savior begins with small steps, often less dramatic than those required of Peter, Andrew, James, and John. It is a daily desire to be more like him. As President Thomas S. Monson reminds us, “There is no resting place along the path called faithfulness. The trek is constant, and no lingering is allowed” (Ensign, October 1993, page 4).

First steps to follow the Savior are often taken without a perfect knowledge. When Nikolai Privezentsev of Moscow, Russia, finally decided to join the Church, he said that he did not know with a perfect knowledge that the Church was true or understand everything about the gospel. “But,” he said, “I know that one day I will know.” He believed that if he exercised the faith to follow, he would receive for himself a fulness of truth.

To help us and followers like Brother Privezentsev, Jesus Christ has shown the way and continues to provide direction. He has given us living prophets. He has given us the scriptures. He has given us the gift of the Holy Ghost. He has given us sacred temple covenants. As we use these gifts, pray for personal revelation, and serve in our homes and communities, we are following him.

While Jesus lived on the earth, he extended the profound invitation, “I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life” (John 8:12). As we follow the Savior, we begin to see the hand of God in our lives. As we live more fully his teachings, we experience the gifts and fruit of the Spirit—the blessings of “love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance” (Gal. 5:22–23).

Even though difficult life circumstances may not quickly change, the Spirit allows us to know these gifts as a result of our choice to follow Christ. The Prophet Joseph Smith said we would enjoy “happiness … if we pursue the path that leads to it” (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pages 255–56). Having the faith to follow the Savior brings the “light of life” into our lives—light that will lead us back to him.

- What have you done to strengthen your commitment to follow the Savior?

- What blessings have come to you as you have followed Christ?
