The article “Improving Our Prayers,” by Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin in the August 2004 issue, was excellent. I know that Heavenly Father listens to us when we tell Him what is in our hearts, and He often answers our prayers through other people. When we pray, we come closer to Him.
Luis Mario Marcelo Carvajal Arce, Teno Branch, Curicó Chile Stake

The Liahona is a guide to help me find the path to follow. I am grateful to our General Authorities who deliver messages to us—they are shepherds that Heavenly Father has given us to guide us. I can show my love for Him by obeying their counsel. I challenge all the youth to do the same.
Alden Yengo, 17, Kinsoundi Ward, Brazzaville Republic of Congo Stake

I want to express my gratitude for the Liahona. I wait eagerly each month for the magazine, and the day I receive it I read it cover to cover. Then throughout the month I read each of the messages more slowly. I enjoy the personal experiences of members of the Church who are trying to live the gospel, and they inspire me to do the same.
Blanca Carrillo de Garza, Quéretaro Ward, Monterrey Mexico Moderna Stake

I really enjoyed “Building a Lesson from Teachings of Presidents of the Church,” in the June 2004 Liahona. I have benefited greatly from these lessons, and the books are a wonderful addition to my library. I look forward to the books still to come.
Gilbert Staepels, Antwerpen First Ward, Antwerp Belgium Stake

When I was baptized the missionaries gave me a copy of the Liahona, and there hasn’t been a year since when I have not subscribed. It is a wonderful guiding light in my life. Heavenly Father answers my questions in its pages, especially in the First Presidency Message and the articles by other Church authorities. I know the Lord knows what is happening to me, and He answers my prayers through His servants.
Rosario Elisa Gómez Castilla, Belaunde Ward, Arequipa Perú Zamácola Stake

Remember that friend at work who occasionally asks questions about the Church? That less-active family you home teach? That family member who needs strengthening? That returned missionary who learned a new language? They are all perfect candidates for a gift subscription to the Liahona.

You can order and receive the Liahona for yourself or as a gift in any of the following languages (frequency varies by language): Albanian, Armenian (East), Bulgarian, Cambodian, Cebuano, Chinese, Croatian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Estonian, Fijian, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Haitian, Hindi, Hungarian, Icelandic, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Kiribati, Korean, Latvian, Lithuanian, Malagasy, Marshallese, Mongolian, Norwegian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Samoan, Sinhala, Slovenian, Spanish, Swedish, Tagalog, Tahitian, Tamil, Telugu, Thai, Tongan, Ukrainian, Urdu, and Vietnamese.

Contact your ward or branch leaders or your local distribution center for subscription and ordering information.
