John A. Widtsoe, In the Gospel Net: The Story of Anna Karine Gaarden Widtsoe ( 1941)

CHAPTER I.

The Outermost Island

Anna Karine Gaarden (Widtsoe) was born June 4, 1849, in the little fishing village of Titran (then Titteren) on the famous little island of Froya (then Froyen), the outermost island off the coast of Norway.

The island of Froya is about thirty-two miles long by nine miles wide. Little villages, of two to a few dozen families, are located at considerable intervals along the shore, wherever an indentation of the coast line makes possible a small harbor of quiet water. The extreme southwest corner of the island, facing the unbounded Atlantic, juts out into the ocean. Almost on the very tip of this projection is located the village of Titran.

Anna Gaarden was born into a display of nature such as few places offer, for on this island, naked nature walks from season to season in full majesty of beauty and power. The sensitive nature of the child was nurtured and moulded in the early impressionable years by a mighty environment.

The coast of Norway is skirted by thousands of little islands, called Skjaergaarden, meaning the home of rocky islets. The deep channels between them are few and irregular. Submarine reefs are everywhere. An accurate knowledge of this labyrinth of narrow, winding water passages, among countless little islands, is so difficult to obtain that even the pilots, brought up to know a few miles of the straits intimately, fail at times to bring a vessel through safely. Shipwrecks are many. In recent years the government has made extensive soundings and has placed markers at dangerous points. When Anna grew up, the pilot with his incomplete chart and practical experience was still the chief dependence of the mariners. Yet through these straits came ships from all countries of earth to trade for Norwegian herring, cod, and salmon.

The islands are bare, rocky, with heavily indented coast lines. On those lying farthest away from the mainland, such as Froya, Anna's home island, not a tree is to be found, and few shrubs more than three feet high. Decayed rock, washed into the hollows, has formed patches of soil; and moss clings to the sides of the rock; but everywhere clean-washed, gray-white domes of granite dominate the landscape. In some of the hollows, rain water has accumulated to form beautiful tjerns or small lakes. Anna's island was lowlying, treeless, rocky.

Covering the island, wherever the rocks are not exposed, growing on the patches of soil and amidst the moss, are heather and trailing plants yielding various delicious berries. The centuries have formed peat bogs which furnish ample fuel to the inhabitants. The gulf stream swings inward towards the island, ameliorating the climate, and prospering vegetation.

When the long northern winter breaks, there can be no more glorious place than these islands. On moss, peat, soil and seemingly on the very rocks, inevery crevice, there appear a wealth and variety of flowers that compensate for the absence of trees and shrubs. Flowers bloom in rich color there, as nowhere else, in the midst of light, warmth, and moisture. In the spring the North Atlantic is still angry. It roars and threatens, and at times works itself into a passion. A visit to the flower-covered island, in the midst of the ruffled ocean, under the mild warmth of the northern sun, is an experience that lives long in memory.

When summer comes, the ocean settles down to rest. The fishermen row, bravely, miles away from the islands. The birds come from the south, and on every high point, on every sunny hillside, are tens of thousands of snow-white or pure gray sea birds, resting in the sunshine. In the safe places the birds make nests, lay eggs, and hatch their young. The sun shines eighteen, twenty, or more hours in a day; and there is no darkness upon the land. The flowers last throughout the summer, for as the earlier ones disappear, others appear. Wild bees buzz about, gathering nectar for delicious honey. The flower garment of the island remains unchanged except for color. To the sailor, passing the island, it is a sign of the season, as red changes to blue, blue to yellow, and yellow fades into colorless gray. Then, in late summer comes the harvest of berries, the nutritious, health-giving blueberry, the red, bitter tytteberry, near relative of the cranberry, and the delicious, semitransparent, pale-yellow multeberry, which melts in the mouth with unsurpassed delicacy of flavor. In late summer, also, the proud mother eider duck rides the slow swell of the sea, followed by her brood offledglings. Exceeding beauty covers the island throughout the summer.

Afterward come the barrenness and desolation of a rock standing alone and uncovered in mid ocean. The short summer is over. The flowers fade away. The dry berries fall to the ground. The birds, one kind at a time, gather into great flocks, and amidst much noisy cackling and flapping begin their journey to the south. The days grow shorter, the nights longer, the ocean rolls restlessly, and autumn is in the air.

In winter the islands are cheerless. The late fall storms are incessant, and frequently continue throughout the season. The waves run high and wash inward seventy-five to a hundred and fifty feet upon the shore. There are only four or five hours of daylight. Snow falls, but melts quickly, and running off the hillsides washes the rocks clean. Under the leaden winter sky the island looks a grayish brown with steelwhite spots where the washed granite appears. The fishermen stay at home or venture upon the sea at the peril of their lives. The place is sea-locked, for few vessels dare to brave the rough waters in the narrow straits. The winter passes in a forced and almost unnatural quiet, and in practically an absolute rest, except for the season when the herring crowds towards land.

At length winter breaks, spring reappears, and the scenes of the seasons are reenacted.

The extremes of nature, on the outermost island, are appreciated with difficulty by those whose sheltered lives are spent among the dull monotony of themainland, away from the ocean. These varying phases of nature, from fierce intensity to easy gentleness, have reacted upon the people of the islands and made them a marked race.

Anna Karine Gaarden was born with the gift of vision and sensitive feelings. The tremendous natural manifestations of her native island thrilled her, taught her, helped her understand God and man, and fitted her finely tempered nature for noble endeavor. As she developed, her own nature seemed to reflect the strong wild winter tempest, and the flower-bedecked, sunlit summer beauty of the island.
