John A. Widtsoe, In the Gospel Net: The Story of Anna Karine Gaarden Widtsoe ( 1941)

CHAPTER II.

The Island People

Anna Karine Gaarden was island born and bred, and mainly of island ancestry, well-traced into the seventeenth century. Her forebears on both sides were intelligent, honest, honorable, God-fearing people. In the search of their history, no moral taint or blemish has been found. Anna was well-born, of goodly parents.

Her paternal ancestors had lived in the village of Titran for several generations—how long is not known. Her father, Peder Olsen Gaarden, was the "King's Pilot," that is, the official government pilot, as had been his father and grandfather before him. Father to son, for three generations they had carried down the knowledge of channel turns and twists, of deep and shallow water, of submarine reefs and treacherous headlands. Their wives had been found in Titran or other villages of the island. On the paternal side, the island blood ran pure in Anna's veins.

Her maternal ancestors were partly from the island and partly from the mainland. Her mother's father, Jorgen Arntsen Haavig, of a mainland family, had settled in a village cove across the island from Titran, known as Hovik (then, Haavig), had married there the daughter of an island family of long residence, and had gradually, by industry and commer-cial acumen, acquired ownership of the village, containing perhaps a dozen families. Her grandmother, Jorgen's wife, was descended from a well-known Jens Hansen, of Kolding, Denmark, who is known in history as Jens Hansen Collin from the time of his appointment by the king to be the inspector of copper and industry in Norway, a position which he held to his death.

People had lived on the island of Froya from prehistoric days. An old church dating back to about <1000< A. D. stood at Titran until about a century ago. Implements from the stone age have been uncovered there in considerable quantity. At least a thousand years before Christ, people lived upon the island. Where they came from is not known; perhaps many of them were of the northward moving tribes of Jacob at the time of the dispersion of Israel. Written island records go back a thousand years, showing already at that time vigorous commerce between the island and the Norwegian mainland and foreign countries.

Scientific study has shown that since the stone age Norwegian culture has been continuous, with no evidence of new racial additions. Throughout their long history, they have been what they are today: farmers on the land and sailors and fishermen on the sea.

The first settlers of Froya came no doubt in search of good fishing grounds. Fishing is exceptionally fine about the islands that lie far away from the coast. The herring, cod, and salmon gather in stupendous shoals in the comparatively shallow ocean, invariably found in the neighborhood of the islands. It was soon discovered that to obtain the best fish andlargest catch, it was necessary to go out into the ocean, and the outlying islands became the nearest stations for food and fresh water. Titran has been famous from time immemorial as one of the finest fishing grounds off the coast of Norway.

The islands may have attracted also adventurous spirits whose constant battle with nature had developed in them a love of places where nature shows her wildest, most dangerous moods, or the spring and summer flower-glory of the island may have created a sudden love within a visitor which led to permanent settlement. Who can tell why the human family have covered the earth from pole to pole? The children of the first settlers knew, of course, no other home, were content with their island life, its joys and terrors, and carried on throughout the centuries.

Certainly, however, they preferred fishing to agriculture. Fair-sized areas of good soil lie inland, uncultivated to this day. Unless he can row to the farm, the fisherman has little interest in it. He is much like the rancher who cares to farm only from a horse's back. The small cultivated areas are all in the villages and near the water. Only trails lead from village to village. Visiting and business are done by boat.

The people in Titran did not live lives of isolation in Anna's day. The world visited them. In early fall, when the herring came down from the north in shoals of uncounted millions, fishermen from far away, from many lands, gathered in Titran to share in the catch, and buyers were present from many countries. It was not uncommon for five thousand persons to crowdthe little village of perhaps two hundred inhabitants. The visitors slept in their boats, spent the days in fishing, and the evenings in such recreation as the village afforded. Then there were song and dance and talk, and often drink. The views of many men and lands were aired among the gathered fishermen. The clear-eyed child Anna with the unquenchable thirst for knowledge learned much of the world from these annual gatherings.

The Titran herring fishery was picturesque and full of life: Hundreds of boats with as many nets, rise and fall with the rolling of the sea; shouts and laughter are passed from boat to boat, as the nets are lifted or lowered; smaller boats pass from one crew to another; herring is hoisted from the fishing boats to the purchasing ships; above all are the blue sky and the bright sun; the while seagulls flap their wings and screech at the sight of the fish drawn out of the water. Even more picturesque was the scene at night (for when a large shoal has been discovered, fishing goes on night and day), when the faint moonlight and the sleepy, rolling lanterns furnish a ghostly illumination of boats and nets and men, as unreal as the mirage of the thirsty desert.

Sometimes, when hundreds of boats and men are engaged in such fishing, a considerable distance from shore, the sun hides behind a cloud, the wind comes in from the west, the ocean grows unruly, and perhaps in an hour or two one of the fearful storms of the North Sea is raging upon the fishing ground. Then the herring is forgotten; the nets are cut loose; masts are taken down; and the God of the ocean, whohas been forgotten in the excitement of the fishing, receives delayed petitions. Men prepare as best they can for the battle to come, which will end, they know, in death to some of their number. The attempt is made to reach the nearest land, but with the mad waves below, and the senseless wind above, the task is one of such infinite labor that many a brown-haired youngster reaches shore a white-haired man. After the ocean has calmed, the wrecked boats and the bodies of the lost drift towards shore, and are gathered in by the island dwellers. There is no laughter on the island that day. At one time or another every family on the island has been required to give a father, son, or sweetheart to the sea. None is spared.

Such storms are viewed calmly by the fishermen as part of the life that fate has willed that they shall lead. Nevertheless, though the first settlers must have been of exceptional courage, as familiarity with danger breeds contempt for it, yet the ceaseless gamble with the elements upon the North Atlantic has fixed upon the people, men and women, certain definite characteristics.

The Norwegian fisherman on the outermost island is large and strong of body. He has developed the sharp eye, careful thought, and sound judgment necessary to live in safety and to prosper amidst the tumultuous activity of the ocean. The memory of his lost nearest ones, carried away by the ocean, and the steady resigned dread of the time when he, too, shall be swallowed up, fill him with a sad sternness which is often mistaken for pride or gloom by those who do not understand the country. On the other hand, whileat fishing the day long in his little boat, miles from shore, he thinks dear thoughts of wife and children and other loved ones, who at home are anxiously examining the sky for signs of an approaching storm, and his heart grows warm and tender with love. The women, likewise, must steel themselves against possible disaster, and their loving thoughts go out to the men on the sea. There is a strange blending of sternness and tenderness in the island people. The man who unflinchingly will carry home the dead bodies of his friends, drowned during the latest storm, will weep at the sorrows of a child.

Naturally under such influences the people have developed an intensely religious outlook. Men cannot live in close communion with nature and witness her many moods without becoming certain that behind the colossal ocean waves, the snow-white breakers, the tearing wind, and the anxious mind; behind the gentle sunshine, the mirrored ocean, the island flowers, and the heart at peace, is a Master of Storm and Rest. There are no infidels upon the outermost island. The people often break away from the rules of the established church, but they worship God as truly, a God they can better understand than the one defined by the priests. They keep the Sabbath day holy, read the Bible and other good books, keep up with the news of the day, and most of them can quote from memory, with an easy grace, much of the Bible and the best literature of the country. They must read to keep happy.

The people on the outermost island are far from perfect. They are independent, jealous of theirrights, and fiery of temper. The stranger is looked upon with suspicion, and if unworthy receives cold treatment. Though at times the men must battle for their lives, their labor is mainly light, and they are inclined to ease. They use few words, but mean a hundred times more than they express in words or actions. Above all, they love honesty; a thief loses complete standing; and truth is revered by them.

Among such people Anna Karine Gaarden passed the greater part of her childhood and girlhood.
