John A. Widtsoe, In the Gospel Net: The Story of Anna Karine Gaarden Widtsoe ( 1941)

CHAPTER III.

Childhood's Round

The Gaarden family was small: Father, mother and two children, Anna Karine, the eldest, and Petroline Jorgine, four years younger. A brother had died at birth. At the time of Anna's birth her father's father, into the eighties, was living with the family.

Anna's childhood was cast in pleasant places, according to the modest island standards. Her father was prosperous; she lived in the oldest and at that time the largest and best house in the village; her wants were amply satisfied; she had loving care from parents and adoring relatives and friends.

The father, Peder Olsen Gaarden, of medium height, small of bone and delicate of feature, courteous of demeanor, was a head worker rather than a hand toiler; the type, in a different environment, of the scholar and the gentleman, a bit of a dandy in clothes and manner. His constant contact with men from many countries as he piloted foreign ships through the Norse fjords, had made him somewhat cosmopolitan in outlook; and his cordial, social disposition had made him very popular, up and down the coast. To qualify as a pilot he had secured rather more than the usual meagre education of the day. This also helped establish him as a leader in the community. He was a good money-maker, but spent freely, and not always wisely. His affections werecentered upon his little family; and he was very proud of his attractive daughters.

Daily at set hours he climbed the highest lookout and scanned the horizon with his spyglass. Were a ship in sight, signalling for the pilot, then nilly-willy, good or rough weather, off he must go and take charge of the wheel and pilot her to the safe harbor of her destination. Since the traffic was heavy past the outermost island, he was absent from home much of his time.

The mother, Beret Martha Haavig, was a tall, erect, dignified woman, of a kindly and generous disposition, who had inherited much power from her father. This man, Jorgen Arntsen Haavig, who, as said, had acquired single handed, ownership of the village of Hovik, must have been cast in a vigorous, determined mould. It is related that when his foot scraped upon the floor as he turned in his chair, the cat hid behind the cupboard! He had five sons and two daughters, all of whom he reared to stalwart and honorable maturity, and to all of whom he left a modest competence when he passed on to his fathers. Much of this man's gift of leadership had been passed on to Anna's mother.

There was need of a steady, governing hand in the Gaarden family. Anna's father, as pilot, was often away, sometimes weeks at a time. Besides, though the family was small, the household was large. Peder Olsen Gaarden not only acted as pilot, but he owned a fishing outfit, several boats, many nets and other fishing paraphernalia, and employed several men to look after his fishing venture. These menroomed in one of the Gaarden buildings and were fed by the family. Then there was the beloved Engeborg (Mikkelsen), the nurse, who never left the two girls, until they, mature, flew away from the home nest. There was other help as needed. Altogether it was a household requiring daily, wise management, such as the young wife and mother was eminently fitted to give. The father earned well and liked to spend freely; she placed a restraining hand upon his liberal arm. The family prospered under such cooperation.

The mother, though precise and practical, was of tender feelings, and loved her two daughters devotedly. She set about to train them for happy womanhood. Play they must have under the summer sun or winter rain; but regular duties they must learn to perform also. Therefore they were trained from childhood in the round of tasks that measured the year.

Every day the household must be fed; the house cleaned, with fresh, clean sand strewn on the living room floor; the cows fed and watered and milked, the sheep looked after, fish cleaned for the next meal; peat brought to the house for fuel; and a hundred other household tasks performed; but something must always be sent to the poor, for the mother believed that "he who giveth to the poor, lendeth to the Lord."

In this daily round, the little girls were allowed to take part; and as they grew older were required to do their share. Nurse Engeborg, who had the girls in daily charge, let them bake playcakes in the long, dark oven, and boil fish of their own selection in little pots hung over the big grate fire; help carry the kitchen refuse, boiled and made tasty, to the cows—for,on the island, cows relish fish soup; and to roll and play in the clean sand to be spread over the floors where the heavy-booted fishermen lived. From infancy the claims of the day in service and labor were impressed upon the girls.

In addition to the daily round, there were the seasonal demands, in which the girls participated or accompanied as spectators.

In early summer, to provide fuel, the men went to the nearest peat bog, cut out small blocks, somewhat bigger than standard sized bricks, which the women and children built into loose, shapely cones for drying until fall when the light chunks of peat were carried to the village, usually by the women, children, and older men who were not out fishing. It was great fun for the girls on peat piling occasions to roam over the free country, to build houses with the peat blocks, and to hunt for berries among the heather.

The cash box was replenished at spare hours in summer by gathering boatloads of seaweed growing near the shore, and gently burning the dried seaweeds to secure the ash from which iodine was extracted in England. That was also a lesson in chemistry for the little girls.

In late fall, provision for light was made. The accumulated fat from the household, and the fat livers from small fish, not suitable for sale, were assembled, boiled in great kettles, and purified. Then long strips were dipped into the fat to make candles, or later poured into moulds, with the string held in the middle of the mould. That was fun for little girls, and oldones too, especially since Nurse Engeborg allowed the children to make baby candles and Christmas candles, and all manner of things that the older folk were not allowed to do. So, a huge heap of newly-made candles was piled neatly upon a shelf of the storehouse, against the long winter nights.

The fat that was left over was mixed with alkali from the peat ashes and formed into soap for use in the household. That also was of interest to the watchful children, but Nurse was more particular, there. No tampering with hot soap, was the explicit order. Nevertheless there was a chance to cut the warm soap into cakes, and to mould pieces into figures of men and cows and horses.

Then throughout the summer the garden had to be cared for. That was woman's work, or work for old men. Able-bodied men must be on the sea where fish are, for fish are money and the things that money can buy. But, digging the soil in spring, planting the seed, pulling weeds, and harvesting, were fun also. Since the plots were small, no one wearied of farming; and the women could always praise their own skill when white, mealy potatoes, and delicious yellow, vitamin-rich rutabagas were brought steaming upon the table.

In late summer and early fall came the indescribable delights of the berry excursions. All who were not fishing joined in. Miles and miles away, it seemed to the little tots, up among the rocks and the heather, lay the berry fields, blueberries, tytteberries, multeberries—delicious to the taste. What little girls could be expected to fill their buckets when eating was sogood! After a long day, the company, blue with berry juice around the lips, and fingers stained, would return with big buckets full of berries. And the next day, and the next, when the fruit was made into mush or preserves, were days worth waiting for a whole year.

When the dark days of fall and winter came, the girls had yet more fun. Then, mother brought from the storehouse the wool of the spring clip, when the sheep, to the delight of the children, had squirmed and twisted under the shears of strong young men or women. The wool was washed, dried, and carded, all by hand. Even little girls could learn to card the wool into long fluffy rolls. Then the wool was spun into thread. Anna and Petroline had their own little spinning wheel, for Mother Gaarden believed that early training makes for a happy life. After spinning came weaving. The loom was set up in the large living room. The mother tried it out, sat queen-like before the loom, throwing the shuttles in and out, and pressing thread to thread, until she was certain that all was in order. After she had decided on patterns, colors, lengths, the more trustworthy were set to work, or an experienced old woman was employed to weave. No little girl was allowed to do more than to look on, except of course when the woman was out, then the shuttle was passed back and forth a few times, but not often for the loom was sacred, and irregular threads were soon discovered and sternly rebuked by mother. Still, in time, the girls were taught to weave. They took part in the joy of splashing and boiling white wool in a muddy liquor to haveit come out beautifully red or blue or yellow. At last came the sacred days of measuring, cutting, and sewing. Mother and the women took care of the underclothing and children's dresses; but a real tailor, sitting cross-legged on a big table, came in to make trousers and coats for the men. Of course, the girls had to learn to sew, and they were taught how to make their own patterns as they made clothes for their dolls.

There was so much to do that the year ended almost as soon as it began.

The constant demand of the fishing industry, also consumed much of the time of the women, children, and old men.

The herring fishing in the fall and winter was the most exciting. Then many a person of importance "put up" with the Gaarden family; and the girls, quiet for a change, heard much big talk.

From February to early April, after the herring season, the codfish sought shallow water to lay eggs, and the codfishing season was on. The cod, caught in nets, is cut open in a manner peculiar to fishermen, so that it will lie flat. The livers are put into large barrels for later extraction of the cod liver oil; the other refuse in other barrels for fertilizer and other uses. The cod is then salted and placed for some time in strong brine. When taken out, it is washed in sea water, laid on the clean granite rocks of the island, and turned twice a day. When sufficiently dry, the fish are piled into loose pyramids, which, to prevent rotting, are taken down and built up again every dayor two. At last, immaculately clean, almost snow-white, the cod is dry enough for export.

When the busy fishing season is over, the cod livers are heated in large iron kettles, surrounded by a hot water jacket, to extract the oil which is sold for medicinal purposes. The fishermen catch the cod, clean, open and salt it; but those on land have to attend to the drying. That means steady, regular attention over the summer months.

During the summer and between the seasons, halibut, whitefish, salmon, flounders, and many other fish are caught, which make work and food for the community. Once in a while, a great whale will drive a large shoal of herring landward. Then there is real excitement. The little fish are caught; and usually at last the whale. Then there is rejoicing, for whale blubber has money value.

Such a life fastened upon the minds of the girls the activities by which men live temporally. It was invaluable training.

There were many simple pleasures. Egg hunting in the spring, on the bare rocks sticking up out of the water near the island, and berry hunting in the fall, were among those most enjoyed. As the girls grew older, the five sturdy uncles at Hovik, would row around the island, and secure permission to take the girls for a visit to their grandparents. On such trips, on the swells of the waves, they began to understand the fear of the ocean.

When Father Gaarden returned home from his trips, the children were hushed with eager expectancy. What had he brought them this time? Sometimes agem from Italy, a bit of lace from France, or a dress pattern from England. Sometimes he came with a strange fruit, yellow and fragrant. But always he came with the love light in his eyes.

As Anna approached ten years of age, a new, glorious type of pleasure came to her. Her father began to take her with him on his trips to the mainland. She went to Kristiansund, a town with real streets; to Trondheim (formerly Trondhjem) the ancient Norwegian capital, and went inside the age-old cathedral, big enough, it seemed to her, to hold the thousands of fishermen in Titran at herring time. The parents saw to it that the children broadened in experience.

All this, the home life and that beyond, was permeated with religious influence. The old church on Titran had been destroyed; the new church had been built on the neighboring island of Hitra (at Dolm) several hours away by boat. On one or two Sundays a month, if the sea were quiet, the whole household rowed to church to attend the noon services. The day before, food was prepared, placed in the native fireless cookers packed in the boats. Early Sunday morning they would be off, rowing and singing as they rowed. The service in church was followed by lunch and an hour or two of visiting with friends. Then home again.

When the household did not row to church, which could not be done in foul weather, family services were held in the home, the master of the household leading the exercises.

In addition, a beautiful, old daily custom prevailed. Every evening, after the day's labor was over, the household, and many of the neighbors, gathered in the large dining-dwelling room of Gaarden. Father Gaarden, when at home, took his place at the head of the long dining table, otherwise Mother Gaarden. The audience partly sat and stood. A hymn was announced, usually from an old collection of songs written nearly two hundred years before by the quaint Norwegian fisherman-preacher-poet, Peder Dass. All joined in and sang with a will the tender words of devotion of the ancient poem. After the song, a chapter from the Bible was read; then another song was sung. After this preliminary service, the head of the house, or Mother Gaarden, or others called upon, recited poems and tales, from book and memory, of the rich legendary history of Norway. Sometimes, after the mails had arrived, the news of the day was given. At intervals a song was suggested or a selection played on the flute, violin, or guitar, the prevailing musical instruments on the island. About ten o'clock, Father Gaarden would arise quickly, and say, "It's time to go to bed." In five minutes the room was cleared. It was an ideal home evening, now as a tale of long passed days, which, repeated whenever work and weather permitted, stimulated the mind to good thoughts and nourished the intellect.

The years of Anna's childhood were full and happy, and they laid secure foundations for the years to come.
