John A. Widtsoe, In the Gospel Net: The Story of Anna Karine Gaarden Widtsoe ( 1941)

CHAPTER IV.

The Fishermaiden

Infancy and childhood had been left behind. Anna Karine Gaarden, at twelve years of age, faced a radiant young womanhood.

She was pretty and gave promise of becoming a beautiful woman. Her hair was brown and wavy, her skin clear and fair, her features cast in classic mould, her dancing eyes dark blue and sparkling with intelligence. She walked erect, looking the world in the face. Her speech was natural and her manner sprightly. The passer-by looked at her twice.

She had been endowed with notable qualities which the natural and human environment of the island, and the steady routine at home, could not overshadow, only direct and perfect. She was individualistic from childhood, knew her own mind, and made her own decisions. She was impatient with traditional practices, which her superb self-reliance enabled her to ignore. She fought her battles with courage, never counting the cost, if she felt herself to be in the right. Her temper flashed quickly at opposition, but subsided as promptly. She loved with intensity. She was as clean in mind and body as the white foam of the wind-driven waves of the ocean, and as firm for right and truth as the storm-washed granite of her native island. Her many-faceted nature, surcharged withdesire for freedom and truth, was as the seabird, winging his free, unhindered way over wave and reef.

She had been blessed with a clear intelligence, coupled with sound judgment. This as she grew older, and the ways of childhood were passed, made her the easy leader of her group, and, in time, of the village.

Her sympathy with those of her kind in sorrow or distress was poignant. Many a surreptitious basket of goodies did she carry from her mother's larder to the poor. And many a time did the mother, herself charitable but made of sterner stuff, explain that charity must be given wisely, and that little girls must ask permission before they break into household stores. Those in sorrow or distress recognized the genuine sympathy that radiated from their Anna. The poor and the broken in spirit sought her out to her last day.

Beauty she loved passionately. It found expression in the flower garden that she made as a child on the patch of soil in front of the house, the only one in the village. Her father had brought home packets of seed, which, carefully planted and tended by Anna, grew into new, strange plants. The villagers could not understand a child who would raise flowers on an island covered all summer long with wild flowers. Throughout her life, wherever she went, she had her flowers, in window pots, if no land were available, but, preferably, in a garden where the soil could be turned and seed planted.

The self-willed girl sat up through long sunlighted summer nights, reading and rereading sagas of the north, stories of the south, poetry and prose—until vast dreams of the unknown future closed her eyes in sleep. And when she awoke, words came to her in prose or in measured rhymes. From early girlhood she wrote her thoughts, mostly in the rhythm and rhyme of the poet. Forever she hungered for more knowledge, more truth, more progress, for greater vistas of the coming day. Therefore, she was never quite satisfied. There was always another step to take. She knew the meaning of "noble discontent."

She was full of pranks. She must have led the village a merry chase. The wise ones said, "Peder Gaarden (Per Gaarn in the vernacular) has some job on his hands in that girl." But they loved her; she galvanized them into joy. After ninety years, she is still a bright memory there. The old survivors of that day chuckle and sometimes they weep as they tell of the mad escapades and deeds of the heart in the day when Anna Gaarden (Anna Gaarn) had the village by the ears. That father and mother had to take her severely in hand at times was only to be expected. The world is organized for the average, not for the exceptional person.

From her earliest days she had looked upward to God. She was always religious, prayerful, and saw divine power in the flash of the elements and in the workings of human life. Orthodox she was not, for she laughed at the minister's ruffled collar, and thought that divine service at home was nearly as good as in church. But she was reverent of sacred things.

Education in those days, and therefore, on the outermost island, was scanty. Yet, for many years,the island people had provided teachers for their children. The youth who did not accept the educational opportunities offered was held in disrepute. The villages were small, means were smaller, and the system of education was not perfected as it is today. One teacher was employed for two or three villages. He traveled from one to the other, spending, perhaps, a week in each village every other week, or once in three weeks. Surprisingly good results were obtained by these peripatetic teachers. Their pupils learned the fundamentals as well as do the modern youth with daily uninterrupted instruction.

Anna attended these schools regularly and voraciously. She pounced upon new truth as a starved man upon food. Her mother and nurse had taught her to read and write very early, so that she made good use of the school whenever it came.

When she was about twelve years old, a new teacher was employed for Titran and the neighboring villages. It was said that he was a young man who had come from the mainland some years ago, why, no one knew, and who had gone away for study at Klaebo Seminarium (at that time the one institution of higher learning in that part of Norway) and who had come back as the new schoolmaster. He was not known on Titran, for he had lived northward, on the other side of the island, but he was reputed, though a young man, to be very intelligent. His name, John Andersen Widtsoe, was also new to Titran people.

Anna was keen to see the new teacher. Perhaps he who had come so recently from the big schools would have much to tell. The day came. At the desk,looking over his flock of fisher lads and maidens, stood a young man (he was then twenty-one years of age) of medium height, square shouldered and athletic, with straight coal-black hair, and deep-set, gray-blue eyes. He had a deep, musical voice, and his eyes twinkled as he spoke to the children. And he was interesting and helpful. If a child worked harder and learned faster than the class, this young teacher would take time to help him privately. And he played with the children, and chatted with the parents, and sang at evening when the home evenings were held. Soon he was drilling the youth of Titran in music, and giving them talks on many subjects, to which the elders came also, somewhat shamefacedly. Yes, this was a new type of teacher.

Anna's ready intelligence led to rapid progress. Language and literature, history and geography she loved, and arithmetic was easy for her. The young instructor took delight in teaching and training her, and sharing with her bright eager mind the little learning that he had gained. For four or five years she received such semi-private instruction from this capable teacher. One thing she did not know, that during his first week in Titran, the schoolmaster had written in his diary that some day he was going to marry that twelve-year-old attractive, intelligent, child of nature, Anna Gaarden. He must have enjoyed the years of educating the mind of the girl he hoped some day to make his wife. Many years passed, however, before he told her of that note in his diary.

Just before Anna's twelfth birthday, on May 30, 1861, the heavens shook and the earth trembled forthe happy little Gaarden family. The beloved mother died suddenly.

The whole community as well as the Gaarden family went into mourning at the passing of their lovable, capable, generous leader. She was only thirty-two years of age at her death. It was a terrible shock to the two girls, who adored the kind, wise woman who had directed their lives from birth. They mourned her; but with the resiliency of youth, lived on in the affairs that the days brought. The husband and father was broken-hearted. His nature was such that since his true love was in the grave he could think of none other. He never married again, though the good-looking, prosperous young widower became the target for love darts from many eligible maids and widows. He could not bear to bring strangers into the home, to interfere with happy memories, so old Nurse Engeborg Mikkelsen was made housekeeper, and the twelve-year-old Anna became mistress of the home. The father cut down his business, reduced the responsibilities of the household, and gave increasing attention to his work as pilot. In his loneliness he joined in more with his convivial friends on ship and shore.

Anna became his chief confidante and friend. Petroline was yet but a child. He took Anna on more and more of his trips. He seemed never so happy as when she was near him. Six or seven years after his wife's death, he sent Petroline away to school for two years, in Trondheim, the ancient Norwegian capital and cathedral city, to learn the household arts and the ways of the world, as well as the rudiments ofa general school education. But Anna could not be spared from home for any length of time.

The nurse, Engeborg, took charge of the house in which she had lived many years, yet Anna felt as never before the meaning of responsibility. As she grew older, the burden became heavier. Merrily, however, in her courageous, world-defying manner, she met the problems of the day. It was hard but valuable training for the young girl, who was to need so much strength before life was over. Her sister, Petroline Jorgine, was also upon her mind, but gave little trouble. Petroline grew up a golden-haired, quiet girl, worshipping at the shrine of her fiery, older sister. She received a good education as opportunities afforded in those days. She learned easily and gained much of the world's polish.

Anna was budding into womanhood. There was no doubt now of her beauty. Suitors came from far and near. Her fame for looks, vivacity, and understanding had spread beyond the island. Among them came the scion of an old, distinguished family, owners of stores, fishing outfits, fishing grounds, related to priests and advocates. She was but a fishermaiden, but she had beauty and intelligence. Her father who dreaded the separation that her marriage would bring, nevertheless felt that the opportunity of union with this family, through the manly, competent son, could not be set aside, for it would ensure life's comforts to his beloved, elder daughter. Gently he urged Anna to accept the wooing; but she was not ready. Ever the glint in the schoolmaster's eye was in her memory.

When she was about eighteen years of age, the schoolmaster told her of his love, which he had harbored since he first saw her six years before. Soon all suitors were dismissed save the prosperous young business man and the poor, young schoolmaster. The choice would have to be between the two.

When she was about nineteen years of age, she made her decision and became engaged to the schoolmaster. Some thought her foolish; her father was a little doubtful; but most people, now that the schoolmaster had become a beloved leader among them, were happy. The wise ones knew that Anna had chosen well, for happiness is the child of love.

Yet nearly three years passed before they were married. The schoolmaster wanted more education; and his promised wife, ambitious for him, urged him on. She added from her inheritance from her mother to his modest savings, and he went off for two years, to become a better instructor of youth. Meanwhile, Anna helped to manage the household, traveled with her father, read and dreamed, and prepared herself for life with the man she loved.

Petroline also was growing into womanhood. She was attractive. Suitors came, but her heart did not respond to any of them. Perhaps the ideal of the schoolmaster set too high a standard. She lived unmarried.
