John A. Widtsoe, In the Gospel Net: The Story of Anna Karine Gaarden Widtsoe ( 1941)

CHAPTER V.

The Schoolmaster's Story

The schoolmaster who won the heart and hand of the fishermaiden also had a story to be told.

John Andersen Widtsoe was born June 9, 1840, in Oien, in the district of Hemne (then Hevne), some forty-five English miles south of Trondheim. The name Widtsoe was taken from a well-known estate or large farm, on which members of the family had lived.

His paternal ancestors, for many generations, had dwelt in the upland, fertile valleys called Orkedalen and Meldalen, not far from Trondheim. While they had moved about considerably, it had been within a relatively small area. They had been farmers, school teachers, and small public office holders. Several had held a position similar to probate judge (lensmand). They had prospered, had good reputations, and enjoyed the confidence of the community. They were inclined to office rather than field work. John's father, Anders Johnsen Widtsoe, an apprenticed carpenter, had broken away from the old family haunts, and had settled in Trondheim. His name appears as a carpenter in the old cathedral record. As time went on, he became a contractor and builder with much success. The house which he built for himself and family in Trondheim in 1869 still stands as an evidence of his technical skill and ambitious ideals. He was wellknown and respected in Trondheim. He died of a fall from the old mission house and hospital in Bergen which he and another had contracted to build. He lies buried in Bergen.

John's maternal ancestors also came from the valleys south of Trondheim. Some years before John's birth, however, his mother's brothers and other members of the family had moved to Trondheim. That may have been why Anders Widtsoe moved there also. His mother's nephews became very prominent in the community. His cousin, Johan Peter Bye, was idolized by the common people; he was returned as the city's representative in the Storthing (Congress), until at last he refused to go again. Another cousin became a priest of much note. Other relatives were in the professional and artistic field. This branch of the family originated in Ronne, Denmark, where the family home still stands. The ancestor who came to Norway fled there to hide in the mountain valleys, for he had committed political offenses in Denmark. This ancestor was a man of much learning, whose memory has been handed down for two hundred years among the people.

The Anders Johnsen Widtsoe family consisted of the father and mother and three children, Johanna the eldest, John, and Sivert the youngest. When John was eleven years old, on November 11, 1851, his mother died, and the housekeeping duties fell upon his sister, then about sixteen years old.

A few years later the father married again. Then trouble began. The children of the first wife could not agree with their stepmother. Especially was Johnunwilling to accept the new mother of the house. He was not of the impetuous, fiery type, but determined and persistent. His mind was made up; he could not live happily in the new household. It is probable that his uncles and aunts, his mother's brothers and sisters, who had not approved of the woman chosen to take their beloved sister's place, encouraged the lad's discontent. He would leave home and stay for weeks with his downtown relatives, without any by your leave from either father or stepmother. The boy was beyond the father's control, which gave deep concern and sorrow to Anders Widtsoe who loved his eldest son.

A story from those days is illuminating. According to the custom of the Lutheran Church to which the family belonged, children when about fourteen years of age are confirmed into the church. This ceremony is preceded by six months' or a year's study with the priest, at regular weekly intervals. Confirmation depends upon whether the priest is satisfied that the child is able to answer certain questions concerning the faith. Then, on confirmation day the candidates are lined up in the church aisle, the boys on one side, the girls on another, and the ceremony of confirmation is consummated.

John was approaching the age of confirmation, and he was urged to attend the classes of the priest. However, he was indifferent to his father's pleadings. He might or might not attend the classes. His father was in real distress. John would probably disgrace himself and fail to be confirmed at the usual time.

Shortly before the confirmation day, John announced that he had seen the priest a few times and that he was to be confirmed. The happy father gladly provided the son with the requisite new suit. On confirmation day the father went to church to witness the ceremony, but with some misgiving. John had been wayward of late, seldom at home. The children were lined up in the aisle as usual. The father sat down rather wearily in a near pew and began to look for his son. The children were always arranged in order of the excellence of their knowledge. The father looked closely at the lower end of the line, where his run-away son should be. He was not there. The father's heart sank. Was it possible that John had failed at the last moment, and was not to be confirmed? That would be humiliation! The father's eyes wandered up the line, from one to the other; no John, no John! This was humiliation indeed! His gaze fell for an instant on the lad at the head of the class, the one of greatest excellence. He looked again. No, there was no mistake. There, at the head of the line, the most honored of all, stood John, stiff in a new suit and white collar. The scamp, bright as a new dollar, had kept his father in ignorance of his industrious study for confirmation. Anders Widtsoe looked at his son once more; then took off his glasses and wiped his eyes.

After confirmation, matters at home, between John and his stepmother, became worse. At last the self-reliant, independent, self-willed lad decided to run away, as far away as possible. He found a ship going to the outermost island, Froya, and earned hispassage there. He found work on the other side of the island, diagonally across from Titran. He was then about fifteen years of age. It is evident that the father soon discovered John's whereabouts, but thought that perhaps the best thing to do, was to let the lad have his own way and learn sense by feeling the world's hard knocks.

The newcomer was, however, able to shift for himself. He was strong of body, of quick intelligence, ready and willing to do anything required of him. Besides, his social, helpful disposition made him everywhere welcome. He was a good wrestler, sang with a deep melodious voice, played with the children, joked with the girls, and wrote letters for the staid parents. A useful boy had come to the island, somewhat different from the native breed.

One day he had been sent out to clean the stable. He was pitching manure, when the three men who looked after school affairs on the island clambered out of their boat and walked up to him with a brand new proposition. More teachers were needed on the island. Would he go to the normal school and study for the profession, if they helped him find the money necessary? They did not tell him that the priest who confirmed the lad had urged the father to educate him and that the father was furnishing the money. They had been warned of the lad's independence, but they needed him. John accepted and promised to come back and teach on the island for a year or two.

Up in a mountain valley, on the mainland near the village of Klaebo, the state had built a seminarium, the primary function of which was to trainteachers. There were lecture halls and class rooms and a library and a small church, and a half-dozen venerable men, wise men, professors, who opened a new world, no, new worlds, to the group of picked young men. A dormitory was there also, and a common dining room; and a mingling and intermingling of words, opinions, and decisions. Life friendships were there established. The coming leaders of the land were being trained there. Young John A. Widtsoe, as he usually wrote his name, revelled in the life. Soon the memory of his unhappy home was dulled. He began to understand that there were two sides to every question. Why worry about little things when there was so much to learn, mathematics, languages, drawing, surveying, methods of teaching, singing — yes, always singing — and all the other things a teacher had to learn?

After two years John was back in Froya, sobered, enlightened, full of courage, filled with ideals for the future. He was about twenty-one years of age, and ready for the fray. There was only one fly in the ointment. To get the full certificate from the seminarium, he would have to attend two more years. He was certified as a teacher, but he wanted all that the school had to give. For that he had to save.

One of his earliest assignments was to Froya, where in his first class he met the clever little girl who was to become his wife. He developed into a splendid teacher. His fame became island-wide. There was no priest on the island. The schoolteacher became the advisor and helper of the people in matters involving deeds, wills, letter-writing, and all sortsof situations requiring educational training. People liked to talk over their affairs with this black-haired, blue-eyed, athletic young man with the deep voice and clear judgment. And he called upon the aged and the sick; and planned with parents for the welfare of their children. His quiet humor and wise suggestions made the family feel better for days.

He had not been there long before he began the work of social reform which has become of lasting benefit to the community, and to its thousands of visitors, and which will be recounted later.

Eight years he served that end of the island and grew in the affections of the people, until today, more than seventy years later, to be his relative is to find open doors in Titran and vicinity.

Year after year he planned to go back to school to finish his work, but the people begged him to stay a little longer; he knew enough for them; and then the fishermaiden had not yet plighted her troth to him.

Eight years after his arrival, they became engaged; and began to plan for life together. She urged him, though the years would be lonely, to return to school and finish the work there.

The fishermaiden was to be his! With a song on his lips and in his heart, he went away another two years. Rich years they were. He was ripened now. Powerful friendships were established. He had a definite objective: wife and home and family. His love letters to the fishermaiden, often in rhyme—for he, too, had the gift of the poet—reveal in beautiful words and rich imagery a nature of delicacy and no-bility, and an aspiring soul of depth of feeling and warmth of expression. How the fishermaiden thrilled to the richness and sweetness of such a love!

The young man must have been beloved by his fellows at the seminarium, for in his autograph album, as it would be called in our day, is a series of half a hundred tributes, implying a devotion and appreciation such as seldom comes from one man to another.

He graduated with high honors, and came back to Froya. Soon afterward he and Anna Gaarden were married.

So runs the story of the schoolmaster.
