John A. Widtsoe, In the Gospel Net: The Story of Anna Karine Gaarden Widtsoe ( 1941)

CHAPTER VI.

The Happy Years

On December 29, 1870, Anna Karine Gaarden, then about twenty-one and a half years old, was marride to John Andersen Widtsoe, who was nine years older. The marriage ceremony was performed in Dolm Church, on the island of Hitra, the church at which Anna had worshipped during her whole life. The wedding party rowed over the sea and across the sound to the church where old Pastor Brodtkorb, who had baptized Anna as an infant, officiated at the ceremony. Afterwards the bridal party rowed back to Titran, and the whole village celebrated the occasion. Radiantly happy was the beautiful bride. The future was golden, touched with rose. But, her father, Peder Olsen Gaarden, thought sadly of bygone days. To him, a cloud hung over the future. He would now be more alone than ever. And sister Petroline wondered when her turn would come.

The schoolmaster had managed to build a large two-story house at Daloe across the island, an hour's walk. It was built for the two-fold purpose of supplying his family with a home, and to furnish school rooms to which the neighboring children for some miles might come for instruction. He was breaking down the practice of the traveling teacher. Into this new house, in which none had lived before, and which the bride had furnished to suit herself, with her ownmoney, the schoolmaster took the fishermaiden to have and to hold forever. The happy years began.

When the schoolmaster as a young man had come to Titran and witnessed the gathering of thousands of fishermen at various seasons of the year, he was stirred into deep thinking. The people themselves needed intellectual awakening; and the visitors needed social supervision. As it was, there were no opportunities for social relaxation or intellectual advancement, and card playing and drinking became the fishermen's chief amusements. He resolved to take a hand in the matter and bring about reform. The people must be lifted. That was his obligation as an educated man.

At that time an organization for popular education in Norway was being effected, The Society for the Promotion of Popular Enlightenment (Selskabet for Folkeoplysningens Fremme). With this movement he was associated and was in fact its representative on the islands. The society published choice books at cost prices, within the reach of the poorest. In fact, the society became a great educational power in the land. The schoolmaster sought to place these inexpensive good books in the homes of the people. His own library was at public disposal. He would take a cherished volume of poems, and read throughout the evening to a group assembled at a family gathering. Thus he whetted their appetites for good reading.

He soon found, however, that this was not enough. The houses were small, and he could as well speak to one or two hundred as to twenty or thirty. Therefore he conceived the idea of constructing a large hall on Titran, which on week days could be used as reading room and community center, in the evenings for lectures and musical events, and on Sunday for sacred services. He set about to secure the necessary funds, was successful in so doing, and finally had the satisfaction of seeing it built under his supervision. It was a duplicate of the assembly hall at the seminarium, eight-sided to get the maximum space with the least materials. It was expensive to ship timber and boards by boat from the mainland.

The experiment was a huge success. The village people, and the visitors in the herring and cod season, made use of the hall. The schoolmaster placed his books at the disposal of the readers; he gave lectures on various subjects in the evenings or conducted musical affairs; and on Sundays he read the service of the Lutheran Church. The institution became a powerful, reforming, upbuilding factor in the community. The building still stands, a silent monument to the eager, successful idealism of a young man who set out to help his fellow man. It was one of the many precursors of the numerous community centers now found in every country. The schoolmaster, in his corner of the world, was a forerunner of the modern social worker.

A contemporary, writing in these recent days, thus speaks of the service rendered by the schoolmaster to the people on the outermost island: "John A. Widtsoe created life, so to speak, on these islands, where life had almost ceased; he started a movement to lift the people, which even today shows the powerthat was in him and his labor. He awakened the people as from a slumber."

On February 23, 1871, Peder Olsen Gaarden died. His life had never been filled since his wife had passed away, eleven years before. When Anna married, it seemed that little remained to him in life. Petroline was then away attending school. Peder Gaarden was tired, and he was taken home.

The death of Anna's father pointed to a new life for the young couple. After the first two years of teaching on the island, the schoolmaster had begun to look towards new fields for the exercise of his talents. He wanted to go to one of the mainland cities, where the schools were graded and better professional opportunities were afforded. He had the urge and the gift to write, in prose and poetry, and wanted to be near places where papers and books were published. He also wanted to spend the year necessary to take a degree from the University of Oslo (then, Christiania), and this could be more easily done with the salary of the larger schools of the mainland. The pleadings of the people and the hope of winning Anna had kept him on the island, but always with the feeling that some day he must get away. When he married, he settled on the island because both he and Anna felt it was not quite right to leave her father alone. When he died, the situation changed. Anna herself wanted to try her wings. The world was big, and she really knew only the islands.

On January 31, 1872, a little more than a year after their marriage, their first child, a son, was born at Daloe in the schoolmaster's own house, a stone'sthrow from the Atlantic, where the waves beat high. The boy was named John Andreas Widtsoe. For a while there was doubt whether the child would live, for he was born with his wrist attached to the side of his head, and a crude surgical operation had to be performed immediately after birth, to release the arm. So imminent seemed the death of the child, that to save its soul from eternal burning, according to the crass teachings of that day, the schoolmaster with several other courageous men rowed across the open sound in angry February weather to secure the priest to come to baptize the baby. This was before the present ruling which permits anyone, man or woman, to perform the rite in such emergencies. But, the child recovered, and because of his baptism at one or two days of age, was not taken to the church for formal baptism.

The coming of a child spelled a new day for the young couple. Another objective in life was set up. Anna would make this son as near like the father as was possible, and the father resolved to train him for the great deeds that he had dreamed to do. The village wondered if the child ought not to be the next "King's Pilot" on the island. Meanwhile, all the villagers wished the parents well, and sent little presents.

Another two or three years passed. The father's estate had to go through the courts, a slow process, their house had to be sold—they had previously moved it from Daloe to Titran, where it still stands—there were many affairs to be closed up, and the people begged him not to go away with their fishermaiden.

About three years after Father Gaarden's death, the schoolmaster accepted a position in the main school, a type of primitive high school, in the city of Namsos, a small town some eighty English miles north of Trondheim. A good deal of Anna's patrimony was used in connection with the move and the travel, and in remembering with gifts her lifelong friends and neighbors whom she was now leaving forever. She was young, in high spirits; the world was to be explored.

Namsos gave both of them the beginnings of that which they wanted. Here the schoolmaster was in daily contact with colleagues. Wits were sharpened; new views were advanced. He soon found he could hold his own with his fellow teachers. The local press discovered his gift for writing and employed him as a regular contributor. The priest heard his musical voice and learned of his knowledge of music, made him the church song leader (Kirkesanger), and other appointments and opportunities came to him. He made many friends. His colleagues admired him and showed their feelings by presents and good words. He revelled in the new life. He felt himself grow.

Anna likewise lived a full and new life in Namsos. The school and professional fraternity of the city mingled in regular social events at one another's homes. There were modest dances, an occasional musical evening, and once in a great while a theatrical performance. The new life gave Anna more time to read, which she used to advantage. Especially did she begin at this time to make a careful study of the Bible and to compare its doctrines with those of thechurches of the land. The people discovered some of Anna's gifts, and she was employed to teach in the domestic arts department of the school, which brought the girls of the school under her wholesome influence.

All in all, the little family at no time lived happier lives. Their little son, though inclined to get into mischief and several times was nearly killed, kept growing into a lively childhood. The father took great delight in trying out educational experiments on the child. He often took the child with him to his schoolroom while the classes were being conducted. To Anna, the little chap was the fulness of earthly joy.

At this period it was rumored that some Mormon missionaries were in town and had made some converts. The schoolmaster said he remembered that two such men had at one time visited Froya, though he had never met them. Both husband and wife regretted that such men and doctrine were abroad, and then promptly forgot the whole matter.

Rather more than two years after their arrival in Namsos, on December 12, 1877, their second child, also a son, was born. He was given a thoroughly Norwegian name, Aasbjorn (later Osborne) Johannes Peder Widtsoe. Honor was done to several people in that sturdy name. This second child brought renewed joy to the family.

Within a few weeks after the birth of Osborne, when the promise of the future was the brightest, destiny struck its heaviest blow, and the happy years were over.
