John A. Widtsoe, In the Gospel Net: The Story of Anna Karine Gaarden Widtsoe ( 1941)

CHAPTER VII.

The Schoolmaster Departs

Early in February 1878, when the baby Osborne was less than two months old, the schoolmaster was taken suddenly ill while in the classroom. His intense suffering was diagnosed as due to intussusception, or a telescoped intestine. The local profession did all it could for him; surgical aid, not then developed greatly, was not available. Inevitably the end crept upon him for three days. On February 14, 1878, the schoolmaster died. He was then nearly thirty-eight years of age; his wife was nearly twenty-nine.

There was lamentation throughout the city, for the schoolmaster had become greatly loved. He was buried from the schoolhouse which represented the ideals of his life, of his noble profession. The chapel and the streets outside were crowded, and hundreds followed the procession to the grave. The baby, of course, was left at home in the cradle, but the fishermaiden and her oldest son stood by the open grave while the cold words of the church funeral service were spoken, "Dust thou art, to dust returnest," with no promise of a future meeting in a happier place than man's earth. Before the first shovelful of earth was cast into the grave, the schoolmaster's son, his namesake, threw a bright crimson rose upon the casket. That was the child's farewell, and his promiseto carry on, in every high ideal that the schoolmaster had left behind.

The fishermaiden? Anna Gaarden, now Anna Widtsoe, the widow? For her the heavens and the earth had been swallowed up in darkness. The story of the weeks that followed would best be left untold. Her faithful sister Petroline came to Namsos by the first boat, and nursed both sister and baby.

The community was very good to the widow. A place was made for her in the teaching body of the school, but she could not endure the memories provoked by the rooms and corridors in which John, her lover, had labored. She disposed of her furniture, and with her two children, went back to the island. But, it was no longer the same place. Her father and mother were gone; her sister was living in the city. The island relatives and friends were good to the bereaved family, almost too good; but peace did not come to her. She must go away. The charm of the island was closed against her eyes.

Her husband's father and mother were dead. His oldest own sister, Johanna Evjen, had married and moved southward, near Oslo. His brother Sivert had followed John out to the island, had married there, and had his own responsibilities. The husband's step-mother had none too kind memories of John's dislike of her, and the half-sister and brother were not yet grown. The young widow analyzed the situation, and found herself very much alone. On the island she had most of her friends, and she knew the life there; but she was driven by an inward feeling to go elsewhere. Her beloved husband had left the island; shewould do as he would have done. Then, too, on the mainland were better chances for her boys, his boys. He would have made them teachers; she would see his wish fulfilled. To the city! To the city she went after a year on the island.

She settled in Trondheim. Her husband's step-mother was kind. She had forgiven the dead. Her husband's mother's relatives, who had always enjoyed him, transferred their attention to the widow and the children. The schoolmaster was well known; his many schoolfellows in the seminarium were now mature men, many filling prominent positions. They went out of their way to help the widow of John A. Widtsoe.

The little family did not suffer want. Most of her inheritance had been spent, but a little remained. The schoolmaster left nothing but hundreds of books—a fine library. The widow held several book auctions, the proceeds from which added materially to the family income. Powerful friends made prompt intercession with the government for the payment of the pension to which the family was entitled due to the schoolmaster's long state service. A pension for life was awarded the widow; and, until he was eighteen years of age, to John for educational purposes; none for the baby until of school age. Thus it was assumed that the little family could care for themselves. As she became acquainted, she set up a dressmaking shop, for she had always been clever with the needle, and she had excellent taste. So, with such labor to eke out the small income, they were protected against want.

She proceeded at once to provide for the educa-tion of the older son, John, who was about seven years of age; the younger son, Osborne, being yet a baby when they moved to Trondheim. John was to be trained to be a teacher or a priest. Her husband's school-fellows, now in the teaching profession, offered to tutor the lad privately. Consequently the boy did not attend school until he was about nine years of age, and ready to enter the preparatory "Latin school." She saw the boy safely on the educational road.

At the schoolmaster's death she was thirty years of age. Her girlhood beauty had matured well. She was very attractive. And, she was vivacious, able to converse on many subjects, for, in addition to being a wide reader, she had made good use of the years in the schoolmaster's company. Besides, she was socially inclined. Inevitably she made friends. Offers of marriage came to her, some from men in her husband's profession, but her girlhood's love, though the schoolmaster was in his grave, was still alive. She declined all such offers; but continued to make many friends.

She kept up her contacts with the island. Once in a while she would go out there; but her visits were short. The old attractions had disappeared. She had entered into another life. However, every spring when school was out, her son John, who was old enough to leave his mother, was sent out to Froya, and kept there until school opened in the fall. She was determined that he should become acquainted with the life and traditions of her people. The summers on the island were health-giving and instructiveto the boy. He was brought to understand the realities of life, as city dwellers seldom have an opportunity to do.

Of great comfort to her was her devoted, peace-making sister Petroline who had given up her own plans and work to live with the lonely sister. The two did sewing and dressmaking; earned a living; and watched over the two boys who had been left to them.

From the time of her husband's death, Anna Widtsoe wrestled with many spiritual problems. Was God kind and just? was her first problem. If so, why had he taken away her husband? At length she found the eternal truth that God is ever kind, though the hand-dealings of God with man are not always understood. There yet remained the question, What is the meaning and what the purpose of life? It was not so easy to answer that question. She had read the Bible since her girlhood. Now, she read it again, with greater understanding. The scriptures brought comfort to her bruised soul. Earnestly she prayed and read and studied to understand the purposes of the Lord with mankind, and especially with herself. She acquired a new nearness to God. Truth appeared holier than ever before. Her sorrow became tinged with the glory of faith. In the language of the day she became one of the "awakened." Yet, she did not find the solace that she had expected in the church of her girlhood. It was cold compared with the living fire of the ancient prophets; and at times she failed to reconcile the teachings of the priest with those that she found in the Bible. Her great sorrow had driven her to dig deep down near the foundations of truth. Thus her soul was prepared for the events to come.
