John A. Widtsoe, In the Gospel Net: The Story of Anna Karine Gaarden Widtsoe ( 1941)

CHAPTER VIII.

The Shoemaker Bears His Testimony

Soon after her arrival in Trondheim, Anna Widtsoe rented an apartment for herself and her two boys on Steensbakken (Steens Hill) which was then being invaded by residences. Above the dwelling, further up the hill, stood the old historic fortress; below, and far into the distance, lay the beautiful panorama of the old city, the thousand year old cathedral standing high, the harbor, the clustered ships, the fjord, and all around, except where the fjord zigzagged out toward the ocean, a background of fir-covered hills. It was beautiful to look upon at all times of the year.

In these two rooms she proceeded to make a home and to look the future in the face. What was left of the schoolmaster's library, except for a half-hundred choice selections, she had stored in Grandfather Widtsoe's house lower down the hill. She had added a little to the treasured articles of furniture brought from Namsos. Equipment for dressmaking had been provided. She was kept busy enough with household cares, dressmaking, and reading and studying her Bible, and trying to reconstruct her shattered world.

One day she asked a neighbor, a ship's captain living in the same house, an older resident, to recommend a shoemaker to whom she might take her son's shoes for repair. One Olaus Johnsen, a very compe-tent, honest workman was recommended. In fact, the shoemaker's son Arnt (at this writing living in Logan, Utah), brought to the house a pair of the captain's shoes, and took with him for repair, a pair of John's shoes. When the boy's shoes were returned, a Mormon tract was stuffed into each shoe. A little later, with a parcel containing another pair of old shoes, the widow set forth in the warm sunshine of the spring of 1879 for the half-hour walk to Johnsen's shoemaker shop. It certainly did not occur to her that she was making the most fateful visit of her life. Yet, who can say that it was the most fateful. The events of life are like the threads of a tapestry—all together make the pattern and picture.

Olaus Johnsen was a wholesome, well-spoken man in his forties, a workman who knew his craft. His wife was of the sturdy Norwegian type. Anna Widtsoe first met the wife, and made inquiry about the meaning of the tracts found in her son's shoes that had been returned, repaired. Mrs. Johnsen declared that they told the truth, but that Mr. Johnsen would explain the whole matter.

The shoemaker agreed to put soles on the shoes, strong enough to last a good while even under the wear of a lively, active lad, who was always moving about. The details of the business were soon agreed upon; the commonplaces of courteous people were exchanged; the widow was about to leave the shop, yet a little curious about the tracts which she had found in the first pair of shoes when they were returned, but unwilling to ask too many questions.

Anna Widtsoe's hand was on the door latch, when the shoemaker said, somewhat hesitatingly, for the business was concluded and the lady was a stranger, "You may be surprised to hear me say that I can give you something of more value than soles for your child's shoes." She was surprised. She looked into the eyes of the man, who stood straight and courageous in his shop.

"What can you, a shoemaker, give me better than soles for my son's shoes? You speak in riddles," she answered.

The shoemaker did not hesitate. "If you will but listen, I can teach you the Lord's true plan of salvation for His children. I can teach you how to find happiness in this life, and to prepare for eternal joy in the life to come. I can tell you whence you came, why you are upon earth, and where you will go after death. I can teach you, as you have never known it before, the love of God for His children on earth."

Understanding, happiness, joy, love—the words with which she was wrestling! But, this was a shoemaker shop. This man was clearly a humble man who knew little of the wisdom of schools and churches. She felt confused. She simply asked, "Who are you?"

"I am a member of the Church of Christ—we are called Mormons. We have the truth of God."

Mormons! It was terrible. She had innocently walked into a dangerous place. Hurriedly she thanked the shoemaker, left the shop, and climbed the hill.

Yet, as she walked homeward, the words of the shoemaker rang in her ears; and she remembered acertain power in his voice and majesty in his bearing when he delivered his message and bore his testimony. He was a shoemaker, but no ordinary man. Could it really be that the Mormons had the truth of the Lord? No, it was absurd! But, it made her thoughtful and restless. When the repaired shoes were brought to the house a day or two later, by the shoemaker's young son, Arnt Johnsen, Anna Widtsoe found, carefully tucked into each shoe, other Mormon tracts. The shoemaker was valiant. He missed no opportunity to fulfill the obligation of a Latter-day Saint, to bear witness modestly and properly but steadily, to all the world.

Then began two years of struggle.

The tracts in the shoes aroused her curiosity to the extent that one Sunday she went to a Mormon meeting. The meeting room was on the second floor of the shoemaker's home, a sturdy log house. A small group of people were there; and a fiery speaker, a missionary, raised all manner of questions in her mind. The main effect of that meeting was a resentment against the primitive environment of the meeting. Very humble people constituted the membership of the Trondheim Branch. Foolish class distinctions were sharply drawn in the land. Anna Widtsoe, though a fishermaiden, had been well born, in the economic as well as in the moral sense; and she had moved upward with the years. She was now of the professional class. To join such a group as she saw there that Sunday seemed to her tradition-bound mind to be a step downward. Had she understood the gospel, such distinctions would have been mean-ingless. One day, some months later, when the truth was forcing itself upon her, she came home, stood quietly in the middle of the floor, and said aloud, to herself, "Must I step down to that? Yes, if it is the truth, I must do so."

Soon, however, all else was forgotten in her battles with the shoemaker and the missionaries upon points of doctrine. She knew her Bible. Time upon time she came prepared to vanquish the elders, only to meet defeat herself. She had not read the Bible as these men did. Gradually she began to comprehend that her reading had been colored and overshadowed by the teachings of the church of her childhood; and that these men, these Mormon missionaries, accepted the Bible in a truer, more literal manner. She liked it. Nevertheless, she fought fearlessly. It was no use. At length she had to admit that the Bible was all on the side of the Mormons.

Even then she was not ready. There were other matters to be settled. Questions of authority, revelation, life within the Church, and a hundred others that her quick mind formulated, were presented to the missionaries, debated, discussed and taken up again. She had a worthy teacher in the missionary then in Trondheim, Elder Anthon L. Skanchy, whose knowledge of the gospel was extensive and sound, and whose wisdom in leading inquirers to truth was unusually fine. This well-informed, intelligent widow tested his powers. Upon her he directed the full battery of gospel evidence. Unwillingly, yet prayerfully, she became convinced that she was in the presence of eternal truth.

At length, on April 1, 1881, a little more than two years after she first heard the gospel, she was baptized into the Church by Elder Anthon L. Skanchy. Thin ice still lay over the edges of the fjord, which had to be broken to permit the ordinance to be performed. The water was icy cold. Yet, she declared to her dying day that never before in all her life had she felt warmer or more comfortable than when she came out of the baptismal waters of old Trondheim's fjord. The fire within was kindled, never to be extinguished. The humble people of the branch became her brethren and sisters. She loved them and rejoiced in their company.

All this is easily told; but who can tell the full story of the spiritual and mental battles, the inner struggles, of those who must lay by the whole of their past lives, as it were, to accept the new-found truth? In the case of Anna Widtsoe there were many and long wakeful nights. There were days of uneasy misgivings. Long solitary walks helped to clear the mind. Prayer, always prayer, brought solace. All that she had of knowledge, strength, and intelligence was brought to bear upon the problem. Moreover, she was obliged to count the material costs. She might be cast out from her circle of friends. What of her boys? Their futures were fairly well assured. Would her acceptance of Mormonism affect them? There were times when she trembled with physical weakness and mental faintness. She was so alone! Her decision must be her own. Those who have charged that men and women accept Mormonism for ulterior motives know little of the intense search for truth and ex-hausting conquest of self that have preceded conversion. Only along the path of sacrifice does the Latter-day Saint enter into his joy. A gladness of soul it is, indeed, when the certainty of truth begins to glorify life. Peace is restored. The price seems small for so great a jewel. Anna Widtsoe found it so. Never, during her life did she speak of sacrifices for the gospel, but always of the blessings that it had brought to her.
