John A. Widtsoe, In the Gospel Net: The Story of Anna Karine Gaarden Widtsoe ( 1941)

CHAPTER IX.

In the Gospel Net

The widow was now well in the gospel net. The news that Anna Widtsoe had become a Mormon spread rapidly among her friends and relatives in Trondheim, and soon was common gossip in Froya, her home island. She was not the type to hide her joy in the new-found truth. The inevitable happened. The schoolmaster's friends, though they pitied the widow and her boys, could not afford to become smudged by contact with Mormonism. All but a few heroic ones turned away from her. The priests threatened to have her pension cancelled unless she came back into the state church.

Her husband's relatives, as had the friends, first reasoned with her, and pointed out her worldly folly; but pursued by her Biblical proofs and clear argument they left her, and tried to forget her. There was no more visiting between the little family and the relatives. The schoolmaster's oldest and only own sister, who had married and was living near Oslo, and who had deeply loved her brother John, pleaded with the widow to forget the insanity which possessed her.

In sheer distress, the new convert took a trip to the island, to find peace among her own people. To her amazement, her dear ones there, who had heard of her scandalous behavior, would have nothing to do with her. Their hearts and houses were closed againsther. Those whom she had fed and clothed and nursed preferred not to speak to her. A few poor, humble folk gave her shelter and listened reservedly to her tale of God's restored gospel.

Heavy-hearted, slightly embittered, but more determined than ever to keep the commandments of the Lord, she returned to her rooms in Trondheim. Her faithful, devoted sister Petroline was then living with her, but even she could not understand the behavior of her sister. It seemed so foolish. Truly the fishermaiden was alone in the world. But, she had found the truth; she had entered God's earthly kingdom; she was preparing for a great eternal blessing; she trusted the Lord.

The perplexing thing was that the plain, simple principles of the gospel did not seem to be comprehended by her friends and relatives. It seemed to her that the truths of the gospel were so clear that no one with intelligence could fail to understand them. How could it be so? She had yet to learn that truth is neither comprehended nor accepted unless the man desires to know the truth and values it above all else. That is the law in all pursuits of truth, within and without religion.

Anna Widtsoe turned to the little branch of Latter-day Saints and took hold of its activities. Her fresh outlook on the gospel, her experience and quick intelligence, and especially her deep devotion to the Latter-day cause, helped to vitalize the branch. It was before the days of the Mutual Improvement Associations in the mission field; but a Relief Society had been organized. Soon she was in the presidencyof the Relief Society. Studies, discussions, social gatherings, excursions gave new life to the membership. She was nothing if not dynamic. Until very recently, and perhaps now, there hung in the Trondheim meeting place, a framed original verse, composed by the new convert, "Sister Widtsoe," in honor of some festive Relief Society affair.

Loosely translated, it reads:

Jesus, our Brother, is King, For us He the victory won; Rejoice, dear brethren and sisters, In the newfound light and life. Our Zion awaits the Savior. We hope to meet Him there; His bride He will fetch to His home, Only be humble and true.

She also enjoyed entertaining the missionaries at her home. She had moved into the center of town and occupied the top floor of a building in the heart of the business district. The location made it easy for her customers—she was still dressmaking—to find her. In this apartment occupied by Anna Widtsoe and her sister, Petroline Gaarden, and the two boys, the missionaries were honored guests. At the meals, gospel questions and answers flew swiftly across the table, and the widow was buoyed up in her feelings.

Some missionary stalwarts visited Trondheim in those days: Anthon L. Skanchy, Hans O. Magleby, Thorvald A. Thoresen, Christian H. Steffensen, Niels H. Borresen, and many others whose long missionary careers are thrilling to hear.

It was an evidence to her of the truth of the gospel message, that her life in the branch among members and missionaries was fully satisfying to her. She had not known before such genuine happiness. Besides, despite the unfriendliness of her immediate friends and relatives, her business prospered. She worked hard, but she enjoyed it, and she was able to support herself and her boys, and to pay her tithe to the Lord. It seemed as if she might live her whole life, with fair success financially, and with life's real enjoyment, in the Trondheim Branch of the Church—the Church of Christ—to which she had given her allegiance.

Soon, however, a restless spirit within her turned her thoughts, then her desires, and at last her hopes, to the land in the far west which her people—the Latter-day Saints—had wrested from the desert, and were now inhabiting as the headquarters of the Church. There was Zion, a promised land; there were thousands who like herself in love of truth had accepted the restored gospel; there were prophets and apostles, bearers of the eternal Priesthood of God. She must go there! The spirit of gathering was upon her.

This matter also required careful consideration. She loved her native land, the sea and the mountains, the sagas and the song, the sturdy people; and in this land rested her forefathers; and here she had thought to rest; and here lived her loved ones, albeit they disdained her religion. The far-distant land, with a new language and foreign customs would present new problems possibly beyond her power to conquer. She would lose her pension, that she had been told offi-cially. Her boys? That was the real question. Would they have the chance in the new land that they would have here? Their futures were fairly well assured here, given reasonable intelligence and good behavior. The question of emigration, of gathering, was weighed and considered, thought about and discussed. Her decision was of course a foregone conclusion. She decided to break away from the past, and take a chance on the future, and to gather with her people.

She was unable to raise the emigration money at once, and looked forward to several years of saving before the required substantial sum of money was available. However, the help of three men in Zion hastened her departure. Elders Anthon L. Skanchy, Christian H. Steffensen, and Ole Berkhoel, each contributed a small sum, which added to the little that she could raise, was more than enough to enable her and her two boys to take the long journey from central Norway to the valleys of the Rocky Mountains. Elders Skanchy and Steffensen had known the widow in Trondheim. Elder Berkhoel, a brilliant, cultured gentleman, a gifted violinist, had known the schoolmaster and his family in Namsos, had later become converted to Mormonism, and, with his family, had emigrated to Utah. To these good men Anna Widtsoe owed the opportunity to take the westward journey in the fall of 1883, a little more than two years after her baptism.

In the spring of 1883, she set about to make preparation for the long journey: Her furniture was to be sold, more auctions of the schoolmaster's library to be held, her various small resources to be collected,good-byes to be said to the people on the island as in the city. It was a busy summer. At the end, boxes of books and many articles of small value had to be left behind, for they could not be sold under forced conditions. She only smiled. She was gathering with the people of the Lord! Her one deep sorrow was that she would have to leave her only and beloved sister, who, of a thoroughly independent mind, could not yet convince herself that the gospel embraced by her sister was really true.

At this time Anna Widtsoe's son John was eleven, her son Osborne, five years old. Loyal to the schoolmaster's memory she took the boys to their father's relatives for farewell visits. As said, however, her husband's oldest sister lived near Oslo, five hundred miles to the south, but on the way to America. She therefore sent John, early in the summer, to spend three or four months with his aunt, Johanna, to whom the lad was very dear because of her love for her brother, the lad's father. Osborne was, of course, too young, and remained with his mother while she made her preparations.

At length, in October, she set forth upon the journey. Never had Norway looked so beautiful to her. Only those who have so left their native hearth can understand the tugging at the heartstrands, when the land of birth and home fades from view. It does not matter how much promise the new land offers. Human nature will have its way. It has been the lot of the Latter-day Saints ever to be torn from the moorings of home, whether in America or foreign lands—but in the end they have rejoiced to sacrifice for truth and righteousness.

On the way southward, she stopped at the country estate managed by the husband of her sister-in-law, and secured her son, John. A miracle occurred there, for the aunt had determined, with the connivance of her husband, to hide away John, to save him from his awful fate among the Mormons. But the widow reached Oslo in safety with her two sons and three trunks.

On the morning of October 20, 1883, she boarded the ship for Hull. Twenty Norwegian Saints were emigrating in the same company. The Oslo Branch was out to bid the travelers farewell. The widow's trunks were firmly roped by two kindly, fine men, Christian D. Fjeldsted, later one of the presidents of the First Council of the Seventy, and Martin Christopherson, who later presided over the Scandinavian and Norwegian Missions. The Saints on shore sang a hymn, handkerchiefs were wafted; tears were shed; the ship moved slowly down beautiful Oslo Fjord. That evening, as night fell, the widow looked long from the deck at the dimming shoreline of the land of her forefathers. The fishermaiden was indeed in the gospel net.

The ship after bumping for sixty hours over the shallow North Sea, landed safely in Hull. Then the emigrants and their baggage were taken by rail from Hull to Liverpool, over England's smudgy midlands district. There, in Liverpool, for the first time did the widow see an apostle of the Lord (John Henry Smith). He was as she had expected, a kindly man,but she looked at him with joy as she recalled the authority of the Priesthood committed to him. There the party was augmented by emigrants from Denmark, Sweden, and England. The party embarked on the S. S. Wisconsin on October 27, 1883, and reached New York after a rough but otherwise uneventful voyage on November 7, 1883. The next day the long railroad trip from New York to Logan, Utah, was begun.

While the trip was long, it was interesting to the widow and her two sons. New countries, constant change, a new language, strange sights and sounds made time pass quickly. True, every once in a while there was a tug at the heart, the anticipation of the unknown, but it was not colored with fear or heaviness. Safe and sound, eager for the next experiences, the party arrived at their destination, the promised valleys of the Rocky Mountains.
