John A. Widtsoe, In the Gospel Net: The Story of Anna Karine Gaarden Widtsoe ( 1941)

CHAPTER X.

In a New Land

On Saturday, November 15, 1883, Anna Gaarden Widtsoe and her two sons landed in Logan, Utah, their destination.

So this was Zion! This was the promised land, the new world! It was a bright, sunlit day. The mountains lay under a mild haze, but the valley air was clear. The widow looked long at the blue sky and the bare, high mountains. She was satisfied. Mountains, sky, and sunshine were as symbols of the strength and beauty and light of the message that had come to her. The love of the West begotten in her soul that day never died. Her heart was glad. Here were the Saints of God, with whom she should spend her life. What more could she ask?

The first two or three days were spent under the hospitable roof of Bishop Anthon L. Skanchy and his family; after which she moved into a one-room house in a large yard, on the southern edge of the city. Bishop Skanchy who had brought her into the Church helped her secure the necessary furniture for meagre but comfortable living. The widow and her children playfully laid off the floor of their one room into four parts, living room, dining room, bedroom and kitchen. Blessed with the power of imagination, the little family soon saw the tiny house as a mansion. New lifebegan happily, though the little money remaining was fast melting away.

Within six weeks after arriving in Logan, the widow had a severe shock and trial. Her elder son John was set upon by a mad dog that bit and tore the flesh of legs and arms so seriously that the boy was kept to his bed for six weeks. February was well over before John was able to move about again in the open air. During this time, the mother was confined to the house as nurse, for there was no one to call upon for help, and the real beginning of the new life was somewhat delayed. But Anna Widtsoe knew that the evil one would gladly destroy her and hers, and defeat their righteous endeavors, so she rejoiced that Satan had been foiled once again.

That winter, which was a bitterly cold one, the little emigrant family tasted real poverty for the first time. As soon as John was well on his feet again, she set about to earn a living for herself and her children. She took up dressmaking, her old trade. Soon plenty of work came to her, for she sewed well and her artistic sense found its way into the clothes she made. But, under pioneer conditions, the pay was small (one dollar and a half was a good price for the making of a gown), and she had to work far into the night, every night, straining her eyes against the weak coal oil light, to earn enough for the support of the family. It was toil by day and night. The first year in Zion was well over before a hand-driven sewing machine was secured. That was a mighty stride into convenience and labor economy. When John's wounds were healed in March, he was employed for some time,again through the help of Bishop Skanchy, in a sawmill, at a few dollars a week. Between them, mother and son earned enough for the needs of the family. Health waited upon them. The younger son, Osborne, grew and played and was the joy of the family and the neighbors.

Actual want there was not. The organization of the Church provided against suffering, should it occur, and kindly friends and neighbors were anxious to give the newcomers a helping hand. One evening during the first, bitter cold winter in Logan, the widow put her last stick of wood into the stove. Then she called her two boys to her side. Together they kneeled down and told the Lord of their condition, and asked him for fuel so that they might keep warm. Within five minutes after their prayer was over, there was a knock on the door, and Brother Larsen, living some distance up the street, and barely an acquaintance, came in with a big sack of coal upon his back, for the emigrant family. The prayer had been answered, almost before it was uttered. The luxury of that coal, the first they had in Zion, and the knowledge that the Lord was near, made the evening one of rare joy.

It was pride, foolish pride, perhaps, rather than necessity, that on several occasions led the little family in those early days to the brink of want. In the spring of 1884, Anna Widtsoe moved into a two-room house—a noble rise in fortune—nearer the business centre and in another ward, so that her customers would not have so far to go. Collections were slow one month; John was out of work. At last the familyhad only a sack of "shorts" left. For three weeks, they lived on "shorts" and water. Never before, in man's history, had "shorts" been served in so many different forms as the widow's ingenuity devised. Nevertheless, the diet was frightfully monotonous. They did not know, then, the high nutritive value of "shorts." One day, after nearly three weeks of rations on "shorts" and water, the Sixth Ward had a ward reunion. A Mormon ward reunion includes a feast of nearly all the good things of earth. When the meal was ended, there was food left over, and the good-hearted Bishop Skanchy—and no man was ever kinder to the poor—filled a large basket with roast chicken and lamb, vegetables and bread, cakes and desserts, and sent them by a messenger to the widow and her sons, who now lived in the First Ward. When the "shorts"-filled boys saw the well-filled basket of goodies uncovered upon their table there was eager, anticipatory swallowing, and much inward joy; all of which was changed to darkest despair when the widow drew herself up to her full height and said, "Brother, please take the basket back to the bishop with my thanks, and say to him that Sister Widtsoe is not a beggar, yet." To the boys, the departure of that basket with its contents was the darkest moment of their first years in Zion. It seemed a foolish pride, but perhaps it was better for the family to nurse a stubborn independence.

The language presented another problem, one to be overcome if progress was to be made. Sister Widtsoe knew only a few words of English; John had had a little in school. Osborne was not yet of school age.

However, they learned quickly, and in inverse proportions to age. Osborne picked up the language at once as it seemed; John, a little more slowly, and the mother, least rapidly. Spoken language, a matter of memory and imitation, is acquired most easily in youth. A copy of Leslies' Weekly became the first instructor, followed by the Book of Mormon and the Bible. By the time the first year in Zion was over, the little family had pretty well battered down the language wall. The mother, however, never overcame the accent inherited from the language of her childhood. But she learned to love the English language.

The most difficult phase of learning English for daily and constant use was the necessity of forsaking the mother tongue. Norwegian is an expressive and a beautiful language, well suited to clothe noble ideas in prose or poetry. It has a fine literature, reaching into the twilight of north European history. The thoughts and feelings, the romance and reality of life become interwoven with the language one speaks. Those who in mature years have not been obliged to adopt a new language for constant use cannot well comprehend the sacrifice that such a change entails. Sister Widtsoe accepted the requirement without hesitation, for it was part of her progress within the new truth; but she took good care that both of her boys retained their knowledge of Norwegian. Also, she yielded to the temptation of meeting with other Scandinavians to speak in the language that they knew best.

The social conditions in Logan were new and strange. The city was only about twenty-four yearsold when the widow and her two sons arrived. It was a typical Mormon pioneer town. The wide streets crossed at right angles, and in the wet season were exceedingly muddy and in the summer as exceedingly dusty. The sidewalks were little better. The houses were still in the log house stage, set back from the streets in large "lots" or plots of ground that served as kitchen gardens. The barns and stables were at some distance in the rear of the houses. Almost every family raised its own vegetables and had its own cows and horses. Culinary water was obtained from wells. Most of the people were farmers and cultivated the lands lying around the town. The business section faced the tabernacle square and boasted a wooden sidewalk. The tabernacle was a first class, substantial building. There were four modest ward meeting-houses. A fine temple was being constructed on the first hill east of the tabernacle square.

Nearly all of the people of Logan were members of the Church. Many of them were of American stock, but the majority were converts from Europe—English, Scandinavian, Swiss, and German, with a few French and Italian. Nearly all had been craftsmen or tradesmen in their native countries, and most of them were now obliged to farm for a living. They were far above the average in intelligence. The city was a true melting pot; the fire necessary came from the gospel which all loved. The organization of the Church helped, taught, cheered the people. They were happy. Naturally, the free and easy pioneer life did not tend to develop the best manners. The youth, especially those who had no knowledge of the toil andstruggle to learn new ways and a strange language, were inclined to laugh at the foreign looks and behavior of the immigrants, and to mock the broken language of the beginner in English. Generally, however, the town was peaceful and kindly. The gospel was their common cause. On that platform they met as equals. Yet the barriers of former customs and language tended to make a social group of those from the same country and speaking the same tongue.

The newness of the town and the thoughtless informality of the community seemed at first unattractive to the woman who had come from a land the ways of which had been fixed for a thousand years, but her common sense explained the situation; she smiled at misunderstandings, and developed love for all the people.

She had come to Zion for the sake of the gospel; and in the activities of the Church she found great joy. That joy was much increased by the knowledge that her beloved sister Petroline had accepted the restored gospel and had been baptized. In fact, her sister soon emigrated to Utah, arriving on July 7, 1885.

The following extracts from a letter dated May 7, 1885, addressed by the widow to her sister just before the latter's departure from Norway, are illuminating.

". . . In this letter I send you five dollars, which use as you desire, but . . . if you can, buy and bring with you . . . two myrtles with strong roots, several bulbs of Mrs. Rian's white lilies, as many bulbs as you can secure of Jacob's lilies, and as many rare flowersas you can conveniently secure. Place them in a tight cigar box containing right good garden soil. Water them carefully on the way . . . I hope this box will not give you any more trouble than John and Osborne caused me."

The love of flowers and things beautiful was ever present in her life.

She continued, "The Lord has blessed this desert so that the poor among His children who come here in faith, are not disappointed . . . I desire to bear witness to you, my dear sister of the covenant, that this gospel that we have accepted is of God, and I say to you and all members of the Church, be faithful in the midst of your tribulations and a glorious and beautiful day will dawn for you . . . This work is the last call to the earth from the King of Glory . . ."

Ever did she proclaim her love of the gospel.

The first year in Zion was strenuous but happy.
