John A. Widtsoe, In the Gospel Net: The Story of Anna Karine Gaarden Widtsoe ( 1941)

CHAPTER XI.

The First Decade in Zion

After the first year, life in Zion was much easier for the little immigrant family. They had found work; the barrier of the foreign tongue was breaking down; and they began to understand life as it was lived in Zion. The widow set about to plan for the future. Two things were uppermost in her mind: She and her children must learn to understand the principles of the gospel and obey its precepts, and she must educate her children. Her obligations to her God and to the schoolmaster, the father of her children, were ever before her.

She rejoiced in the gospel and in life within the Church. She was a regular attendant at meetings, no matter how busy she was. The Sunday afternoon sacrament meeting in the Logan Tabernacle was the favorite, though she delighted also in the less formal Sunday evening ward meeting. It was thrilling to her to sit under the voices of men who held the holy Priesthood, and faithful women who were as priestesses to her. But, she never forgot that they were but men and women through whom the Lord did His earthly work, and as such might make mistakes. Her northern canniness saved her from many a shock.

She joined the Relief Society when she first arrived and served regularly as a Relief Society teacher. Some years after her arrival, she was made a memberof the ward Relief Society presidency. Association with faithful Latter-day Saints and participation in the activities of the Church were really her life's vocation.

She had much to learn about the gospel. The two years of investigation had been devoted primarily to the fundamental principles leading to entrance into the Church. For example, she had not been taught the Word of Wisdom, except as it had been mentioned casually in gospel conversations. Now, she began to understand its real meaning and purpose and the necessity of obeying it since it was the desire of the Father that His children should heed it. Following the custom of most of her country people she had drunk coffee from her childhood and was an occasional user of tea. Alcoholic beverages she did not use. She set about to give up the use of tea and coffee but found it difficult. When she sewed every night far beyond midnight, the cup of coffee seemed to freshen her, she thought. After a two months' struggle, she came home one day, having given serious consideration to the Word of Wisdom problem. Her mind was made up. She stood in the middle of the room and said aloud, "Never again. Get behind me, Satan!" and, walking briskly to her cupboard, took out the packages of coffee and tea and threw them on the fire. From that day she never used tea or coffee.

The building of the Logan Temple led to constant city-wide discussion of the doctrine of vicarious work for the dead. In that principle, as it was unfolded before her, she verily revelled. It threw a flood oflight upon the whole meaning of the gospel as well as upon the nature of God. She thought of her beloved father and mother, of other dear departed ones, especially of the schoolmaster, and she rejoiced and praised the Lord. She became a diligent searcher for her genealogy, and did much temple work for her dead. The doctrine of universal salvation was to her one of the greatest gifts of the gospel. The day on which temple work was done for her father, mother, and husband, was the notable day of that year to the family.

A never-to-be-forgotten day was May 17, 1884, when the Logan Temple was dedicated. Through the help of her old friend Bishop Anthon L. Skanchy, she and her son John received tickets admitting them to the services. The spiritual enrichment of the day was ample reward for whatever sacrifices she had had to make for the gospel. It seemed to her as if the heavens had opened and the very voice of God had been heard by her. She had never been so near the heavenly hosts before. The same spirit was upon her when she received her own endowments on April 15, 1887.

She trained her boys in Church service. John was baptized into the Church, at his own request, on April 3, 1884, in the creek below the Brigham Young College; and Osborne in 1886, in the font in the Logan Temple. To Sunday School they must go, and to the other Sunday meetings, and later to the Mutual Improvement Association, when it was established. Activity in the Church of God was a privilege, not a duty—so she taught her children.

She grew rapidly in spiritual power. Under gospel influence her comprehension was quickened, and a prophetic view of the future was developed. She walked in close communion with the spiritual forces which she invited by eager, never-failing attention to her duties as she learned to understand them. One day in her ward testimony meeting she arose, her face glowing with a new light, and spoke in an unknown tongue. Another faithful sister arose and interpreted Sister Widtsoe's remarks. Both had received that day the gift of tongues. The widow had the same gift on several later occasions. She grew more and more as an inspired woman of Israel.

In the midst of such rich spiritual labors and experiences, she kept firm hold on the physical, material aspects of life. She still engaged in dressmaking. To be nearer the few business streets she moved into a part of the long log house owned by William Fereday. Brother and Sister Fereday, well advanced in years, were among the choice spirits of the city. Humble in earthly things, they were passing rich in things of the spirit. They were English converts, who, like the widow, had gathered to Zion to be with the Saints. From these spiritually minded people, who took much kind interest in the immigrant family, the widow and her sons learned much of value in life.

A little later Anna Widtsoe conceived the idea of organizing a sewing school. She had had experience in her native country as a preceptress in domestic subjects. So, she rented upstairs rooms in one of the business blocks, provided sewing rooms, and sleeping accommodations for out-of-town pupils. The ventureproved successful, and many a present grandmother learned how to make women's clothing from Sister Widtsoe's humble dressmaking school. But, the work was heavy, and tested her strength to the utmost, so that after a year or two she gave it up, and went back to her sewing.

When she had been in Zion nearly six years, her longing for the independence to which her early life had accustomed her, began to assert itself. She wanted a home of her own, and a piece of land in which she could plant flowers. The widow, Anna Widtsoe, was still the fishermaiden, Anna Gaarden. She had saved a few dollars out of her toil; her son, John, who had then been employed for two years had saved a little. They pooled their resources, and the widow proceeded to make several dollars grow where one grew before.

She found just the property she wanted, which could be handled profitably, and negotiated for its purchase. If she had little money, she put up a brave face, and trusted that her wits, with the help of the Lord, would enable her to succeed with her plans. Before completing the transaction, she went for advice to a friend, a man of influence in the community. He sensed that the widow had hit upon a good thing and promptly bought the property for himself. This angered her, but did not embitter her. She understood that all men had faults; she, herself, had plenty; and she always had the sound sense to distinguish between the actions of weak human beings and the royal truth of that which they represented in weakness. She said to herself that a man who would dosuch a thing would not prosper. Indeed so it turned out.

She looked around and found another piece of property, not so good but acceptable. She bought it; sold a part; bought and sold again. At the end she found herself the owner of a well-situated building site, six by twelve rods, and enough money to pay for the little four-roomed house that she built. When she had been in Zion about six years she moved into her own home, fully paid for, but not fully finished inside. It had been a real task. Then she thanked the Lord. She was happy. True, there were times when her soul ached for the rumble and roar of the ocean, the flapping of seabird's wings, and the sweet music of the mother tongue. But, she lifted her eyes in the new, sunlit land, where the Saints and prophets of God were, and peace nestled again in her heart.

The new home brought new interests. At a fire sale she bought for a trifle a set of slightly damaged, handsome portieres to hang over the doorway to the little staircase leading to the upper rooms of the house. That was an expensive investment. From that day on, when table, chair, or carpet, or any other article of furniture was to be bought, the question was always, "Is it good enough to be in the room with the portieres?" The house was furnished around the portieres!

Then she had a chance at her beloved flowers. The path could not be made straight from the gate to the house as was customary, but in the interests of beauty it must be curved to a gate beyond the end of the house. She planted a lawn, and flower beds, and herlove for flowers soon made her garden one of the best. The roots that she planted were still blossoming forty years later. The land behind the house the boys made into a kitchen garden, which yielded most of their food supplies. The keen zest of securing this humble home and beautifying it, was no whit smaller than that of the millionnaire who accomplishes the same thing, no more, on a larger scale.

During these years she made many friends. She was companionable and of a sociable disposition. Her experience and wide reading made her conversation interesting. Sister Widtsoe soon became a well-known figure in Logan. Then as she prospered a little, with more time and money at her disposal, she reverted to her old ways among the poor and sorrowing. Many came to her for counsel and comfort. The poor never left without a gift to take along. Hundreds of men and women can testify to the help that Sister Anna Widtsoe gave in starting them out again and correctly upon the path of life. Her genuine, intelligent sympathy was felt by all who came into her presence.

It was only to be expected that the handsome, rather dashing widow would have many male admirers; some of them of wealth and position. The boys were somewhat resentful at being crowded out of the living room by men who came to court their mother. The offers of marriage carried with them freedom from the toil and responsibility that she was under; but in the end the schoolmaster won; and she chose to remain a widow. She never remarried. Hers was also a single-hearted love.

While the years hurried along, she never lost sightof her duty to educate her sons. The younger, Osborne, went through the regular school curriculum as then organized. When he was ten years of age, he was entered in the preparatory department of the Brigham Young College. He possessed a mind of extraordinary readiness. He stood at the head of his class, always, yet had ample time for play. Of a sunny, genial disposition, he was popular with everybody. The elder, John, who had had good school training in Norway, finished the so-called grade school during the first two years in Zion, doing odd jobs in the evenings and during the summer. He then found employment, through the help of C. E. Thorstensen, in the old U. O. Store in Logan, where he worked about three years. To carry on the educational process, he took private lessons in the evenings, and thus covered many subjects in English, mathematics, and the languages. The widow was also eager that the lads should have special cultural training, and provided music lessons for them, as well as lessons in painting. She dreamed great dreams.

Her house was not yet built when she decided that John should no longer be kept from regular schooling. He was well employed and giving satisfaction; soon he would be able to provide for the family. To take him out of such employment, to get a bit more book learning, considering that they were a family of poor immigrants, seemed very unwise to many good people. The bishop remonstrated with the widow. The boy would become lazy. He should be in the canyon now, learning to do hard work. His boys were trained to work. She should be content with what she had. Thewidow listened politely, though the storm was gathering. She was never afraid to speak her mind when occasion arose. She was grateful for the bishop's interest; he meant well. But, the Lord had given the boys to her and not to the bishop. They were her responsibility, not his. She had obligations to the living and the dead which he did not know about. Besides, he did not understand, as she did, that the training of the mind is as necessary as the training of the muscles. She concluded by looking into the future, and predicting that he and others would yet admit that she was right; and that the time would come when all children would be given the opportunity of higher education. The good man, for he was a kind, generous man, limited in his vision by his own hard pioneer experience, saw that nothing could be done to change the widow's mind, and that the boy would have to go on to possible destruction!

John was sent to the Brigham Young College for further education, and the widow worked the harder to keep the family fed and clothed. In the spring of 1891, the young man was graduated. He had done so well in his studies that he was encouraged by the wise and enthusiastic president of the institution, Dr. Joseph M. Tanner, to go away to an eastern institution for still further study. This suited the brave widow. It fitted into her plan for training her sons to be worthy of their father. The little home was mortgaged, some friends, believers in the boy's promise, gave some help, by signing notes, and provision was made for several years of study. The interest rate was very high, but, then, it was as important forbanks to make a profit as for an unknown, immigrant boy to secure an education. In June 1891, about seven and a half years after their arrival in Zion, the little family were separated, the oldest boy going to Harvard University for study. The widow knew that everything depended upon the outcome of the venture, but she had faith that all would end well. She rented her house, gave a last hour of attention to her flowers, and with her younger boy journeyed to Salt Lake City to live. She thought that there she would more readily find work for herself and her boy, and moreover her sister had settled there. Her heart was heavy as she left her little home which she had occupied less than two years. But she was realizing her ideal.

During the three years that followed, she lived a most interesting life in Salt Lake City. She worked hard, yet had the opportunity of making a host of friends, many of them her countrymen, with whom happy social relations were maintained. She enjoyed also the meetings in the great tabernacle, where she heard the leaders of the Church explain the principles of the gospel. These were the years of the completion of the temple, and out of her poverty she made her contribution, and insisted that each of her sons make a contribution also. Osborne at this time was working in the Z. C. M. I. While John was attending school, Osborne must work. But both enjoyed good health and were happy.

Two years after John left, she had a visit from a golden-haired, pink-cheeked, blue-eyed young woman two years younger than John, who had met John dur-ing a summer at Cambridge. Again, the widow looked the future full in the face. The time would of course come when she would have to share her sons' affection with their wives. Was this beautiful girl to be one of them?

A little more than three years after his departure, John was graduated from Harvard, with highest honors, and was employed by the Utah State Agricultural College, located in Logan. She looked upward with gratitude. She would yet meet the obligations of her life. But she would have to be careful to hold before the boys the ideal of service as well as education. What was the value of learning if not used for human good?

When John returned in the summer of 1894, the family moved back to Logan, took possession of their little home, and settled down to write a new chapter in their lives. This was nearly eleven years after their arrival in Zion. Thus ended the first decade in Zion.
