John A. Widtsoe, In the Gospel Net: The Story of Anna Karine Gaarden Widtsoe ( 1941)

CHAPTER XII.

The Wheel Turns

The three years after the autumn of 1894 were happy ones. The widow kept house for her two sons. Her sister was in Salt Lake City, within easy reach. Finances were easier; a new kitchen was added, making the house a comfortable five-room cottage. John was well employed at the Utah State Agricultural College, and was giving satisfaction. Osborne was making a brilliant record as a student in the same school. It was with much gratitude in her heart that she heard her son Osborne deliver the valedictory address in behalf of his class, when he graduated in June 1897. The toil of the past was bringing its recompense.

During this time, as always, she was firm in her devotion to the gospel. The eternal truth restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith was the joy of her life. That faith she knew must be kept untarnished. That must be defended at all costs. She was everywhere the upholder of the Church, its principles and officers. At times this attitude was put to the test. For example:

About 1896, Moses Thatcher, an apostle of the Church, was suspended from service in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Brother Thatcher, a man of unusual gifts and most charming personality, was very popular in his home town of Logan, as through-out the Church. His suspension caused widespread discussion, and many of his intimate Logan friends felt that he had been treated unjustly, and took his side against the action of the authorities of the Church. The temporary upheaval was tempestuous. Men's feelings ran high. While the excitement was at its height, two of the ward elders called at the Widtsoe home as ward teachers. The widow's two sons were home, and the whole family assembled to be instructed by the visiting teachers. Soon the visitors began to comment on the "Thatcher episode," as it was called, and explained how unjustly Brother Thatcher had been treated. The widow answered not a word, but there was a gathering storm in her stern eyes and high-held head. After some minutes of listening to the visitors find fault with the Quorum of the Apostles with respect to Brother Thatcher, she slowly rose from her chair and as slowly walked to the entrance door of the house which she threw wide open. With eyes now blazing she turned to the two brethren and said: "There is the door. I want you to leave this house instantly. I will not permit anyone in this house to revile the authorities of the Church, men laboring under divine inspiration. Nor do I wish such things spoken before my sons whom I have taught to love the leaders of the Church. And don't come back until you come in the right spirit to teach us the gospel. Here is the door. Now, go!" The visitors hurried out shamefacedly, for the widow had chastised them thoroughly. In defense of the gospel, Sister Widtsoe knew no fear.

Many a family council had been held before Osborne's graduation. The mother had pointed out the blessings that the family were receiving, and she urged that steps be taken to make repayment. The gospel had brought happiness and success to the family; now the family must render service in return, so that the gospel blessings might be yet more fully extended. Moreover, she set forth that love does not wax strong, nor appreciation, without sacrifice. In short, she felt that one of the boys should take a mission to the nations in behalf of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. To this, her sons gladly assented.

It was decided that John should volunteer for a mission; and that Osborne, now graduated, should teach to earn the living while John was away, and that when John returned, Osborne would have his turn. The plan was well laid, but like many manmade plans did not work out. John was told that it was desired that before he take a mission, he first "lay the foundation for a family." In view of this answer, the family set about to make other plans. It was arranged that Osborne should enter Harvard University that autumn to continue his studies and to take an advanced degree. Rooms were secured for him in the college dormitories and his transportation arranged for, when suddenly fate entered protest.

A week before Osborne was to leave for Harvard University, a telephone message, rare in those days, informed him that he had been called to fill a mission for the Church in the Society Islands. Of course, he accepted, without even consulting his mother or brother. He knew the temper of the family. But, thesoul of the widow was somewhat tried because her baby boy was not to go to Norway, to preach the gospel to her own people. It did seem strange that he should be called to the South Sea Islands, for, in addition to English, he spoke Norwegian, French, and German, and he was of European origin. The widow, however, realized that by just such experiences is faith made strong; and she set about to prepare for the appointed departure of her missionary son. Osborne was ordained a seventy and set apart for his mission by President George Reynolds on October 28, 1897, and left for his mission on the same day. When he left at the set time, her heart was heavy, for the three unruffled years with her boys had been happy ones. Distrustful as she ever was of destiny, she wondered what might come next to change the even progress of her life.

She did not have long to wait. On the following June 1, 1898, John was married to Leah Eudora Dunford; and two months later, set sail for Europe for the purpose of continuing his education. The widow was glad that her elder son had found a desirable companion; she believed in marriage and family life; but she dreaded the loneliness with both of her boys away. Indeed, the little family had become widely scattered; one in Europe, another in America, and the third on the Pacific isles.

She left Logan soon after John's departure, to live in Salt Lake City, near her sister, and in the larger city which she loved. However, the years passed quickly. Two years later, John and his wife returned, with their first child, the widow's firstgranddaughter, and her namesake. John had been appointed director of the Utah State Agricultural Experiment Station, and moved into the official residence of the station director, with his family and mother. A few months later, on February 10, 1901, after about forty months' absence, Osborne returned from his mission, successfully and honorably filled. He also lived with his brother. Again, the family was reunited under one roof, throughout the winter of 1900-01 and during the spring and summer of 1901; but, for the last time, since maturity had seized upon the boys and life's duties called in different ways.

In the autumn of 1901, Osborne went to Salt Lake City to teach in the Latter-day Saints' University. His mother went along to keep house for him. She was happy in the progress of her sons, and in the society of her sister Petroline, an intelligent, devoted, lovable companion, to whom she became more closely drawn, as her sons entered into independent life.

Nearly twenty years had passed since she and her sons had arrived in the "valleys of the mountains." Her experiences had been many and various. She could testify that the Lord had not forgotten her. Indeed, blessings wonderful beyond her dreams had come to her. She was nearing her fifty-fourth birthday anniversary, and it seemed that the afternoon and evening of life could be spent in ease among her family and friends. The future looked peacefully inviting.

Then destiny took hold of her again and opened another happy, though unexpected chapter in herlife's activities. On May 7, 1903, she and her sister were called to fill missions in Norway. Unexpected as the call was, it was gratefully received. Both the sisters loved the gospel above all else, and they looked forward eagerly, now that the privilege had been given them, of teaching the truths of salvation to their people in the land of their birth. They prepared without delay for their departure.

Well-attended farewell socials were given in their honor, first by the Salt Lake City Seventeenth Ward; then by the Scandinavian organization in the Fourteenth Ward meetinghouse. On June 23, 1903, they were set apart for their missions and received their missionary certificates. On the following day they began the journey into the mission field.
