John A. Widtsoe, In the Gospel Net: The Story of Anna Karine Gaarden Widtsoe ( 1941)

CHAPTER XIII.

Preaching the Gospel

The sisters left Salt Lake City for the mission field on June 24, 1903. As the train chugged through the canyons that day, the panorama of her life swept before the widow's eyes. She had reason to know that He "who is mighty to take, is great to give," and her heart swelled within her. Though she had at times rebelled at her trials, and questioned eternal justice, she was being taught in unmistakable terms that God is good—He had been good to her, and now He was giving her this great opportunity of bearing witness to the truth she had found, to her relatives, friends, and countrymen in Norway. June 24, 1903, was a memorable day for her. She scarcely foresaw, however, that four years and a half would elapse before she should again see the glow of the setting sun upon the mountains of the West.

The sisters kept a somewhat detailed diary of their missionary experiences, which with its naive, direct style is good reading. The indefatigable industry and selfless devotion displayed by these women in their journal is almost unbelievable. They certainly felt that they were on the Lord's errand, and could waste no time nor opportunity. Day after day for more than four years and a half, they labored with never a day of vacation or rest, except for such change and travel as accompanied the performance of their duties.

It is a marvelous record, an example to the host of younger men and women who go into the mission field.

Though both sisters were more than fifty years of age, they were eager for knowledge, keenly alive to every new experience, and responsive to the beauty, majesty or power about them. They confirmed the doctrine of this later day, that adults may learn as well as youth, and to the very end of life.

On the outward journey they record the interesting places visited in Omaha, Chicago, and Boston. They were overawed with the power of the Niagara Falls, they stood gratefully at Cambridge, Massachusetts, under the old elm by which Washington took command of the American forces of the Revolution. Harvard University they inspected carefully for it was there that John and Osborne had studied and graduated. Likewise, across the ocean and in Europe they were interested in all that they saw. In spirit they were young.

Copenhagen, where they arrived July 13, 1903, was at that time the home of the administrative office of the Scandinavian Mission composed of Norway, Denmark, and Sweden. There the sisters met their old friend and father in the gospel, Bishop A. L. Skanchy, then president of the Scandinavian Mission. There also they received their first assignment to labor.

They were assigned to the Trondheim Conference (now District) Norway, where they labored from August 1, 1903, to December 29, 1904. They were then assigned to the Christiania Conference (now Oslo District) where they labored until January 2, 1906. Their final assignment was again to the Trondheim Conference, where they labored until their release on October 31, 1907. They also paid official visits to the third missionary district in Norway, the Bergen Conference (now District). In short, they visited and spoke to practically every branch in the Norwegian Mission. When they arrived in the mission field, Elder Francis M. Lyman was presiding over the European Mission. He was succeeded soon thereafter by Elder Heber J. Grant, who was succeeded three years later by Elder Charles W. Penrose. During this period, the Scandinavian Mission was presided over successively by Elders Anthon L. Skanchy, C. D. Fjeldsted, and J. M. Christensen.

The sisters were among the first regular women missionaries to Norway. Other women missionaries had usually accompanied their husbands. The slanderous word had gone forth into every Norwegian village that the Mormons were an immoral people, who sent out missionaries to gather girls to Utah for unlawful purposes. Tales of the wildest and vilest kind had been circulated about the Mormons and their practices. So widely and with such apparent authority had these false rumors spread that the population was up in arms against the Latter-day Saints. Under these conditions it was of great help to be able to present two women who had gone to Utah in their early maturity, had remained unmarried, and had come back to tell the truth about the Mormons. They awakened interest everywhere. Men might lie, said the people, but these women were likely to tell thetruth. The sisters told their story in every accessible village, they gave innumerable lectures on women among the Mormons, they traveled, visited friends and members, and often, because of their connections, had access to influential people. Perhaps the most important phase of their mission was to allay the prejudice created through untruthful tales about the Mormons. At any rate from one end of the land to the other was heralded the story of these women, of a respectable Norse family. The evidence that they produced, and they had a well-organized group of facts, figures, pictures, and personal experiences, tended to silence for the time at least the traducers of the Mormons. They entered into competition with one of these vendors of untruth, an apostate from the Church, silenced him, then visited him, and brought him to tearful acknowledgment of his error.

The refutation of lies did not, however, bring Mormon popularity. The prejudice was too deep for that. In Trondheim, the home city of the widow's husband, the sisters became well known. There, they and the family had relatives. Trondheim is the ancient capital of Norway, where the king even now must go to be crowned, and it is the home of the finest cathedral in all northern Europe. Many distinguished men have claimed Trondheim as their home. Besides, the city lies at the finest fjord and harbor facilities in central Norway. These factors and others have given the people a foolish feeling of aristocracy. They, in the noted cathedral city, could have nothing to do with the Mormons! They could not put a Mormonblemish on their illustrious written history of more than a thousand years!

The priests as teachers of the people were often unwilling or unable to do even the duty of Christian men. At one time the sisters visited the church at Dolm on the island of Hitra (formerly Hitteren) in search of genealogy. It was the church in which both had been christened, in which both had been confirmed, and in which the widow was married to the schoolmaster. For generations the family of the sisters had supported the church. Yet, it was with extreme reluctance that the priest permitted them to examine the records to the use of which they were lawfully entitled. And when they asked if they might occupy a room during their stay, in the extensive buildings at the priest's disposal, they were refused, and he explained that he dared not give help or shelter to anyone of the Mormon faith. As a result, since the sisters were determined to secure all available family names, they had to cross day after day, morning and evening, an ugly, restless body of the ocean. So dangerous was the crossing that on several occasions they came near to losing their lives. The priest of course was fully informed of the predicament of the two women. Christian charity cannot remake the world, when they who profess to represent the Christ, show such intolerance towards those who may differ from them in matters of belief.

The sisters also sought out persons of prominence in their campaign to allay the anti-Mormon prejudice. In these attempts they found helpers in the school friends of the departed schoolmaster. Many ofthese friends had risen to prominence, and several were members of the National Congress (Storthing). The widow lost no time, but sought out these old friends, everyone of whom received her with courtesy and kindness, and listened with interest to her story of the restoration of the gospel and the organized Church of Christ in the valleys of western America. Another friend, a relative of the schoolmaster, of the Swedish aristocracy, but resident in Norway, opened his house to the sisters. Thus in the midst of opposition, there were oases of friendliness.

Some of her powerful friends gave material assistance. Professor Hegstad, one of the schoolmaster's boyhood friends, now a congressman himself, presented a petition in congress for the restoration of the widow's pension (based upon her husband's service to the state) of which she had been deprived because she became a Mormon. The pension was restored, and continued to her death, and the sum due her for the years that the pension was unlawfully withheld from her, was also paid her. Such contacts of necessity assisted, however indirectly, in promoting the cause that she represented.

Amidst the daily toil and battle for truth came now and then the keen reward of seeing some friend, to whom they had taught the gospel, go in faith and with a repentant heart into the waters of baptism. Likewise, there was joy in visiting among the Saints, teaching and comforting them, settling difficulties and leading the wayward into the path of safety. The journals of the sisters abound in kindly, loving references to the Saints among whom they labored. Thereare hundreds, yet living, who bear witness to the helpfulness, friendliness, and loving wisdom of these two women missionaries. They left and received blessings wherever they went.

The sisters took great delight in their associations with their fellow missionaries, most of them young men. To these brethren, the sisters gave motherly counsel and help and received in return kindnesses and courtesies fully recorded in the journals. The teachings of the Priesthood meetings, held generally in connection with the district conferences, these faithful women drank in as the thirsty traveler drinks water. When the Scandinavian or European mission president happened to be present, the journals overflow with quotations to be remembered. On the one occasion when they heard President Heber J. Grant speak in Trondheim, they filled the day's page with his advice. For President Grant, as their journals show, they always entertained a deep feeling of love.

Rich spiritual experiences were theirs during the years in the mission field. On many occasions they witnessed the healing of the sick under the hands of the Priesthood of Almighty God. At various times the spirit of prophecy was present in their meetings, and they had the privilege of seeing the prophecies fulfilled. Once at least the gift of tongues was upon the widow to the comfort of herself and others. By the whisperings of the spirit they avoided dangers and often found unexpected success. They testified that their prayers had been answered time and again. Powerfully they bore witness, from personal experiences, that the day of miracles had not ended, that thegifts of the spirit were again upon earth, and that the spiritual and temporal domains of life were often in communion.

Such experiences enriched their days and perfected their missionary joy. True happiness comes to those who serve God and who know of a certainty that God lives. They may commune with Him.
