John A. Widtsoe, In the Gospel Net: The Story of Anna Karine Gaarden Widtsoe ( 1941)

CHAPTER XIV.

More Missionary Days

The missionary experiences of the widow and her sister were varied and many. Upon their entrance into the mission (July 13, 1903) they spent a few days in visiting Copenhagen, the beautiful capital of Denmark. They then went on to Christiania (now Oslo) where they remained to witness the dedication of the new Christiania Chapel. On July 27, 1903, when the dedication occurred, there were present, in addition to the presidents of the European and Scandinavian missions, and the missionaries of the Norwegian districts, a large number of missionaries from the several missions in Europe. It was an occasion of great spiritual joy; and a splendid introduction to the work the two sisters were to do. They made their small contribution to the building fund, and had their names sealed in the iron memorial box.

On the last day of July, 1903, the sisters took train for Trondheim, where they had been assigned to labor. Early in the following December, they returned to Christiania to be present at the celebration on December 7, of the fiftieth anniversary of the organization of Christiania Branch. This was also a valuable spiritual experience to them. Then, also, on December 8, the memorial box was sealed. They were back in their field of labor on December 16.

Two years later, June 22, 1906, they witnessed the coronation of Haakon VII, King of Norway, in the ancient cathedral at Trondheim. They were not fond of kings but were glad that so fine a man had been selected to be ruler of their native land. They thought longingly of the inspired government of their adopted country, the United States of America.

It was necessary to use intelligence in making headway among a people so prejudiced against Mormonism, or in any event not interested in it. One of the devices to this end, much enjoyed by the widow especially, was to give lectures on non-religious subjects, such as silk-raising in Utah, irrigation in America, the Scandinavians in western America. Many came to listen who would not have come to an address on Mormonism, and they often remained to hear the Mormon sequel to each of these lectures. Such talks were also interesting to the members in their Relief Society and Mutual Improvement meetings, in both of which organizations the sisters gave much valued help.

The widow's fine critical judgment and literary taste made her very useful in helping the young members of the auxiliaries of the Church. In fact she was in constant demand as "critic" at auxiliary programs, and usually filled the role to the satisfaction of all.

During their long mission, the sisters traveled widely over Norway. The country is one of the most picturesque in the world, in nature, people, and customs. Among the most interesting of these missionary trips were the visits, beginning and ending at Trondheim, along the magnificent broken coastlineto the very north of Norway around North Cape to the city of Vardo. The first began on August 19, 1903, and lasted until September 1903; the second began on June 1, 1904, and ended on June 28, 1904. They were therefore, on the second visit, in the north at the time of the midnight sun. Above them hung the sun, its light tempered by the water vapor in the air. It swung about in a circle, dipping towards the mountains in the evening, but changing its mind, rising again, thus giving twenty-four hours of unbroken sunshine on a cloudless day. They describe in their diaries the vastness, breath-taking majesty of nature in the far north, the ocean, the mountains, the glaciers, the forests, the profusion of flowers, the boats and the fishing, the battle for a livelihood, and they voice their gratitude to the good Father who has brought so much beauty to earth.

But, on these trips, even more attention was given to the people who needed the gospel. They preached to the passengers on the ship; they gathered the fishermen about them and spoke of revelation in our day; they stood in the northernmost city of the world and under the midnight sun bore their testimony of the truth of the restored gospel. Their journals make thrilling reading.

Another missionary trip took them southward along the coast of Norway where they held meetings in all the principal cities, including Bergen, in which city they did very effective work. Other journeyings took them landward, to Roros, Tonsberg, Drammen, and numerous other places. Everywhere they did the usual missionary work, teaching the Saints, proselyt-ing among strangers, always bearing testimony to the truth of the restored gospel. Occasionally they had harrowing experiences, often hard ones, but always there was a note of gratitude in their words and prayers.

The sisters felt that on their mission it was their duty to seek out and preach to their relatives. So, soon after their arrival in Trondheim, in the summer of 1903, they took the boat for the outermost island and Titran. As the boat laid to at the quay, they looked down the gangplank with some misgiving. More than twenty years earlier, the people had turned against the widow because she had become a Mormon, and the evil was aggravated when she betook herself, with her two boys, to the American home of Mormondom. It might have been a bit more decent, they reasoned, had she left the boys behind, but to inculcate Mormonism into the minds of the boys was unforgivable. Had she been forgiven? she wondered as she stepped ashore. Here her people had lived for generations; here she had been born and reared. Had the people forgiven her?

She soon discovered her standing in the community. The sisters introduced themselves. The word spread like wildfire among the homes: Anna Gaarden Widtsoe and her sister had arrived, as Mormon missionaries! When the sisters sought lodging, every door was closed against them. After much persuasion, a simple-minded family, strangers on the island, who thought that to be charitable was to be Christlike, took them in, and there they remained, while the houses of their blood relatives were closed to them.

Nothing daunted, however, the two sisters, who, may it be said to their credit, never lacked in courage, found entrance, however cold the reception, into every house for a gospel conversation. The neighboring village of Hovik was more tolerant, but towards them human kindness was nowhere going to waste. After a few days, the sisters returned to Trondheim, grieving over men's hardness of heart, but determined that they should yet hold meetings and preach the gospel in Titran, their native village.

Five times during the four and one-half years of missionary service did the sisters visit Titran and neighboring villages. At each succeeding visit the opposition became milder. At last they were invited into every house and treated royally. On the last two visits they held meetings and spoke to crowded houses about the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. But, the people were fearful. The priest made two visits or more a year. How should they square their contact with the Mormons and his instructions? The sisters failed to make any converts among their relatives, but the violent prejudice of the past was removed. This was a great comfort to the sisters who felt that in bearing repeated testimonies they had freed themselves from responsibility. However, to the end of their days they kept in constant touch with their relatives in Norway, in Titran and elsewhere, and supplied them with Mormon literature.

The last few months of their mission were devoted to an intensive search for genealogical information. Helpers were secured; they spent long weeks in the archive; they visited every locality in which membersof the family were supposed to have lived. They were moderately successful, and brought back a connected genealogy which became the foundation of the larger genealogy now possessed by the family. To the best of their ability these two faithful, devoted followers of the Lord Jesus Christ, sought to do their duty towards the living and the dead, towards relative and stranger.

It would fill a large volume to relate the many experiences that came into their missionary lives. It is so with every missionary story. One thing remains certain: that the devoted, never-ceasing, and intelligent labor of the sisters did result in much good. They were able to do work and to find access to opportunities not within the reach of male missionaries. There is a distinct, important place for women in the missionary system of the Church.

One journey the widow left almost to the end of the mission. At last, however, she took the journey to Namsos, eighty miles north of Trondheim. Here she visited old friends; the school in which she taught; those remaining of her husband's teaching colleagues. Then, with courage in her heart, she went on August 14, 1907, to the cemetery and stood long by the grave of the schoolmaster, her husband. "Memories of the past filled my heart and overflowed," she writes in her journal. Then she turned back to life on earth with its duties and blessings.

October 26, 1907, the sisters left Trondheim for Christiania. On the 31st, they received their formal release, and on that day left Norway for their Utah home. En route they visited Copenhagen, Berlin (where she met Mrs. Susa Young Gates, the mother of her elder son's wife), Paris, London, and many intermediate points. They still had zest for new scenes and more knowledge. On November 21, they sailed from Liverpool on the S. S. Dominion. On December 7, at 12:30 in the morning their train arrived in Ogden. There they were met by John and Osborne. Two hours later they were in Salt Lake City. The everlasting hills looked down upon them as in the past. They were back in Zion. Another chapter was closed. They thanked God for His mercies. The sisters slept well that night.
