John A. Widtsoe, In the Gospel Net: The Story of Anna Karine Gaarden Widtsoe ( 1941)

CHAPTER XV.

Ripening Years

The widow had made her second entrance into the "valleys of Zion." How would she find the home of the Saints after these years of absence? That was her question. The day after her arrival, in the full blaze of the western sun, the widow surveyed the valley, the mountains, and the city founded by her people. All looked good to her, though nature seemed parched and barren in contrast with the green luxuriance of Norway's mountain-sides. She was glad to be home again. This was home!

Then, as was her wont, she soberly weighed the issues of life. She had sought and found truth; she had taught it at home and abroad; henceforth it must be her stay, support, and guide. Through its power she must ripen her life into fitness for the eternal harvest. The reality of her good Heavenly Father was again borne in upon her, the self-sacrificing leadership of the Son of God, and the high commission of His truth-loving prophet, Joseph Smith. Her heart beat with warmth at the flood of grateful thoughts. Where the Saints are, there is home!

Times had changed for her family. During her absence in the mission field, Osborne had married Rose (Rosetta Rebekah) Homer, a charming, capable young woman of noble pioneer pedigree, whom he had met while a student at the Utah State Agricul-tural College. He and his bride were situated in Salt Lake City where he was rising rapidly in the service of the Latter-day Saints University, ultimately becoming the president of the institution. John, after a two-year sojourn in the employ of Brigham Young University, had returned to the Utah State Agricultural College, where he was serving as president of the institution. She was no longer a stranger in a strange land.

After her return from the mission field, she visited first in Salt Lake City with her son Osborne and his family; then in Logan with her son John and his family. Then she settled permanently in Salt Lake City, where, shortly, her home, a small modern cottage, 310 Wall Street, was built, now razed to make way for the grounds of Utah State Capitol. The physical comforts of life were hers, but, indeed, for them she cared little.

She set about at once to seek out those, chiefly immigrants but also many others, who had need of cheer and guidance. As in the past, her home became a gathering place for dreaming youth and disillusioned age. To both she gave strength and inspiration. She became an interpreter of life to the many who frequented her home. Ever she pointed her lessons with the truths of the gospel. Her quick resentment would rise against any aspersion cast upon the divinely inspired labors of Joseph Smith, who to her was the chosen interpreter to this age of Jesus, the Christ. Scores of men and women bear testimony to the spiritual comfort and sane practical advice received from "Sister Widtsoe."

One recently arrived convert who had not found things to his liking complained bitterly about the Church and the people. Promptly, the widow set him right, "We have come here to build up Zion, not to tear it down." That message changed the course of a life.

A youth or maiden gifted with a spark of artistic genius won her immediate concern and support. Her own nature from girlhood had moved in the realm of spiritual things. Poets, painters, sculptors, all who possessed creative power, she cherished and encouraged, for she believed that they gave life to material existence. The young artist's hard struggle became easier when the widow said, "You have the gift; the world needs you; don't give up; you'll make it."

The poor in purse were her equal concern. The plea of the poor she could not resist. So she gave of her own small income, until she often had to go without. Yet, when she was found at her frugal meal, sometimes of sour milk and potatoes (an old-world wholesome dish), she used to say that it tasted sweet because she knew that the last visitor was having enough to eat. The poor loved her.

Meanwhile she was as active as she could be in church and civic affairs. Among the Scandinavians she was a ready committee worker. She took part in the work of the Relief Society to which she belonged. She was a charter member, perhaps the founder, of a Norwegian literary society, Norroenna Laget, which punctuated literary studies with social enjoyments. She was a member of the Utah Women's Press Club, a group of Utah women writers, whichshe served one term as president. When the American-Norwegians celebrated the centennial of Norwegian independence, she and her sister were among the active workers. The widow was ever possessed of zest and an eager interest in new knowledge.

She took a keen interest in civic affairs, for she believed that good government depended on the characters of the men and women elected to office. Therefore before election times she was active in behalf of the candidates she thought best fitted for public service. Her sister was equally active in such matters.

From childhood she and her sister had been trained in handwork, and always retained a feeling of appreciation for products of the skillful hand, especially if they had housewifely meanings. This appreciation was not merely theoretical, for the sisters were always engaged in some type of handwork which they occasionally exhibited. At one of the Utah State Fairs, Sister Widtsoe received a diploma for the best embroidery, and her sister for the best woodcarving exhibited. Their innate sense of beauty no doubt helped much in these home occupations. Philosophers of our day are urging the people of this machine age to occupy themselves with some handwork, both as a means of filling leisure time and as a provision against the social disorders which often follow exclusive machine production. Closely connected are the mind and the body. The healthiest man is he who uses, in proper balance, all of his faculties. The sisters lived normal lives.

Numerous appointments came and were filled, as the years rolled on. Her Church meetings in taber-nacle and ward house were always attended and gave her greatest joy. She loved to hear the Priesthood discuss the principles of the gospel. She also gave attention to the dead of her line by doing temple work, though the burden of that work fell upon her sister Petroline.

One handicap overshadowed Sister Widtsoe's life. She was a mature woman thirty-four years of age, when she came to America, an age at which it is difficult to learn to speak a foreign language without accent. She acquired facility in reading and writing English, and understanding the spoken word. Yet, naturally, she was freer in the use of her native tongue. She always felt a certain inward embarrassment when, as she knew, she spoke English in her broken manner. Language is one of the most serious barriers among men. Failure to understand one another leads to misunderstanding and suspicion. Those who speak the dominant language of a country often fail to appreciate the virtues of those of foreign extraction who cannot acquire the native accent, or the ready use of the language. This was very evident in early Utah, peopled by Mormon converts from many foreign lands. In fact, the native American stock were not free from unkindness due to ignorance, in their views and treatment of the immigrant. In any event, the widow found or felt herself handicapped in her progress among her chosen people, because of her broken English accent, which was not improved by her years in the foreign mission field, and she was therefore led more than ever to use her energies among the people of her own national origin.

The leisure of this period of her life nurtured the creative power with which she had been endowed from birth. She had expressed herself in prose and poetry from her girlhood, but the gift had slumbered, perforce, during the hard, strenuous years of middle life. Now, her desire for literary expression was reawakened. Poetry became the main outlet of her feelings. Her verses reflected her own moods as well as those of the sublime nature of the land in which she lived and had lived. At times she rose to real heights of poetic imagery, and seldom did she merely write verses. She wrote, of course, in Norwegian. It would be useless to attempt to render her work into English—poetry is usually untranslatable—but the titles of her poems indicate a wide scope of vision and feeling. Especially did the beauty of the world and its people stir her into poetic flights. Her work was always reverent. Some of her poems were published in Bikuben, others in the eastern Scandinavian Press; most of them remain in manuscript. Her poems are made alive by a deep spiritual feeling, clothed with the products of a vivid, beauty-loving imagination—they are poems, indeed. Her dearest wishes were placed on paper in rhyming, measured lines. Even her burial wish was left in a heart-touching stanza. The possession and use of her creative gifts gave her much real comfort.

She delighted in the terse summaries of human wisdom, characteristic of Norway as of other countries, and indeed made an excellent collection of such everyday wisdom. She added some of her own making. The following selections give an idea of the nature of this wisdom collection:

She who seldom spins, does not know where to find spinning wheel or wool.

A long journey makes a light burden heavy.

One person may throw a handful of feathers into the air, but a nation may not be able to gather them.

Slander and lying may cease, but the effect of such talk never disappears.

If you wish to say something that will not be repeated, speak well of your neighbor and friend.

Need drives a naked woman to spin.

It needs a strong back to bear prosperity.

Children do the work of children.

No matter how far the gull flies, it uses the same wings.

My parents need not to have been evil because I am so.

No matter where a servant goes, his harness hangs by the door.

Even if the earth were burning we should have to remain on it.

He who would please everybody must get up early in the morning.

Big words and small deeds usually go together.

Great knowledge and true culture are not the same. True culture may be found in the laborer's cottage, for there are many things that cannot be bought with money.

Evil-minded people demand the greatest virtues of their neighbors.

They who set up most conditions for their happiness are the unhappiest.

She found time also to enjoy the prose and poetical productions of the great minds of all times. She read wisely. In her well-stocked library which looked worn from use, the subjects ranged from science, through history and philosophy, to religion. She came back with childlike delight to the wealth of northern literature, upon which she had been nourished in her youth. She often quoted the wise sayings of the ancient Norse sagas. But, most worn and oftenestread were the Bible, Book of Mormon, and the other works of the Church. Cheap and trashy literature went into the wastebasket with scant ceremony. The spirit of culture was in her home.

Current events fascinated her. She read in them the operation of human wills, bent to truth or untruth. When World War I broke out, before America had entered it, she cannily said, "Study the leaders, and let your sympathies move accordingly. Germany suffers from bad leadership, which must be overcome." She observed, sometimes with amusement, the antics of local politics. "It does not matter much who wins," she would say, "so that the winner is honest." There was nothing complicated in her mind concerning human relations; they resulted from individual fitness or unfitness. The individual man was her concern.

In the midst of this busy life—attending to her Church duties, waiting upon others, reading and writing—she made time to look after her garden. A home without a flower garden was impossible in her mind. She dug, planted, watered, and weeded, until a small flower paradise rewarded her efforts. To secure a slip of a new and better variety of a cherished plant, she would take a journey of miles. She would discuss for hours the best care of her beloved flowers. Her garden work she did alone; it was a favor to her sister to be allowed to take part in the gardening. "Flowers know those who love them," she said, "and the more you love them the better they grow." Her gardening no doubt contributed to her physical health.

She saw her family frequently; there were regular family gatherings, at which the ideals of the family were repeated for the benefit of young and old, with many a warning and counsel to all. The sons might grow in worldly position, but she was still their mother and under the obligation to teach and guide them. The family understood, and respected the wisdom of the mother and grandmother. At these affairs, the feasting was partly Norwegian, in honorable memory of the land of origin, and partly American, in honor of the country of adoption. The family were widely traveled, and an occasional dish from a far country tempted the palate. Christmas eve, true to north European traditions, the family had ludfisk (cod brought to a jelly-like consistency through treatment with soda) and flodegrod (a mush made from sour cream) sprinkled with cinnamon and sugar. On birthdays, dainty, delicious fish puddings, served with browned butter, formed the piece de resistance. The daughters-in-law learned to make these dishes and others that have been perfected in long winter evenings of the lands of the midnight sun. And there was many another delightful celebration, of family interest only.

Thus, with labor and rest, writing and reading, serving God and man, the ripening years increased. She took frequent occasion to contemplate the future, to read its riddles.
