John A. Widtsoe, In the Gospel Net: The Story of Anna Karine Gaarden Widtsoe ( 1941)

CHAPTER XVI.

Sunset

In course of time Sister Widtsoe had the satisfaction of having her whole family settled near her in Salt Lake City. Osborne received in 1915, a call to enter the service of the University of Utah as professor of English and head of the department of English. John was called the following year to assume the presidency of the University of Utah. Both were active in Church work; both serving as members of the General Board of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association. She saw her boys in their professional and Church activity. She was happiest to know that both had a living faith in the gospel.

Early in the spring of 1919, the widow was seized with an illness, diagnosed as of minor importance. An unexpected, accidental complication made the illness dangerous.

In the hope that complete rest would lead to recovery she was sent to the L. D. S. hospital, but was not happy away from her home. Therefore she was returned to her Wall Street residence. When she was laid upon her bed she looked up and said, "Do you think that this means death?" "No," was the answer, "not death, for we want to keep you a long time, yet." The wise eyes of the widow glowed as she said, "I'm not so sure of that. In case this is my last illness, I want to tell you that the most glorious thing thatcame into my life, was the message delivered to me by Shoemaker Johnsen of Trondheim. The restored gospel has been the great joy of my life. Please bear that witness for me to all who will listen."

The feared accident occurred. The end was inevitable. On July 11, 1919, five weeks after her seventieth birthday she passed quietly into the Great Beyond. Around her bedside then were all the members of her family, including her devoted, faithful, life-long companion, her sister Petroline. The Lord in his kindness allowed her to the end the companionship of her youngest son Osborne, who was soon to follow her into the great beyond, and who was always very near and dear to her.

Anna Karine Gaarden Widtsoe was buried from the chapel of the old Nineteenth Ward on Sunday, July 13, 1919. The house was crowded with friends, poor and rich. The program of the occasion was suited to the life and spirit of the departed wife, mother, and sister. The services were conducted by Bishop Charles W. Huhl; a quartet composed of Mrs. Lizzie Thomas Edwards, Agnes O. Thomas, John Thomas, and Ole Gulbrandsen sang, "I Know My Heavenly Father Knows"; prayer was offered by Elder Martin Christopherson, who was on the quay at Oslo when Sister Widtsoe first emigrated to Zion; a violin solo, "Aase's Death," by Grieg, was played by Elder Adolph Swenson. Then Elder Arnt Engh and Elder Andrew Jenson, Assistant Church Historian, spoke on themes essentially connected with the character, origin, and life of the departed sister. Professor W. C. Clive played a violin solo, "Melodyin F," Elder Joseph Fielding Smith of the Council of the Twelve delivered a comforting doctrinal address. Mrs. Lizzie Thomas Edwards sang "The Angel's Serenade" with violin obligato by Professor W. C. Clive, Lawrence Eberly at the piano, and Dorothy Bull at the organ. The concluding speaker was President Heber J. Grant who presided over the European Mission during most of Sister Widtsoe's mission, and who, always with a sympathetic heart for the widow and the orphan, did her memory and her family the honor to be present and to speak at her funeral. He addressed himself to the reality of life beyond the grave and the power of the gospel to bring happiness into human lives. Professor J. H. Paul read a resolution of sympathy from the faculty of the University of Utah. Bishop Charles W. Huhl made a few closing remarks. The quartet sang "The Christian's Good Night," and the benediction was pronounced by Elder Arthur Parsons. The University flag was half-masted in her honor. It was a long journey that the fishermaiden had traveled.

Thus she passed into the next world, the reality of which was her life's certainty. She had kept faith with her husband and her sons, with her fellow man and her own soul, and with her Father in heaven. She had given much in keeping her life's trust, and she had received much in return. She humbly, sometimes doubtfully, looked upon her life's labors; but all who knew her said, "Well done." The Lord will deal gently with her.

In the diary of her older son, on the date of Sister Widtsoe's funeral, occurs the following: "She was a most devoted mother, loyal to the last degree. Her devotion to the cause of truth was almost sublime. She was self-sacrificing beyond expression in behalf of her own and those who needed help. Her mind was transparently clear. The great issues of her life always swept before her. To her I owe my inspiration. Thanks! Many thanks! dear Mother. Goodbye, until me meet again on the last stretch of the endless journey."
