John A. Widtsoe, In the Gospel Net: The Story of Anna Karine Gaarden Widtsoe ( 1941)

CHAPTER XVII.

"Aunty"

The saga of Anna Karine Gaarden Widtsoe can come to a close only with a chapter about her sister, Petroline Jorgine Gaarden—Aunty as she was known affectionately by the family. The lives of these two women were so intertwined and interwoven that they seemed as one. During most of the years of their lives they lived together under one roof or in very close proximity to each other. They met the issues of life together; they divided the labors of the day according to their special tastes and gifts; they shared the rewards of life's efforts. They were as Jonathan and David, but held together by the closest ties of blood as of spirit. They traveled life's journey, as it were, arm in arm.

Petroline Gaarden was born July 3, 1853, and was therefore four years younger than her sister. She grew up with her sister in Titran. In her late 'teens she was sent away for a two years' course of study in a technical school on the Norwegian mainland. Suitors she had in plenty, but conforming to the family tradition, found it difficult to make a choice to which her heart would give assent. She never married, but in her late years was sealed in the temple to a good man long before deceased.

Aunty loved language and literature. She had an extensive vocabulary and a remarkable facility inchoosing and using words in her speech. Her training in household science during her school days kept her interested throughout life in household affairs. She left behind a large collection of clippings from numerous sources bearing upon her special interests. It was always profitable to converse with her, for her interests were wide, and she viewed men and affairs with a wise, clear judgment. It was not easy to deceive her.

Aunty was of a calm, unruffled disposition. She was never angry, seldom excited; her life moved onward smoothly. Thus she met easily the more active, urgent nature of her sister, who was quick to anger and as quick to forgive. Hers was the constructive, her sister's the creative temperament. She built as her sister originated. Aunty would express the need; her sister would devise the means of meeting it; and the two would set out to secure it. It was an astonishingly effective combination.

The Bible was taught to Aunty from babyhood. She knew it well. Her spiritual nature was well developed. Her faith in God and His Son was implicit. There were no lingering doubts. By temperament, however, she was inclined to cling to that which she had been taught to be right. Therefore, when the restored gospel came to the family she took several years longer than her sister to convince herself that the new message was really of the Lord. There was a stubborn determination about her which made it impossible to drive her into any belief or action. Therefore, when she at last had settled in her own mind and soul that Joseph Smith was divinely called, therewas no wavering, no changing, no compromising—the gospel path was her path.

She was baptized into the Church on September 23, 1883. Soon thereafter she emigrated to America, sailing on the S. S. Wisconsin from Liverpool on June 20, 1885, arriving in New York, July 1, 1885, and in Salt Lake City, July 7, 1885. On April 15, 1887, she received her endowments in the Logan Temple. The days of her baptism and endowment were great in the book of her life.

When the sisters were on their long mission, Aunty was often obliged because of her frail health to remain home for a day or two, yet it was she who with unwavering fidelity and without one day's break, made the entries in their diaries of their doings. She gathered and formed, and her active sister fired the bullets that had been prepared. Her joy in teaching gospel truths was unbounded.

From her early womanhood, her health was uncertain. For many years she was unable to carry a full load of life's duties because of her physical infirmity. However, as she grew older, her health improved; though she was never robust, yet she outlived her more vigorous, healthy sister by twelve years. With more robust health, Aunty would undoubtedly have added to her many useful activities.

Since she had no family of her own, her sister's sons and grandchildren became the objects of her affection. She would not live with them; for that she was too independent; she scorned unnecessary assistance, and her life was after all her own. But when she was needed, she was always on hand. On holidays,birthdays and all festive occasions, Aunty could always be depended on to provide something that all would enjoy. Both sisters were good cooks. On these special occasions, there would be an abundance of dainty dishes prepared with much labor and representing the highly developed culinary art of the north European countries. When Aunty arrived, everybody smacked his lips.

This lovely, peacemaking woman lived for others throughout her whole life. She was content to stand in the shadow and let others enjoy the limelight. Yet, there was no self-deception about her. She knew her rights.

She stood by her sister's deathbed. The parting left Aunty very much alone. She insisted wisely on living by herself. Temple work engaged her attention from that time as never before. She arranged the genealogical data gathered by her sister and herself. At the same time she attended to her Relief Society and other Church duties. She was a regular attendant at the Scandinavian and tabernacle meetings. Especially did the latter have an attraction for her. She read extensively. Her old Stars (Skandinaviens Stjerne, a missionary publication) were worn thin by frequent use. She filled her life with worthwhile duties. But, all the while she missed the association of her sister, the sister on whom she had leaned so long.

She was yet to endure another shock. Nearly two years after the death of her sister, her beloved nephew, Osborne, died suddenly. He was the younger of the widow's sons, and had crept into Aunty's heart as ifhe were her own. She grieved greatly at his passing, but the gospel came to her rescue. Meanwhile her health declined rapidly.

She and John were now the only remaining ones of the emigrant family. They met often; and Aunty made frequent visits to the families of the two boys. John was called into the Council of the Twelve, which was a joy to her, but which also made their visits, because of his travels, less frequent. Nevertheless, the feast days were celebrated as of yore, with Aunty in the place of honor.

In the autumn of 1927, John was called to preside over the European Mission. Aunty did not feel herself strong enough to accompany him, and decided to remain at home. Thus in her old age and weakened by disease, she found herself the only remaining member of the original family, in the land of her adoption. Her letters betray her loneliness. John was the only remaining one who could talk with her about the things of the past, so dear to her. Yet, she rejoiced that John should have the privilege of teaching the gospel among European peoples.

Her health weakened. She was ready for the entrance into the other world. She received tender, watchful care from Lucy Gates Bowen and Albert E. Bowen, John's sister- and brother-in-law, who for several weeks took her into their home, and nursed her. Other friends helped her.

At last the body had no more resistance. The end was near. "Lord, let me go," she prayed. "I want to rejoin my sister." Death came to her while faith andlove were upon her lips, on April 11, 1929, at the age of seventy-five years and nine months.

Aunty's funeral services were held in the Seventeenth Ward meetinghouse on Sunday, April 14, 1929. A beautiful program, worthy of a lovable character was rendered. Among others, President Anthony W. Ivins, lover of mankind, was present to do her memory honor.

Beautiful singing was rendered by the Norwegian Choir (Silent Night); by a quartet consisting of Hyrum J. Christiansen, Agnes Olsen Thomas, and Brother and Sister Ole Gulbrandsen (O, My Father, and Shall We Meet Beyond the River), and interspersed among the addresses, were a vocal solo (Home So Blessed) by Hyrum J. Christiansen, and a violin solo by Alice Anderson, accompanied by Becky Almond.

Comforting remarks were made by Arnt Engh, Andrew Jenson, Albert E. Bowen, and Nicholas G. Smith, Aunty's ward bishop. President Ivins delivered a doctrinal sermon.

The spirit of the gathering was sweet and peaceful, like Aunty's nature.

The grave was dedicated by Jacob F. Gates.

Aunty could not have wished for a more beautiful service; and she, in her simple honesty, would have been grateful for whatever those left behind could do for her. Such characters, as was Aunty's, make the earth lovely, and give assurance that man is indeed in the image of God.

John was far away, across the ocean, when Aunty died; yet her sister Anna and nephew Osborne, longin the spirit world, were probably near. The temporal and spiritual worlds are not far apart. There was a glorious meeting on the other side when the two sisters, long together on earth, clasped each other in close embrace at the beginning of an endless association.

Only one then remained on earth of the family which the widow's search for truth had brought to the western Zion. But he was not alone. He had his own family; his brother's family was near; he dwelt among friends, amidst the beloved people of his Church, who are as one great family, such as may nowhere else be found. He understood the eternity of life. He rejoiced with a warm gratitude that the widow and her family had been caught in the gospel net.
