John A. Widtsoe, In the Gospel Net: The Story of Anna Karine Gaarden Widtsoe ( 1941)

CHAPTER XVIII.

A Summary Tribute

At the funeral of Sister Petroline J. Gaarden, Elder Albert E. Bowen summarized the lives of the widow and her sister in touching, eloquent words:

"More than forty years ago, there came to this state two women, leading by the hands two little, fatherless, immigrant boys. They had no wealth, no possessions. All these they had left behind in the Northland, whence they had come, but they were rich in purpose and in faith, and in those qualities which go to make manhood and womanhood. They were extraordinarily well endowed. And in this strange land among strange people with new ways and a new tongue, they set themselves down to fight out life's battle.

"They had traditions, and one of those traditions was that the boys of that family must be schooled, must be educated, must be trained for usefulness; and the two lone women gave themselves the task of giving those two boys the preparation that would make them men of usefulness in this life. They worked with their needles, they toiled at whatever task lent them a recompense, in order that they might accomplish that one great task they had set themselves—and most richly was their work rewarded. Those boys used all the opportunities that were given them. They studied, they applied themselves with diligence, and it was notlong until they were marked men. Among their comrades they were looked upon as models of scholarship and achievement.

"It was not enough that they should get the schooling which this state at that time offered, but they must go where the best in this land was to be obtained, and there perfect themselves further for useful lives. And while they were struggling to attain, these two women were struggling to support. But when that task was accomplished and these boys had achieved their goal, so far as the mere preparation for life is concerned, then it was their task to care for the women who had cared for them. And it is a most happy thing to be able to say that they prized what had been done for them and repaid it a hundredfold, because from the time when those boys set out upon their own careers these women never more had to toil or struggle.

"Perhaps nothing could come to a human soul that would be more bitter than to see one for whom he had struggled turn away from him, and nothing is sweeter than to see fidelity rewarded with fidelity and appreciation. And that has been the lot of this little family which trudged into these valleys so many years ago. These two little boys, who were the butt of jests because they couldn't speak our tongue, have left a mark among the peoples of this state, of the surrounding states, and of this country, which anybody would be proud to have made. By their industry, by their intelligence, by their application, they have given to this land in which we live, knowledge that has blessed the land and the people who inhabitit and will continue to bless it through the generations to come—nothing ephemeral or transitory, but an achievement which has blessed mankind. I would rather be the author of the books they have written, of the researches they have conducted, of the applied knowledge they have given to the world, than to be possessed of all the wealth of Croesus.

"And this good woman, whose remains lie before us here today, is one of those women whose life's labors made possible the achievements of these boys. Shall anyone say her life has not been rich? And now she has grown weak, and her body is worn out, and most of her friends are on the other side. She has finished with life, and what a blessed thing it is that she could lie down to rest. This is not a day to mourn. It is a day to rejoice, that when people's bodies have grown frail and ailments have overcome their physical powers, and they are no longer able to go about the business of life, they can find release from it all by lying down in sleep.

"May God help us with understanding hearts and with desires always to do our part as nobly and as well as this woman has done hers, I pray in the name of Jesus, Amen."
