My mother and I had just finished our nightly prayer. We hugged each other and said, “I love you.” Then I walked to my bedroom. As I reached for my door handle, a strong impression came into my mind that the next day my mom would die.

My brain and heart tried to fight the thought. There was no way that something was going to happen to my mom. Everything would be fine with her.

Once in my room, I knelt in prayer and told Heavenly Father that the impression about my mom could not be true. I asked Him to please take the thought away, but it didn’t leave. I returned to my parents’ room and told my mom I wanted one more hug and kiss before I went to bed. We again said, “I love you,” and I returned to my room. It took me a while to fall asleep that night.

When I woke up the next morning, I was nervous. Thankfully, there was my mom, happy and well. But in the back of my mind, I still had that nagging feeling that something wasn’t right. At fast and testimony meeting that day, Mom stood up and bore a beautiful testimony.

After sacrament meeting she went to teach her Primary class, and I went to Sunday School. I had another distinct impression, this time to get up and leave Sunday School. I didn’t want to draw attention to myself, but something pulled me out of my seat and out of the door. Within a few minutes, I found myself sitting in my mom’s Primary class listening to her teach. I didn’t know why I was there, but I knew that was where I needed to be.

Later that afternoon at my brother’s house, my mom stared straight into my eyes for the last time as she collapsed and passed away from a pulmonary embolism. For His reasons and in His mercy, Heavenly Father had sent the Holy Ghost to prepare me. Those promptings gave me extra time with my mom that I wouldn’t have enjoyed had I ignored the still, small voice.

The love of my Heavenly Father had never been so evident to me until the events that took place around my mom’s passing. How blessed we are to have a Father in Heaven who loves us enough to give us the special gift of the Holy Ghost.
