Since the world began, Heavenly Father has called prophets to lead and guide His children on earth. Each prophet is also a special witness of Jesus Christ. The scriptures tell us about courageous prophets of old. Today President Gordon B. Hinckley is our prophet. It is important for each of us to listen and follow his counsel and guidance. Following his counsel will help us face the challenges of everyday life and will bring peace to our lives. As you read the scriptures referred to on this year’s poster, do so prayerfully. As you do, your knowledge and testimony of prophets will be strengthened.

1.  Remove the poster from the magazine.

2.  Cut out the pictures at the side of the poster and place them in an envelope.

3.  Mount the poster on lightweight cardboard, and hang it up.

4.  Starting in January 2001, at the beginning of each month read the theme and the scripture for that month. Then find that month’s picture in the envelope, and tape or glue the top of the picture in place on the poster. Turn the bottom of the picture up to read the information on the back.

Additional copies of this poster are available from local distribution centers.

© 2000 by Intellectual Reserve, Inc.

January

What is a prophet?

“For his word ye shall receive, as if from mine own mouth, in all patience and faith” (D&C 21:5).

February

The prophet is the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

“The duty of the President … is to preside over the whole church” (D&C 107:91).

March

Heavenly Father prepared the current prophet to be the prophet today.

“And God saw these souls that they were good, … and he said: These I will make my rulers” (Abr. 3:23).

April

What has Heavenly Father told us through our prophet at the most recent general conference?

“What I the Lord have spoken, I have spoken, … whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same” (D&C 1:38).

May

How are our lives blessed when we follow the prophet?

“I will … open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing that there shall not be room enough to receive it” (3 Ne. 24:10).

June

Through the ages, people have been blessed as they have followed the prophet.

“He spake by the mouth of his holy prophets, which have been since the world began” (Luke 1:70).

July

The true Church of Jesus Christ was restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith.

“And I have sent forth the fulness of my gospel by the hand of my servant Joseph” (D&C 35:17).

August

Heavenly Father sends prophets to warn and teach His children.

“And the voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen” (D&C 1:4).

September

How can we follow the prophet?

“I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them” (1 Ne. 3:7).

October

What specific direction has the prophet given us during the most recent general conference?

“I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise” (D&C 82:10).

November

Prophets prophesy of things to come.

“Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets” (Amos 3:7).

December

Prophets down through the ages have prophesied of the coming of Jesus Christ and testified that He is the Savior of the world. They have also prophesied that He will come again.

“And he also spake concerning the prophets, how great a number had testified … concerning this Messiah, … this Redeemer of the world” (1 Ne. 10:5).
