The following are additional ideas Primary leaders may use with the Sharing Time printed in the January 2009 Liahona. For the lesson, instructions, and activity that correspond with these ideas, see “I Have a Father in Heaven, Who Loves Me” on pages F4 and F5 of the children’s section in this issue.

1.  Recite together Doctrine and Covenants 138:56, substituting the words they and their with we and our. We lived with Heavenly Father and were given responsibilities. Display pictures of people in the scriptures who were given responsibilities in the premortal life to help accomplish Heavenly Father’s work (examples: Jesus; Mary, mother of Jesus; Adam and Eve; John the Baptist; Joseph Smith). Make wordstrips that tell the work each person did on earth. Pass around the wordstrips in a sack while the pianist plays “I Will Follow God’s Plan” (Children’s Songbook, 164–65). When the music stops, have the child holding the sack read a wordstrip and match it with the correct picture.

    Ask each class to discuss a responsibility that they might have in the future (examples: missionary, father or mother, Primary teacher, bishop). Have the classes discuss with their teachers what they can do now to prepare for that responsibility and whatever other responsibilities may come to them. Make wordstrips of different colors with phrases from “I Will Follow God’s Plan” that tell what we can do now to prepare for our responsibilities (examples: “seek for God’s light,” “I will follow,” “I will work,” “I will pray”). Have the children wearing the same color as the wordstrip stand up when that phrase is sung. Testify of the importance of preparing now for responsibilities we have been given.

2.  Write on the chalkboard “The family is ordained of God.” Have the children say it together. Erase one word, and have the children recite it again. Continue to erase words and have the children recite until all the words are gone. Ask: “Why do you think Heavenly Father planned for us to live in families?” Have one of the older classes stand and sing the first line of the chorus to “The Family Is of God” (Liahona, Oct. 2008, F12–F13). Ask: “In what ways can a family help us become who God wants us to be?” Show a picture of Joseph Smith’s family (3-7 from the Primary 3 picture packet).

    Read together Joseph Smith—History 1:22, 50. Point out that Joseph’s father supported Joseph Smith and helped him accomplish his mission. Beforehand and with the bishop’s or branch president’s approval, invite several adults or children to share a positive experience when the love and support of a family member helped them. Hand out paper and pencils, and invite all the children to write or draw a picture of one thing they will do this week to build love in their family. On the same paper have them write “The family is ordained of God.”
