Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 1 ( 1983)

3

Crisis Intervention

Richard D. Berrett

The phone rings several times before Bishop Cole, with eyes still closed and senses dulled by sleep, finds it and places the receiver to his ear. Through muffled sobs, a woman relates the details of an evening of fighting with her husband: caustic remarks, painful accusations, bitter confrontations—a crisis.

The silence settling on the emergency room brings with it the realization that the baby is dead. The medical staff did all they could. Still, the baby is gone. Numbed, the parents stare blankly at the wall. They seem to be in another world, the world of crisis.

Answering the knock at the door, a youth leader sees an angry teenager desperate to tell his story: "Mom and Dad just don't understand me. They won't listen. I hate them!" A crisis.

Each of these situations illustrates the overwhelming nature of a crisis. The people involved feel helpless because their problems seem to have no solutions—they lack the necessary resources to cope with their difficulties.

Individuals and families constantly adjust to the demands of life. These adjustments usually provide people with a sense of security. But when a person finds adjusting too difficult, he may develop a sense of helplessness and inability to cope. Crisis intervention includes helping people who are unable to adjust to the challenges of life to regain the sense of stability and security that they enjoyed prior to the crisis.

Some people, because of past experiences, are more resilient to the shock of a crisis and may require little aid. Others who are less experienced and who may lack the necessary resources often demand immediate help. You can help by understanding the crisis, by exploring available resources, and by evaluating possible solutions and their consequences with the person.

Understanding the Crisis

The first help a lay counselor can give is to offer a listening ear and a comforting voice. As the troubled person expresses his feelings to someone who is nonjudgmental, calm, interested, empathetic, and helpful, his stress diminishes, and he gains a more realistic understanding of his crisis. Here is an example of such a discussion:

Stacie: Bishop Cole, Jim left about an hour ago, and I know he doesn't love me anymore. How could he walk out on me and the children?

Bishop: It seems to you that if he really cared he wouldn't have left?

Stacie: Yes, I could have left too; after all, I'm the one who is rejected, not him.

Bishop: You sound as if you don't think Jim is hurt by what has happened.

Stacie: If it did hurt him, he sure didn't let me know.

Bishop: Could it be that when Jim is really hurt, he becomes angry and leaves? Maybe his leaving doesn't mean he no longer loves you and the children, but that he is so frustrated he doesn't know what else to do.

Stacie: I hadn't thought of it that way.

Through listening carefully to Stacie, reflecting her emotions and thoughts back to her, and asking relevant questions, the bishop helps her understand the crisis. He helps her distinguish her feelings about the crisis from the actual nature of the crisis. After all, it is possible that Jim left feeling as much pain as Stacie and that Stacie's belief that he doesn't love her is incorrect.

When you, the counselor, gain an accurate view of the nature of the crisis, you become a source of understanding and information for the person you counsel. The trust you build as you demonstrate concern by listening will influence the person to listen to your guidance. He will become more willing to explore all parts and implications of the crisis and to receive your counsel. You should clarify, give perspective, and define the crisis so that the sufferer's anxiety is reduced and his hope is rekindled.

Avoid simple prescriptions. If you give simple prescriptions without really listening to the person, he will become defensive and may reject your recommendations. Your effectiveness as a counselor is based on your ability to demonstrate understanding and concern.

It is important in a crisis to assess the person's stability. Because the crisis may leave him helpless and hopeless, he may consider suicide. It is wise to discuss with the person whether he has suicidal thoughts. Facing such thoughts head-on can prevent a suicide. Similarly, finding out whether the distressed person has violent feelings toward others may keep him from harming someone else. If the danger is great enough that your discussion does not decrease his hatred and rage, it may be essential to seek professional aid.

Discussing several questions with those going through a crisis can help them understand the crisis. You might ask: What caused the crisis? How are others being affected by the experience? Has this type of thing occurred before? How long has this been happening? Who else knows about the trouble?

After the troubled person and the counselor understand the crisis, the second phase of crisis intervention may begin.

Using Appropriate Resources

Because of the urgency of a crisis, it is generally necessary to give immediate help to alleviate it. Several sources of help are available, and it is important for the counselor to use each one that is appropriate. These sources are discussed below:

Spiritual Strength

Religious beliefs provide an eternal perspective for many of life's tragedies. The counselor can help people explore the broad meanings of discouraging experiences. Marital difficulty might be seen as a chance to develop a stronger marriage through greater effort. Death might promote a desire to live worthy of a reunion with the deceased. Family conflict can indicate the need to increase family time together and to improve family communication.

The power of prayer and fasting often helps those who are troubled. And many testify of the comfort they have felt as a group of concerned friends united in prayer and fasting on their behalf. In some circumstances a special blessing might be administered to one who is suffering. A message of consolation from the Lord through those giving blessings often lifts the troubled. Counselors should seek spiritual guidance in crisis situations and should encourage those they are helping to seek the power of spiritual resources.

Personal Worth

Unfortunately, many people interpret a crisis as an indication that they lack personal worth. If they are troubled and overwhelmed, they feel weak, inadequate, or even worthless. It is important for the troubled person to build his self-esteem. Questions that provide insight into the person's strengths will help him do this: Have you made it through difficult periods before? What have you done in the past to help when things seemed overwhelming What strengths do you have that might help you solve this problem? As a more balanced picture of one's power to deal with difficulties emerges from such discussions, the person will become aware of himself as a resource. This can provide confidence that the crisis will pass and that he can solve his problems.

The Chinese character for crisis suggests both danger and opportunity. Quite naturally, in the early stages of crisis, one is most aware of the dangers involved. But as a person explores his strengths, he becomes more sensitive to the opportunities that may be present. Enhancing self-worth by overcoming adversity is one such opportunity. Effective counselors help people see themselves as part of the solution to the crisis.

The Family

Families are too often deprived of the chance to become closer through supporting one another during traumatic periods. Counselors can help a person overcome his pride and fears by exploring the resources of his immediate and extended family. You might ask: Who do you trust the most in your family? Would you be willing to let me ask for their help? If they were in a similar circumstance, would you be eager to help them? Could it be that your pride is interfering with your willingness to seek their help?

Families can and should offer emotional support during the most trying of times. For example, a sick child requires help beyond the abilities of the working parents. The child's aunt is a resource who may come as an "angel of mercy" to care for the sick child. If a person can't pay a utility bill, a financially secure cousin might be called upon for help. A family forced to evacuate their home because of flood danger, might move in with the husband's sister. Counselors should help people explore all possible family resources that may help them solve their problems.

The Church

The Church has extensive resources to help with crises. These resources, with plans for their use, are outlined in various Church handbooks. The resources include "commodities, fast offering funds, job opportunities, and services provided by LDS Social Services or Deseret Industries, welfare services missionaries, welfare service committee members, and Church members with specific skills and resources." [^1] After identifying the nature of the crisis, the counselor may use the appropriate resources available through the Church to help the troubled person.

The Community

The Church's Welfare Services Resource Handbook notes, "Community resources that provide services consistent with Church standards may be used. These include family counseling centers, clinics for the handicapped, private counselors or therapists, alcohol or drug rehabilitation centers, university medical centers, mental hospitals, outpatient clinics, and extended care facilities. State agencies, including agricultural extension services, and private professional persons, including psychologists, education counselors, agronomists, accountants, attorneys, and doctors, should be evaluated and approved by the bishop before their services are used. The bishop should help members determine how they can receive such assistance without fear of ridicule or pressure to change values (such as values connected with Church positions on chastity, abortion, marriage, family prayer, church activity, and the Word of Wisdom)." [^2]

Using the Resources Available

Effective counselors will use these resources to help in crisis situations. The following example illustrates these principles.

The Hill family was in a state of shock when their home teacher arrived at the hospital emergency room. Annette, their four-year-old and youngest in the family, had been hit by a car. After being rushed to the hospital, she died. Several days passed before the shock subsided and the reality hit the family members. Brother Hill withdrew from contact with almost all his friends. He was unable to work because of his intense emotions over his daughter's death. He would often lock himself in his room for long periods of time. The crisis of Annette's death was now compounded by the reaction of her father.

Through delicate discussions with Brother Hill, his home teacher discovered Brother Hill's deep feelings of guilt about his daughter's death. The home teacher determined that the depressed feelings resulted from the idea that in some way Brother Hill had caused his daughter's death. He reported coming home later than usual the day of the accident and not spending his accustomed playtime with Annette. He felt that if he had been home earlier, she would have come home from her friend's house before the traffic increased and would not have been hit.

During the next several weeks, the home teacher and Brother Hill talked almost daily. These discussions revealed that although Brother Hill was seriously depressed, he was not considering suicide and could begin to examine the crisis in a broader, more realistic way. The home teacher's goals included helping Brother Hill through his intense guilt, helping him reestablish contact with those from whom he was isolated, and helping him develop the emotional strength to cope with this experience for which he was totally unprepared.

During this period, Brother Hill fasted and prayed often, and this helped him greatly. Blessing his wife and children gave him renewed contact with his family and an opportunity to think of the other family members during this crisis that affected all of them.

Soon he returned to work and was surprised by the concern and support received from his co-workers. His supervisors, too, seemed to reach out with understanding toward him.

Brother Hill also took time to study death. He read several books about hew others have coped with losing loved ones and discovered he was not alone in his experience. Through study, he also began to develop an eternal perspective about death, which helped him move from a feeling of hopelessness to one of hope. Brother Hill learned to understand his guilt feelings and that they would pass.

In this example, the troubled person at first saw the accident as his responsibility. He withdrew from contact with his family, friends, and others who might be sources of support. Because of his incorrect ideas and actions, he increased his stress and the seriousness of the crisis. Later, however, he used appropriate resources to help him understand the crisis and overcome his problems. Some of the resources he used were spiritual strength, his family, and the Church. Counselors should always encourage the troubled people who come to them to use such resources.

Evaluating Possible Solutions and Their Consequences

After defining the crisis and examining the available resources, the counselor and the troubled person should examine possible solutions to the problem. An important part of doing this is considering the possible consequences of each solution. After they have discussed several solutions, the counselor and the person should choose the solution that will best solve the problem and try it to see if it works. It would be wise to seek the Lord's help in doing this.

As you read the following dialogue, notice how the counselor helps solve the crisis by (1) helping the troubled person understand it, (2) exploring available resources, and (3) evaluating possible solutions and their consequences.

Dave: Mom and Dad don't understand me. They won't even listen. I hate them!

Counselor: Will you tell me what happened, Dave?

Dave: They say I can't take the car to the dance on Saturday because I didn't go to church last week. And they say if I don't do better in school, I'll be grounded for the rest of the term.

Counselor: You seem to think your parents have made some really hard demands on you.

Dave: Wow, is that an understatement! They're just crazy, and I don't care if I ever see them again.

Counselor: I guess you'd like to hurt them because they're causing so much trouble for you.

Dave: That's right, I'd like to tell them what I really think of them.

Counselor: Would that help you feel better about not having the car on Saturday?

Dave: No, not really, but at least it would let them share some of the problems they're giving me.

Counselor: This may sound like something your mom and dad would say, but I hope you'll understand I'm just trying to help you solve this problem. Could it be they're already hurt because you're not doing as well as they think you can in school and aren't going to church with them?

Dave: Yeah, I know they don't like what's going on.

Counselor: Why don't we jump in the car and go talk with them about these problems?

Dave: No thanks. I never want to see them again.

Counselor: Is not seeing them another way to pay them back for what they have done?

Dave: That's right.

Counselor: Well, how will not seeing them solve the problem about the car?

Dave: It won't.

Counselor: Maybe since they have control of the car and they are the ones you are having trouble with, they are the most important resources you have to solve these problems.

Dave: But how do you talk to someone you hate?

Counselor: Have you hated them in the past?

Dave: Yes.

Counselor: Did you stop after the problem became less serious?

Dave: Yeah, I did.

Counselor: Well, if you stopped hating them over problems in the past, maybe trying to solve this problem with their help might help you stop hating them now.

Dave: Maybe, but what about the car for Saturday?

Counselor: Let's go over there and talk with them, and maybe your anger and having the car can be worked out.

Dave: Okay.

Notice how the counselor in this example helped his friend understand his problem. Dave realized that his anger was only temporary because of the car, that he did not really hate his parents. The counselor also suggested an appropriate resource to help solve the problem: Dave's parents. Finally, the counselor helped Dave explore possible solutions and their consequences, and they decided to try one of the solutions.

Suicide

Perhaps the most serious crisis is a potential suicide. Successful prevention is more likely when a lay counselor recognizes some of the elements of suicide attempts. Generally, the person contemplating suicide is faced with a problem he believes is unsolvable and intolerable. His feelings of helplessness and despair create stress, depression, and withdrawal from all who could give support. Appetite is frequently depressed, causing a weight loss. Often, the person doesn't sleep well, and may awake in the middle of the night and be unable to get back to sleep.

Such symptoms may result from a severe loss of some type, such as a loved one's death, a broken relationship, unemployment, or a loss of self-esteem.

Counselors who are aware of these situations and symptoms need to become extremely sensitive to words and actions that may indicate thoughts of suicide. Such statements as "I don't know how I can go on without her," "Things really don't matter anymore," or "Soon everything will be taken care of, and nobody will have to worry any longer" may suggest a preparation for suicide. Changing one's will, taking out a large insurance policy, giving away valued objects, quitting school or a job, or breaking off contact with friends and relatives may be steps toward suicide.

Suicide attempts are often a cry for help. The victim, feeling unable to cope with his problems, thinks about suicide, talks about suicide, and attempts suicide. It is not true that those who talk about taking their lives will never do it. Such talk may lead to action unless someone intercedes.

The seriousness of the risk can be gauged by the person's circumstances. Does the person have a gun, lots of sleeping pills, or access to an automobile? Generally the more specific the threats and the more lethal the method he has in mind, the greater likelihood of a suicide attempt.

When anyone threatens directly or subtly to take his life, even in jest, you should start looking for other signs of contemplated suicide.

It is crucial that you contact a professional if it appears there is some possibility of suicide. It would be far better to contact a professional and find a suicide threat to be a false alarm than to think you are overreacting to a threat and delay until it is too late.

The person you think has suicidal feelings needs to know that you care about him, that you have some ideas about how to help him solve his problems, and that there is hope for the future. Helping the person plan a better future is one way to show him that help is available. Moreover, a discussion of alternative future plans helps him see that things need not be hopeless.

It may be necessary to talk about how suicide would be futile while other alternatives would not be. Since a person contemplating suicide often thinks living is futile, you should show him that just the opposite is true. Where there is life, there is hope, but suicide will only intensify any problems that already exist. By discussing opportunities available to the person by choosing to live, and by showing him that he would cheat himself of those opportunities if he chose to die, you may be able to decrease his desire to die.

Of course, these suggestions assume that the person will talk rationally with you. Even if the person is not rational or doesn't feel your suggestions are meaningful, keep talking. To help yourself do this, ask yourself: What does my love of this person require of me? How can I communicate my concern? Even if his life seems to mean nothing to him, how can I teach him that his life has meaning to me?

Summary

Helping people in crisis is one of the most difficult tasks a counselor faces, as well as one of the most rewarding. Helping people grow from emotional helplessness and hopelessness into confidence and strength is the very essence of gospel service.

Crisis Intervention: Notes

About the Author

Dr. Richard D. Berrett, professor of child and family studies at California State University at Fresno, received his bachelor's and master's degrees from Brigham Young University and his Ph.D. from Florida State University. A member of many national and regional professional and honorary societies, Professor Berrett is a past president of the Association of Mormon Counselors and Psychotherapists. He is a clinical member of the American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy. In addition to his teaching and research responsibilities, he is in private practice in marriage, family, and child therapy.

An active member of the Church, Dr. Berrett has served in a Young Men presidency, as a ward executive secretary, as a full-time missionary, and on district and stake high councils.

He and his wife, Christine, are the parents of three children.

---
Notas:
[^1] Aaron T. Beck, John A. Rush, Brian F. Shaw, Gary Emery, Cognitive Therapy of Depression (New York: Guilford Press, 1979.)
[^2] Psychosis is a severe psychological disorder involving loss of contact with reality and gross personality distortion. Hospitalization is ordinarily required.
