Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 1 ( 1983)

4

Depression

David G. Weight

Abraham Lincoln, who struggled with depression throughout much of his life, once wrote, "If what I feel were equally distributed to the whole human family, there would not be one cheerful face on earth." Depression takes an inestimable toll on the human family, and it is the most common complaint brought to the attention of professional and lay counselors alike. The condition might be thought of as the "common cold" of emotional problems, since it occurs so broadly, is found with so many other physical and mental disorders, and is difficult to cure. According to the National Institute of Mental Health, at least 15 percent of all adults between the ages of eighteen and seventy-four suffer the destructive effects of depression sometime. The actual incidence, however, may be much higher, estimated as high as 30 percent. Estimates of dollar costs for this disorder have been placed at between 300 and 900 million dollars. As a counselor, friend, or relative of a depressed person, you should quickly recognize how devastating this condition can be to the person as well as to his family and friends. And since suicide is often considered by the depressed person as the solution to his despair and self-condemnation, this condition may be dangerous enough to require professional treatment.

Signs of Depression

Everyone has changes in mood from time to time. Negative moods seldom last for more than a few days, and a person would rarely seek help from a counselor in such cases. These "normal" depressions are usually related to stress, disappointment, or even biological change. In many cases, grieving at the loss of a loved one or an important relationship will produce short-term depression. Short-term counseling in adjusting to these mood swings may be helpful, and it may avoid the development of deeper depression. Our greater concerns, however, are for those whose depression stays relatively unchanged for longer than a week or two.

According to Aaron Beck, [^1] depression has four major facets: emotional, cognitive, motivational, and physical.

Emotional

The depressed person usually has pronounced feelings of hopelessness and despair with periods of uncontrolled crying and feelings of guilt and unworthiness. The person will often describe awakening in the morning and feeling a kind of gloominess settle around him. He may feel that even the most basic requirements of life are overwhelming and frightening. Such a person often feels tension and anxiety and finds it difficult to think and concentrate. He may also feel a loss of control and be troubled by fear of insanity, disease, or even death. Perhaps the most characteristic emotional symptom of depression, however, is the person's loss of interest or pleasure in almost all of his usual activities and pastimes. Nothing seems worth doing. In fact, the severely depressed individual may have almost no sense of love, excitement, or accomplishment.

Most depressed people feel guilty. They often believe that their behavior is sinful and that their depressive feelings may be God's punishment. They may believe they have committed an unpardonable sin or have been abandoned by God. In extreme cases this feeling may be psychotic. [^2] The counselor will have to evaluate whether such guilt is justified while recognizing that guilt is often a symptom of depression.

Some people do not experience guilt, but blame their depression on external causes. They may believe that if the counselor or others would reduce their demands, the depression would leave.

Cognitive

Some depressed people experience poor concentration, memory problems, difficulty in carrying on a normal conversation, and preoccupation with the fear of looking foolish. They have great difficulty making decisions or being creative. Unfortunately, these reactions feed the person's feeling of inadequacy and incompetence, which produce greater difficulty in performance and production, which leads to increased feelings of incompetence, and so on, dragging the person into a downward cycle of despair.

Motivational

Everything seems difficult to depressed people. Morning seems to be the worst time of the day, since the effort required to get up and get going seems so monumental. They are afraid to encounter other people or their usual work, since they will be reminded of their failure and inadequacy. They often cut back on social activities and stay home for long periods of time, sometimes in bed. They have little ambition to take on new projects, and church or work obligations seem overwhelming.

Physical

During depression, the body often exhibits what are known as the "clinical signs of depression." These include sleep disturbances, eating disturbances, decrease in sexual drive, and loss of physical energy.

Sleep disturbances. Depressed people may have a difficult time falling asleep or may awaken early in the morning and not be able to get back to sleep. However, they may also require more and more sleep, wanting to spend every available moment in bed.

Eating disturbances. Those who are depressed may lose their appetites and experience rapid weight loss. They may describe eating as something that is done only because it is necessary, and they may get little pleasure from eating. On the other hand, they may develop voracious appetites with nervous and sporadic eating throughout the day. Constipation and gastrointestinal problems are also typical.

Decrease in sexual drive. With a general decrease in the capacity for pleasure, depressed people often report reduced sexual interest. In severe cases, the body temporarily loses its capacity for sexual excitement.

Loss of physical energy. Depressed people often report fatigue and loss of energy. In extreme cases, it is difficult for them even to move about the house. Coordination between the mind and the body may slow to such a point that reaction time is impaired, and the people may have difficulty with tasks they usually do well. They may also feel agitated with constant need to pace and to rub their hands, hair, skin, clothing, or other objects. They usually speak very little and seem tired even without any physical exertion. They may also report having pain when there is no medical explanation for it.

Depression in Children

Depression in children can be difficult to recognize. Since younger children do not have a well-developed ability to think or talk about abstract concepts, a counselor must look for behavioral clues to a child's depression. A gloomy mood or failure to find excitement in life are signs of depression. The child may withdraw from other children, fail to gain weight, or develop a clinging and insecure attachment to parents or other adults. Adolescent boys may develop antisocial behavior and feel misunderstood and rejected. Girls may become sexually promiscuous in an attempt to be accepted by others. Withdrawal from social activities, reluctance to attend family outings, and spending increasing amounts of time alone are also signs of depression. Other signs include difficulty with schoolwork, inattention to personal appearance, and overly strong reactions to love relationships. The adolescent, of course, is much more able to think about and discuss depression than can young children, and they can contribute more to their own treatment.

Medical Causes of Depression

Depression can be caused by medical problems, such as untreated diabetes, side effects from medications, or changes in the brain from stroke or senility. Because this is true, if depression lasts longer than a week or two, the person should see a medical doctor. If the doctor finds no medical cause for the depression, the person should probably be referred to a mental health professional.

Counseling the Depressed

Even if the depressed person is seeing a mental health professional, the lay counselor can do much to help him (being sure, of course, not to undermine the work of the professional). First, it is important that the counselor establish a relationship with the person that will inspire confidence. Depressed people often feel they are disclosing frightening and terrible aspects of themselves and are afraid that other people would take advantage of this information and tell it to their neighbors, ward members, and others. Establishing confidentiality and confidence is vital to helping those who are depressed.

The counselor must also attempt to understand the person's despair. Sometimes a counselor has had depressed feelings and would like to deny the existence of depression in other people to protect himself from his own feelings. This is particularly true of one counseling a member of his own family. We love people in our families, want them to be successful, and want to help them take responsibility for their emotional problems. However, we may deny the existence or severity of their depression. Remember, one reason a person seeks out a counselor or confidant is to find someone who he thinks might understand his feelings. If the counselor refuses to compassionately understand the person's feelings or dismisses them as the result of failure to keep the commandments, insufficient faith, working too hard, and so on, then the counselor may lose his opportunity to help.

The depressed person needs to know that he is accepted. This can be a challenge for the counselor, since depressed people are often critical and demanding of themselves as well as their family, friends, and those trying to help them. As a counselor, when you recognize this symptom of depression, you will typically avoid the tendency to feel hurt by the rejection or criticism of the depressed person.

The troubled person can be helped by learning about the symptoms of depression discussed in this chapter. In many cases it is helpful to let the person know that he is experiencing a condition with certain predictable symptoms. This will help reduce the pressure he tends to put on himself. Many people, especially those with strong religious commitment, feel that emotional problems are strictly the result of deficient will or determination. This attitude is a part of their guilt feelings and actually stands in the way of easing their burdens. Recognizing that depression has predictable symptoms, the person may be able to examine some of his unrealistic expectations that may be a part of the depression.

A cardinal rule in the treatment of depression is to provide structure in the person's life. Those who are depressed tend to pull back from the world to avoid being reminded of their failures and inadequacies. By avoiding or denying their problems, they actually make them worse. By providing structure, a counselor helps the person function in the real world and also helps him become distracted from his obsessive feelings. Structure can be provided in a number of ways. Sensitive neighbors may be encouraged to develop recreation programs, to share hobbies, to set luncheon dates, or to provide outings. Part-time or full-time work, as well as volunteer activity, can provide structure. The counselor might prescribe a night of the week for the person and his or her spouse to go out together. And regular walking, jogging, or other exercise programs can be very helpful. It must be pointed out, however, that structured activity is usually the last thing the depressed person wants, and consequently he will require considerable encouragement and direction.

Since the depressed person feels such despair, it is important that he be offered a sense of hope from those who are trying to help. The counselor can provide hope by becoming quite active in the person's life. One of the symptoms of depression is difficulty in making decisions and seeing the world clearly. Anxiety, which usually accompanies depression, has a very constricting quality. It produces a sort of emotional tunnel vision, making it difficult for him to see solutions to his problems. The anxious person can benefit from someone who can see further down the road. The kind of support and hope he requires does not come from patting him on the back, telling him things are not as bad as he thinks, or helping him count his blessings. The depressed person is likely to respond, "I have that many blessings and still I'm depressed; I'm a worse person than I thought—I'm ungrateful!" The support you should give is to help him see that you understand his feelings and that there are solutions to many of his problems, but that he is having trouble seeing them. He also needs to know that other people have felt as he feels and still have been able to survive (and even like themselves). He can recognize that depression distorts his understanding of reality—something the counselor can help him straighten out.

Generally, depressed people should be with others as much as possible. Long periods alone contribute to withdrawal and self-criticism. Isolated people tend to become self-centered and do not benefit from the give-and-take of social interaction. If they are living alone and depression is a serious concern, some attempt could be made to change their living arrangements so these needs might be met.

An Approach to Counseling

After many years of research, Dr. Aaron T. Beck has developed a treatment system that is becoming increasingly successful. Some of his principles can be used by the lay counselor to treat mild to moderate depressions. Dr. Beck has observed that three major belief patterns are part of most depressions. The first has to do with the person's negative views of himself. He believes himself to be inadequate or defective in some way and tends to attribute his failure and despair to this moral, psychological, or physical defect. Second, he views his present experience in a negative way. He feels that the world expects too much of him and that too many obstacles block his progress. The third belief is a negative view of the future. He is convinced that his current problems and suffering will continue indefinitely. He expects frustration and difficulties and is convinced he will fail at any task he tries. Generally speaking, all of these beliefs give the person the general feeling of hopelessness that is so typical of depression.

In evaluating the thinking of the depressed person, the counselor will typically find false assumptions that lead to depression and sadness. Some of these that have been discussed by Beck [^3] include the following: (1) to be happy, I have to be successful at whatever I undertake; (2) to be happy, I must be accepted by all people at all times; (3) if I make a mistake, it means that I am a failure; (4) I can't live without my spouse; (5) if someone disagrees with me, it means he doesn't like me; (6) my value as a person depends on what others think of me. Some other false assumptions are these: (1) if I'm spiritual, bad things will not happen to me; (2) I should be able to make anyone love me; (3) good parents always love their children and never become angry with them; (4) good people are never angry and never have negative feelings.

Most depression is based on such false assumptions. These assumptions lead to false conclusions and automatic negative thoughts, which lead to catastrophic conclusions. For example, a person may have this false assumption: If I am a loving person (suffer for others, do everything that's expected of me, always seem happy and pleasant), bad things (divorce, financial problems, disobedient children) won't happen to me. If so, he might conclude, It's my fault when bad things happen because I'm not loving and good enough. Such a conclusion then leads to automatic negative thoughts, which Beck says are a major cause of depression. Examples of such thoughts are (1) I caused my children to disobey; (2) I ruined my children's lives by getting a divorce; (3) I'm too selfish; (4) I never have good times; (5) I caused my spouse to have problems. Such thoughts may lead to such catastrophic conclusions as (1) my spouse will probably divorce me; (2) people will see what I'm like and fire me from my job; (3) I have disappointed God, so he will abandon me; (4) if I fail at something as basic as loving, I might as well be dead; (5) my children will fail and I will be responsible. Not surprisingly, such conclusions drive the person into despair.

The counselor can help the depressed person by identifying his false assumptions. However, as strange as it may seem, such beliefs are often near and dear to the person who has them. Even though his beliefs are irrational, the person judges his worth on how well he follows his beliefs. Simply calling the error to his attention will not be enough. The counselor will need to help him recognize the many times he thinks these self-defeating thoughts that lead to depression. Helping him do this must be done carefully and with sensitivity, or he may become defensive and angry.

The following list of assumptions and counseling strategies may help you counsel the depressed. [^4]

False assumption: Failures are important, but successes are not.

Counseling strategy: Encourage the person to keep a written record of his successes and to talk with others to become aware of successes he has forgotten or overlooked. Being willing to do something about depression is one success.

False assumption: I am totally responsible for the problems of other people.

Counseling strategy: Help the person recognize that many of the problems of others are out of his control. Other people have their own agency and make their own decisions, and they are ultimately responsible for their own problems and happiness. Only the Savior himself was able to bear the burdens of the whole world.

False assumption: I am the center of everyone's attention, especially when I make a mistake.

Counseling strategy: Help the person think of times when he really would be the center of attention and times when he would not. Help him distinguish between the two. Other people are probably paying less attention to him than he thinks. For example, few people would notice or even care if his shirt had a spot on it.

False assumption: The worst thing that could happen will happen.

Counseling strategy: Help the person understand how slim the chances are that the worst will always happen. You can do this by helping him remember that the worst has not usually happened in the past. For example, just because the person made a mistake at work does not mean he will automatically be fired.

Suicide

Anytime a person is depressed, and particularly if his feelings are severe, there is a strong possibility he has suicidal thoughts or intentions. The person will often drop clues about such feelings by making such comments as "I won't have to worry about Christmas next year," "I just can't stand it any longer," or "I can't face another day." He may give away prized possessions or develop unusual concerns about having a will drawn up. When a counselor knows that a person is depressed, especially if he sees some of the clues, he should directly question the person about suicidal feelings. Many depressed people, however, will try to hide these feelings because of the moral concerns associated with suicide. This should be taken into account, and the person should be helped to honestly evaluate his feelings. Any person who is clearly a suicidal risk should be referred immediately for professional help and possible hospitalization.

Most depressed people have suicidal thoughts from time to time even though they do not believe they would ever really commit suicide. However, every statement of suicidal intent should be taken seriously. One should never assume that the person doesn't mean what he says. If you are counseling someone with suicidal thoughts, the following strategies are important: [^5] (1) Assure your availability. Let the person know where you can be reached if he is feeling despondent. (2) Counsel the person much more frequently than usual. You may want to require him to call you regularly. (3) Contact the person immediately if he cancels or fails to keep an appointment. (4) Get help from the person's family and friends, especially those who are sensitive and could help provide structure. (5) Make sure the person is not left alone for long periods of time. He may need to stay with a friend or enter the hospital. (6) If the person is being treated with medication, it is vital that the dosage be carefully monitored and that some responsible person dispense the medication, particularly if large quantities are available. (7) Appeal to the person's religious beliefs and family obligations to reduce the possibility of suicide. (8) Don't give empty reassurance. Saying something like, "Things aren't that bad; everyone feels blue once in a while," will likely alienate the person and make him feel you are not on his side.

Getting Help

Never underestimate the many resources available to help you. Professional mental health practitioners can be consulted. Churches, families, and schools have been helping people for years.

Families can be made aware of the person's symptoms and help him change his interpretation of his problems. They can become more aware of his needs and become more tolerant of his problems.

The Church has many resources, and Relief Society and priesthood leaders can be very helpful. Professional help is available from LDS Social Services.

Schools often have counseling programs, and they can also provide opportunities for people to develop hobbies and skills that promote self-esteem and decreased feelings of helplessness.

All of these resources might be used to help the person who is depressed. In addition, you should use your creativity to come up with other resources that might be helpful but have not yet been tapped.

Depression: Notes

About the Author

Dr. David G. Weight, associate professor of psychology at Brigham Young University, received his bachelor's and master's degrees from that institution and his Ph.D. from the University of Washington. A highly respected clinical psychologist, Dr. Weight has had broad experience in therapeutic work in Washington and Utah. He is a consultant to Utah Valley Hospital Mental Health Services and a large Utah school district. He supervises a department of the BYU Comprehensive Clinic. Professor Weight has written a number of professional articles.

In the Church, Dr. Weight has served as a missionary, bishop, high councilor, and a Young Men's president.

He and his wife, Shauna, are the parents of five children.

---
Notas:
[^1] Not having enough time to accomplish everything. Disregard for low or high priority tasks. A wife refuses to get up in the morning. A student neglects studying. A leader stops going to meetings or fails to follow through on assignments. A teacher fails to prepare a lesson or to show up for class. When a person abandons his efforts to be productive, he may have crossed that dangerous line to distress. Talk out troubles. People should be encouraged to talk about their problems with someone they like and respect. Most people just need to talk through their problems. They don't need advice on how to solve them, but merely need a listening ear. It helps to share worries with someone else. This is not admitting defeat; it is admitting that one knows when to ask for help. John D. Adams, Understanding and Managing Stress: A Book of Readings and A Workbook in Changing Life Styles (San Diego: University Associates, 1980).
[^2] Excessive guilt from unrepented sin. Reduced time given to a task. A child suddenly refuses to take enough time for important assignments such as cleaning his room or mowing the lawn. A father reduces his time spent with his family. A wife does not give adequate attention to homemaking. Sudden changes such as these may be attributed to outside pressures. Learn to accept what can't be changed. Some problems are beyond control and can't be solved. In such instances, the person should be encouraged to accept the situation until change is possible. Such acceptance in itself may reduce the pressure.
[^3] Uncertainty about goals. Shifting responsibility. One child tries to shift responsibilities to another child. A Relief Society president delegates more than is reasonable. A scoutmaster asks other members of the ward to take on his responsibilities. Such shifts may be related to stress. Plan daily activities. Many people under stress try to accomplish too much at once. People who are able to plan their activities tend to work through problems more effectively. Helping people plan their activities so that every aspect of their lives does not seem hurried can greatly reduce their stress.
[^4] Dissatisfaction with employment. Blocking out new information. A Sunday School president reacts negatively when suggestions are made for improving teaching in the ward. A father becomes abusive when his wife offers advice to help improve his relationship with their children. Such reactions often reflect a breakdown of resistance due to pressures at home or work. Avoid loneliness. People should be encouraged to reach out to others. If they will take the initiative to make friends, they will have someone to turn to during difficult times.
[^5] Anxiety about a new Church calling. Superficial involvement or appearing to give up. A ward officer tells the bishop he does not want to continue in his calling because it is too overwhelming. A student fails in school because of problems at home. A spouse dissolves a marriage because the effort needed to improve the relationship seems too great. People who abandon a project or relationship often do so as a way of dealing with stress. Deal with the cause. If the person's tension comes from a deteriorating relationship, he should be encouraged to talk out his differences with the other person involved. The longer a broken relationship continues, the more stressful it becomes. If stress comes from an important unfinished task, the person should be urged to change his priorities to accomplish the task.
