Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 1 ( 1983)

5

Stress

Val R. Christensen

Nearly every Church leader has counseled someone with emotional or psychological conflict, commonly known as stress. Such a person may display a great amount of hostility, frustration, or anger. He may grieve from the loss of a loved one. Or, he may simply be overworked or burdened with heavy responsibilities. In most cases, he is not functioning effectively or enjoying a happy, well-balanced life.

The following situations often contribute to stress:

What Is Stress?

Stress is the strong feeling of uncertainty one might have when he considers something important. Imagine that you are walking down a trail in Yellowstone Park. It is a beautiful, tranquil day. Wild flowers are in bloom and chipmunks scurry across the trail. Suddenly ahead of you appears a huge grizzly bear. Your mind immediately directs the autonomic nervous system and the endocrine glands to activate. This speeds up the cardiovascular functions and slows down the gastrointestinal operations, giving the body strength to "fight or take flight." You suddenly have great strength to run swiftly down the trail to safety.

The same kind of physical reaction can occur when you have a fight with a family member or give a talk in sacrament meeting. Arguing with the boss about a difficult problem or confronting your teenager when he arrives home in the early hours of the morning may have a similar effect. The body responds in the same way, no matter what the stressful situation.

Stress is not always bad. In fact, it is often helpful. It may help you run from a bear or motivate you to solve family problems. The harm comes as you dwell on the stressful situation and worry that the problem will recur. For example, you pitch your tent at night in an enclosed camping area and crawl into your sleeping bag but continue to fret that a bear may attack you in your sleep. If you allow stress to linger too long, it becomes distress or strain.

Distress is stress out of control. Once stress is allowed, often by your own inaction, to cross the fine line into distress, it no longer helps you handle pressure from without, but it begins to weaken your body and to increase the likelihood of disease and emotional upheaval. The amount of distress a person can handle depends upon a number of factors, such as heredity, personality, habits, past accidents, illnesses, and physical well-being. Some stress may help us function at our peak. But if pressures continue for long periods of time, serious problems can develop, including physical and emotional illness.

Signs of Stress

Counselors should be sensitive to behavior that indicates harmful levels of stress. Dr. John Adams lists the most common symptoms: [^1]

There are other signs of stress. People under stress are often overexcited, worry a great deal, feel insecure, cannot sleep at night, or are easily confused and forgetful. Physical symptoms include upset stomach, pounding heart, profuse sweating, moist hands, lightheadedness, fainting episodes, cold chills, and flushed face. Other possible symptoms are trembling fingers or hands, inability to sit or stand still, severe headaches, tense muscles, stammering, or a stiff neck.

Once a counselor recognizes the symptoms of stress, he should begin to examine the three dimensions of the person's life that affect stress. These dimensions are physical, interpersonal, and spiritual.

The Physical Dimension

The physical dimension includes exercise and nutrition. Many Church members do not pay adequate attention to these areas. In a world where only a few jobs require strenuous physical activity, most people are terribly out of shape. They ride cars and buses rather than walk, and they use elevators instead of stairs. Once a person has the endorsement of a physician, he should begin a regular exercise program to build body strength. Then he should be able to maintain good physical condition with three or four thirty-minute exercise sessions each week. People on a regular exercise program tend to handle stress more effectively.

Nutrition also makes a difference in how people handle stress. People should be encouraged to eat a balanced diet and maintain proper weight. We often rely on convenience foods that are unnecessarily high in calories, salt, and additives. A good eating plan based on a balanced diet of cereals and grains, vegetables, fruits, dairy products and meats is important in withstanding stress. A good stress-fighting diet minimizes the use of sugar, salt, saturated fats, artificial additives, alcohol, tobacco, and caffeine. When counseling someone suffering from stress, the counselor should ask about his physical activity and eating habits and suggest possible changes, in consultation with competent medical and nutritional professionals.

The Interpersonal Dimension

An important factor in coping with stress is developing a support network of people to turn to for help. Often a person is not able to eliminate pressure but can receive love and concern from family and friends. Often those who are unable to solve their problems are isolated from others who might be of help. An effective counselor will help the troubled person stay close to such people. Bishops, quorum leaders, home teachers, and visiting teachers can often do much to help those under stress. For some problems, especially marriage difficulties, people outside of the family can sometimes provide more effective and objective assistance than can family members. It is important to ask a distressed person who he knows that might be able to help him.

People who have many friends and associates often work through problems more rapidly than do those who feel alone or alienated. Those who have close relationships with only one or two people limit themselves in effectively coping with stress. For this reason, counselors should encourage people to develop a broad range of friends and associates.

The Spiritual Dimension

Spirituality is feeling close to God. Those who do not feel God's influence are often lonely and troubled. Such spiritual isolation is usually a result of sin. Those who commit adultery, who fail to pay tithing, or who do not regularly attend church often feel stress.

Someone who has been an active member of the Church but who begins to fall away will probably alienate himself not only from God but also from Church leaders, family members, and friends. Consequently, he may have a negative attitude toward Church leaders or doctrine. Likewise, he may cause arguments and other problems at home.

For a person to work through such problems and to learn to be obedient to gospel principles may take time, but confessing and forsaking transgressions can greatly reduce stress. Helping a person return to God may be the most important thing a counselor can do.

Sometimes a counselor makes the mistake of considering only one dimension of a person's life. The counselor may advise him to pray, read the scriptures, or attend church. But it is most effective to explore all three dimensions carefully to understand the breadth of the problem. To encourage someone to read the scriptures or to pray may not entirely solve the problem. Likewise, to suggest exercise as a way to reduce stress may not remove the loneliness, confusion, and alienation from friends or from a good relationship with our Father in Heaven. All three dimensions are important.

Coping with Stress

In addition to helping someone analyze the three dimensions of his life, the counselor can use other principles:

Conclusion

It is important for people to understand the impact that stress can have on their lives. Some stress is necessary. But when worry, jealousy, anger, or sorrow become too much for one to bear, he may need help. Counselors can help a person under stress to analyze the three dimensions of his life—physical, interpersonal, and spiritual—and then suggest ways to reduce stress.

Stress Note

Suggested Readings

John D. Adams, Understanding and Managing Stress: A Book of Readings (San Diego: University Associates, 1980).

———, Understanding and Managing Stress: A Workbook in Changing Life Styles (San Diego: University Associates, 1980).

Ramona Adams, Herbert Otto, and Au-Deane Cowley, Letting Go: Uncomplicating Your Life (New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1980).

Hans Selye, Stress Without Distress (New York: J.B. Lippincott, 1974).

About the Author

Dr. Val R. Christensen, vice president of student affairs at Utah State University, received his bachelor's and master's degrees from Utah State University and his Ph.D. from Michigan State University in higher education administration. Well known in northern Utah as a lecturer on LDS topics, Dr. Christensen has years of teaching and administrative experience at the high school and college levels. He has published several articles in the Ensign and in a number of professional publications.

In the Church, Dr. Christensen is presently president of the Logan Utah East Stake. Previous callings include counselor in a USU campus stake presidency, bishop, bishop's counselor, stake mission president, and Young Men's president.

He and his wife, Ruth Ann, are the parents of five children.

---
Notas:
[^1] Not having enough time to accomplish everything. Disregard for low or high priority tasks. A wife refuses to get up in the morning. A student neglects studying. A leader stops going to meetings or fails to follow through on assignments. A teacher fails to prepare a lesson or to show up for class. When a person abandons his efforts to be productive, he may have crossed that dangerous line to distress. Talk out troubles. People should be encouraged to talk about their problems with someone they like and respect. Most people just need to talk through their problems. They don't need advice on how to solve them, but merely need a listening ear. It helps to share worries with someone else. This is not admitting defeat; it is admitting that one knows when to ask for help. John D. Adams, Understanding and Managing Stress: A Book of Readings and A Workbook in Changing Life Styles (San Diego: University Associates, 1980).
