Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 1 ( 1983)

6

Loneliness

Cathleen Sue Croxton

Man was not created to be alone, yet loneliness afflicts all—young and old, bond and free, rich and poor, healthy and sick, righteous and wicked. It was the lot of Joseph of old, of Joseph Smith, of Job, and even Christ to feel alone, forsaken, and abandoned for a time so that they might fill the measure of their creation. This chapter will explain what loneliness is and what its probable causes are. It will also discuss how counselors and friends can best help the lonely.

What Is Loneliness?

Loneliness is being without the presence or support of those who are congenial to one's interests, temperament, viewpoint, or way of life. It is to be without those who share one's situation. It is to be empty, to be void of some influence that one would like to have. For some, loneliness means discomfort; for others, despair. For some it is trial; for others, temptation.

The fall of Adam made possible this mortal probation, and we are free to do what is right or to sin. But we all sin, and sin promotes loneliness in several ways. First, when we sin, we remove ourselves from the Spirit of God. Since God is the source of the deepest love and companionship available to us, this separation creates great loneliness and misery. Second, sin can create gulfs between family members or friends. These gulfs cause loneliness for the sinner and for those who love him. Third, because of our weaknesses, we are given experiences to strengthen us and confirm our loyalty to God. This is the purpose of our mortal probation. In many instances, loneliness is the testing ground where faithfulness is tried and strengthened.

Adam's fall also brought death, and all of us have experienced or will yet experience the death of a loved one. Regardless of the courage of those who meet this challenge, they are still without that person for the rest of their lives.

The suffering associated with loneliness resulting from sin and death is meant to turn our hearts to God for comfort and peace. We are taught by Lehi in 2 Nephi 2 that there must be opposition in all things. If we do not know suffering, we can never know joy. Suffering, therefore, is necessary so that we might know a fullness of joy as does God. Regardless of the cause of the suffering, it can be a blessing. It can turn us to God, and it gives us experience to prepare us to help and to be helped. It refines, teaches, strengthens, and sanctifies.

Preparing to Counsel the Lonely

In cultivating our desire and our ability to serve, we must begin with our own hearts. Are we willing and able to be charitable? Are we willing and able to discover what charity might demand in various situations? What does charity mean in connection with counseling the lonely? The definition of charity gives some excellent suggestions that might be used in counseling the lonely: "And charity suffereth long, and is kind, and envieth not, and is not puffed up, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil, and rejoiceth not in iniquity but rejoiceth in the truth, beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things." (Moroni 7:45.)

Your kindness and consideration may be the greatest gift you could give to a lonely person. By recognizing that his feelings are real and normal, you can help him create meaningful relationships by deepening and developing the one you have with him.

Sometimes a lonely person becomes uncharitable, accusatory, and bitter about his circumstances. This might provoke uncharitable responses in you. If so, you would not be able to help him. For example, a lonely mother might say, "My son makes me sick. All his life I served him, cleaned up after him, cooked for him. I was the best mother he could have asked for. And now that I'm old and can't get out to see him, do you think he comes to see me? Can you blame me for hating him?" If you were to accept her attitude and by your response support her feelings, you would be helping her carry enmity in her heart rather than forgiveness and peace. By helping her maintain hatred, you would be accepting her sin by sinning with her.

It is possible to concoct feelings such as loneliness and to use these feelings to blame and accuse others. Often these accusatory feelings represent some personal refusal to be obedient to the commandments, to love God, neighbor, and self. A person concocting such feelings might say, "How can I love my son? Look at how he neglects and abuses me. Obviously I am not responsible for not loving him. It's his fault. He is responsible for my not keeping the commandments; my suffering and loneliness are proof. If he treated me in a way that made him lovable, I could love him, but my loneliness is proof that he is definitely not lovable."

Such feelings might be described as pseudo-loneliness, for while the person feels empty and angry, her attitudes are not purifying, but are a refusal to be true to what is right. She concocts her feelings as evidence or justification. The feelings are real but false.

The refusal to accept responsibility for one's own failure to be charitable often provokes the counselor to refute or to accept the person's insistence that she is not responsible for her suffering. Both reactions will only encourage the person's negative feelings. The counselor should not accept provocation no matter what form it takes. He should help turn the lonely person's hostile heart to the gospel. In the above example, the woman's son may be wrong in not visiting her, but she can seek ways, in charity, of not being part of the problem. Her own charity will restore her personal peace. She may still be lonely, but instead of hating her son, she will feel sorrow for him.

When our thoughts concerning the lonely are loving, we can see the lonely as a blessing to our lives, for they bring us the opportunity to serve them and to be served by them. But if we view the lonely in a negative way, we will not be able to serve them. We should avoid thoughts like these: "Why can't this person take care of his own problems? He demands so much of my time and energy, and I don't have it to give. I feel like a heel if I don't try to help and I feel as if he takes advantage of me if I do." Such thoughts produce a seeming dilemma in which both alternatives are unattractive. If we look deeply into our hearts, though, we will always find that another alternative exists—charity.

Helping the Lonely

Here are some ways to charitably help the lonely.

Help the lonely person discover the source of his loneliness. Together, explore the lonely person's situation. It may be helpful to ask him to spend a certain amount of time each day pondering the meaning of his loneliness until he has arrived at an honest understanding of his problem. This may promote introspection that reveals the true source of the problem, a source that might otherwise go unrecognized or misunderstood. Suppose the friend you are counseling lives in an area where she has few friends her own age. You recommend that she move to an area where she will be closer to people her own age, but she refuses. She complains that she has lived where she is for many years and that a move would be too difficult for her mentally and physically. This may be true, but she may simply be afraid to move. She may not feel that she will be accepted in a new place by new people. Unless she takes time to understand her feelings, she may never realize what her real fear is and be able to improve her circumstances.

Sometimes a person is lonely because he needs to repent but is too busy covering his tracks to yield to the truth. By setting aside time to consider his situation, he may slow down long enough to consider the possibility that he is his own source of loneliness and can therefore be his own source of happiness. By encouraging him to pray and study, you can help him understand the real problem.

Many people do not want to know the source of their problems, although they say they do. They do not want to know because they do not want to change. You may sometime have heard a conversation like this one:

Betty: Sandy, I feel crummy.

Sandy: What's wrong?

Betty: I'm so lonely. I want to get out and meet people.

Sandy: Me too. Why don't you come with me to the party we've been invited to?

Betty: No, I don't think I want to go.

Sandy: Why not?

Betty: Because if I went, no one would pay any attention to me. I'd be just as lonely there as I am here.

Sandy: Would you pay attention to the people at the party?

Betty: Not really. I figure if they wanted to get to know me, they would make the effort.

What would happen if Sandy persuaded Betty to go to the party but Betty's attitude stayed the same? Betty would stand defiantly or martyr-like alone against the wall, her demeanor defying anyone to try to change her mind about the cold, cruel world. Of course no one would try to get to know her. Outwardly she might appear to have changed because she went to the party, but her real goal of accusing the world would not have changed at all. Only her way of doing so would be different. Betty would still be in the business of being alone, and until she decides to see the world less accusingly, you could do little to help her. For instance, you might say, "Betty, if you would change your attitude, you would be so much happier." But she would reply, "I'm not going to accept responsibility for everyone else's insensitivity. My attitude might be bad, but whose wouldn't be if they faced rejection like I do?"

If you were to drop by for a visit, how would Betty accept it? She might see it as a pity visit: "He just feels sorry for me. He thinks I'm a social misfit or something." Of course, Betty might not respond in this way. In fact, your visit might be the very thing she needs. But until she is willing to give up her accusing attitude and see your visit for what it is, her problems won't be solved. When people truly want to change their situations or perspectives, they will seek to understand the source of their problems. Then you can really work together.

You may be able to understand some things about the lonely person and his situation that he does not. For example, a man we'll call Mark almost completely neglects his personal hygiene. Because of his upbringing, he is totally unaware of the problem. Mark is distressed because no one will befriend him. Although such a situation is less subtle than many you might face, being tactfully honest about a person's causes of loneliness could benefit him greatly.

Help the lonely person get involved in constructive activity. Become aware of the opportunities in your area for service to individuals, families, schools, churches, and the community that you could recommend to the lonely. Many people have lost themselves in service only to discover that the only thing they have really lost is their loneliness. Service helps relieve the mind and heart of suffering.

Whenever possible, recommend service that is related to the person's needs. Avoid service that will cause further discomfort. For instance, it may help a childless couple to fellowship another childless couple into Church activity.

If necessary, remind the lonely person that his service might not result in the fulfillment of a specific desire, such as finding a spouse. Help him to render service for its own sake, not for the rewards it might bring.

When a person is seeking a particular type of relationship, help him focus on what he needs to do to develop it. For example, suppose a man who is widowed with children came to you and told you that he needs to find a wife. He is lonely for companionship and at the same time wants his children to enjoy a mother again. But he is financially irresponsible and is deep in debt, which frightens his marriage prospects away. He needs to learn the principles of money management. While you might not feel qualified to teach him those principles, you might be able to point out the problem and find someone else to teach him.

Help the person understand that when the Lord has laid a course for him it is important that he submit to that course. You might use Job as an example to teach this concept. Job suffered severe loneliness. He was forsaken by family, friends, and associates. Even though he was sorely afflicted, he would not curse God. He remained faithful and submissive to the Lord. His submission did not change because he was miserable, nor did his misery change because he wished it to. It did not change until he proved himself faithful.

When you can see that a person has done all he can to alleviate his suffering, it might help to explore the idea that his suffering is necessary. So often we hear people say, "Boy, have I been tried this week!" or "The Lord must really be preparing me for something great to put me through all this." The self-congratulatory attitude that sparks such statements is not what is meant by necessary suffering. What is being suggested is comfort for those who can learn and grow from their trials.

Help the person understand that his loneliness does not necessarily mean that his life is unacceptable before God. Again, Job is an excellent example. Several of Job's closest friends rebuked him in the name of God's justice for sins that he had not committed. They eventually reaped the vengeance of God while Job was blessed for his faithfulness.

If the lonely person thinks his loneliness is punishment for sin, discuss that possibility. If it appears that his loneliness is a natural consequence of wrongdoing, encourage him to repent. However, if he has an incorrect understanding of the consequences of sin, correct his misconceptions. For example, a woman who feels that her husband's death and her ensuing loneliness are a result of her failure to pay tithing needs better understanding of justice and of cause-and-effect relationships.

Encourage the lonely person to be willing to be loved. So much loneliness can be averted if we will let people into our lives and hearts. When we accept service, we are also serving. Encourage the lonely to reach out to family, friends, and Church members in times of both need and rejoicing.

Don't be afraid to contact others and invite them to befriend a lonely person. This is especially important when the person is elderly, restricted in activity, or confined to one place. After finding out the needs of the person, ask for help from those who might give it.

When the lonely person is living in or working in conditions that increase their loneliness, suggest a change in surroundings. The aged generally enjoy association with their peers just as do the middle-aged and the young. While a move or a change of employment may seem threatening, it may do much to revitalize a dull, dreary life. Friends and associates in the church and community can help make such changes less frightening and more feasible.

When the person has few or no hobbies or interests, try to arouse interest in one or several that would lead the person to self-fulfillment and association with others. There are many organizations, clubs, and community and church groups based on specific interests and activities that provide the opportunity for both a social climate and fulfilling activity.

Be consistent in your concern for the person's welfare. Such consistency may be the catalyst that sparks their willingness and confidence to overcome their obstacles.

In brief, perhaps the most important thing to remember is to help the lonely, in faith, imagine the ways out of their difficulties. Such a goal will help diminish hopelessness and increase activity.

About the Author

Cathleen Sue Croxton, a homemaker, received her bachelor's degree in psychology and is a candidate for a master's degree in family sciences from Brigham Young University. She has counseled and taught courses in child development and family relations.

She has held a number of positions in the Church, including Relief Society counselor, Relief Society stake board member, and teacher for various teaching organizations.

She and her husband, Brent, and their child live in Dallas, Texas.
