Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 1 ( 1983)

8

Self-Esteem

Terrance D. Olson and R. Lanier Britsch

Think for a moment of someone you consider confident. How would you describe him? Two qualities of confident people—noted frequently by observers—are their concern for others and their unconcern for self. In a culture where there is great concern for self-fulfillment, self-gratification, self-assertiveness, self-expression, and self-worth, it is no wonder that there is a great concern for self-esteem. However, the concept may be valuable only when making observations about others. If a person talks about his own self-esteem being high, listeners may see the remark as a sign of conceit.

Self-esteem is the value a person places on himself. We see only one possible value that can be an honest assessment: "And let every man esteem his brother as himself, and practice virtue and holiness before me." (D&C 38:24.)

In other words, my worth and your worth is indistinguishable. It is unnecessary to measure it, for it is infinite.

Four issues need to be considered in helping people to esteem themselves and others. First, what is our true identity? Second, what is the role of virtue and holiness—obedience—in maintaining self-esteem? Third, what do our efforts to give our best, to progress, to develop our talents and abilities, have to do with personal worth? Finally, what is the meaning of self-forgetfulness, sacrifice, and service as related to self-esteem?

Our True Identity

A person who suffers from low self-esteem often disregards his origins as a child of Heavenly Father. All of us need to know that we are unconditionally loved by God the Father and Jesus Christ. This love is not given because we are good, but because God is good. He loves all mankind, even with their faults. Latter-day Saints recognize that Christ's suffering in Gethsemane and death on Calvary were the ultimate acts of love for all people at all times.

This knowledge of our divine identity and of God's love for us is born of faith. In a sense, when accountable people discount their own infinite value, they are being unfaithful. Knowledge of truth is not sufficient for personal happiness. Acting on truth, living by it, is essential. Nevertheless, for those who see themselves as less than others, what is life like? How could their experience be described?

When people see themselves as inferior, they behave in ways that support their thinking. They are ineffective in achieving their goals. They are usually unhappy, perhaps even depressed. Mental comparisons with others give them evidence of their inadequacies. This "proof" of their shortcomings is often used as ammunition against those who would encourage them.

They may also be hesitant, shy, or hostile. Often a person with low self-esteem experiences a perverse joy at the misfortunes of those they see as superior. The overriding feeling of such people is hopelessness.

Fortunately, the gospel offers hope, but self-esteem extends beyond God's fatherhood of our spirits and his unconditional love for us. Self-esteem depends to a considerable degree on a person's ability to see himself as a productive, contributing, effective part of society. It also depends on his ability to believe that the Atonement of Christ is really valid in his behalf. This leads to the necessity of his keeping God's laws.

Obedience

Once we understand our identity, the key issue in how we see ourselves is honesty—our obedience to what we understand. When we accept ourselves as God does, we can see our opportunities and challenges clearly. We can meet them with the best that is in us. We also see others honestly, and our esteem for them matches our esteem for ourselves. The reason this is so is that when we see ourselves honestly, we become more godlike in our attitude toward others. Just as God is no respecter of persons, we too become accepting rather than unrighteously judgmental. A comparison of people's worth is seen for what it is—a worthless activity. The source of this kind of vision of others is our obedience to the gospel or to whatever light and truth we have.

When a person with low self-esteem comes to you for help, it may seem pretty simplistic just to say to them, "You are a child of God" and "Obey the gospel." Although these two ideas could be sources of peace and confidence for them, in their frame of mind these ideas are seen as unrealistic. Nevertheless, you can relate to the people by believing these truths yourself. By accepting them as children of God, you offer them hope and help them dispel their feelings of inadequacy. You can challenge their false beliefs about themselves.

Giving Our Best

If man now is as God once was, then man has the opportunity to progress. We claim that the keys to this progress are knowledge and obedience. Further, we claim that effort, sacrifice, struggle, perseverance, and commitment are fulfilling. Consequently, a person who suffers from low self-esteem may need more than to have his beliefs challenged. He must be challenged to act, to do, to try. "What do you believe is possible?" is a question that invites a person to explore his faith. "What are you willing to do?" is a question that invites him to act.

Consider this possibility. Jane is a woman who considers herself as plain as her name. She is hesitant in public, she is embarrassed at the Relief Society teacher training meetings she attends, and she is so discouraged that she does not want to teach anymore. "After all," she says, "there are so many sisters more talented than I."

Just in this brief sketch we see clues of low self-esteem:

If you were in a position to help Jane, consider the following questions:

Perhaps stating your beliefs would be more helpful than asking questions. ("I'm not sure releasing you would be in your best interests." "Maybe some women do have talents you don't have, but that isn't the point." "I suppose you could be released, but we need you.")

Jane's feelings should not be ignored but should be examined in the light of faith. See what she is willing to see. Tell her what you see.

Such questions are meant to help Jane take responsibility, to give whatever is her best. Of course, she can discount any of these suggestions if she is insistent enough. Your responsibility is to show that faith and works will help her meet the challenges of life. Faith includes seeing her and yourself honestly and acting on that faith. You are reminding her that the "power is in [her]." (D&C 58:28.)

The foundation of these remarks is the belief that the Holy Ghost prompts the spirit of man to good acts. The human conscience also motivates to good works. And when man chooses to do right, he follows his inborn ability to act like his Father in Heaven.

When we give our best—whatever that is—it will include faith and obedience to the gospel, and some different attitudes will be evident in our lives than when we had "low self-esteem":

In short, all of us are blessed with gifts or talents. All of us who are capable of worrying about self-esteem are capable of self-improvement and spiritual growth. Such growth comes through self-forgetfulness.

Self-Forgetfulness

Perhaps there is a key to appropriate counseling in the word self-consciousness. When we speak of a self-conscious person, we mean one who is overly concerned about how he is perceived by others or who is almost dysfunctional because of self-doubt or fear of failure. Such persons are always looking at themselves. The philosopher said, "Know thyself," but too much looking inside can shut out many other attractive landscapes.

It is significant that Moses, reflecting upon his vision of the "world upon which he was created . . . and the ends thereof, and all the children of men which are, and which were created," marveled and wondered. (Moses 1:8.)

Moses enjoyed great power in the courts of the Pharaoh, but after his vision, he remarked, "Now . . . I know that man is nothing, which thing I never had supposed." (Moses 1:10.) Such an attitude is not low self-esteem, but is humility before the glory of God. Moses also testified that because he saw the glory of God, he could discern the darkness of Satan when he came tempting Moses to worship him. Moses also recorded God's purpose for mankind: "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

God's concern is us, not himself. The purpose of Moses' vision was to bless Moses. God did not show his greatness for any vain purpose.

So also, in our conduct on earth, we are most blessed when we help and enrich others. If Jane is to be blessed by her Church calling, her talents, or her weaknesses, she must give up her inordinate concern about them and simply serve with all her faith and ability. Humility is a blessing. Feelings of inferiority are not. In rendering honest service, she could stop worrying about herself.

Since the world emphasizes the importance of the self, in one sense self-forgetfulness is an "overcoming" or a "coming out of the world. Service given freely is, ultimately, no sacrifice at all, but this is learned only through service freely given. Then and only then will such experience teach us and be for our good. (See D&C 122.)

When Children Feel Inadequate

Children depend on adults for help in assessing the meaning of their experiences. If children are around parents and other adults who demean and reject them or in other ways refuse to love them, the children literally suffer the sins of the parents upon their heads. They learn false ideas about what family relationships should be like.

Although children come to earth to be blessed, their mistreatment can hide their blessings from them. One reason children feel inadequate is that their adequacy has never been acknowledged by the adults in their lives. Whether you are trying to help a child who feels inadequate or an adult who was sinned against as a child, neither person need be trapped by their circumstances. They can give up their feelings of inadequacy.

Your greatest help to a child in this situation is your unbridled compassion for them. You must see that they are of worth, that they need not be miserable, that their capacities for accomplishment and peace are intact. No matter what might have been done to them, they have not lost the power to be fully human. They can be free, even of the sins of their parents against them.

You will not help children by telling them these things, however. You will help them by being an example of love and truth. Fortunately, most parents are not constantly negative with their children. Most children have been treated both properly and improperly. They have been exposed to both light and darkness. Therefore, they feel inadequate only in certain situations. Still, you can provide additional light.

Children's sense of self-worth is fostered when they:

Esteem and Responsibility

As children grow older, their feelings of inferiority often become ways to avoid opportunities, responsibilities, or challenges. As they become accountable, such feelings can also spring from their refusal to do what they already believe is right. One high school student, who was complaining about how unfair, boring, and difficult a certain math teacher was, kept insisting that he was "no good in math." When he was told that was not true, he began insisting that he was simply no good. But he responded responsibly when asked two questions:

Suddenly, his "feelings of inadequacy" were no longer the issue. In behaving responsibly, he no longer used such feelings to avoid responsibility. With older children and adults, the general principle is not to try to move them from low self-esteem to high self-esteem, but to move them to the point that worry about personal esteem is seen as a vain, foolish, and irresponsible activity. Self-forgetfulness, effort, commitment and courage are at stake. Here are some examples of ways accountable people with inferiority feelings might give up those feelings:

Inferiority feeling: A student is embarrassed because he is in the ninth grade and can't read.

Responsible action: The student should learn to read. He could do this by getting help from his parents and teachers and by practicing reading each day.

Inferiority feeling: A businessman feels that nobody at work appreciates him.

Responsible action: He should examine his own commitment to do his best. He should strive to be of service to those at work.

Inferiority feeling: A woman feels inadequate as she sees that her children do not "measure up" to her neighbor's children.

Responsible action: She should teach her children that whatever their best is, is good enough. She should teach them what she believes is right.

Inferiority feeling: A young mother is depressed because she quit taking music lessons as a teenager and now aches when she hears her old college roommates play inspiring piano pieces.

Responsible action: She should either resume learning to play the piano or learn to rejoice in the talents of her old roommates—perhaps both, if she feels these are the right things for her to do.

Inferiority feeling: Dan is not confident around those who receive the more "prominent" Church callings, and he is unhappy in his position as cubmaster.

Responsible action: Dan should yield his heart to the boys he is serving. He should pray for knowledge of how to help them and should lose himself in their service.

Inferiority feeling: A new husband feels shut out of his father-in-law's hunting and camping activities.

Responsible action: He might talk with his father-in-law about his feelings. He might also try harder to build a close relationship with his father-in-law, not because he believes this will make his father-in-law want to include him more in his activities, but because he believes it is right to be a good son-in-law.

What Else Can We Do?

In short, those among us who suffer from a poor self-image can be helped by our love for others and for ourselves. Ultimately, there is no difference between those two loves. If we acknowledge our eternal identity, we give up vain comparisons of ourselves with others and esteem them as ourselves. If we give the best in us to do what we believe is right, and if we make service and selflessness the hallmark of our relationships with others, we will see ourselves so honestly that self-esteem will not even be a concern. We will be too busy serving, blessing, and healing others to notice that we have healed ourselves. Arthur Schlesinger has noted, "When we are really honest with ourselves, we must admit that our lives are all that really belong to us. So it is how we use our lives that determines what kind of men we are. It is my deepest belief that only by giving our lives do we find life. I am convinced that the truest act of courage, the strongest act of manliness, is to sacrifice ourselves for others in a totally nonviolent struggle for justice. To be a man is to suffer for others. God help us to be men." [^1]

Finally, and most appropriately, we bless those with low self-esteem when we live by the words of King Benjamin: "And behold, I tell you these things that ye may learn wisdom; that ye may learn that when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.)

Self-Esteem Note

---
Notas:
[^1] A concern about how one appears to others. Do you see her honestly, acknowledging her as a child of God? Do you see her compassionately and esteem her as yourself? We will be concerned about our tasks and responsibilities but not about always winning the approval of others. are talked with, not down to. From which student in the class could you get the most help? Arthur M. Schlesinger, Robert Kennedy and His Times, vol. 2 (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1978), p. 884.
