Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 1 ( 1983)

9

Managing Conflict

James T. Duke and J. Lynn England

Conflict, frustration, affliction, and misunderstanding are normal aspects of the mortal world. Speaking through Lehi, the Lord instructed us that "it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things." (2 Nephi 2:11.) In mortality, opposition is present and makes possible choice and the exercise of agency.

This does not mean, however, that we should encourage conflict or allow it to control our lives. God expects us to improve our lives and our social relationships as much as possible during our stay in mortality, and this includes resolving conflicts and learning to develop social relationships based on love, service, patience, and understanding. (See D&C 121:41-42; Alma 7:23.) While we can expect conflict, we should also expect to manage conflict and let peace and love abound.

It is important to recognize the difference between patterns of conflict, in which two people (or two groups) are regularly in conflict with each other (as in sibling rivalries), and a situational conflict that may occur only once (as in a difference of opinion between two people who usually agree on things).

A distinction may also be made between a conflict that is accidental or unintentional and one that is intentional. How we respond to a conflict and how we go about reducing it and repairing the resulting damage to the relationship depends largely on whether the conflict was intentional or not.

The opposite of love and friendship is often identified as conflict, but the real opposite of love is indifference, apathy, and withdrawal (or divorce). As the sociologist George Simmel recognized, conflict is a form of association or interaction and is an indication that people care enough about their relationship to fight. As long as conflict exists, the two parties at least have a relationship, no matter how bad it may be. This conflict may lead them to hurt or even kill each other or to forgive and forget, but the conflict shows that something about the relationship is still important to the people involved. When the people show complete indifference or apathy, the relationship is dead.

This leads us to a final distinction: conflict can have both positive and negative results. Our Heavenly Father realized that opposition was an indispensable part of mortality. Conflict or competition between two people impels both to improve, strengthens group boundaries, increases the identification of group members with their own group, and forces people to establish ties with others. As muscles are strengthened by stress, so people and groups can be strengthened by conflict and tribulations. Of course, conflict often has negative results, but it may also have beneficial effects if it can be used to strengthen personal relations, negotiate more satisfactory role relationships, resolve disagreements, and so on.

Causes of Conflict

Before we can manage conflict effectively, we need to identify and understand its causes. Only if the people involved have a clear picture of the causes of conflict can they act wisely to deal with its resolution.

Individual Differences

One of the most significant causes of conflict is individual differences. People are different in many ways, and each person has a unique combination of personality and character traits. Individual differences do not necessarily lead to conflict, but they provide the potential for conflict and increase the possibility that conflict will occur. In other words, people who are similar are less likely to have conflicts than those who are different from each other. Following are discussions of some individual differences.

Physiological differences. Some of the most serious social conflicts arise from physiological differences between people, and often we are unaware of the physiological basis of such conflicts. In addition to the obvious physiological differences between males and females and old and young are many more subtle differences that influence behavior. The level of sexual desire of two marriage partners may be quite different, leading to misunderstandings and frustrations. The intelligence, manual dexterity, and energy level of people differ dramatically, and misunderstandings frequently arise from such differences. Complicating things even further, some people tend to wake up early and have their greatest energy levels in the morning hours; these are the so-called "larks." Other people, sometimes called "owls," tend to wake up later and more slowly, and their bodies take longer to reach high levels of energy. Once going, however, these individuals tend to have much higher energy levels in the evening hours and tend to stay up longer. If a "lark" is married to an "owl," or if the parents are one type while one or more of their children are another type, conflicts may arise and adjustments may be necessary. One type of person may condemn the other for being "different." What is most important is that different types of people learn to understand and appreciate each other.

Personality differences. Some people are outgoing and confident while others are more shy and quiet. Some people are aggressive or domineering while others are more submissive or adjustive. Some like adventure and others prefer security. Same people are giving while others appear to require much support from others.

Experience and conditioning. People differ greatly in the experiences they have had in their lives as well as in the way they interpret these experiences. A person who grew up in a happy home may have a totally different outlook than another person who was abused or rejected as a child. Those who have lived through a war or depression may have a very different view of the world from those who have not experienced such things.

Our experiences influence us to place greater value on some things than others and to believe that some behaviors are more successful or rewarding than others. If we are praised or rewarded for being quiet or saying our prayers, we soon learn to be quiet or say our prayers. If we gain benefits from being aggressive, we are more likely in the future to use aggression to gain our objectives. We tend to approach problems or people in ways that are customary or typical for us personally and for the members of the social group to which we belong. Thus, every person's life is a treasure trove of past experience and conditioning—a gold mine too vast to be explored or understood adequately by another person, but one we constantly return to for the resources to face our daily tasks and relationships.

Talents and interests. People differ greatly in their talents, skills, and interests. Some people appear to possess great musical ability, while others have abilities in mathematics, mechanics, or language. Some people like the opera; others like football games or boxing matches. Of course, everyone has talents and skills, but some may have a greater variety than others. Many conflicts arise from these differences. An example would be a husband who likes to attend sporting events who has a wife who would rather go to concerts.

Emotional Closeness

Emotional closeness can be a cause of conflict, but this is not often recognized. The German sociologist George Simmel noted that in any close relationship, it is likely that strong feelings will develop that are both positive and negative. Family members, roommates, club members, soldiers in the same outfit, and others who interact frequently are likely to develop strong feelings toward each other. Usually these are feelings of affection and friendship that contribute to the well-being of the group and the happiness of its members. However, such emotional closeness can lead also to misunderstanding, frustration, competition, and anger. Frequently, close relationships involve a mixture of positive and negative feelings. Spouses are likely to feel both love and frustration more strongly with each other than with a casual acquaintance. After all, they interact more frequently, and their relationship touches every facet of their lives.

Several years ago the sleeping arrangements in one family placed a thirteen-year-old boy in the same bedroom with his three-year-old brother. The parents noted that these two brothers of different ages developed a strong affection for each other and that the elder brother cared for and helped his younger brother. In turn, the younger boy sought out the elder brother when he needed help. However, these two boys were also more likely than other children in the family to quarrel and to feel frustrated with each other about such things as cleaning up their room.

Police have long been aware that family squabbles tend to escalate into violence more frequently than other types of misunderstandings. And social occasions, especially in the local tavern, are more likely to produce both friendship and violent confrontations. Many parents have noted that when the emotional level in the home gets high and people are laughing, teasing, and getting excited, misunderstandings and squabbles may also occur. They therefore try to keep the emotional level on a more even keel to help control conflict.

Expectations and Norms

Every person has a great diversity of expectations about how various people will behave. From experience I have come to expect my seventeen-year-old son to show joy when a bowl of ice cream is placed before him and to reject a bowl of peas.

Such expectations tend to be communicated from person to person and to become standardized within a social group—both my wife and I share the same expectations about the reactions of our son to certain foods. When such expectations are widely shared within a social group, they become a social norm, a group-held expectation behavior. Such norms serve as standards of behavior and tend to be infused with a moral character, so that people expect others to act in a certain way and believe that they should act that way. Sometimes these norms are enacted into law, but more frequently they are simply communicated from person to person and sanctioned informally. Many norms apply only to a specific type of person, for example, to a young man, a wife, or a doctor. As people grow up, they learn the norms of their social group and society and "internalize" or accept as their own these norms. People carry these norms in their minds and apply them to themselves and others constantly. For example, college professors are expected to stand up while they lecture; college students are expected to sit down and take notes. Mothers "should" do the dishes; fathers "should" mow the lawn. Children "should" obey their parents. People "should" go to church on Sunday.

Conformity to the expectations of others is much more extensive than nonconformity. We eat the food typical of our group (whether pasta or potatoes), sleep early or late as is the custom, wear clothing dictated by social custom, and follow the latest fads in diets or exercise or recreation. We stand in line without crowding in, speak when we are spoken to, cut our meat with a knife, and don't eat with our fingers. The expectations of others, especially those who are close to us, have a powerful impact on our lives.

Some norms early a stronger moral tone than others, and some norms (like those regarding sex roles) may not be agreed upon by everyone. And the strength of norms tends to decline as people choose not to conform to the norm and act contrary to the expectations of others.

One of the greatest sources of conflict in social relationships is disagreement about norms or nonconformity to group-held expectations. If a young man grows up in a group that teaches the norm of male aggressiveness and independence and then marries a young woman who learned a different expectation of male responsibility and quiet leadership, both the man and the woman may feel that the other person is not living up to his or her expectations.

In my family as I was growing up, my mother always took out the garbage after a meal and put it in a garbage can in our garage. In my wife's family, her father always carried the garbage out of the house. When we were married, we both expected the other to carry out the garbage. What is most significant about this example, however, is that we did not communicate our expectations to each other. We simply had come to assume that certain things would happen, and we were both uncomfortable that the other was not living up to our expectations. Since we loved each other, we didn't want to criticize each other, so without speaking about the garbage we both waited for the other to take it out, and eventually one or the other of us would, all the while muttering under his breath. Only when the conflict became more marked did one of us mention it to the other; then we were able to discuss our expectations openly. Eventually, buying a garbage disposal solved much of the problem, and now we both take an equal responsibility to put the garbage down the disposal.

Only by bringing their expectations to the surface and discussing them openly can people deal with them. But we should realize that norms may have been long internalized and that it is not easy to change one's norms once they are well established.

Sin

Breaking God's commandments—that is, sinning—lies at the root of much of the world's conflict and unhappiness. Alma told his wayward son, Corianton, "Wickedness never was happiness." (Alma 41:10.) Mormon identified Satan as the "author of all sin" (Helaman 6:30), and in his great sermon to his son Jacob, Lehi said that because Satan "had fallen from heaven, and had become miserable forever, he sought also the misery of all mankind" (2 Nephi 2:18). The Savior taught that "the spirit of contention . . . is of the devil." (3 Nephi 11:29.)

It follows that one of the best ways to avoid conflict is to be righteous and obedient and to practice the law of love in our relationships with others. People who are guided by the Spirit, who are full of charity towards all men," and who "let virtue garnish [their] thoughts unceasingly" (D&C 121:45) do not enter into conflict with others. Of course, they may sometimes "[reprove] . . . with sharpness," which may set the person in conflict with the person he has reproved, but the relationship is strengthened because the person "show[s] forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom [he has) reproved." (D&C 121:43.)

Sin may be a source of conflict when people do not agree on what is sinful. At a restaurant a woman orders a cola drink. Her husband sees this as breaking the Word of Wisdom, and conflict ensues. On Sunday a boy plays a sandlot baseball game with members of his deacons quorum, and his mother accuses him of breaking the Sabbath.

Resolving Conflicts

Resolving conflicts usually involves at least four things: changing how we think, changing how we feel, changing our behavior, and changing our relationships. Social scientists often speak of the ABCs of social life: (a) affect (emotion), (b) behavior, and (c) cognition (thinking). To these three might be added a fourth: relationships. These elements are central to understanding human behavior and how conflicts may be resolved. A change in any one of these elements will bring changes in the others because of their close interconnection. Changing our way of thinking will bring about a change in our emotions, our behavior, and our relationships. Likewise, changing behavior will bring about a change in feeling and thinking. Consequently, conflict can often be resolved through changes in feelings, behavior, thinking, or relationships.

Once the cause of a conflict has been identified, it is much easier to decide how to resolve the conflict. Following are discussions of various techniques to help resolve conflicts.

Toleration: A Change in Thinking and Feeling

One of the best ways to deal with conflict is to tolerate it and the differences that underlie it. Rather than being upset that his wife thinks differently than he does, a husband might accept the difference and come to appreciate the variety and interest it creates in his life. Differences can be a source of strength in a relationship. If one spouse is a "lark" and the other is an "owl," for example, each spouse will have some time alone to read, think, or write.

Repentance: A Change in Behavior

Some conflicts can be resolved through repentance. Sometimes only one person in a relationship has sinned and needs repentance. But more frequently, both need to repent. A truly repentant attitude can resolve the pain of the person who has sinned and, provided the other person is forgiving, bring their relationship back to one of peace and harmony.

Forgiveness

Our Heavenly Father expects us to forgive those who have sinned against us. (See D&C 64:10.) Much conflict arises or is prolonged because we fail to heed this counsel. When we carry bad feelings in our hearts, when we condemn others and refuse to forgive them, we unnecessarily add fuel to a conflict and keep it going long after it should have been resolved.

It usually takes two people to fight. In our family we have learned that when a person refuses to be offended, or when a person forgives quickly, the conflict is soon resolved and peace is restored. It is possible for one person to keep a conflict going if he persists in offending or hurting another, but most people will turn from their sins if the other person forgives and refuses to join the conflict. When we truly forgive, we remember the sin no more and treat the person who has sinned against us as if nothing had happened.

My three-year-old daughter taught me such forgiveness. I had been impatient and unloving with her on a Saturday night and had sent her to bed with some harsh words. The next morning I left for Church meetings that lasted most of the morning. During this time I felt sorry for my actions of the previous night and planned to ask my daughter's forgiveness. I finally arrived at our ward near the close of our sacrament meeting. Upon entering the building, I found my daughter sitting in the foyer on her elder sister's lap. I sat down beside them, and as I did so, my younger daughter slid onto my lap and settled in comfortably. She didn't say a word, but she gave me no sign that she remembered my harshness. I held her in my arms, I felt forgiven and healed of my sin, and our relationship was restored.

Negotiation and Compromise

Most people resolve their conflicts through negotiation, but they do not usually realize that they are negotiating. Raising children involves a continual sequence of proposals by parent or child and counter-proposals by the other. Living together as husband and wife requires the repeated use of suggestions and counter-suggestions about individual conduct and family activities. However, most of us do not recognize that we are negotiating. Rarely do we plan our negotiating strategy and devote as much time to negotiating with our spouses and children as we do to negotiating with a car salesman or real estate broker. Yet, the consequences of negotiations within the family last longer and affect our lives more than any purchase or passing relationship.

When family members begin to search for ways to improve their abilities as negotiators, they need to understand the nature of family relationships. First, negotiations to solve any single conflict take place as part of relationships that have usually had a long history of negotiations and face an equally long future. They are not like negotiations with a salesman we have never met before and will probably never see again. Hence, as we negotiate, that history and future need to be taken into account. Second, the family relationship is one that involves virtually every aspect of our lives. We know many things about each other that are irrelevant to the current conflict. We know personal items that can hurt the person with whom we are negotiating. There may be several other areas of conflict that have not yet been resolved. Consequently, as we negotiate with family members it is tempting to bring up other problems to hurt the other person. Third, as we seek models of good negotiators and effective strategies for negotiations, it is important to remember that the other party is not a hated enemy, does not have goals that are very different from our own, and is not going to be able to go home after negotiations are over.

These characteristics of family relationships lead us to emphasize three aspects of negotiations. First, negotiation is a way to solve conflicts to ensure that all who are involved benefit in some way. The basic idea behind negotiations is that a careful consideration of all alternatives should lead to a settlement that is an improvement for everyone over the existing situation. The problem is not who will give in, but how much each person must compromise to promote mutual benefit.

The second aspect of family negotiation is that negotiations must be focused on a specific issue and the strategies used must be restricted to protect the relationship. When a husband and wife are negotiating over the frequency of visits to in-laws, it does not ordinarily help to bring up other unresolved issues such as appropriate Sunday activities while on vacation, techniques for disciplining a teenage daughter, or the current method of meeting family financial obligations. Typically, this only adds one more unresolved issue to the list. In addition, it is often tempting to use knowledge about the other person's weaknesses and emotions to obtain a favorable solution or to coerce him into a concession. For example, if a husband wants to visit his parents more frequently, and his wife knows he feels guilty about his inability to stand up to his parents' excessive demands, the wife may be tempted to keep the number of visits as they are simply by attacking his masculinity and pointing out the childish nature of his desires. His guilt may need to be worked out at some point, but it is destructive to use it on him in this way.

The final aspect of negotiations in families is that they need to be based on mutual trust. A friend once described a disagreement with her husband in which he agreed to give up a football game to attend the wedding of a member of her family. She said, "He gave in so easily that I knew he was up to something. I am scared to death that he plans to use this on me to get me to do something I really don't like." Negotiations between persons who don't trust each other are greatly complicated by the guessing involved in trying to determine what the other person is really planning or meaning. A Jewish anecdote describes this problem: "Telling me you are going to Minsk so that I will think you are going to Pinsk helps me to know that you will go to Minsk. " People who are starting to resolve conflict by improving their negotiating skills must examine the trust in their relationship. If trust is low, the first order of business should be increasing trust.

It is helpful to think of negotiation as a three-stage process: (1) information gathering and issue formation, (2)bargaining, (3) agreement.

Most effective negotiators start out by seeking information and trying to clarify the issue. During this phase of the negotiations, it is important to avoid taking firm positions or forcing the other parties to take firm positions. Background information about the feelings of all the parties, their thoughts, and their actions are crucial. Find out where you are and where the others are. This will be extremely helpful in conducting the other phases of the negotiations. If I know that my daughter is feeling socially insecure and is afraid of being left out of social events, I will be much more skillful and considerate as we negotiate whether she will baby-sit or attend a school dance.

Similarly, background concerning the state of the relationship is extremely important. When a wife and her husband resolve a conflict over the frequency of visits to in-laws, the alternatives considered, offers made, and reactions to suggestions may depend on the kind of relationship between them. What are the communication patterns (open, closed, or restricted)? Is the relationship healthy or in trouble?

Finally, a negotiator should clarify the issues to be negotiated. Each person should state as clearly as possible the issues that raise the current problem. This is important because it focuses the discussion on specifics instead of allowing matters to remain general and vague. It also helps the people to know each other's concerns. Too often negotiations fail because, unknowingly, the parties are responding to different issues.

The second stage involves the actual exchange of offers or suggestions. The various alternatives are presented and responded to. Some alternatives are eliminated because they are mutually unacceptable or totally undesirable for one of the parties Other alternatives are retained for further consideration. The basic question when an alternative is presented is whether the listening party should make a concession and modify some aspect of his position by moving closer to agreement with the other. People often fear making concessions because they are afraid of looking weak. However, concessions are extremely important in convincing the other person to compromise as well. Some modest concessions should be made early, but they should be accompanied by an explanation of the expectations of concessions from the others involved. A father might suggest to his daughter, "I am willing to have you go to your school party this Saturday instead of tending the younger children if you will tend them next Friday night."

In addition to presenting alternatives, each person should respond to each suggestion to formulate new alternatives. The final solution to a conflict is often created during the negotiations. Some refer to this as seeking the formula to solve the problem. As my daughter and I negotiate over her activities on weekends, the ultimate solution may be a new suggestion arising from our reactions to earlier alternatives.

The exchanges of alternatives and attempts to create new alternatives usually lead to an agreement. As the agreement is reached, it should be implemented with care, for two reasons. First, everyone needs to feel that he gained from the process. Second, the agreement reached on a specific issue lays the foundations for the subsequent negotiations. It is important to make certain that the trust and quality of the relationship have held constant or have improved. When agreements are implemented with care, the true strengths of negotiation emerge: the conflict is resolved, the parties are better off, and the relationship is improved.

Mediation

At times none of the tactics described above resolve a conflict. If the issue is not serious, we usually learn to live with the lack of agreement. However, at other times the issue is serious or it introduces other conflicts that are not solved either. The failure may arise due to a lack of trust, intolerance, failure to repent, failure to forgive, or other problems. In any case, the people involved need to look outside themselves for a solution. In formal conflict resolution, a mediator is often brought in as a disinterested third party. In families, this strategy is often useful. A mediator can be brought in to help the family explore their feelings, thinking, and actions to try to find opportunities for change. The relationship may be examined for ways to improve it. A mediator is often most helpful simply as a source of new alternatives. The couple trying to solve the issue of in-raw visits may never have explored inviting in-laws to their home, changing the format of the visits, or using the telephone. A mediator may simply provide such fresh ideas.

The choice of a mediator is crucial. It must be someone who is not more closely allied to one of the parties than the other. A husband's tennis companion is probably not a good choice because he will be seen by the wife simply as an ally of her husband. The person may also be someone who is personally interested in both parties and who can be talked to openly by them. Sometimes bishops, Relief Society presidents, teachers, or friends ably perform the role.

Conclusion

Conflict is a normal part of living. However, an understanding of the nature of a conflict, an appreciation for its underlying causes, and using techniques to manage it can make our lives more pleasant and less stressful.

About the Authors

Dr. James T. Duke, professor of sociology at Brigham Young University, received his bachelor's and master's degrees from the University of Utah and his Ph.D. from the University of California at Los Angeles. He has taught at UCLA, the University of Utah, and the University of Texas at El Paso. In 1971, Dr. Duke received the Professor of the Year Award for distinguished teaching at BYU.

Dr. Duke presently serves as a high councilor in the Orem, Utah, Sharon Stake. He has previously served as a branch president at BYU, as stake and ward YMMIA president, as stake and ward Sunday School president, and as elders quorum instructor. He has done research on conversion for the Correlation Evaluation Department of the Church.

He and his wife, Ruth, are the parents of nine children.

Dr. J. Lynn England, professor of sociology at Brigham Young University, received his bachelor's and master's degrees in philosophy from the University of Utah and his Ph.D. in sociology from the University of Pittsburgh. He has taught at BYU since 1970. His special interests are the sociology of knowledge and mediation and negotiation. He has published widely and is a member of several honorary and professional associations.

Dr. England has served as a teacher in various organizations of the Church, as a member of a stake Sunday School presidency, and as first counselor in the bishopric of his Orem ward.

He and his wife, Anna, are the parents of five children.
