Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 1 ( 1983)

10

Counseling Couples

Terrance D. Olson

Fundamental to successful marriage counseling is the belief that progress is possible with any couple. When you don't believe change is possible, it is time to do something other than counsel the couple. You could refer them to professional help, of course, or you could simply acknowledge that you believe you have nothing to offer.

Fortunately, many options are available to pursue before your personal and spiritual resources are exhausted. There are numerous steps, conditions, and strategies to consider before you get to the end of your rope.

In counseling a couple, you must have faith that change can occur. You need not be professionally trained to exercise faith. Nor must you be licensed to hold before a couple, however dark their despair, the hope that they can overcome their problems.

Who Should Be Present In Counseling?

Typically, you can help even when one member of the couple refuses to visit you. When this is true, however, or when one partner wants the meetings to be kept secret from the other, success is unlikely. Such restrictions suggest that one or both partners do not feel "at one" with the other. But if you listen to one partner's story, you have a one-eyed view of the marriage. You may begin to make the same judgments against the missing member of the marriage that the person telling you about the marriage is making. You then become an ally of the person you are counseling, not a counselor who is going to foster change or strengthen a marriage.

The solution to this problem is rarely to see one partner and then the other. It may look as if you could be more "fair" if you "heard both sides," but you will only have heard two jaundiced views of the relationship instead of one. You then place yourself (with the couple's assistance) in the position of judging the credibility of each partner in the marriage instead of helping them.

In most cases where the marriage relationship seems to be the problem, you cannot even begin to suggest solutions until the couple attend the counseling sessions together. This does not mean that one person cannot be taught, but it does mean if one partner in a marriage is deeply troubled about the relationship, involving the other partner is fundamental to solving their relationship problems.

Seeing the Couple

Although the couple appears for help together, one or both partners may be reluctant to take responsibility or to address issues directly. It is helpful to ask each partner why they have come and what they hope to accomplish. In this way you focus on a goal, a possibility, a direction.

Here's an example:

Counselor: What do you hope our time together will accomplish?

Husband: I don't know. She's the one who is upset and drag—uh—wanted us to come.

Wife (looking at husband): Maybe you had better tell him why I get upset.

Husband: You're a big girl, you tell him.

Wife: Oh, you never want to help with anything, do you?

Husband: (Exhales slowly.)

Wife: We just don't seem to get along, we—

Husband: She just doesn't like the fact that I'd rather be in the bowling league once a month than stay home with her every night.

Wife: Is that what you think? Well, you can go bowling every night if you want. Don't let me keep you around your own house and your own kids.

Counselor: I'm willing to have either one of you tell me, before we go any further, what you would like the future to be like. I'd rather have you look ahead to some goal or dream.

Wife: I don't know if I have any dreams anymore. (Glances at husband.)

Husband: (Exhales slowly.)

Negativism, veiled put-downs, reined resentment, accusations, martyr-like complaints, and superiority through silence are reasonable descriptions of the "mood" of this couple. Notice that this couple has used the lay counselor's two invitations to identity a hope or goal to "get at" each other. It is usually safe to assume that even in this brief conversation, the couple has revealed a pattern and theme of their interaction at home.

So what do you do? There are two things you ought not to do: (1) Do not listen to rehearsals of the two sides of their story; and (2) do not sketch for this couple reminders of what it means to be one in marriage or note what they ought to be like. Most couples who are this accusatory have magnified their problems to the point that it affects almost every aspect of their lives. Moreover, each partner is usually blind to his role in fueling the fires of hostility and destructiveness. Consequently, if you intervene and ask them to "tell their story" in an orderly way (by taking turns, for example), you may formalize and legitimize the hostile and destructive interactions you have already witnessed.

Likewise, when people are having marital difficulties, the experience of being "one" in marriage is foreign to them. Even though they are seeking help, they do not correctly imagine how they would feel or what their life would be like if they were free of their problems. Therefore, your suggestions may be seen by the people in distress as unrealistic fantasies.

Whose Responsibility Is the Problem?

This couple have avoided taking responsibility for a solution to their problem. They may not know what their problem is or what the possible solutions are, but that does not make it impossible for them to ponder both causes and consequences of their behavior. The counselor's goal is to place responsibility for the healing of their marriage on their shoulders. This will help bring the oneness in their relationship that now seems an unlikely option.

How do you place responsibility? Here are some suggestions:

Counselor: I've asked you a couple of times to share with me a goal or direction you wish to pursue, but you have done something else. What is it you wish me to understand about your coming here? (This is another invitation to focus on the issues.)

or

I believe you have the ability to work this out, but right now you seem to be using your ability to hurt rather than help each other. (Explain your belief in their capacity to improve.)

or

If I listen to the complaints each of you has right now, what am I supposed to do, choose sides? It almost looks as if you want me to be a referee instead of a counselor. (This is a description of what might be the outcome of listening to complaints. Making a statement like this followed by silence leaves the ball in their court. It is now their responsibility to initiate something.)

Counselor: Do you believe in agency—the power in you to meet challenges that come your way?

Couple: Yes.

Counselor: Are there also some moral truths you believe in?

Couple: I guess so.

Counselor: Then could we proceed in this way? If each of you were to accept the idea that you could do some things differently to help improve your relationship, then we could tackle first things first. Each of you, no matter what the wrongs of the other against you might be, could focus on what you could do, rather than on what the other has done.

Couple: But what if I change and my partner doesn't?

Counselor: What if each of you demands that the other change before you do? What then? (There will be no change.)

By the way, the only kind of change I'm talking about right now is that you exercise your agency to live by things you believe in.

Let's consider what might have happened if the answer to the first question—"Do you believe in agency?"—had been negative.

Couple: Yes, I believe in agency, but a person can take only so much.

Counselor: In other words, your partner's insensitivities or sins have made it impossible for you to meet life, to change, or to be happy?

Couple: Well . . .

Counselor: If you really are trapped by each other, what hope is there for either of you? Wasn't seeking help or coming here something you did on your own?

Husband: Well, yes, but she put a lot of pressure on me.

Counselor: What I am getting at is this: I believe you have the power to have your marriage be different. If you don't believe that, coming here is futile, because I can only invite you to examine your hearts. If you are not willing to look, what will we accomplish?

Teaching principles (like personal responsibility) is important because it is your way of bringing a couple face to face with possibilities. It also often reveals inconsistencies or flaws in the way they see their current situation.

In placing responsibility, you are sowing seeds of change in the proper field. In teaching principles, you are establishing a foundation for mutual action. In inviting obedience, you are asking the couple to focus on their own responsibilities, sometimes even in spite of what each person is doing. You need not hide what you are doing from the couple, and you could share with them any ground rules you wish to abide by. For example:

Counselor: This may not be what you expected, but I would like to institute the Golden Rule here in our discussions. That is, I would like all of us to treat each other as we would like to be treated.

When you as a counselor move along these lines, you set the stage for success. All three of these recommendations (place responsibility, teach principles, and invite obedience) strike at the heart of any matter. In addition, you establish a mood and atmosphere in which the counseling can proceed, which is itself a model of the kind of atmosphere necessary for this couple to resolve difficulties on their own. An hour discussing disagreements, misunderstandings—even past hostilities—in a spirit guided by the Golden Rule may not be an overnight cure, but it is a powerful live demonstration of another way to live.

When People Refuse to Be Responsible

Professional counselors are often amazed at the intensity of the blaming, argumentative attitudes of the people who come seeking help. The sheer energy required to maintain such a high level of hate, moment after moment, is great. People in such conditions seem, because of their perspective and their emotions, to be incapable of changing. Most of the time, however, such perspectives and emotions are not the cause of the problem, they are the problem. Many times the resentments, hostilities, and depressions of the help-seekers, though really felt by them, have a different origin than they suppose.

Usually they think that the insensitivity of their partner, or the financial pressures of a large family, or their own low self-esteem is the source of their "uncontrollable" feelings, but it may be that these very feelings are the evidence a troubled person clings to as "proof" of how they are wronged, mistreated, or incompetent. Even if this view is logical to you, it is unlikely that "diagnosing" the people who come to you would be well received.

That is why I have suggested that in a context of love and faith you establish general boundaries for the counseling. These boundaries are actually a way of establishing a starting point for change. The couples you help must have a willingness to ponder, to take personal responsibility, and to have a forgiving heart, a repentant spirit, a confessing soul. Sometimes establishing this beginning can take weeks. But persist! Until the couple gives up their destructive attitudes, you can do little to help them. To give up such destructive feelings does not mean to express, vent, control, or stifle them. It means to give them up. When people think that such feelings cannot be given up, they are limiting the success of the counseling sessions.

Negative, nonproductive, hateful feelings can be given up, even though the person feeling them might laugh at such an idea. Only after the feelings have been given up is it completely evident that they can be. Ruptures in marriages can he healed, but healing them starts with compassionately confronting the attitudes by which couples make enemies of one another.

What Is Your Responsibility as a Counselor?

Your responsibility is to show the couple that they have the capacity to change. If you see the possibility of their change, if you care about the people who come to you, then you have found a starting point to help them. That starting point is not something reserved for those who are trained as marriage and family counselors. It is grounded in who you are as a person. Your success as a counselor depends more on what kind of man or woman you are than on what formal knowledge you have. The compassionate, firm, truth-telling friend can be more powerful than any professional who is devoid of these qualities.

Avoiding "Diagnosis"

Sometimes counselors and couples get caught up in the complexity of "diagnosis," of exploring extensive whys and wherefores of attitudes, predicaments, or behavior patterns. Guessing the reasons for behavior may be a part of the approach a counselor takes. However, it may be counterproductive to give a couple an analysis of their behavior.

Teaching people to analyze each other does not free them of their miseries; it simply allows them to continue their accusatory feelings toward each other on a more sophisticated, analytical level. There is an old story about a man who had sought counseling as a remedy for his emotional misery. After months of counseling sessions, the man seemed to his friends to be as miserable as before. When asked how things were progressing, he responded, "Well, I feel much better. When told that he seemed just as unhappy as before, he replied, "Oh, I am still as miserable as I ever was, but now I know why." As a helper of couples you should not become a party to that kind of solution.

Here's an example. Let's suppose that the "reason" Julie is hesitant to give compliments to her husband is "because" her own father mistreated her, or "because" her husband does not appreciate her. If this analysis is correct, then Julie is seen as a victim, either of her father's treatment of her or of her husband's current attitude. Since her father is present only in her past, we turn to her husband with the idea of teaching him to be more appreciative of her. We explain her "need" for his approval. He complains that he could be more appreciative of her if only she would quit being so impatient and negative with the children. He agrees to "try" to praise her, but confides that this is going to require some energy and searching of her behavior to find something praiseworthy. He also explains how afraid he always was of his mother, who spoke to her children harshly.

In other words, we have a husband and wife who see their behavior as the result of what is being "done unto them" by the other. "If only he were more appreciative, I could then relate to him," thinks Julie. "If only she weren't so negative, I would, of course, be able to reward her," thinks Phil. Each believes himself to be a victim of the other. Each is trapped. Each thinks he or she is forced, by the other's behavior, to feel and do what he or she is doing and feeling.

What do we accomplish with such a couple if we explain their behavior to them by using their own perspective? We justify their actions and agree to their helplessness. Especially if we promote the notion that they are victims of their parents' behavior do we then become part of the problem. Then we see them as victims of their past, rather than as agents who could be free of whatever negative experiences might have been theirs.

There is a second reason not to spend time on extensive analyses or explanations. By teaching a couple to be analytical about each other, we may be inviting them to see each other as objects, to look for hidden motives, to second-guess the "meaning" behind their mate's behavior in ways that encourage them to stay apart.

Seeking Honesty

The better way would be for each partner to examine his or her willingness to "yield his heart" to the other. This would include a discussion of what each believes is right to do, whether or not the partner is also doing right. Each should ponder what kind of person he can and ought to be. This will help them focus on their own attitudes, thus striking at the root of what keeps them distant from each other.

As the impatient woman examines her own behavior, she considers what her relationship with her children (and her husband) would be like if she were less tense or ruffled. After all, though her impatience is a "bone of contention," she is not that way all the time. By imagining the times when she is giving and calm, she reminds herself that she does experience something other than constant tension.

Similarly, however unappreciative this husband might be, he can remember his times of freely giving and caring. By considering the difference in his relationship with his wife when he is appreciative, he can imagine the world of experience he would like to live in with her.

Sometimes marriage partners examine their own attitudes as a way of showing that their attitudes are not their fault. They insist that they are trapped by what their partner is like. Again, if they are right, if they really are trapped, what hope is there for change?

We cannot decide what others are going to do, but we can decide what we are going to do. If a feuding couple will not accept this idea, they will persist in using their agency to insist that they have none.

This stalemate means there will be no progress toward a solution of the couple's problems. For the couple who have been taught to find explanations or "reasons" for their feelings, it means a justification of their problem, not an escape from it.

The wife in our example may begin thinking about her husband in this way: He just can't relate to women, given what his mother was like. I don't know what I'm going to do. If that's who he is, that's who he is."

The husband, of course, may be thinking, "She just doesn't have the constitution to handle children. Boy, it's going to be a tense fifteen more years."

Contrast these attitudes with these alternatives:

Wife: I will be my best. If I stumble, I stumble, but I can always keep trying. Besides, I know I don't have to take offense at what he does.

Husband: I guess sometimes things don't go well with her. I wonder if there is anything I could do to help when I come home?

The truth is, we cannot make people change. So the obvious question is, how do we move people from their negative attitudes to more caring ones? We can invite them to do so, we can sketch the alternative way of living, but until people acknowledge their own role in their difficulties, they will remain in them.

Compassionate, understanding attitudes are what provide a foundation for solutions to the kinds of problems illustrated here, and those attitudes are the responsibility of the people who hold them. The alternative to diagnosing a couple, then, is to teach them general principles of relationships while placing responsibility for change on their shoulders.

Pointing Out Patterns

It is often helpful to point out to a couple the patterns of behavior they are cooperating to produce. You are asking them to see something outside themselves (a pattern of relating to each other), but in a way that helps them realize that they are generating the pattern.

By observing them as they interact together, you will discover patterns of behavior. If the couple fails to respond to your questions about why they have come to you, you can always ask them to describe some part of their relationship—how they handle financial matters, what they believe about child rearing, or how they plan holiday activities. Observe carefully. Do not make too much out of little things (such as who responds first, who defers to whom, etc.), but look for repetitive patterns. (Does one partner frequently interrupt the other? Does a challenge from one partner usually result in silence from the other?)

Let's assume that the couple has been dealing with an issue as if it were a "hot potato." That is, each makes a comment that throws responsibility on the partner to answer a question or disclose feelings. This may occur when a couple begins to answer one of your questions:

Husband (to wife): Well, why don't you go ahead?

Wife: No, that's okay—go on.

Husband: Well, I think you have stronger feelings about it.

Wife: But you're the one who thinks I'm not doing it right.

Husband: Yes, but he needs to have your point of view.

Wife: Maybe, but you go first; you brought us here.

And so it goes. This is a pattern you could analyze if you wanted to, but a more effective way to help the couple would be to show them their pattern and let them tell you what it might mean. In practice, before you point out a pattern you would want the couple to show you more examples of this pattern than just this beginning dialogue.

Counselor: I've noticed a way that you two are cooperating that you may not be aware of.

Husband: What do you mean?

Counselor: I notice that each of you invites the other to speak first.

Wife: Well, maybe so, but so what?

Counselor: I'm not sure, but I'm wondering what that means to you. For example, if you two were trying to make a decision about something and this were the pattern you were using, how would you come to a decision?

Wife: I guess sometimes we do hesitate a long time.

Counselor: And that may be valuable, and you can talk about that after you leave here, but there is something else about this pattern that teaches me something about you—you cooperate very well to produce such a pattern. It could not exist without both of you "working at it," so to speak. In other words, I know you have the ability to cooperate. The question to consider may be "How often do you cooperate in positive or negative ways?"

Husband: Well, I don't see what this has to do with our problem.

Counselor: Maybe nothing. You'll have to think it out.

Husband: Then why are you telling us all this?

Counselor: So I can learn from you what you understand about yourselves.

Wife: Well, we don't know about these kinds of things.

Counselor: But you know enough about your own family to be able to discuss this with each other.

When should you point out a pattern? Usually when you feel doing so would achieve the following purposes:

It is important not to assign motives to the patterns you describe. That is just analysis again. Your goal is to help the couple see their own role in their problem and that they may be maintaining the problem through the ways they "cooperate."

Examining Beliefs

If the couple does not agree on what marital commitment means and what beliefs partners in a marriage should have, counseling them may accomplish little. However, these beliefs do not necessarily have to be presented in the counseling sessions. They may be, but the most important examination of beliefs would be each marriage partner's reflection on his or her own commitments, values, and standards. This could be done through private reflection, personal journal writing, pondering and prayer, or talking with the marriage partner outside the counseling session.

The purpose of examining beliefs is to clarify what the person's commitments are. For example, does Julie believe in the value of impatience as a way to deal with children, promote family unity, and so on? Does Phil really believe it right to withhold appreciation from his wife? These may seem like ridiculous questions to a couple who think their impatience or lack of appreciation is not their fault, but the issue is to acknowledge what the standard is, what the hope or dream for the future is. Sometimes, when a husband or wife is complaining about his or her mate, you can ask this, "Do you believe that what you are doing in this situation is right?" The person may not be able to give an answer, but it may only be necessary for the person to ponder the question to change his blaming or negative attitude. When people are feeling or behaving in ways they do not believe are right, little permanent change is likely until they give up what goes against what they believe. Suppose a woman is complaining about her alcoholic husband. Her rehearsal of his wrongs may be accurate—his disappearing for a day, his late-night stumbling through the door, his verbal abuse of the children. However, to help this woman deal effectively with her husband's problem, you must first make sure that she is not part of the problem.

For example, imagine that this woman's discouragement becomes apparent to her friends. They try to buoy her up, to encourage her. At first she appreciates the love and concern of her friends. But as time passes, she becomes more and more dependent on their sympathy. This dependence, if it is to continue, requires that her husband continue in his problem. In other words, the woman is now dependent not only on her friends' support but on her husband's alcoholism. If so, she must give up her attitude, which helps maintain, not eliminate, her husband's problem. To solve the problem, she will have to adopt a new attitude toward him—compassion and concern (assuming this is what she believes is right). She will have to give up being a helpless victim of his wrongdoing. This may require firm behavior from her, including her refusal to "bail him out" of his self-produced miseries. However, such firmness may be a powerful act of love that invites him to become responsible. Her alternative—to sit back as a martyr and receive a perverse comfort from others—shows neither respect for herself nor love for her husband. In such a condition, the marriage is not a blessing to either partner.

Asking Questions

In a way, asking people what they believe is right is a measure of their willingness to learn from you and a sign of how honest they are willing to be. Asking such a question will either be accepted or resisted, but you may not know the outcome of asking the question until weeks have passed. Therefore, if your question does not seem to invite an honest reflection or personal searching, do not follow it up with more pushing or challenging questions. The value of the question consists, in part, in backing away after you have asked it. By asking the question, you have invited them to turn their attention to an issue more fundamental than their complaints. You have also placed the responsibility on their shoulders to examine other possible ways of seeing the situation.

The question of what a couple believes is right is not the only question that could be asked. Here are some others:

Teaching Correct Principles

Much of your contribution to solving marriage problems will come from your teaching of correct principles. The reason this chapter addressed attitudes and beliefs first is because the attitudes of a couple toward their own beliefs and commitments is the key to the quality of their marriage. It has already been illustrated that a destructive attitude is itself the biggest obstacle faced by a couple. It has also been shown that if people think their attitudes are not their responsibility, they will continue to suffer needlessly at the hands of their self-selected enemy. Without giving up such a point of view, hostile couples will continue in their hostility. If, after your attempts to teach the Golden Rule, the attitudes of the couple seem unchanged, you may have a couple whose attitude is accurately described by this verse: "For what doth it profit a man if a gift is bestowed upon him, and he receive not the gift? Behold, he rejoices not in that which is given unto him, neither rejoices in him who is the giver of the gift." (D&C 88:33.)

In other words, when your attempt to give the gift of correct principles is resisted, the couple sees neither the value of your counsel nor your commitment as the giver. They see no value in the valuable. However, given the softening of a husband's heart, given the flicker of acknowledgment by a wife that she could be different, formal sharing of principles like compassion, repentance, forgiveness, sacrifice, or commitment can help. Notice that even these fundamentals flow more from the heart than from the head. In teaching these principles, it may be inappropriate to turn the counseling session into a long gospel discourse. On the other hand, a way to link a gospel ideal with the couple's circumstances is to ask them to do it.

You could present a case study from the scriptures, giving the couple the responsibility to interpret it. Or you might simply ask what forgiveness or compassion means to them. Your goal is to link some gospel idea with an illustration or example and with the couple's own experiences. The couple who participates in the pondering and the discovery of the meanings of gospel truths is already taking responsibility to link theory with practice.

The Problem of Ignorance

Not all people seeking counsel in their marriages have problems because of negative attitudes. Sometimes couples may approach you with a sincere and mutual concern about how they are living their lives. Sometimes financial difficulties or physical illness or chronic employment problems are related to their lack of knowledge or wisdom. Where you are knowledgeable in these matters, share your knowledge. Where you can introduce only an idea or two, refer the couple to trusted resource people. Point them in a direction you believe will lead them to be independent of you and give them the chance to become knowledgeable.

When the issue is how to accomplish a task rather than how to solve relationship problems, you can become a source of knowledge to the couple. Because their relationship is not part of the problem, they can use your knowledge to overcome it. When the couple is already united by love, forgiveness, and patience, their resources are ready to be applied to situations where lack of knowledge is the only limitation.

This is another important reason to see the couple together. You then have a cooperative unit that can work on the problem. Often, a problem caused by a lack of knowledge can be addressed most effectively in two ways, from the two different perspectives of the marriage partners themselves.

The Couple Versus Their Circumstances

When couples are united but face challenges that seem overwhelming, it is still important to leave the responsibility for decisions and actions on their shoulders. More than one sincere counselor has been blamed by couples because they "did what the counselor told us to do." Perhaps the following guidelines will help you counsel a couple without taking from them the responsibility:

Obviously, much pondering, information gathering, honest sharing, prayer, and sometimes trial-and-error experiences are part of this seemingly simplistic set of suggestions. Nevertheless, these suggestions provide a structure on which the couple can hang their problems, examine them, and move toward solutions.

What about Sex?

Some difficulties really are the result of ignorance of body functions and the processes of conception and reproduction. In such cases, it may be necessary for the couple to obtain competent written medical information or to consult with a physician.

More often, however, sexual problems are a specific reflection of more general relationship problems. The couple are not physically close because they are not emotionally close (and they may not be emotionally close because they are not spiritually in tune). If a couple refuses to communicate about financial matters or decides to punish each other over conflicting child-rearing practices, then those same refusals and petty attitudes will be brought to their physical relationship. In such cases, sex becomes just another weapon in an emotional war, not a means of blessing and bonding.

If a couple proposes that their problem is sexual, resist the temptation to launch into medical explanations or recommendations. Look for problems of attitude. Ask them to discuss their general relationship. Look for clues of their level of compassion and mutual respect as they discuss anything from their hobbies to how they have decorated their home. If their discussion of such matters is done with warmth and reverence for each other, their sexual problem may be one in which additional knowledge about sexuality is needed. When a couple's feelings are harsh or distant, then an examination, reevaluation, and abandoning of such attitudes is necessary before it will be clear whether there even is a sexual problem. Emotional bonding and oneness is always a prerequisite to quality intimacy.

Seeking Oneness

Ultimately, marriage counseling should help a couple feel as one. The biggest obstacle to that oneness is the couple's refusal to be one. This occurs when they withhold their hearts and refuse to live by their commitments and covenants to one another. Such refusals produce many of the negative attitudes discussed earlier in this chapter.

In a sense, being one is synonymous with the couple's living by the light and truth they have. It means turning to their marriage with full purpose of heart. When couples do this, it is amazing what their resources are and what solutions become obvious. In this oneness, each partner sees that the best interests of one partner truly are the best interests of the other. Not only is it to their mutual advantage to leave behind competitive interests, but the very process of thinking together about their future promotes oneness.

Until a couple gives up the idea that their personal behaviors and goals are more important than their togetherness, they will perpetuate their problems, and they will not be one no matter how much outside intervention there may be. The basic truth is that the power is in the hands of the couple to solve their problems.

When Your Efforts Are in Vain

If a man climbing a mountain stops climbing and does not reach the top, the observer may never know the answer to this question: "Did the man stop climbing because he could not go on, or because he would not?" And if, after your own prayerful efforts, the couple does not resolve their difficulties, then, without some prompting of the Spirit, you may never know why.

Whether you failed to teach them or they refused to be taught does not change the need for you to acknowledge the futility of your visits together. It may be wise, however, to refer the couple elsewhere.

Remember, because "the power is in [them]" to change, if they do change, it is their victory, not yours. And if they do not change, it is their tragedy, not yours, although you will rejoice in their progress or mourn their refusal to change.

In referring a couple, you are suggesting another tool. The following questions will help you decide whether to refer a couple elsewhere:

Summary

In marriage counseling, it is important to see the couple together and to assess and discern their general attitude toward one another. This is the crux of most marriage problems. Until negative attitudes are given up, there is little chance of change.

However, as compassionate understanding replaces blaming attitudes, the couple can move toward independence and to solving problems on their own. If the couple does not progress, you may want to refer them to someone else.

Suggested Readings

Brent A. Barlow, What Husbands Expect of Wives (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1983).

———, What Wives Expect of Husbands (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1982).

Spencer W. Kimball, Marriage and Divorce (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1976).

C. S. Lewis, The Great Divorce (New York: Macmillan Publishing, 1946; pb, 1978).

Neal A. Maxwell, That My Family Should Partake (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1974).

Terrance D. Olson, "The Compassionate Marriage Partner," Ensign 12 (August 1982): 14-17.

A. Lynn Scoresby, The Marriage Dialogue (Menlo Park, Ca.: Addison-Wesley, 1977).
