Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 1 ( 1983)

16

Aging

J. Richard Connelly

Most of us deny the aging process. As we get older, we sometimes refuse to admit that we don't see or hear as well as when we were young, and even if we admit it, we avoid getting glasses or asking people to speak up unless it is absolutely necessary. But old age comes, perhaps earlier than we expect it. The most rapid decline in the five senses—vision, hearing, taste, touch, and smell—occurs between forty and sixty years of age; however, these deficits are usually associated with people much older. Fortunately, because of the adaptability and the extra abilities possessed by most people, inability to cope and severe disabilities do not occur until seventy-five years of age or later. Yet community and even church programs often separate, stereotype, and stigmatize older people.

We need to analyze our attitudes about aging and the aged. When you see a person fifty years of age, do you see a person whose life is half over or one who has half his life yet to live? When you look at yourself in the mirror, do you see signs and marks of a life lived and appreciated or do you regret the passage of time? Would you like to return to your younger years?

Who is old? Is it a ninety-year-old woman who says that she will not participate in a senior citizens center or the Church's Special Interest program because that's where all the old folks are? Is it the sixty-five-year-old who complains about retirement, about his children, about the way society deals with older people? Or is it the woman who is twenty, thirty, or forty years old who complains about what the passage of time has done to her? Many people believe that the only people who are old are those who are older than themselves. Other people consider themselves old if others define and treat them as being old.

When I was working with elderly Indians in Arizona, a seventy-one-year-old Navajo woman said to me, "I didn't know that I was old until last fall when I was picking an apple off my tree and fell down. As I lay on the ground, I realized that no one had pushed me. I did not trip over a stone. I simply fell down. And, as I looked to the heavens, I said, 'Lord, I must be getting old."' That statement was confirmed when a few days later a worker with a nutrition program for the elderly called at her home. The worker said, "Irene, you qualify as a senior citizen, and we would like to have you come to our nutrition site and enjoy a good meal and socialize with others who are there." Irene had fallen, someone had said she was a senior citizen, so she decided maybe she was old.

Being old is a perception and an attitude. Some people who are chronologically in their nineties display youthful attitudes, intellect, and enthusiasm, and stay in good physical condition. It is up to each person to decide if he will let others influence the way he perceives his later years.

On the other hand, being old is also a time in life when people lose loved ones, lose physical agility, and must depend more on others. They often cause families, neighbors, Church members, and the community to face diseases—often deteriorative—and circumstances they have never dealt with before.

Nevertheless, it is important to understand that there are greater differences among older people than there are similarities. No two people are the same. The freedom we allow and the encouragement we give to people of all ages is critical to building the self-awareness, self-esteem, and independence of older people. We sometimes tend to lump people together, to force all people of certain ages into similar molds. But people are more individualistic and unique when they are older than they were when they were younger. As you are around and work with older people, be sensitive to their uniqueness, for it is impressive, and it is also one of their strengths.

Challenges of Older People

There are two general groups of older people. The first group is the "Young-Old" (from fifty-five to seventy-four years of age) and the other is the "Vulnerable-Old" seventy-five years of age and older).

The challenges of the Young-Old group include at least the following:

The Young-Old people can be a powerful force in changing laws that will assure that they benefit from an economic system they contributed to for so long. They can also be a great force to be called upon in the Church to help others who are in difficulty; to advise, counsel, and teach the young. Their experiences have given them administrative knowledge, family wisdom, and solutions to many problems. However, time demands on the Young-Old must be offered with the same reverence, prayer, and respect due those of any age group. In addition, a sensitivity to their age limitations, family commitments, and so on is crucial. To assume that a retired couple would be ideal to serve in a nursery or that they should usually tend their grandchildren may be incorrect.

The other group of people, the Vulnerable-Old, often suffer from loss of hearing or sight. They may have various arthritic or respiratory ailments. Many suffer from some form of cardiac decompensation or from kidney and bladder problems. Diabetes is another common problem of this group. Yet these people continue to survive despite these losses, and are often happy and cheerful.

People over seventy-five face the following tasks and challenges:

The Vulnerable-Old have more difficulty than the Young-Old in making friends, maintaining old friendships, and contributing what they would consider their fair share toward church, neighborhood, and community activities. They frequently suffer from isolation—more social isolation than geographic isolation. Their need to be needed is strong and presents a challenge that a counselor can help creatively fill.

To accurately assess the needs of older people is difficult. But if we focus on their tasks and challenges, understand the personality changes that occur with the passage of time, and then learn about the physical changes of old age, we will have a better chance to deal with problems of the aging more effectively.

Personality Changes

Research indicates that with increasing old age, people's thoughts turn inward. People change from active to passive ways of controlling their environments. Developmental psychologists call this an increased "inferiority" of personality. There are some differences in aging between men and women. Men seem to become more receptive to group activities and more nurturant. They also appear to cope with the environment in increasingly abstract and intellectual ways. Women seem to become more assertive and less guilty about being so. They also increase in their feelings and their expression of those feelings. It is not clear whether personality changes are due to the passage of time (aging) and its accompanying physical and biological changes or if they are due to how society deals with older people. Major physical and mental health problems sometimes affect the personality in ways that influence the older person's family to want to avoid him or even deny his existence.

Senility

The label "senile," as used by most people in our society, describes a person who is old, confused, forgetful, emotionally unstable, stubborn, or disagreeable. If a person is young and strong-minded, he is labeled "headstrong" or "aggressive." But if he is old and strong-minded, he is sometimes labeled "stubborn." If he is young and forgets a place, or the time, he simply forgot or had too many things on his mind. But if he is old and forgets something, he is "senile." Some people even believe that senility is a natural process of aging ("Well, you can't expect anything different from someone his age") or that it is irreversible ("Well, there is nothing we can do for her now; she's old and senile"), and that if an older person is not senile, he is an exception.

All of these perceptions are inaccurate. In fact, senility is not a medical term. The medical term is senile dementia or senile psychosis, also known as organic brain syndromes. Organic brain syndromes generally affect five areas: (1) judgment (impaired); (2) feelings (instability or shallowness); (3) memory (usually short-term); (4) confusion (spotty, worse at night); (5) orientation (to time, place, or person). These five symptoms occur when there is a lack of blood flowing to the brain cells. The blood carries oxygen and nutrients that activate and maintain the brain cells.

True senile dementia occurs when brain cells die. This condition occurs largely because of cerebral arteriosclerosis, or hardening and narrowing of the arteries. With this hardening, less blood is able to flow into all parts of the brain, and without adequate nourishment, some brain cells die. Senile dementia may also be caused by primary degenerative disease of the brain.

There is a major problem in making an accurate diagnosis of senility, because other causes may restrict the flow of blood or the amount of oxygen or nutrients in the blood that feed the brain cells, such causes as congestive heart failure, malnutrition, infection, stroke, combination or overdose of drugs, head trauma, alcoholism, anxiety, and depression. All of these causes, however, are treatable and therefore reversible. Only in cases of true senile dementia (approximately 2 percent of older people) is the condition irreversible.

To assure the family and yourself as a counselor that a diagnosis of senile dementia is accurate, you should select a physician trained in geriatric medicine and consult with a geriatric nurse clinician.

Depression

Older people who are frequently depressed appear to be suffering from chronic brain syndrome. They seem disoriented, confused, and show memory losses. Because there is a steady rise in depressive conditions with advancing age, depression is a common complaint among the elderly. Social, psychological, and physical changes of old age create difficult problems and make the aged person vulnerable to frustration, failure, grief, disappointment, and apathy. Physical losses and disturbances in the brain may maintain and increase the depressive state.

Loss of physical health is often depressive, so a counselor should look to prevention and early detection of illness. Depressive states in the elderly often go unnoticed, perhaps because many people assume that older people are by nature somewhat confused and apathetic. This expectation that older people are senile masks the depression.

Important points to consider about depression in older people include the following:

Help the older person with depression from loss of status and self-worth to find an activity of genuine interest and to develop relationships with others. Work with the person's family, with his ward members, with his neighbors, and with the community. With more severe depression (because of death of a loved one, serious illness, or other losses), help the person find an "intimate confidant," a person who will be an active listener. The release of grief and anger is liberating, but it is not enough. Listening should be combined with encouragement and reinforcement to help the person establish self-awareness and self-worth.

Loneliness

Clark E. Moustakas said in his book Loneliness (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1961), "Elder citizens in our society are particularly affected by the social and cultural changes and by the separation, urbanization, alienation, and automation in modern living. There is no longer a place for old age, no feeling of organic belonging, no reverence or respect, or regard for the wisdom and talent of the ancient." Our elder citizens often have feelings of uselessness and conclude that life is utterly futile. The fear of death is common among old people. Losses in the later years of life are realities. Loneliness among the elderly may be caused by the death of a spouse, a sibling, a close neighbor, a roommate, or anyone who has been important to him. Loneliness is often revisited on the birthdays, anniversaries, and the death date of those who have died. However, the memories of these people can be enriching. Pets are often important to older people, and the loss of a pet often makes life lonelier for an aging person.

People from different ethnic backgrounds, particularly those in America who can't speak English, often feel isolated and alone. The pains and aches of rheumatism and arthritis, though common, may produce a feeling of being alone. There are certain times of the day and certain times of the year that are more difficult to live through than others. Holidays often create loneliness for elderly people who are widowed. Making major decisions (and sometimes minor decisions) like buying a car or an appliance often creates a lonely feeling in someone who has for years made those decisions with a spouse or someone else who has died.

Loneliness can be difficult to treat mainly because it is an individual matter and deeply rooted in the self-esteem of a person. Constant effort should be made to bolster the person's self-esteem through frequent contact and acknowledgment on difficult days. Acknowledgment and praise for the smallest gain or positive change in an older person's behavior bolsters his self-image and lets him know that someone cares.

In relationships with older people, we should be willing to experiment in trying to help those who are lonely. We should be creative in our approaches and encourage interaction of those who are lonely with other people of all ages and in all kinds of activities.

Chronic Illness

The number of people between the ages of fifty-five and sixty-five who have one or more chronic conditions skyrockets. Among the population forty-five to sixty-four years of age, about seventy-two percent have one or more chronic conditions. That percentage increases to 86 percent among the population sixty-five years of age and older. Among the elderly, multiple chronic conditions are common. These conditions generally include mental illness, diabetes, arthritis, rheumatic disease, heart and circulatory disorders, and vision and hearing impairments.

Many diseases manifest themselves after age sixty-five because they are consequences of changes in the body brought on by slow, progressive, deteriorative conditions. People do not get sick just because they are old; old people get sick because many disease processes start early but become more likely to cause illness the longer they last.

Despite their many chronic health problems that develop with increasing age, most older people do not consider themselves to be seriously handicapped in pursuing their ordinary daily activities. Though four out of five persons who are sixty-five years of age and over suffer from at least one chronic medical condition, less than one in five report that they are severely handicapped or that they are unable to carry on major daily activities. Generally, most elderly people rate their health as fair, good, or excellent rather than as poor.

The best way to help people with chronic illnesses is to be supportive and help them manage their disease. We can help with shopping and provide encouragement, companionship, transportation, and help with illnesses or disabilities. We can learn about community support agencies and get help from medical and health professionals in emergencies. Treatment of one disease without knowledge of the other diseases that might accompany it could be disastrous. We should encourage the use of a reputable physician trained in geriatrics and a chemical pharmacist who sees older people regularly and knows their disease and drug histories.

Deciding to Use a Long-Term Care Facility

When should an older person in need of care be placed in a long-term care facility, and when should that person continue to live in the community? Families and older individuals are plagued with this question constantly. It can never be answered in a simple way. The answer depends on the person and must be based on the community resources that are available.

Community Services

Services available to the older population range from preventive services to institutional living. Services are medical and nonmedical. Eighty different programs are funded by the federal government alone. Most of these programs are available in every state in the nation and in most communities. Some services may not be available, but Area Agencies on Aging (AAA) cover small geographical areas within each state. In addition, State Unit on Aging can be contacted for referral.

Preventive services include health screening clinics or health screening activities. These may be carried on at various places. Elderly people receive glaucoma, podiatry, blood pressure, and other types of screening. Early detection is important in the treatment and control of disease. Physical and mental health education is available, as well as general education. Almost every community has an information and referral service for the aged. Through this service, people are directed to the most appropriate service agency.

In-home services include home repairs, shopping assistance, meals on wheels, friendly visitors, volunteer services, telephone reassurance, homemakers, chore services, and home health services. These services are usually inexpensive and can help maintain an older person without placing him in an institution.

Community services range from social and recreational clubs to community mental health centers. Often the Area Agency on Aging or a community services council maintains a directory listing all the community agencies and the services they deliver. The directories are often free or may be purchased for a nominal fee.

Community living includes homes and other living arrangements that can provide support and social interaction for an older person. Hospice organizations provide support for a dying person and their families. This support can be delivered as in-home services or as services within a hospice. The professional services allow an older person to die at home or at least outside a hospital.

Institutional living includes intermediate care facilities, which generally have nursing staffs that are present only during the day, whereas the other types of institutions in this category have nursing and often other health disciplines represented twenty-four hours a day. Only 5 to 6 percent of the population sixty years of age and older are in nursing homes at any one time in the United States, but there is about a 22 percent chance that an older person will spend some time as a patient in a nursing home during his lifetime.

Deciding to Use Services for the Aged

There is no one moment when a decision to use services for the aged should be made. The decision should be a continual one beginning when a need for service first becomes evident. The elderly person and his family members should discuss the possibility of using these services. Few older people receive careful preparation. They should always he asked to participate in making the decision, as this is a critical factor in their subsequent adjustment and well-being. New decisions should reflect changes in individual and family circumstances. Options created by new legislation and the development of new services also encourage additional decisions.

Assessment of individual and family circumstances can be done by the family, by local church leaders, by neighbors, and by friends. Professionals in the field should also be relied upon to help assess functioning levels of the older person and to suggest appropriate placements and to monitor adjustments and future changes.

Conditions that promote institutionalization are usually advanced old age; multiple physical and mental impairments; and lack of economic, family, and social support. The financial resources available to a person from his own private sources, from family, and from federal programs often determine whether he can take advantage of some of the services he needs. In some cases, the most appropriate placement cannot be made because of financial limitations. The eligibility criteria, the range of benefits, and the administrative and admissions arrangements of community agencies and services often control the decision for services.

Family Involvement

The family is usually the first to observe changes in the mental and physical health of the elderly. In assessing those changes, the family usually seeks advice from others and is likely to assume responsibility for planning the future of the older person. The assumption may prevail that the family should make all the decisions and arrangements. But someone, whether it be a professional social worker, a nurse, a physician, a bishop, or a Church Social Services worker, needs to see that the planning is carried out with the older person. This helper needs to respond to the family's request for information and discussion of the situation, but the older person should be consulted as early as possible.

In most cases, families are interested and concerned about their elderly parent or relation. Families should not, and usually do not, "dump" their elderly into institutions. Research indicates that family ties continue to be viable, adult children continue to behave responsibly, and the placing of an elderly relative is the last rather than the first resort of families. In general, families exhaust all other alternatives and often endure severe personal, social, and economic stresses in the process, ending up making the final decision with the utmost reluctance, often with feelings of guilt. To put it another way, there is much evidence of genuine affection and loyalty between institutionalized older people and their children.

The family is interested in the welfare of their older relative but often are unknowledgeable and fearful. It is imperative that others involved in planning help the family work through their feelings. The family is often disheartened, unhappy, frightened, and guilty. Adult children feel that they are rejecting their aged parents. These feelings come even when the only possible solution is institutionalization.

Some family members find it too painful to watch the deterioration of an older loved one or maintain a distance because of unresolved conflicts. Families may find it difficult to visit long-term care facilities or to watch the degenerative process that changes the personality and appearance of their loved ones.

If institutions cannot be avoided, it is important that the entire family be encouraged to continue to care for the older person. The counselor should tell the family that there will be difficult times, such as admission day to the institution, and that often on holidays and certain times of the day the person may feel abandoned and forced to be there against his will. Regular visits and planned activities with the older person are crucial to his well-being and happiness.

The family is the key to adjustment of the elderly. They can draw on great strengths within themselves, their relatives, their neighbors, and the Church to maintain an older person at home.

Conclusion

"The meaning or lack of meaning that old age takes on in any given society," writes Simone de Beauvoir, "puts the whole society to the test, since it reveals the meaning or lack of meaning of the entirety of life." Indeed, a society can be judged by the way it treats its old. Certainly we will be judged according to the commandment "Honour thy father and thy mother." (Exodus 20:12.) The commandment "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself" (Matthew 22:39) instructs us to be concerned about other elderly people, not just about family members. The Lord will work miracles as we serve the elderly. He will hear our prayers and help us provide for our own elderly and for others. Even though we may "cry unto him in [our] houses . . . both morning, mid-day, and evening," this is not all we must do: "For after ye have done all these things, if ye turn away the needy, and the naked, and visit not the sick and afflicted, and impart of your substance, if ye have, to those who stand in need—I say unto you, if ye do not any of these things, behold, your prayer is in vain, and availeth you nothing. and ye are as hypocrites who do deny the faith. Therefore, if ye do not remember to be charitable, ye are as dross, which the refiners do cast out, (it being of no worth) and is trodden under foot of men." (Alma 34:21, 28-29.)

Let us not allow older people to enter old age with empty hands. Let us strive to help them achieve respect and dignity and to maintain this to the end of their lives.

Suggested Readings

Janet Brigham and Terry Mayer, "When Members Have Long-Term Needs," Ensign 9 (July 1979): 10-13.

Brent D. Cooper, "We adopted Some Grandparents," Ensign 11 (August 1981): 48-49.

William Fox, "Don't Call Me Old What's His Name," Ensign 9 (June 1979): 69.

Ron and Sheri Zirker, "Making Room for Grandpa," Ensign 11 (February 1981): 44-47.

About the Author

Dr. J. Richard Connelly, associate director of the University of Utah gerontology program, received his bachelor's and master's degrees in sociology from Brigham Young University and his Ph.D. from Pennsylvania State University. He has taught courses in human development, aging, child development, and family relations. He has also been involved in the development and administration of gerontology programs at the University of Utah and Oregon State University and screening centers for the elderly. Dr. Connelly is a consultant to state and private agencies and programs relating to retirement and care for adults and older people.

An author and lecturer, Dr. Connelly is a member of several professional and honorary organizations.

In the Church, Dr. Connelly has served in two bishoprics, as a stake Sunday School president, and as a high councilor.

He and his wife, Cheryl Ann, are the parents of eight children.
