Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 1 ( 1983)

17

Explaining Death to Children

Brent A. Barlow

Parents are one of the best sources from which children learn about the meaning of death. However, you may find yourself in a position where you must teach a child other than your own about death, or you may need to instruct the parents themselves.

Several years ago President Joseph F. Smith said, "Children are sure to be brought into some acquaintanceship with the incident of death, even during the kindergarten period; and it would be a great relief to the puzzled and perplexed conditions of their minds if some intelligent statements of the reason for death were made to them." [^1]

It is evident from President Smith's statement and from daily observation of the Latter-day Saint child that the child is constantly learning about death. Many children's stories, at least in the original versions, have death themes, including "Snow White," "Little Red Riding Hood," and "The Three Little Pigs." In addition, some children's songs ("Rock-a-Bye Baby") and rhymes ("Humpty Dumpty") may be interpreted by children to contain death incidents. Contemporary children differ from children of previous generations in that many of them watch a great deal of television, which deals heavily with death and death-related incidents. Many children watch television about six hours every day, which is 50 percent more time than they spend in school. Watching television is the second largest activity in many children's lives, second only to sleep. On any given night (or day), a child can see several deaths on television. He may see literally hundreds and even thousands by the time he reaches adulthood. Questions are now being raised about the numerous, quick, synthetic deaths children observe on television or in the movies. Tonight's villain is killed only to appear next week on another program in another role, thereby assuring the child that death is a temporary, emotionless event.

President Joseph F. Smith also observed:

It is a principle widely accepted that it is not desirable to teach these little ones those things that are horrifying to childish natures. And what may be said of children is equally true in all stages of student life. But death is not an unmixed horror. With it are associated some of the profoundest and most important truths of human life. Although painful in the extreme to those who must suffer the departure of dear ones, death is one of the grandest blessings in divine economy; and we think children should be taught something of its true meaning as early in life as possible. [^2]

It has recently been noted that children have differing views of death at certain age levels. In general, few children under the age of three have much comprehension of death, other than being separated. They are mostly concerned about someone caring for their physical, and to some degree emotional, needs. When children experience the death of a loved one, they need to be assured verbally and perhaps by touch that there are others who still love them and will care for them. Between the ages of about three and six, most children begin to understand death as a separation, but they often perceive it to be temporary or reversible, as when Prince Charming kisses Snow White and awakens her from her "sleep." Children during these ages can "kill" each other while playing cops and robbers because of the temporary nature of death. From the age of six to about eight or nine, children begin to understand the significance of death for others and the permanence of death during mortality. At about the age of nine, most children begin to realize the reality of their own death.

Several books and articles have recently been written with suggestions for explaining death to children. The following general guidelines have been condensed (and modified, in some instances) for use by Latter-day Saint parents:

No explanation of death to a child's mind can anywhere be found that is more simple and convincing than is the death of our Master, connected as it is and ever must be with the glorious resurrection. . . . We are born that we may put on mortality, that is, that we may clothe our spirits with a body. Such a blessing is the first step toward an immortal body, and the second step is death. Death lies along the road of eternal progress; and though hard to bear, no one who believes in the gospel of Jesus Christ, and especially in the resurrection, would have it otherwise. Children should be taught early in life that death is really a necessity as well as a blessing, and that we would not and could not be satisfied and supremely happy without it. Upon the crucifixion and the resurrection of Jesus, one of the grandest principles of the gospel depends. If children were taught this early in life, death would not have the horrifying influence that it does have over many childish minds. [^3]

Explaining Death to Children: Notes

About the Author

Dr. Brent Barlow, associate professor in the Department of Family Sciences at Brigham Young University, received his bachelor's and master's degrees from Brigham Young University and his Ph.D. from Florida State University. He has taught marriage and family classes at Florida State University; at Southern Illinois University, where he received the Outstanding Teaching Award; and at the University of Wisconsin—Stout, where he received the Distinguished Teaching Award. He writes a weekly column on marriage for the Deseret News, is the editor of Understanding Death, and has written two books on marriage, What Wives Expect of Husbands and What Husbands Expect of Wives, all from Deseret Book.

He is a member of the National Council on Family Relations, a member of the Association of Mormon Counselors and Psychotherapists, and a clinical member of the American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy.

Dr. Barlow has served in the Church as a Gospel Doctrine teacher, a branch president, a bishop's counselor, a high councilor, and a member of the Church curriculum committee that wrote Foundations for Temple Marriage, the manual used in temple preparation classes.

He and his wife, Susan, are the parents of six children.

---
Notas:
[^1] Type of body disposition (burial, cremation, etc.) Consider why you are writing. Your letter is to reaffirm your relationship with the bereaved and to show you care. At the same time, it helps you accept the death. Earl A. Grollman, Concerning Death: A Practical Guide for the Living (Boston: Beacon Press, 1974), pp. 282-86.
[^2] Place of body disposition. Write and send the letter right away.
[^3] If there is a burial, should there be an open or closed casket? Consider alternatives besides a letter. If a letter seems too hard to write, pick up the phone and talk with the bereaved person. Or you may send a telegram.
