Francis M. Gibbons, George Albert Smith: Kind and Caring Christian, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1990)

Preface

This is the story of George Albert Smith, one of the greatest practitioners of Christian ethics known to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It traces his growth and development from a spindly boy, unsure of himself and struggling under the burden of his distinguished name, to the pinnacle of Church leadership. In the process, he endured physical disabilities and pain that repeatedly threatened his life and interfered with his apostolic duties. Notwithstanding, he maintained a positive, happy outlook, never complaining, always optimistic and consistent in trying to lift the burdens of others.

As a boy, he was identified as a future apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ and president of the Church through the prophetic blessing of an inspired patriarch. His long life thereafter was characterized by an effort to emulate his Lord, to observe the principles He taught, and to exhort others to do likewise.

The keystone of his behavior and teachings was love—love of God, which he demonstrated by keeping the commandments, and love of his fellow beings, which he demonstrated by repeated acts of kindness and caring concern. These were not empty gestures of generosity or glad handing but rather heartfelt expressions of interest in the welfare and happiness of others. Such were the purity of his motives and the genuineness of his conduct that his appeal to others was almost universal, crossing boundaries of creed, color, or nationality. People of every kind instinctively liked and trusted this man.

Two inherent qualities of character surface intermittently in the life of George Albert Smith that provide important insights into his motivations. The first was a fierce family loyalty and a pride of ancestry. In some, this quality manifests itself in a smug, complacent assumption of intrinsic superiority, bordering on arrogance or conceit. In George Albert Smith, however, it served chiefly as a goad to achievement and gave a sense of responsibility to measure up to his forebears, compensating through service to others for the advantages he had inherited through the accident of birth. With all this, he knew that he came from good stock and that in his body flowed the blood of prophets. Such knowledge, reinforced over the years through the words and examples of his ancestors, gave him poise and self-confidence in the presence of all people, including some whose physical and intellectual attributes and achievements overshadowed his own.

This love of ancestry was undoubtedly a major force that fueled his intense interest in historic monuments and markers and in the Sons of the American Revolution. He wanted the exploits and traditions of these ancestors to live on and to motivate those who would follow, in the same way he had been motivated.

The other inherent characteristic in George Albert Smith's makeup that propelled him toward superior achievement was a powerful competitive instinct. This may surprise some whose views of President Smith have been conditioned by the image of the benign, bearded, loving, and much-loved prophet he ultimately became. But beneath that exterior burned fierce fires of will, determination, and the desire to succeed, if not to excel. In the early years, this characteristic revealed itself in a love for debate and in competitive activities, whether in business or in sports. It was clearly evident in his battles against illness. One with less will and desire to conquer would have been crushed by the physical and emotional problems he faced. In his later years, this characteristic seems to have been muted into an internal drive, aimed toward self-improvement and the attainment of personal perfection rather than toward any demonstration of personal superiority or achievement over another.

It is easy to see in this characteristic why aspiring, energetic young people were attracted to him and were motivated by his admonitions for them to excel. "Don't be a scrub," he repeatedly told them, an admonition that says almost as much about the character of the speaker as it does about the message he delivered.

The sources necessary to write a biography of George Albert Smith are varied and extensive. His personal diaries, which he kept over the years, are an important original source. Also, his official and private correspondence and papers provide vital documentation. Many of these are housed in the archives of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Salt Lake City or in the Special Collections & Manuscripts section of the University of Utah Library. I am grateful to the personnel at these institutions, who were uniformly helpful and cordial in providing access to these important, basic sources. (I have used the abbreviation "GASC" in this book to refer to the George Albert Smith Collection at the University of Utah Library. Photos are used courtesy of LDS Church Historical Department.) Thanks also to Dr. Andrew S. Gibbons III and to Ruth Bay Stoneman, who provided important research assistance, and to many others, relatives or associates of President Smith, who provided valuable information, help, and counsel. Thanks too, as always, go to the Mentor.
