Hugh B. Brown, Eternal Quest ( 1956)

Foreword

My first recollection of Hugh B. Brown was when I was a small boy in church. He was then a young veteran of World War I. He had served as a major with Canada's mounted infantry. He was speaker in our ward. I cannot remember what he said those many years ago. But I could not forget him. His name became a household favorite in my father's home. It is in ours today. It doubtless holds a similar place in thousands of other homes across the broad horizons of the Church.

Hugh B. Brown has a way of making young people want to be good for the sheer adventure of it. He can take truths that otherwise seem dull, and give them an exciting freshness. His messages have a poetic manliness that sinks right into the sinew of the soul.

Elder Brown can be both solidly practical and inspiringly lofty. His own life is like that. He has excelled as a soldier. He has succeeded in business and law—in two countries. For decades he has been in demand as a speaker and teacher. Hundreds have taken their personal problems to him for counsel. Thousands have followed him as a Church leader. He is equally happy with a book or a five-iron, but there is no joy to him like that of his family.

Elder Brown has presided over two stakes, Lethbridge in western Canada and Granite in Salt Lake City. He was president of the British Mission during some of its most difficult years: immediately before and after World War II. During the war he was coordinator of all Latter-day Saint servicemen. Since 1953 he has been one of the General Authorities of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

This book is the result of urgings of friends and family—for a ready collection of Hugh B. Brown's wisdom and inspiration. The compilation has been made by Elder Brown's son, Dr. Charles Manley Brown, himself a distinguished educator. There are gleanings from addresses, articles, stories, and lessons through many years. The result is a wide range of challenging subjects, from "Immortality" to the "Girls behind the Men behind the Guns." In all of it Hugh B. Brown is at his best—stimulating, logical, brilliant in rhetoric, entertaining, yet always inspiring.

This is a book you will want to open to start or close your day. You will find it a soothing companion when life's pressures run high. It is also rich in helps for the gospel teacher or speaker. It has much for the leader. It is full of lifts for life.

—Wendell J. Ashton
