Hugh B. Brown, Eternal Quest ( 1956)

Preface

Eternal Quest is the result of a half-century of Church activity. It carries the working philosophy of one who has responded with distinction to a wide variety of calls to Church service.

Many of those who have been inspired by Father's writings and sermons have long encouraged their collection and publication. Only after considerable persuasion from several sources was his reluctant permission to proceed with the present volume granted.

The content of Eternal Quest has various origins. Some sections are from radio sermons delivered when Father was a professor at Brigham Young University. Others are editorials and articles from the Millennial Star written during his presidencies over the British Mission. Articles from the Instructor, the Improvement Era, and the Relief Society Magazine, written before and since he was called as one of the General Authorities, have been used. Material written for Church members in the armed-forces when Father was coordinator for LDS Servicemen during World War II form an important part of Eternal Quest. Speeches and sermons included in this volume have been delivered at BYU devotional assemblies and Leadership Weeks as well as at recent General Conferences and at conferences of the various auxiliary organizations. No attempt has been made to group the contents either chronologically or with respect to source. Instead a topical organization has been employed. Materials written or delivered at various times and under various auspices have been grouped around central themes.

The title, suggested by my sister, Margaret, (Mrs. Clinton O. Jorgenson) reflects Father's lifelong desire to see truth ever more clearly. One of his favorite songs is "O Take the Dimness of my Soul Away." That he has frequently warned of the danger of arriving at a point of development where further growth was felt unnecessary is illustrated by this characteristic quotation from a Leadership address: "Then, when the change called death shall come, we shall find that we must take up the quest where we left it off. Awareness, like creation and salvation, is an on-going process. The quest for truth is eternal."

Many influences have helped to shape Father's life. I will not attempt to enumerate them — they are too well stated in his poem at the beginning of this volume for me to presume to reiterate. But of one influence, on behalf of the seven living children, I must speak. All of us know—and Father is always the first to assert—that Mother has been his constant inspiration. In addition to epitomizing all that is desirable in a mother and home-maker, as a wife she has helped him "Meet triumph and disaster and treat these two impostors just the same." She has been tenaciously loyal, courageously true, constantly faithful. No man has ever had a more selfless companion. Because these qualities have contributed beyond measure to the quality of his Church service, this volume is most appropriately dedicated to his eternal companion in honor of their son, Hugh C., who gave his life in World War II.

Many persons have had a part in the fruition of this project. Acknowledgment is especially due to Norma Ashdown whose faithfulness, diligence, and accuracy have made the final editing easier and to my sister, Zina Lou (Mrs. Gaurdello P. Brown) who has transcribed many of his sermons from her own shorthand notes and assisted with the editing.

And so this volume is offered to those throughout the Church who may be encouraged in their own quest for truth. Charles Manley Brown

Glendale, California

October 26, 1956
