Hugh B. Brown, Eternal Quest ( 1956)

I thank thee, Lord, that thou hast called me "son," And fired my soul with the astounding thought That there is something of thee in me. May the prophecy of this relationship— Impel me to be worthy. I am grateful for a covenant birth; For noble parents and an ancestry who beckon me To heights beyond my grasp, but still attainable If with stamina and effort I cultivate their seed— And prove that I am worthy. I am grateful for a companion on this Eternal Quest, Whose roots and birth and vision match my own; Whose never-failing faith and loyalty have furnished light in darkness, And re-steeled fortitude. May her faith in me Inspire me to be worthy. I am grateful for the cleansing power of parenthood, With its self-denial and sacrifice—prerequisites to filial and parent love; For each child entrusted to our care, I humbly thank thee; If I would associate with them eternally, I know I must be worthy. I am grateful for the one who was recalled in youth, For his love and loyalty and sacrifice. May the memory of his clean and manly life keep resolute the hope That I may renew companionship with him—and thee; For this I would be worthy. I am grateful for the children of my children. And, in anticipation, for others yet to be Keep alive, I pray, within my bosom, a sense of obligation unto them, To pass a name unsullied as it came. To become an honored sire, O make me worthy! I am grateful for the lifting power of the gospel of thy Son; For the knowledge thou hast given me of its beauty, truth and worth. To attain its promised glory, may I to the end endure, And then, forgiven, let charity tip the scales and allow me To be considered worthy. Hugh B. Brown

SECTION I A Rational Faith So far as we can see there is no goal at which me may "arrive" and arriving, abide. Life is an infinite search leading toward an ideal which forever leads forward and forever recedes.

Religion — A Challenge to Creative Living (A series of fourteen radio addresses commencing September 7 and concluding December 28, 1947.) I respond to this assignment with feelings of trepidation and misgivings, and seek divine guidance as I attempt to direct your thinking. I come to you as one who invites his friends to accompany him on a quest, the kind of quest which implies curiosity, a desire to know, a certain teachable humility—all of which are prerequisites to a successful search for truth. They who seek truth must have courage, must love truth, and must be unafraid of new adventure. They must be willing to depart, if need be, from the beaten path, and to alter and amend their own opinions. They must have vision to see, valor to venture, and faith to sustain them on the quest. Inasmuch as we shall be seeking to discover, to interpret, to evaluate—we must be open-minded, unprejudiced, and unafraid. There will be no disposition on the part of the speaker to say dogmatically, "This is it—no more and no less." Rather, he will undertake to give some reasons for certain convictions which he entertains, and will welcome questions, suggestions, and criticisms. Because of long and close association with servicemen, I especially invite them to join us. Their experience has taught them something of the problems involved in new adventure, in orientation, and in finding one's way in the dark. They have been trained to listen, to inquire, to interpret, to decide, and then to act on the basis of that decision. We shall hope also to welcome other young people of high school and college age, prospective and returned missionaries, and young couples who are starting life together. If a few older ones should care to come along, they will be most welcome. Their interest will indicate that they have not lost the questing spirit, have not overtaken their horizons, have not arrived. Our own experience seems to confirm the opinion expressed by a Jewish writer as to the attitudes of people toward religion:

"There are with respect to religion, three classes of people—the religious rationalizers, the irreligious rationalizers, and the religiously inquisitive. The first class may think about religion from the outside to defend it; the second class may think about it from the outside to destroy it; but only the third class thinks about it from the inside with a view to discovering precisely what may be the good of it. The first class, the religious rationalizers, are generally very devout and earnest people. They acquired their religion in childhood or youth or in some profound experience of later years. It is quite complete and finished, and they have nothing more to learn about. . . . They may be very glad to talk about religion or hear others do so, providing this talk does not arouse any thought concerning the nature and value and true significance of their religious emotions and doings. . . . The second class also refuses to enter into a candid investigation of the merits of religion, but for an opposite reason. It has antipathy for it. As the first class was blinded with prejudice for, the second is blinded with prejudice against. They have no understanding of it, of course, but they have made up their minds concerning it and will not investigate it with fairness. For both of these groups, religion is something cut and dried and stored away and not to be thought about. The third class is intellectually alive in the direction of religion. . . . They do not think merely in order to defend their religion against attack. . . . They think in order to understand."fn We are sure you who may become interested in these short discussions will not be rationalizers, either for or against religion, but rather open-minded truth seekers who are religiously inquisitive; who will accept truth wherever it may be found and reject error whatever may be its source. Having decided, then, that this is to be a friendly discussion of religious subjects, we should perhaps first search for a satisfactory definition of religion. The method employed by the Apostle Paul in his matchless discussion of charity is most effective. He first tells us what charity is not and then proceeds to define it. Religion is not merely theology. Nor is it a bundle of inhibitions which must be carried through life. It is not negative except in the sense that a sign at the crossroads may be negative. If one is bound for New York and at the crossroads sees a sign reading "To San Francisco," that is a negative sign advising him not to go that way. Religion tells where various roads will lead, and after the warning, lets the traveler take his choice. It is not a joy killer. It is not in reverse gear, pulling against progress. It is true that religion says emphatically, "Thou shalt not," but science says it also and with equal emphasis. Religion is dynamic, positive, joy giving—an eternal challenge to creative living. It is a way of life, and to millions, it is the way of life. It is an approach to reality in which personal values are emphasized as the highest values. It deals with the satisfaction of needs; it adds hope to aspiration. It ever beckons toward a more abundant life. Religion has been defined as "the art of living," theology as "The theoretical background which enriches the art;" again, as, "personal devotion to the will of God as it stands revealed in Jesus Christ, finding expression for its aspiration in worship and for its sense of obligation in obedient service." Dr. John A. Widtsoe tells us that "religion in its broad sense consists of beliefs, including belief in God, that determine human actions. It becomes then, first: an explanation of man and the universe; second: a guide to conduct; and, third: a conviction according to which a person organizes his life." In the New Testament, we find the searching and oft-quoted words of the Apostle James:

"Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world." (James 1:27.) From these and other definitions it seems obvious that our quest will involve the heart as well as the head, something which can be felt as well as thought. Emotion is not enough, cold intellect will not suffice, but rational faith fired by spiritual insight will bring enthusiastic devotion expressed in obedient service. The purpose of these discussions is to encourage those whose lives are before them to examine the claims of religion when seeking a way of life; you who are to be the parents and teachers of a future generation will be greatly concerned with the problem of character education. There is a fundamental relationship between character and religion. There is a corresponding rise in moral delinquency when interest in religion wanes. A recent commission report, following a fact-finding survey of conditions in England emphasizes the declension from Christian moral standards and says:

"In every department, both of public and private life, the same trend is clearly seen. The gravest feature in the whole situation is that there is so little feeling of shame in loose living, still less in untruthfulness or dishonesty. The sense of responsibility and of duty have become undermined. There is no longer a generally accepted moral standard by which men judge their own actions. Instead, they excuse themselves by an appeal to pseudo-scientific determinism. The idea of man as a responsible person is in danger of disappearing with the loss of belief in God." We of the older generation are concerned for you who are to take over from us. We pass on to you a world of international unrest, economic chaos, and political floundering. But we are more concerned because of present-day tendencies to appraise all values by material standards, to worship technological means, and to lose sight of spiritual ends. In the world which you are to inherit from us, the application of scientific knowledge has invaded every area of human experience. In the countries where you servicemen traveled, and in your own country when you returned home, you found interest chiefly centered upon seeking satisfactions from economic goods. You saw the effects of scientific efficiency, harnessed to godless materialism, in both Europe and Asia. You fought to preserve the American way of life which was founded in and has flourished because of deep religious convictions. The statesmen of all lands today are gravely concerned for the future peace and reconstruction of the world. The most urgent and insistent need in many lands is for material rehabilitation, and that is understandable to you who have visited these lands and seen the havoc wrought there. But there is emerging in all lands, including our own, a desire for spiritual rehabilitation. There is universal heart-hunger for the truths of religion and for the comfort and confidence which comes with faith in God. There is an upsurge of belief in the dignity, glory, and immortality of the individual, endowed as he was by the Creator with certain inalienable rights. In these discussions we shall consider these rights from the religious point of view, which underlines the duties and responsibilities which in God's economy inevitably accompany rights and privileges. We shall speak, humbly and reverently, of God and of his purposes, of man's relationship to God, and of what that relationship entails. We shall inquire as to how man may know God, since it is life eternal to know him, and how, knowing him, we may serve him. We shall be dealing with the age-old problems of whence, why, and whither; and we believe religion gives the only satisfactory answers to these queries. I have said that this proposed quest will require faith. Any honest consideration of the vast and controversial subject of religion calls for faith—for an inner vision. The spirit of adventure in any field is sustained by faith. At the edge of knowledge, the scientist as well as the religionist leans on faith and, if courageous, will follow its tender light. George Santayana has expressed this thought in verse as follows: "O World, thou choosest not the better part! It is not wisdom to be only wise, And on the inner vision close the eyes, But it is wisdom to believe the heart. Columbus found a world and had no chart, Save one that faith deciphered in the skies; To trust the soul's invincible surmise Was all his science and his only art. Our knowledge is a torch of smoky pine That lights the pathway but one step ahead, Across a void of mystery and dread, Bid, then, the tender light of Faith to shine, By which alone, the mortal heart is led Unto the thinking of the thought divine."

Objective Witnesses

Servicemen during the war had informal discussions in their barracks, mess halls, tents, and army huts, anywhere they could talk freely and wrestle with their thoughts. The occasional presence of someone from home who was not in uniform seemed to encourage them to "think out loud."

They talked of home, of childhood, of life and its purpose, "if any." They took issue with one another and debated many sides of various questions. But when someone mentioned an absent one whose personal belongings were being sent home, there was a noticeable hush or respectful silence until someone thought aloud, "I wonder where he is now." And then they talked of death, of immortality, of God, and of religion.

It was evident that some of them had become confused by their harrowing experiences. They had lost their sense of direction and were reaching for a hand in the dark. As one young fellow put it:

"Life has exploded in my face, and I can't put the pieces together again. Things just don't add up to the right answer; What I have experienced here seems to be a denial of all that I have been taught to believe about the power, mercy, and love of God."

And then the inevitable question, "Is there a God; and, if so, what sort of being is he?"

Let us think together on this the oldest question that has ever challenged human thought in the hope that we may find some intimations of the truth. I shall not attempt to prove by reasoning, by logic, philosophy, or science, that there is a God. Certainly we shall not learn from any of these approaches what sort of being he is. One may have, as I have, a firm and abiding conviction that God lives. One may say, as I now say in all humility, that I know with every fiber of my being that I am a child of God and that he, my Father, is mindful of me. But beyond that, one pauses and admits with the Apostle Paul, "I know in part." (1 Cor. 13:12.)

First, let us cite what some of the men said in answer to the question, "What do you mean when you reverently use the word God?" One lad replied, "Well,—a perfect being"; another, "One who has all knowledge and power, one who cares for us." A third said, "I think of someone who guarantees that righteousness will finally prevail." That lad had just come from "D Day," from a maelstrom of hate and carnage, and one could sense that the anchor of his faith had held during the storm.

There was a certain unanimity in the concepts of God as expressed by these men, in spite of the fact that they were members of various churches—or of none. It was refreshing and assuring to see them ignore the confusing and limiting definitions of the various creeds and give expression to the thoughts of their hearts unwarped by memories of the chanted "three incomprehensibles in one incomprehensible." They spoke of Deity, with reverence, but with frankness, and with simple faith. One felt that they were speaking from deep within themselves, and that the search for evidence of God is after all man's attempt to prove what he has always believed.

The first answer we get then to the question, "Is there a God?" comes from the questioner himself. And the answer, when the heart is allowed to speak, is "Yes—definitely yes." This answer may be based on feeling, instinct, or intuition, but does not rule it out as evidence. In fact someone has said "that purely intuitive religious faith is a much more efficacious human lever than science or philosophy and that action follows conviction."

Surely man's intuitive hopes are not without their basis in fact. That which has been implanted in man is native to his nature; it is elemental. No rationalism can destroy what has been divinely impressed upon the structure of the mind. The Bible refers to it as "the evidence of things not seen." It is faith, and we hope to show that it may be rational faith. Let us think for a moment of some of the things we have seen and try to relate them to our question. Some of you have seen the Taj Mahal in India, St. Peter's Cathedral in Rome, St. Mark's Cathedral in Venice, or Westminster Abbey in London. Did it ever occur to you that these beautiful and ornate structures resulted from mere chance; that they just happened, without thought or plan or design; that there was no architect or builder? Were the well-fitted stones, the interior decorations, the patterns of the mosiacs, the provision for light and heat and comfort, all mere chance, or do you think they were made by someone for the use and benefit of man?

Have you ever wondered as you looked about you, especially at night, and asked yourself, "What am I in the midst of all this?" Have you marveled at the evidences of plan and purpose and design all about you? Have you felt that someone had thought and planned and that the planning seemingly had you in mind? In this universe in which you find yourself you see that provision was made for food, shelter, comfort, and happiness. You note the changing seasons, the vegetation, the fruit and grain, the birds, animals, and fish. Do you not feel that somehow all this was made for the use and benefit of man?

When you study such courses as zoology, botany, geology, astronomy, your wonder increases with your increasing awareness of your surroundings. No doubt many questions have been asked which, as yet, have not been answered; no doubt you have found, or have had called to your attention, seeming conflicts with the religion of your childhood. Even the specialists in these fields are still learning. The evidence is not all in.

You will have no patience with those who argue that the buildings of which we have spoken must have just happened because the architects have not been seen for several hundred years. You know that someone thought about them, planned them, and built them according to design and with a purpose. Just so we see all about us evidence of plan and design, of law and order, of intelligence and purpose. It is more difficult to believe that what we see about us is the result of chance that to have faith that there was an architect whom we have not seen.

But what of those whose training, facilities, and opportunities for observation entitle them to speak with authority? Do they think that what they behold results from chance alone? Do they say law operates without intelligence? Let us hear from some expert witnesses, who, because they are experts, are permitted to draw conclusions.

Some would say Albert Einstein is an adverse witness, but listen: "It is enough for me," he says, "to try humbly to comprehend even an infinitesimal part of the intelligence manifested in nature."

An astronomer, Robert Grant Aitken, director of Lick Observatory, said: "It is a universe, in my belief, with thought and more than thought within it; a universe that is the expression of the thought of an eminent, infinite spirit."

A geologist, Bailey Willis of Stanford, tells us: "Law is dominant. But law is inconceivable without intelligence. Law is omnipotent. . .Intelligence, the inevitable antecedent, must be omnipotent."

A professor of natural history, Sir Arthur Thompson, late of the University of Aberdeen, declares: "We maintain that the world of life is rich in beings and doings, becomings and results, that should fill us with wonder. We are led from our own minds, back and back to the Supreme Mind without whom there was nothing made that was made."

A physicist from Cambridge, England, James Arnold Crowther finds: "Modern science face to face with the mystery of the act of creation, finds no words more appropriate than those of the great Hebrew poet: `And God said, Let there be light: and there was light.'" (Gen. 1:3.) (The above quotations are from The Great Design edited by Frances Mason and published by Macmillan Co. of New York.)

Past president of New York Academy of Sciences, A. Cressy Morrison, author of Man Does Not Stand Alone published by Revell Co. of New York, says the purpose of his book is:

"To point out clearly and scientifically the narrow limits within which any life can exist on earth, and to prove by real evidence that all the nearly exact requirements of life could not be brought about on one planet at one time by chance." And further, "What science sees and what all thinking men know, is the unbelievable value of the universal faith in a supreme being. Man's advance to mortality and a sense of obligation is the outgrowth of faith in God and belief in immortality."

Author of Human Destiny, Dr. Lecomte Du Nouy, declares: "Our entire organized living universe becomes incomprehensible without the hypothesis of God." And again, "Let (man) above all never forget that the divine spark is in him, in him alone, and that he is free to disregard it, to kill it, or to come closer to God by showing his eagerness to work with him and for him."

A recent number of Life Magazine quotes Hocking as saying: "Faithful observation (of nature) tends to become reverent observation: reverence and faith are supposed to be childlike qualities, but science's increasing mystery has compelled them in the highest reaches of the deepest minds."

Now my purpose in quoting these scientists is not to show or even to intimate that science has or can supply a complete and final answer to our question. They tell of what they have observed in the objective field. Their testimony seems to confirm what we ourselves have felt, as we, in a more limited field, have beheld the wonders of the universe.

But for what we really know or may know of the character and attributes of God, we are limited to what he reveals concerning himself.

Let us all in the spirit of reverence and of faith pursue our search of truth.

Prophetic Witnesses

On the question of whether or not there is a Supreme Intelligence in the universe, we submitted the testimony of some expert witnesses in the objective field. Their conclusions, based upon their observations, support the affirmative side of the question. Others of equal eminence do not agree with these conclusions, but I think both sides agree that though within the limits of their search they may discover no reality that can be called "God" in the sense in which the servicemen defined him, still science does not submit a shred of evidence to disprove such a reality. The question of the character and attributes of Deity does not come within the realm of scientific investigation.

However, recent discoveries and wider opportunities for investigation seem to confirm the opinions expressed by earlier scholars, like Pascal, Locke, Newton, to the effect that ours is a universe of law and therefore one of intelligence; that it is a universe of order and therefore one which is controlled; and it is a universe of thought and therefore, as Sir James Jeans has said, "Its creation must have been an act of thought."

May it not be that science instead of undermining or disproving the claims of religion is discovering for us a vaster and more sublime universe, thereby increasing our awareness and giving new basis for rational faith. While the ever-widening observations of scientists seem to confirm our intuitive faith, that faith or inspiration may illuminate and give deeper meaning to the facts observed.

Every great achievement of the human mind which aids us in understanding and controlling life, except in cases of direct revelation, began with an intuitive illumination of some observed fact or group of facts. Alfred Noyes in The Torch Bearers emphasizes this in the following lines: "Naught avails in science, till the light you seize from heaven shines through the clear sharp fact beneath your feet,. . .transfigures it, confirms it, gives it new and deeper meanings; and itself in turn is thereby seen more truly."

It is assumed that our audience consists of believers in the scriptures to which we turn for a written record of generations of men who transmitted to their descendants an oral account of their own concepts and experiences of God. After all, the first evidence men have of the existence of God comes from tradition or the oral transmission of information. We shall not have time to discuss, but I wish to refer in passing to the fact that traces of this traditional faith in God are to be found in nearly all of the mythologies of the world including those of the Greeks and Romans, of India, China, Egypt, and the American Indians.

According to the account given in Genesis, Adam associated intimately with God before the fall; discussed with him the works of his creation, and, under divine direction, he gave names to all the beasts of the field and fowl of the air. We do not know how long this association continued, but certainly Adam had first-hand knowledge of the fact of God's existence and knew something of his character and attributes. That this knowledge was not withdrawn after the fall is evident from the record of subsequent conversations and instructions and from the fact that Adam offered sacrifices by command of God.

These experiences with the Creator were discussed by Adam and Eve with their children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren who in turn passed them on to succeeding generations.

In this matter of oral transmission of information and experiences, the ancients had some advantage over us as they lived to a very great age. Adam, for instance, lived 930 years during which time he talked with and doubtless related his experiences to several generations of his descendants even down to Lamech, the father of Noah. During these hundreds of years of association, they must have become familiar with the story of God as Adam knew him. Lamech was one hundred and eighty-two years old when Noah was born, but he lived fifty-six years during the lifetime of Adam, so that what he told Noah during the remaining 595 years of his life was first-hand information. Noah and his sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth were also acquainted with many of the other patriarchs. Noah, during the 350 years he lived after the flood, had ample time to teach several generations of his posterity the tradition respecting God which he had received from the patriarchs before the flood. Noah was himself directly instructed to build the ark. From Noah to Moses and from Moses to Christ these traditions were taught and became firmly fixed in the minds of men.

But they were not wholly dependent upon what their fathers told them, as many of them had their own experiences with Deity, walking and talking with him, working under his direction and personal guidance, warning the people, as inspired by him, of events to come. Read the testimonies of Abraham, Jacob, and Joseph, of Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, of Hosea, Joel, and Amos. Read of the American prophets, of Lehi, Nephi, Alma, Mosiah, Mormon, Moroni, and others, and from them learn not only that there is in fact a God, but learn also of his character and attributes, of "what sort of being he is." These and many others were eyewitnesses; they tell what they know, not what they deduce from the objective world about them.

We are told that Enoch walked with God, (Gen. 5:24) that Noah by direct revelation warned his generation and saved his own family, (Gen. 6 and 7.) Abraham received special revelation on the plains of Mamre. (Gen. 18.) God also appeared to Jacob and inspired Joseph, while a prisoner in Egypt, to interpret Pharaoh's dream and save a nation and his father's house. He appeared to Moses and said, ". . . I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. . ." (Ex. 3:6.) All Israel knew, though they were unworthy and afraid to behold him, that God descended upon Mt. Sinai and declared unto them, "I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

"Thou shalt have no other gods before me." (Ex. 20: 2-3.) Seventy of the elders of Israel went up with Moses and ". . . saw the God of Israel. . . and did eat and drink." (Ex. 24:9-11.)

The New Testament writers also affirm the existence of God although they, like the prophets before them, spend little time attempting to prove that there is a God—that they take for granted. Matthew, Mark, and Luke relate the incidents of the baptism of Jesus and of the Transfiguration on the Mount when Moses and Elias appeared. In both instances the voice of the Father was heard declaring that Jesus was his Beloved Son. Stephen, when being stoned by the Jews, looked up into heaven and saw, ". . . The Son of Man standing on the right hand of God." (Acts 7:56.) In fact the New Testament is replete with testimonies of the existence of God.fn

And then there is the testimony of the prophets who lived on this the American continent. The Book of Mormon is as replete as is the Bible with references to the personal experience of many men with Deity. Here again the fact of his existence is not argued, but knowledge is revealed concerning his character and attributes. Testimonies are given as to how they were led and taught by the inspiration of heaven and of how they witnessed wonderful demonstrations of the presence and power of God. In fact, it is recorded that a whole multitude of people witnessed the visitation of Jesus Christ among them, heard him announce himself as the Son of God and bear testimony to the existence of his Father.

But for a moment let us see what the prophets have said concerning his character and attributes, for we must have some knowledge of him if we are to exercise rational and intelligent faith. David said, "Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou hadst formed the earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God." (Ps. 90:2.) John testifies, "All things were made by him; and without him was not anything that was made.

"In him was life; and the life was the light of men." (John 1:3-4.) The Apostle Paul corroborates John's testimony with, "God . . . Hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom he also made the worlds." (Heb. 1:1-2.) Moses refers to him as being, ". . . merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth." (Ex. 34:6.) And James declares that with him there, ". . . is no variableness, neither shadow of turning." (James 1:17.) Peter tells us that he is no respecter of persons. (Acts 10:34.) John says, ". . . God is Love," (1 Jn. 4:8) while Jesus asks us to call him "Father."

You ask then—what sort of being is he? And on the testimony of these witnesses we reply: he is the Creator of all that is, is all-powerful, just, merciful, abundant in goodness; he changes not, is a God of truth and cannot lie, is no respecter of persons, is a God of love, and he is our Father.

Faith in such a One tends to lift us out of the pettiness and isolation of our own little private lives into a sense of participation in a great moral enterprise. It gives impetus to effort, sustenance to courage, and the comfort of feeling, "I am not alone."

We have referred then to the intuitive or instinctive faith which seems to be almost universal among men; we have heard some opinions expressed by scientific investigators indicating that God is manifest in nature; we have heard testimonies of prophets who lived on two hemispheres declaring that he lives; that he appeared to them and revealed something of his character and attributes. There remains one final Witness who was himself a complete revelation of God and whose life was a testimony of such transcendent worth as to eclipse all other evidence. We shall refer to him in the next discussion.

But in closing this discussion let us hear from the latest witness to bear testimony of a personal visitation from the Father and the Son. This witness is an American who in simple language tells of a great experience and confirms and makes clear what the others have said. He testifies: "I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name, and said, pointing to the other, This is My Beloved Son, Hear Him!" (P. of G. P., Joseph Smith 2:17.)

Though persecuted throughout his life and finally killed because of his testimony, it stands uncontradicted, confirmed by later events, and attested by one million now living.

The Messiah

". . . This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.) This statement of the Master emphasizes the significance of our search, the importance of finding the correct answer to the question which we have been considering, "What sort of Being is God?"

There are two ways to know God or people. We may know them by their works or face to face. There may also be written records of what others have said. If a man's neighbors and those who know him best speak well of him, tell of his honesty, fair dealing, thrift, scholarship, benevolence, skill, we form an opinion of the man. If we go to his farm and see evidence of industry, good management, economy; if we see new and useful machinery which he has invented, see well-bred animals and ample provision for their care; if we find his library stocked with good books which give evidence of use; if we see some masterpieces on his walls and statuary in his rooms; a painting of his wife and pictures of his family; these and other things indicate that he is industrious, orderly, creative, a lover of fine animals, educated, artistic, a considerate, and thoughtful husband and father.

If we read his journal where he has kept a record of his life, we get further information about the man. He has perhaps set down some rules of life for himself and his family, has indicated what he esteems to be of real value. He may refer to his eldest son as being the image of himself, and has perhaps executed a general power of attorney by which his son is authorized to act for him. Perhaps we meet his son who tells us that to have seen him is to have seen his father, they are so much alike. Surely from these evidences and testimonies we get a fairly accurate conception of this man whom we have not seen.

We have been trying to get information about our Heavenly Father. We have read what was said and written by those who knew him face to face; we have observed some of his works and have noted the deductions of expert observers regarding the dominance of law, the evidence of intelligence, the beauty and order and utility of the universe; we have had access to his journal, the scriptures, and are impressed by his love for his children, his reference to his First-born Son, his instructions and admonitions and solicitude.

The testimonies which are given of him, and the records which we have of him all indicate in unmistakable language that he is a Personal God with body, parts, and passions in whose likeness and image man is made, that he is the superlative of all the best we know. I am aware of the repugnance of many to the term anthropomorphism and of the contention that to liken him in any way to man, in image, form, or attributes, is to debase him. But when you see an image or likeness of someone, what other conclusion can you draw than that the original is similar to what you see? This, of course, unless it is a cartoon or caricature, and surely when God made an image of himself there was no distortion.

The prophets and apostles speak of him as of a person, they relate their experiences as matters of fact which need no supporting arguments. Nor do I propose to argue the case in these discussions or to impose my own opinions. We are on a quest, and each must be free to weigh the evidence and draw his own conclusions.

While we submit some evidence as to his character and attributes, we do not pretend to understand him fully nor to comprehend his infinite majesty with our finite minds. If his life did not transcend our finite comprehension of it, he would cease, for us, to be infinite. But as we desire salvation, as we think in terms of immortality for ourselves and those we love, so we seek to know more of him and of his purposes concerning us.

Our relationship to him is somewhat similar to that of a small child to his earthly father. The child comprehends but little of the life of his earthly parent, but year by year his understanding increases until, as he matures, he is able to understand and appreciate his father more fully.

This concept of the relationship of Father and son existing between our Heavenly Father and ourselves, gives new meaning to the Master's words, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matt. 5:48.) Considering that we are to have an eternity in which to mature, with an Elder Brother, even the Master as our guide and tutor, who can put limits to man's destiny, or change the law of "like begets like"?

Fortunately he has revealed himself in such a way as to leave no room for question on the matter of his being a Personal God. He came and dwelt among men in a mortal body; subjected himself voluntarily to the limitations of mortality; experienced pain, hunger, fatigue, even death; and refused to exercise, in his own behalf, that divine power which was his from the beginning.

When, in the Meridian of Time, ". . . the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us . . ." (John 1:14), the world was given a new revelation of God, a new insight into man's relationship to him and their responsibility to one another. It was this new insight which caused John, the beloved, to exclaim: ". . . Now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know, that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is." (1 Jn. 3:2.)

Let us consider for a moment a question put to me by a serviceman on one occasion: "Who was Jesus of Nazareth?" Much confusion could be avoided on this question if men understood and accepted the fact that Jesus is not only the revelation of God the Father but also that he himself is God. With what is known of Jesus, of his life and mission, and especially with what has been revealed concerning his pre-existent life and status, it is difficult to understand why some early Christian leaders should have gone to pagan philosophies for a definition of Deity.

First then, let us inquire as to his status before he became the Babe of Bethlehem. We shall not be able to discuss the general principle of pre-existence, but if we find that Jesus lived before he was born, it may lead us to inquire into the possibility of the pre-earth life of spirits generally.

The Master himself said, ". . . Before Abraham was, I am." (John 8:58.) In his prayer to the Father he referred to his pre-mortal glory with evident nostalgia. ". . . O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world was." (John 17:5.) He announced himself to Abraham with the words: ". . . Behold my name is Jehovah. . ." (Abr. 1:16.) And to the Jews of his day he said: "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad." (John 8:56.) The Apostle John tells us he was in the beginning with God and that all things were made by him before he ". . . was made flesh, and dwelt among us. . ." (John 1:14), and Paul corroborates this statement.

The prophets of the Old Testament looked forward to the time of his incarnation as note the following: Moses was told by the Father, "I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren. . . and will put my words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him." (Deut. 18:18.) Isaiah predicted: ". . . Behold; a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel." (Meaning "God with us.") (Isa. 7:14.) And again Isaiah: "For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulders: and his name shall be called, Wonderful, Counsellor, the mighty God, The everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace." (Isa. 9:6.) The angel said to Mary who was to become the mother of Jesus, ". . . that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God." (Luke 1:35.)

That he was in fact the Creator of the world was understood by the Apostle Paul who refers to him as the first-born of every creature and declares:

"For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers; all things were created by him, and for him." (Col. 1:16.)

And John's testimony is as emphatic: "All things were made by him; and without him was not anything made that was made." (John 1:3.)

The scriptures explicitly direct us to worship the Creator, who is as we have shown, Jesus the Christ. Listen to John while he was on the Isle of Patmos: ". . . Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the seas, and the fountains of waters." (Rev. 14:7.)

Let it not be understood, however, that this interpretation of the mission and status of the Messiah in any way displaces God the Father. The relationship is clearly that of Father and Son. God the Father, Elohim, presided in the Godhead and directed God the Son, Jehovah, in the work of creating the world. Later, in commendation the Father said to the Son: "And, Thou, LORD, in the beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth; and the heavens are the work of thine hands." (Heb. 1:10.)

Men generally have thought of Jesus of Nazareth either as the Babe of Bethlehem, the Boy in the temple, the itinerant Preacher by the seaside with a few unknown fishermen as disciples, or as the Man of Sorrows, the Meek and Lowly One, the One who had nowhere to lay his head, the One who was crucified on Calvary. These were descriptive incidents in his mortal life, but in his pre-earth life he was Jehovah, the God of Israel.

He existed in the spirit world as did all the spirit children of our Father. But he attained a status far above that of any other. He was the First-born of the Father in the spirit and the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh. Was that body which was begotten of the Father, given to him for the period of his earth life only, was his status as a personal, embodied God changed after the resurrection? To all believing Christians there can be but one answer to that question: His body was resurrected from the tomb. He appeared to Mary, to the men on the way to Emmaus, to the disciples in the upper room; he allowed the one who would not trust his own sight to feel the prints of the nails in his hands and the wound in his side. In their wonder and amazement he assured them with the words: ". . . A spirit hath not flesh and bones, as you see me have." (Luke 24:39.) He with his resurrected body visited the people on the American continent and to thousands of them he testified, "Behold, I am Jesus Christ the Son of God. I created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are. I was with the Father from the beginning. . ." (3 Ne. 8:15.)

His disciples witnessed his ascension into heaven with his resurrected, glorified body, still bearing the marks of the nails and spear, and they heard the angels predict that: ". . . This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." (Luke 24:50, Acts 1:9-11.) The martyr Stephen looked into heaven, ". . .saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God." (Acts 7:55.) Zechariah says when he shall appear on the Mount of Olives the Jews shall note the wounds in his hands and will ask concerning them, and "Then he shall answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends." (Zech. 13:6.)

What then do you say to the question, "What sort of Being is God?" If Jesus was and is God as the scriptures plainly declare, if he was the Creator whom we are commanded to worship, "The Word" who was made flesh and dwelt among men; if he later took his resurrected body into heaven after ministering to thousands while yet on earth and was there seen standing on the right hand of the Father, and finally if on his reappearance he is to be identified by the marks in his hands, then what do you say? Is he a God with body, parts, and passions?

As a fellow pilgrim I humbly confess my own belief that Jesus Christ is a resurrected, glorified Being whose immortal spirit was tabernacled in the flesh in the Meridian of Time, that he was the God of Israel, the Creator of the world, and that he is the express image of his Father.

Believing with John that we are the sons of God will help us to hold a high opinion of ourselves and to be worthy of our heritage. I pray that this brief discussion of this age-old question, which is ever new, may lead to further investigation and enable us to say with the prophet of old, ". . .I know that my Redeemer lives. . ." (Job 19:25.)

Life Hereafter

The servicemen frequently asked, "Is death the end of conscious existence?" This question is not peculiar to them, but it was kept in the forefront of their minds by their proximity to death. Fifteen hundred years before Christ, Job asked: "If a man die, shall he live again?. . ." (Job 14:14.) It is a question which has persisted through the ages. The noblest thoughts of the world's profoundest thinkers have been given to it.

We propose to discuss this subject under two headings. First, we shall refer to what philosophers, scientists, educators, and others have said on the subject. Second: we shall examine scripture for the revelations of God concerning the soul of man. We shall not expect any detailed information from the first group, and even from the prophets we shall not get an illustrated travel talk as by a tourist returning from a strange country. God has seen fit to withhold many things about the state of the soul after death, and doubtless for good and sufficient reasons.

We find here, as we found in our search for evidence of the existence of God, that men of all races, tribes, and nationalities during all recorded time, have had, and have expressed in various ways, a deep conviction that the soul of man is immortal. It is intuitive and instinctive. Unless warped or dampened by man-made dogmas or the pessimistic arguments of the cynic, this faith is simple, positive, and enduring. The heart hunger of mankind after immortality is both rational and normal. The human spirit by its very nature has a passion for life, and for life that is timeless; it has eternity stamped upon it.

This is not a subject to which we can apply the scientific process of trial and error. All of us will eventually have personal knowledge, but few, if any, will be permitted to return and tell what they learn. We cannot by reason or logic lead men to an understanding of a subject which is, as yet, partly shrouded in mystery. But we can all bear witness to an inner urge, an irrepressible hope, a deep-seated faith in immortality.

Tom Fitch wrote:

"We feel the truth of immortality with an intuition that is higher than reason. Our conviction that we shall live again comes to us from an inner source, which we can no more discern with the eyes of mere reason, than we can weigh reason itself in an apothecary's scales. It is the spiritual sense of man that perceives the spiritual life of man."

And Emerson speaks in similar vein:

"All serious souls are better believers in immortality than we can give reasons for. The real evidence is too subtle, or is higher than we can write down in propositions."

Victor Hugo, the French poet and novelist, expressed his faith in eternal life as follows:

"The nearer I approach the end, the clearer I hear around me the immortal symphonies of the worlds which invite me. It is marvelous yet simple. For half a century I have been writing my thoughts in prose, verse, history, drama, romance, tradition, satire, ode and song—I have tried all; but I feel that I have not said a thousandth part of that which is in me. When I go down to the grave, I can say like many others, `I have finished my day's work'; but I cannot say, `I have finished my life's work'; my day's work will begin the next morning. The tomb is not a blind alley. It is an open thoroughfare. It closes in the twilight to open in the dawn. My work is only beginning; my work is hardly above its foundation. I would gladly see it mounting forever. The thirst for the infinite proves infinity."

Tennyson must have had a similar faith when he wrote:

"When that which drew from out the boundless deep, turns again home."

So our search leads to the discovery that men, and apparently all men, believe intuitively in some kind of conscious existence after death. But is the fact that men universally believe a thing any evidence of its truth? Dr. Carl S. Knopf, of the University of Southern California, calls this universal faith an instinct, and on the subject of instincts he says:

"Imagine a world with bees and beehives, all geared up for the honey making process—and no honey; no honey secreting process in any flower upon the earth! Imagine a world of fish—and no water to swim in. A cursory glance at the world about us shows that there is no life urge or instinct without a complementary medium of fulfillment. Instincts are not suspended urges; they are directional."

Speaking of man's instinctive hope of immortality, he says:

"Such a universal wish pattern would stand as a contradictory element in the whole scheme of planetary life if it were the one unattached instinct. The logic of science demands that this instinct have a counterpart in reality, just as the honey gathering urge of the bee demands honey to gather. Man's irrespressible hope of immortality is one of its chief guarantees."

Many of the servicemen were confused as they attempted to justify their faith in a meaningful world, and especially their belief in ultimate justice, when they witnessed chaos and injustice on such a wholesale scale as the war exposed. If there is no larger scope for man's achievement than is afforded between the cradle and the grave, if there is no court of appeal where injustice may be redressed, it is difficult to justify life for the mass of mankind.

In our former discussions we found ample evidence that there is a God and that he rules in the affairs of men. We found evidence that he is just, merciful, and purposeful, but unless there is a future life in which there may be redress for the glaring inequalities of this one, then indeed our faith is vain. As the apostle said: "If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable." (1 Cor. 15:19.) Thinking men generally believe mortal existence to be but a training ground for life. As Franklin truly said: "Life is rather a state of embryo, a preparation for life. A man is not completely born until he has passed through death."

Most men when they come to the end of their days have a feeling of incompleteness; of unrealized dreams and resolutions; of unfinished work. This seems to suggest that there is still a design to be carried out. As Robert Browning said:

"Only an infinite existence is commensurate with man's dreams of achievement."

As we think of another world it may seem strange and unreal because it is a world unknown; but it could not be any more unknown than this one was when we entered it. We came here as strangers, and surely we will never be more helpless than we were when we were born. But our coming was prepared for, and we found an environment suited to our new bodies. We had developed lungs to breathe the air into which we were to come. Our ears and eyes and other organs of the body had been of no use in our pre-natal state and yet without them we would have died at birth. If we could have thought and willed in our pre-natal state without memory of pre-existence, we should doubtless have said, "I do not wish to be born as that would be death to me. I am dependent upon my mother for my life. If I am separated from her I must die." And yet it would have been fatal to our mothers and to us if we had not been born when our bodies reached that stage of development where they could maintain a separate existence.

May it not be that in this life we are preparing for and awaiting birth? Have we not good reason to believe that the same divinity which made provision for our coming here will have prepared a place for us; prepared the kind of existence for which our development here will have conditioned us? Dying and living again will be just as natural as being born and living in this form. Is it unreasonable to suppose that upon our arrival there we shall have certain spiritual faculties which we have not had here, or of which we were not aware; that we may have many senses, and find ranges of existence to answer all of them?

The Bible says there is a spiritual body; and modern revelation informs us that spirit is matter infinitely refined. Is it then irrational to expect a continuation of the process of growth and development which has marked our earthly life; that mortality and death are only changes denoting transitions from one state to another? It seems reasonable to conclude on the basis of what we know that, with relation to the spirit, death is merely discarding one garment to put on one more refined and more suitable for the new environment.

As Dr. Fareed, a physician and psychologist, admonished Professor Armstrong of McGill University:

"Let not any disorganization of the body or disintegration in the material world disturb you and me. You and I have not stepped forth from nonbeing yesterday that we should fear non-existence tomorrow. Non-existence is the very antithesis of life and so non-existence cannot become existence. We who are today have been forever and will continue forevermore."

In thinking upon this subject we find ourselves confronted with a choice between annihilation and immortality. There can be no middle ground. The cynic claims our insistent hope of eternal life is but wishful thinking, is a will-of-the-wisp, a phantom; we are merely chasing butterflies. But the thought of annihilation is not only extreme pessimism, it is also repugnant to our natures, a contradiction of all we know, and it is unscientific.

The annihilator tells us that:

"All who have ever lived have been blotted out forever, and that the same inexorable fate awaits all who now live and all who shall live in the future; that man with his God-like intellect, his moral development and his spirituality is of no more significance than the snows of by-gone ages. Only on the firm foundation of unyielding despair can the soul's habitation henceforth be safely built."

But opposed to this philosophy of despair—which was never held by more than a small minority of mankind—is the optimistic and reasonable philosophy—which is almost universal—that, "the spiritual part of man is a permanent reality which survives the death of the material body and carries with it the personality and memory of the individual, thus opening the way for endless progress in the spiritual world."

You who are reading now just try for a moment to believe that creation is merely a blowing of soap bubbles, that its value is temporary and transient, that the universe is just a death trap; that all the best and finest things you know, are destined to extinction. Do you not find that from deep down within yourselves you recoil at such a thought; that your inner self records a protest and desperately clings to what you intuitively know?

If you burn the chair on which you are sitting, you know you have not destroyed any part of it. Its form is changed, but if you gather up the ash, and capture the smoke and gas, they will weigh exactly what the chair weighed before the fire. If there are permanent values, then, in this universe of ours, if the material things which are about us may be changed but not destroyed, then what of the highest and noblest qualities of which you are aware? Does it not seem in the very nature of the case that such things as love, sympathy, service, intellect, spirituality, personality must be permanent?

Some think of immortality in terms of the spirit being absorbed into some universal spirit ocean. Does this change which we call death result in loss of conscious life, do we cease to be, as individuals, and become part of a mass where we can never again say "I"? If that be immortality, one might as well believe that our physical bodies are immortal because they return to the earth and become a part of it.

If we are to be robbed of the personal stream of consciousness, we, as individuals, will not have immortality. It is the soul of man that is immortal, and that soul consists of a spirit, which had no beginning and can have no end, and a body which will have passed through a change, called death, and been resurrected to everlasting life.

The Author of our being, the Father of our spirits, did not undertake a temporary or transitory work when he created man in his own image. We passed through a change when we were born, but we did not cease to be. We shall experience another change at death and shall find that we are born again. Growth and development demands change, but changing a garment does not destroy the body that wore it.

No doubt Benjamin Franklin was thinking along this line when he wrote his own epitaph:

"The body of Benjamin Franklin, like the cover of an old book, its contents torn out and stripped of its leather and gilding, lies here; yet the work itself shall not be lost for it will, as he believes, appear once more in a new and more beautiful edition, corrected and amended by its author."

There is no goal at which we arrive and, arriving may abide. We believe not only in eternal life but in eternal progress. Let us then, as our loved ones leave us, turn our faces hopefully towards the dawn and courageously carry on.

And so we leave this phase of our subject impressed by the unanimity of philosophers and convinced that there must be some basis for the reasoning that leads practically all thinkers to the same conclusion. Wordsworth's lines, often quoted, find an echo in our souls, and we reply to the servicemen: "Death is but returning home."

"Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting, The soul that rises with us, our life's star, Hath had elsewhere its setting And cometh from afar. Not in entire forgetfulness And not in utter nakedness But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God who is our home."

Immortality

The opinions of business and professional men on the subject of immortality reveal a gratifying unanimity of thought. Although they represent various churches and creeds, although they differ on many points of doctrine, on this subject they find common ground for faith. As Judge Wade of the United States District Court in Iowa, a Catholic, said, "There is at least one great truth upon which all Christians and Jews can agree—the immortality of the soul."

There is comfort in the knowledge that there is almost universal faith in that which we, above all else, desire to believe. This universal expectancy is an earnest of what is to come. We study nature's intimations of immortality and discover in the creative and evolving qualities of life some basis for our faith. There is also assurance in what seems to be an inexorable law—that for every faculty there is a function.

It is a source of inspiration to glimpse the possibilities of spiritual faculties which will begin to function when we are born into a realm of spirit. In fact we cling tenaciously to every bit of evidence which would seem to support and justify our faith.

Some have professed disbelief and have spent their lives trying to convince others—and themselves—that there is no hope of life beyond the grave. But even they, when called upon to part with a loved one, find that from their broken hearts there is released the essence of belief and trust. They feel what one of them was impelled to say: "In the hour of death hope sees a star and listening love can hear the rustle of a wing."

When we face the grim reality of death—and it is an immutable law that every living soul shall face it—when we see the body of the one whom we have loved being lowered into the grave, our souls cry out for more substantial evidence than the philosopher, the naturalist, or the scientist can give. We ask for better evidence to support our faith that there still exists something more than the mere memory of the one we loved. We long for contact with some traveler who has "returned from that bourne" of which Shakespeare speaks.

Fortunately we have such evidence, and it comes from the most penetrating and inspiring personality of all time. While he lived, the Master always spoke of death in terms of life, and after he himself had tasted death, he returned and proclaimed his victory over it.

But before we hear the testimony of those who actually saw the Risen Lord, let us refer to some predictions which were recorded in books which millions accept as the word of God.

First, listen to the prophetic promise made by Jehovah himself—the God of Israel—speaking through Ezekiel: "Therefore prophesy and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, O my people, I will open your graves.

"And ye shall know that I am the Lord when I have opened your graves. . . ." (Ezek. 37:12-13.)

The Jehovah who made that promise afterwards became Jesus of Nazareth, and he did in fact, "open the graves of them that slept"—he himself came forth from the grave as he promised, and the disciples recognized him as the Risen Lord.

Matthew testifies: "And the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose,

"And came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many." (Matt. 27:52-53.)

Daniel predicted that: "And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt." (Dan. 12:2)

And the writer of the Psalms exclaimed: "For thou wilt not leave my soul in hell; neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption." (Ps. 16:10.) And again: "But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave: for he shall receive me." (Ps. 49:15.)

The next few witnesses are men and women who saw and conversed with the Risen Redeemer who was an immortal, resurrected Being. The evidence of these eyewitnesses is relevant, competent, material, admissible, and the witnesses have never been impeached. Furthermore, it is evidence given against interest, at least insofar as bodily safety was concerned. Their lives were threatened because of it, but no one of them retracted or recanted. Either their testimony is true or it is wilful falsehood since they say they saw and felt and heard. Men do not give their lives to perpetuate a lie. These men had seen the Risen Lord, had heard his voice, had felt again the power of his Divine Personality, and all the persecution under heaven could not change their testimony. By their death they attested what in life they had proclaimed.

When the two Marys and Joanna went to the sepulchre to perform certain rites for the dead, they found the stone had been rolled away and that the body of the Lord was gone. They did not understand the question of the angels, ". . .Why seek ye the living among the dead?" (Luke 24:15.) Mary Magdalene went to Peter and John and cried, ". . .They have taken away the Lord out of the sepulchre, and we know not where they have laid him." (John 20:2.) Peter and John ran to the sepulchre and confirmed the report. Later the Risen Lord appeared to Mary and through her made an appointment to meet the disciples. This meeting is reported by Luke as follows:

"And as they thus spake, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you.

"But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a spirit.

"And he said unto them, why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts?

"Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.

"And when he had thus spoken, he shewed them his hands and his feet.

"And while they yet believed not for joy, and wondered, he said unto them, have ye here any meat?

"And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb.

"And he took it, and did eat before them." (Luke 24:36-43.)

"But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came.

"The other disciples therefore said unto him, We have seen the Lord. But he said unto them, Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe.

"And after eight days again his disciples were within, and Thomas with them: then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said, Peace be unto you.

"Then saith he to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side; and be not faithless, but believing." (John 20:24-27)

The miracle which they had witnessed was but the first fruits of the resurrection. He had previously assured them that it was to apply to all. "Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live.

". . .Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice,

"And shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation." (John 5:25, 28-29.)

John the Revelator said:

"Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection: on such the second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.

". . .And the sea gave up the dead which were in it; and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were judged every man according to their works." (Rev. 20:6, 13.)

The Apostle Paul, in characteristic earnestness, leaves no doubt as to his conviction: "But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in you." (Rom. 8:11.)

"If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable.

"But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first-fruits of them that slept.

"For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.

"For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.

". . .But some men will say, How are the dead raised up? And with what body do they come?

"There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: for one star differeth from another star in glory.

"So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption:

". . .it is sown in weakness; it is raised in power.

"It is sown in a natural body; it is raised in a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body." (1 Cor. 15:19-22, 35, 41-44.)

There were also prophets on the American continent who predicted his birth, death, and resurrection. Nephi, Mosiah, Alma, Abinadi, Samuel the Lamanite, and others taught the doctrine of the resurrection and of immortality and foretold the coming of the Messiah and the purpose of his mission.

Here is an excerpt from the record of the visit of the Risen Redeemer to the people on the American continent:

"And it came to pass that while they were thus conversing one with another, they heard a voice as if it came out of heaven; and they cast their eyes around about, for they understood not the voice which they heard; and it was not a harsh voice, neither was it a loud voice; nevertheless, and notwithstanding it being a small voice, it did pierce them that did hear to the center, insomuch that there was not part of their frame that it did not cause to quake; yea, it did pierce them to the very soul, and did cause their hearts to burn.

"And it came to pass that again they heard the voice, and they understood it not.

"And again the third time they did hear the voice, and did open their ears to hear it; and their eyes were towards the sound thereof; and they did look steadfastly toward heaven, from whence the sound came.

"And behold, the third time they did understand the voice which they heard; and it said unto them:

"Behold my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name—hear ye him.

"And it came to pass, as they understood they cast their eyes up again towards heaven; and behold, they saw a Man descending out of heaven; and he was clothed in a white robe; and he came down and stood in the midst of them; and the eyes of the whole multitude were turned upon him, and they durst not open their mouths, even one to another, and wist not what it meant, for they thought it was an angel that had appeared unto them.

"And it came to pass that he stretched forth his hand and spake unto the people, saying:

"Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified should come into the world:

"And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning.

"And it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these words the whole multitude fell to the earth, for they remembered that it had been prophesied among them that Christ should show himself unto them after his ascension into heaven.

"And it came to pass that the Lord spake unto them saying:

"Arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world.

"And it came to pass that the multitude went forth, and thrust their hands into his side, and did feel the prints of the nails in his hands and in his feet; and this they did do, going forth one by one until they had all gone forth, and did see with their eyes and did feel with their hands, and did know of a surety, and did bear record, that it was he, of whom it was written by the prophets, that should come.

"And when they had all gone forth and had witnessed for themselves, they did cry out with one accord, saying:

"Hosanna! Blessed be the name of the Most High God! And they did fall down at the feet of Jesus, and did worship him." (3 Ne. 11:3-17.)

And so we have the unimpeachable testimony of many witnesses, from two continents that Jesus of Nazareth, who was crucified on Calvary, was, in fact, raised from the dead and that he was seen by them on several occasions. They were permitted to confirm the evidence of sight by that of touch and both he and his Father testified that he was the same who was slain in Jerusalem. He and the prophets and apostles of ancient, meridian, and modern times declare without equivocation that all men will be raised from the dead. That even as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in a newness of life.

Next to the thought of God, and of man's relationship to him, there is no thought which is more sobering, more inspiring, than the thought of immortality. To believe that one is an immortal soul with freedom to choose his course and carve his destiny, that throughout the eternities one must live with himself; to realize that one is a moral agent, the architect of a deathless soul, with limitless possibilities, this is a concept, a conviction, which at once inspires hope and steadies resolution. It sustains us in the hour of death and gives us courage to carry on.

And so when we stand at the bier of our loved ones, or when we know our own time has come, we have an assurance which enables us to approach the change with unfaltering trust. The gloom which otherwise might follow the twilight of death is dispelled by the hope of the dawn which dwells beyond the sunset. We come to visualize life in terms of eternity rather than of mortality. Though we mourn the departure of those whom we love it is not a hopeless grief to those who accept the divine assurance of the Master.

". . .I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live:

"And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die." (John 11:25-26.)

With renewed conviction we issue the apostle's challenge:

"O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?" (1 Cor. 15:55.)

Humbly we bow and worship him who broke the bands of death, even Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Man and Freedom

In our discussion of immortality, the evidence submitted seemed to indicate, if not to prove, that man does not cease to be when his body dies; that there is a spirit which lives on, an intelligent entity which is eternal. Too often men have thought of everlasting life as being eternal in one direction only; that it will not end. Its inevitable corollary, that it had no beginning, is not generally understood.

That the spirits of men passed through a stage of existence prior to their earthly probation is clearly taught in the scriptures. Furthermore, it is evident that our natures, dispositions, tendencies, and even our status and possible destiny were known to the Father of spirits before we were born into mortality. "Known unto God were all his works from the beginning of the world." (Acts 15:18.)

The doctrine of pre-existence and foreordination, however, does not imply compulsion and should not be confused with the idea of absolute predestination. The law of free agency is eternal and immutable. ". . .Thou mayest choose for thyself," (P. of G. P., Moses 3:17) spoken unto Adam, applies to all of his descendants. Predestination would rob man of his birthright to "choose his life and what he'll be."

We have submitted evidence that Jesus Christ, our elder brother, was chosen and ordained to be the Redeemer of the world long before his earthly advent. Peter, in speaking of Christ, said: "Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world. . ."(I 1 Pet. 1:20.) And on the Day of Pentecost he told the assembled Jews: ". . .Jesus of Nazareth. . .

"Being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain. . ." (Acts 2:22-23.)

There is abundant scriptural evidence that others too were foreordained to certain callings, and from this fact is it not reasonable to assume that there was divine selection and preappointment among all the ante-mortal spirits of men?

The prophet Jeremiah was one who was chosen for a special work. We read: "Then the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

"Before I formed thee. . .I knew thee; and before thou camest forth. . .I sanctified thee, and ordained thee a prophet unto the nations." (Jer. 1:4-5.) Abraham was told in an interview with the Lord, that he was one of the noble and great ones among the intelligences that were organized before the world was, and that he was chosen before he was born. (Abr. 3:23.)

Alma the Nephite prophet, speaking of the priests who had been ordained, explained: "And this is the manner after which they were ordained—being called and prepared from the foundation of the world according to the foreknowledge of God, on account of their exceeding faith and good works; in the first place being left to choose good or evil; therefore they having chosen good, and exercising exceeding great faith, are called with a holy calling. . .which was prepared with, and according to, a preparatory redemption for such." (Alma 13:3.)

This doctrine of pre-existence and foreordination sheds revealing light on the subject of gradations and diversities among men. With the doctrine of free agency operating from the beginning we were, to a degree, masters of our fate in the spiritual world as well as in our present mortal state.

There are five definite stages of development of the human soul: intelligence, which always existed; spirit bodies of which God is the Father; mortality, which was optional; disembodied spirits between death and the resurrection; and resurrected, immortal souls. That we help to condition ourselves in each stage for the one which is to follow seems reasonable and logical.

Abraham referred to this conditioning process as the keeping of various estates and being added upon. They who kept their first estate had a glory in a kingdom where those who failed could not come. ". . . They who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads forever and ever." (Abr. 3:26.) Differences of endowment, varying environment, degrees of valor during conflict, and of wisdom in exercising choice, condition men for various degrees of glory. There will be a place for all, and each will find the place suited to his capacity. Each day we write a line of the verdict which will be read on judgment day.

Scientists, philosophers, scholars have made little progress in their study of the science of living beings and especially of the human individual. Alexis Carrel, in Man the Unknown, points to the limitations in this field of research and says, "Our ignorance is profound."

"There is no method capable of apprehending man . . . in his entirety, his parts and his relations with the outer world." The different sciences with their various techniques arrive at a different conception of their common object. "They abstract only from man what is attainable by their special methods. And those abstractions, after they have been added together, are still less rich than the concrete fact. They leave behind a residue too important to be neglected. . . . Most of the questions put to themselves by those who study human beings remain without answer."

The doctrine of the eternal nature of man—eternal in both directions without beginning or end—is both reasonable and scriptural, and some understanding of it is necessary if we are to comprehend ourselves and our fellow beings.

The revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith on this subject is clear and definite. "Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be." (D&C 93:29.) And the prophet asks: "Is it logical to say that the intelligence of spirits is immortal, and yet that it had a beginning? The intelligence of spirits had no beginning neither will it have an end . . . There never was a time when there were not spirits (intelligences); for they are co-equal (meaning doubtless co-eternal) with our Father in heaven. . . . As the Lord liveth, if it (intelligence) had a beginning, it will have an end." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 353.)

This idea, of life having no beginning, is difficult to grasp at first thought as we have grown accustomed to what we call beginnings and ends. Our idea of time, for example, is measured by years, seasons, months, weeks, and days. Each seems to begin and end, replacing and giving place to preceding and succeeding events. But in reality there is no division of time; it does not begin or end; there is no division between today and tomorrow. In our minds and for convenience we consider it in sections, but God's time is not computed by man's calendar. And so with life. We think of it as pre-mortal, mortal, and post-mortal, but in God's economy it is all one eternal life.

Scientists have long recognized that some aspects of the universe are eternal, such as "matter" and "energy." To put it into the language of one of them: "There is an entity in the physical world which is always conserved; though there may be transformation from one to the other, when matter and energy are summed, there is no loss in the process." Men have through the ages referred to God as being "without beginning of days or end of years." (See Heb. 7:3.)

Life, that elusive element which baffles the scientists, that residue which precision instruments cannot measure, weigh, or analyze—life, being a part of God is also "without beginning of days or end of years." (Idem.) What a boon, what a challenge, what a responsibility we have, we, who are "all architects of fate."

Our next submission on the subject of man is that he is free. The fact that Deity holds man responsible for his acts requires that he have freedom of choice between given alternatives. Certainly man should not be praised or blamed for his acts if they are not voluntary. Man is not morally answerable for what he cannot help.

Freedom of choice implies that man's progress does not depend solely upon God but partially upon his own individual effort. Creation is acknowledged to be an ongoing process, but many have failed to realize that it is a co-operative effort—that God needs our help since, granting free agency, he cannot coerce. It was to protect and insure this freedom that the war in heaven was fought.

Isaiah laments: "How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground which didst weaken the nations!" (Isa. 14:12.) It was the selfish and ambitious desire of Lucifer to rob men of this freedom and arrogate all honor to himself, which caused his downfall. It was his desire for power and dominion, his love of self which prompted the proposal to redeem all mankind by force.

On the other hand it was love of God and of fellow men which prompted the gospel plan of salvation involving the atonement of Christ and our exercise of responsible choice. "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." (John 3:16.) Someone has suggested that "God abdicated part of his omnipotence in favor of his creature," when he gave man his free agency. Certainly he regarded man's liberty as real for he refused to trammel it.

But man's freedom of choice is not absolute. There are many things he cannot do. There are a number of factors which limit his liberty; for instance, there are certain laws in his universe which limit his action, as, for example, the law of gravity. Ignorance is a limiting factor. Sin robs man of his freedom; it places him in bondage. The Master said: ". . . Whosoever commiteth sin is the servant of sin." (John 8:34.) And of course our freedom is limited by the rights of others. Our freedom is sometimes impinged by the sin and ignorance of others as witness the last two world wars where ignorant and ambitious men attempted to institute Satan's plan of domination.

Man may grow and develop by the exercise of his free agency in proper directions, by gaining and utilizing knowledge, by living in harmony with truth. ". . . The truth shall make you free," said the Master. (John 8:32.) And the Lord said in this day: "I, the Lord God, make you free, therefore ye are free indeed. . . ." (D&C 98:8.) Just as men may limit their freedom by ignorance and sin, so they may increase their opportunities to exercise it by intelligence and love. The Master emphasized love of God and of fellow men as first essentials to rich and radiant living.

Freedom to choose involves responsibility for choice just as privileges and rights involve duties and obligations. Thinking men, when they assert the rights of freedom to do as they please, are willing to be held accountable for what they do. If man is to be the master of his fate and if he strives for a high destiny, he must assume moral responsibility, engage in moral struggle, and exercise moral faith. His emancipation from slavery and serfdom whether imposed or self-inflicted carries with it the responsibility of making future choices with eternal consequences. How glorious the thought that freedom is God-given and inalienable. How awful the responsibility for its proper use or for its loss through misuse.

With this freedom and an eternity in which to exercise it, man needs a cause to serve, a purpose which will give point and meaning to life, an aim toward which to work, a goal toward which to strive.

The gospel of Jesus Christ gives purpose and meaning to life and sets a supreme, all-inclusive and eternal goal. Modern scripture tells us that: "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy." (2 Ne. 2:25.) The Savior said he came that we might have more abundant life (see John 10:10) while the Father declared it to be his work and his glory to bring to pass our immortality and eternal life. (See P of GP Moses 1:39.) Perfection is the goal set by the Savior for himself and for us. More life, abundant, joy-bringing, soul-satisfying life is the goal toward which we may work through time and eternity.

The Master having experienced the deepest meaning of life, or as he said, having descended below all, has risen above all and achieved "all power . . . in heaven and in earth." (Matt. 28:18.) Because of his love for us, he invites us to develop such moral, intellectual, and spiritual attributes as will enable us to associate with him and with his Father and with other resurrected, immortal beings, our brothers and sisters, throughout eternity.

Eternal life means more than just continuing to exist. In a qualitative sense it means a Godlike life. It is life eternal, to know God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. To know him involves becoming like him which in turn involves becoming unlike much which we now are. Man is then eternal; he is free; his life is purposeful, and may become Godlike in character if he has the moral valor which eternal progress will require.

Let us then be conscious of the fact that we are now living eternal life and that, as Roger Babson says, all that we think and say and do goes on forever. This concept of man's eternal nature, of his relationship to Deity, of his moral responsibility to himself and to his fellow men, of his right to freedom, and his responsibility for its use—this concept forms the very core of our democracy and is the basis of our faith.

May we have the wisdom to choose and the valor to maintain the course which will lead us to our destiny with the help of God, our Father, through his Son Jesus Christ.

The Word of God

We have attempted to say something concerning MAN as an eternal being. We referred to his inalienable right to choose his course in life and to his inescapable responsibility for the consequence of that choice. We suggested that more life, abundant, Godlike, eternal life was the goal toward which all men should strive throughout eternity.

We have briefly outlined the mission of the Messiah with its objective, man's salvation, and have drawn attention to the declaration of the Father that it is his work and glory to bring to pass our immortality and eternal life. With the assurance of their active solicitude for us and with the promise that our free agency will continue throughout eternity enabling us to "build the ladders by which we rise," we get an inspiring glimpse of the eternal realm of unattained possibility.

The acute awareness of limitless time, untrammeled liberty, and the possibility of never-ending progress and development emphasizes our responsibility as builders of our destiny. With this concept there comes a desire to adjust our behavior and achieve harmony with eternal law. To this end we are constantly in need of guidance lest we ignorantly choose the wrong course and suffer costly delay or permanent disaster.

Life then is a great adventure, calling for intelligent action, indomitable courage, and unfaltering faith. Just as on less important journeys we consult maps, charts, compasses, or employ experienced guides, so on this eternal journey we shall be constantly in need of help. He who is the Author of the plan which made possible the adventure of this mortal life has not left us without accessible sources of reliable information. There are "maps and charts and compasses," there are printed instructions and competent authorized guides. Information is available as to the purpose of the journey, the best and safest route, the dangers and the detours along the way, and the final goal toward which we strive. We refer to the holy scriptures, both ancient and modern, and to the source from which all scriptures came.

Divine revelation in all ages has been adapted to the needs and understanding of men. Giving and receiving of revelation is in its nature a co-operative undertaking to which there must be at least two parties. Many have thought, however, of revelation as coming—without regard to time, place, or human understanding—by direct dictation without any effort on man's part. Man, in this view, is simply a recording machine. On the other hand some students of science hold that revelation, if any, results solely from human experimentation and experience. God has nothing to do with it. Man seeks and discovers and takes the credit for his effort.

Revelation as understood by the Latter-day Saints, is communication, and that of course requires intelligent understanding between the parties concerned. Not only must there be an intelligent personal God, capable of and willing to communicate, but there must be someone, intelligent enough and worthy to receive the message. Revelation comes in response to need and is usually preceded by eager search and prayer for divine guidance.

Each succeeding generation has needed special revelation to meet its own peculiar needs. Adam was instructed for his own day and generation, but if Noah had relied alone on what God had said to Adam, he would not have been forewarned about the flood. So Abraham and Jacob walked and talked with God, but they were not told what Moses would need to meet the problems of the Israelites in Egypt. Joshua, Samuel, David, Isaiah, Ezekiel, Malachi, and all the prophets between them, were guided by divine revelation and were chosen agents of the Lord. Luke tells us: ". . . He spake by the mouth of his holy prophets, which have been since the world began." (Luke 1:70.) While many of them looked with prophetic vision upon what the future held, each dispensation was in need of special guidance to meet their unprecedented problems.

And when the Master came, while he referred frequently to the "Law and to the Prophets," sometimes with approval, he emphasized the fact that His gospel was up to date and forward looking. How often he repeated the words: "Ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old . . . but I say unto you. . . ." (Matt. 5:21-23, 27-28, 31-32, ff. He gave the Beatitudes as a supplement to the law of Moses and clearly indicated that other revelations were yet to be. "And Jesus answered and said unto them, Elias truly shall first come, and restore all things." (Matt. 17:11.)

The Master promised his disciples that the Holy Ghost would come to them after his departure. "Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth: . . . and he will shew you things to come.

"He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you." (John 16:13-14.) The New Testament is part of the fulfilment of that promise for it was by the power of the Holy Ghost that it was written. Paul declares: "by revelation he made known unto me the mystery.

"Which . . . is now revealed unto his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit." (Eph. 3:3-5.) And again: "God, who at sundry times and in diverse manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets,

"Hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, . . ." (Heb. 1:1-2.)

The faith of the Latter-day Saints in the revealed Word of God is compressed into one sentence in our Articles of Faith: "We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God." Christians everywhere profess belief in "what God has revealed" provided it bears a date not later than the first century of the Christian era. It seems strange that believers in the Bible should doubt God's power or willingness to continue to lead and guide his children by revelation as he did during all of Bible history. When asked how the Bible came to be, they quote from it and say: ". . . Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." (2 Pet. 1:21.) But they reject the thought that the Holy Ghost may move other men to speak by his power.

We believe there were "Holy men of God" in other lands who also were moved "by the Holy Ghost" to speak and write and that the records which they left us are scripture, companion records with the Bible, testifying that he lives and that Jesus Christ is the Only Begotten Son of God. We believe further that there are men today who hold the same authority and appointment as God's agents and that his divine will may be made known through them.

"It is inconsistent with reason and with our conception of the unchangeable justice of God, to aver that He will bless the Church in one dispensation with a present living revelation of His will, and in another leave the Church, to which He gives His name, to live as best it may according to the laws of a by-gone age. True through apostasy, the authority of the priesthood may have been taken from the earth for a season, leaving the people in a condition of darkness, with the windows of heaven shut against them; but at such times, God has recognized no earthly church as His own, nor any prophet to declare with authority. `Thus saith the Lord.'" (See Ready References.)

The apostles evaluate the scriptures as a guide to men's conduct and an inspiration to their lives. Paul said to Timothy: ". . .The holy scriptures. . .are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith," (2 Tim. 3:15.) And to the Saints in Rome: "For whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope." (Rom. 15:4.) The Master counsels us to: "Search the scriptures for. . .they are they which testify of me." (John 5:39.) He surprised the priests and wise men with his knowledge of the scriptures of their day.

In the Old Testament we find frequent reference to future revelation from God. "And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it." (Isa. 40:5.) "Therefore my people shall know my name: therefore they shall know in that day that I am he that doth speak: behold it is I." (Isa. 52:6.) "And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions:

"And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit." (Joel 2:28-29.) "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secrets unto his servants the prophets." (Amos 3:7.) "Where there is no vision, the people perish. . . ." (Prov. 29:18.)

We have quoted rather extensively to emphasize the fact that men have had access to the Word of God, as spoken and written by his servants. That God is in fact no respecter of persons is evidenced by the fact that we, in this age, may be guided by him, not only by reading what he said to former dispensations but also by reading and listening to his Word as given through his servants, our contemporaries. Nephi said: ". . .By the Spirit are all things made known unto the prophets, which shall come upon the children of men. . . . " (1 Ne. 22:2.) And in this dispensation the Lord said of his servants: ". . . They shall speak as they are moved upon by the Holy Ghost.

"And whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation." (D&C 68:3-4.)

The prophets and apostles of old were enabled by the spirit of prophecy and through visions to see our day, and they describe it as ". . .The dispensation of the fulness of times. . ." (Eph. 1:10.) They indicate that it is the final dispensation of the gospel and that it will be followed by the return of the Messiah who is to reign during the millennium. John on the Isle of Patmos declared: "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach to them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people,

"Saying with a loud voice, Fear God and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of water." (Rev. 14:6-7.)

Our Heavenly Father is never idle in his avowed work of our redemption; but too often we are obtuse and unresponsive to his appeal. Through his word and by the promptings of his Holy Spirit enlightenment and inspiration are available to all who come into the world. His instructions, warning, and admonitions have found their way into many lands and can be read in many languages. We have his assurance of help in time of trouble, of his inspiration through the night of strife, of his beacons on the hilltops when we have lost our way in the storm.

These helps are available to us if we will become familiar with his written word, if we heed the counsel of the living oracles, and if we listen to the "still small voice." We have grave responsibility, for, as the radio has taught us, broadcasting stations are futile without properly tuned receiving sets. So we must be in tune with the Sender or the message will not reach us. The mechanism of the spirit is so delicate that even our thought may interfere with good reception and unguarded actions may create such static as to make reception impossible.

He warns us to "Deny not the spirit of revelation, nor the spirit of prophecy, for wo unto him that denieth these things." (D&C 11:25.) And he promises: ". . .Behold, I will tell you in your mind and in your heart by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you, and which shall dwell in your heart." (D&C 8:2.) Too often we rebuff his proffered help by lack of faith. "How often would I have gathered you," he pleads, "but you would not." (See Matt. 23:37, Luke 13:34.)

And so the Master Teacher admonishes us to read the scriptures and learn the lessons of life from the word of God. But we must read with more than mere academic interest if we are to achieve spiritual growth. We must see in them more than a history of the past, more than things, however marvelous, which were done for our fathers. The writers of those sacred pages must challenge our thinking, renew our aspirations, color and flavor our daily living, and be an inspiration in our search for the abundant life.

Let us close with a scholar's estimate of the value of the Bible. Henry Van Dyke writes: "No other book in the world has had such a strange vitality, such an outgoing power of influence and inspiration. Not only has it brought to the countries in whose heart it has been set new ideals of civilization, new models of character, new conceptions of virtue and hopes of happiness; but it has also given new impulse and form to the shaping imagination of man. . .

"Born in the East and clothed in Oriental form and imagery, the Bible walks the way of all the world with familiar feet and enters land after land to find its own everywhere. It has learned to speak in hundreds of languages to the heart of man. It comes into the palace to tell the monarch that he is servant of the Most High, and into the cottage to insure the peasant that he is the son of God. Children listen to its stories with wonder and delight, and wise men ponder them as parables of life. It has a word of peace for the time of peril, a word of comfort for the day of calamity, a word of light for the hour of darkness.

"No man is poor or desolate who has this treasure for his own. When the landscape darkens and the trembling pilgrim comes to the Valley named Shadow, he is not afraid to enter; he takes the rod and staff of scripture in his hand; he says to a friend and comrade, `good-by; we shall meet again'; and comforted by that support, he goes toward the lonely pass as one who walks through darkness into light."

May God help us to appreciate his word, whether written, spoken, or impressed upon our souls, by his spirit, I humbly pray.

Prayer

In our brief discussion we implied a universal need of help beyond what man can give. The awareness of that need increases with mental and spiritual maturity or is driven home by the common experiences of life.

Some have thought that revelation or divine communication comes without thought or effort on man's part. Our Father has invited us repeatedly to "call on him." While he is ever ready to answer when we call, he waits upon our invitation. "Ask, and it shall be given you,. . .knock, and it shall be opened unto you." (Matt. 7:7.)

He who makes a habit of sincere prayer, and prays believing, will find his life noticeably and profoundly enriched and steadied. He will increase in tranquility and poise; he will have added courage and stamina. His physical, moral, and spiritual attitude will indicate he is aware of the presence of a powerful Friend.

In attempting to develop a life of prayer, one becomes conscious of the fact that he is two persons, and this is true of all of us. There is our outside self, the person who is seen and watched by others, who lives and speaks and acts in public, the person we reveal to others with varying degrees of frankness or affectation. And there is that other self—the inner self, which is ever partly hidden even from our closest friends, and which we, ourselves, but dimly apprehend.

It is this self, our better self, that the Master sees and values. To him the door of this interior castle is always open. He sees the real person. He knows that the fiercest battles are fought in this "sector of the soul," and he whispers hope to all who have not surrendered there. It was because of this insight that he could distinguish with such startling penetration between the woman and her accusers, between the fishermen and the scribes and Pharisees.

It was this understanding of the inner man which caused him to advise us to go alone into our closets and close the door when we would commune with the Father. Man, when alone with God, knows there can be no pretense, or make-believe. Here at least he is absolutely honest. "We feel the thing we ought to be beating beneath the thing we are." Realizing that he knows before we tell him, we lay bare our souls to God. It is the antiseptic washing of the wound which makes healing possible, and in religion this is called repentance and forgiveness. It is a time when our souls are naked and perhaps ashamed, but, when no longer distracted by fear of discovery, we can really concentrate on prayer.

Rich and radiant living is generated in the hour of quiet meditation, of self-examination, of confession of weaknesses and prayer for forgiveness. This searching of our own souls and admitting what we see, is sometimes painful, but its effects are healing and wholesome. Probing a wound is sometimes more beneficial than applying an ointment.

Prayer is a time to express gratitude for blessings. Real soul growth results from humbly expressing thanks for favors, and our blessings seem to multiply when we pause to name them to the Giver. Gratitude is akin to humility and love. It refines character and re-emphasizes values. While it should not be what someone has called it, "A lively sense of favors to come," still gratitude is a seed which will bear fruit in future blessings. Most prayers would be enriched by a larger portion of thanksgiving.

We need the growth that comes to all who praise and worship the Creator. It is not implied that he needs our praise or seeks our adoration. He is our ideal of all the good we know, and to praise and adore him is to hold before us all the virtues which in him have reached perfection. Contemplation of the life of Christ, and adoration of the Deity, will tend to lift us above the petty, selfish, and superficial thoughts and experiences of our daily existence and to make us more like that which we adore.

We should ask forgiveness when we pray. Each of us will, at some time in his life, feel the need of mercy and forgiveness, and this need may bring us to our knees in prayer. David felt this poignant need after the Prophet Nathan pointed the accusing finger at him and said, ". . .Thou art the man. . ." (2 Sam. 12:7.) Listen to the cry of a once proud but now broken heart as David prays:

"Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy lovingkindness: according unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.

"Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

"For I acknowledge my transgressions: and my sin is ever before me. . .Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.

"Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me." (Ps. 51:1-3, 9-10.)

Humility on the part of him who prays was commended by the Savior in the parable of the Pharisee and the publican. The Pharisee prayed: ". . .God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican.

"I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess." (Luke 18:11-12.) The publican's prayer was more acceptable though it was spoken in only seven simple words: ". . .God, be merciful to me a sinner." (Luke 18:13.) There was no humility in the heart of the Pharisee; he had the reputation of being a good man; and he was quite willing to admit it. He said "I" five times in two sentences without stopping to draw a breath. He was not seeking forgiveness; his was not a prayer of thanksgiving, nor a prayer of praise except praise of self; there was no worship in it; in fact, it was not prayer but a cheap exhibition of self-righteousness. The publican's humility was so sincere that he could not even lift his eyes toward heaven; his plea for mercy came from a contrite heart. Speaking of the publican, Jesus said: ". . .This man went down to his house justified rather than the other. . ." (Luke 18:14.)

We should pray for strength and wisdom, for courage and stamina, for understanding and charity, for the things we need to help build worthy characters and thus to glorify our Maker. We should pray for help to make us equal to our tasks as Lincoln did. "I have been driven many times to my knees," he said, "by the overwhelming conviction that I had nowhere else to go; my own wisdom and that of all around me seemed insufficient for the day." At another time he said: "I have always taken counsel of Him, and have never adopted a course of proceeding without being assured, as far as I could be, of His approbation."

Solomon, who is credited with unusual wisdom, was mindful of its source—at least in his early life—and he prayed for help. "And now, O Lord my God, thou hast made thy servant king instead of David my father: and I am but a little child: I know not how to go out or come in.

"And thy servant is in the midst of thy people. . .that cannot be numbered nor counted for multitude.

"Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and bad; for who is able to judge this thy so great a people." (1 Kgs. 3:7-9.)

Prophets of old frequently retired into secluded places for prayer and meditation. Elijah heard the "still small voice" when alone at the brook of Cherith, and he came back with a great message. John the Baptist spent much time in the wilderness preparing for his mission to announce the coming of the Son of God. Much of the transformation from Saul of Tarsus to Paul the Apostle took place while he was alone in Arabia after his great vision. The Prophet Joseph Smith sought the solitude of the Sacred Grove where the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times was ushered in by prayer. The Savior frequently went apart to pray, to get away from the multitude, and to be alone with his Father. Upon his return from one such communion, his disciples, noting his radiance and the renewal of his strength, and feeling that their own prayers had sometimes been unavailing, cried unto him, "Lord, teach us how to pray." (See Luke 11:1.) That appeal could well be the introduction to all our prayers.

It is essential that all of us spend some time alone with God, but we should also commune with him in company with others. Many young lives have been enriched and spiritually provisioned for life's journey as they knelt around the family altar and heard their parents talk with God. Family ties are closely knit when children ask God's blessings on their parents and on one another while kneeling in this sacred circle. There would be fewer broken homes if the foundations were daily "pointed up" by family prayer.

We have known men who pray while working, in the office, shop, or factory, in pulpit, any time and anywhere was for them the time and place to pray. "I thank thee Lord, that I may stop along the way at any time of night or day and talk to thee."

Sometimes we lose confidence in prayer because we do not realize the answer.

"We ask for strength, and God gives us difficulties which make us strong. We pray for wisdom, and God sends us problems, the solution of which develops wisdom. We plead for prosperity, and God gives us brain and brawn to work with. We plead for courage and God gives us dangers to overcome. We ask for favors—God gives us opportunities. This is the answer."

Today a group of men, delegates from many nations, are making plans for world peace. Behind them is a larger group, working almost day and night on propaganda to influence their policies and decisions. But the hundreds of millions of us who have no direct contact with them need not be helpless, though in their councils we must be silent. We all have a vital interest in the outcome of their deliberations; we the common people everywhere could profoundly influence what they do by ceaseless importunities to God. The prayers we prayed for our servicemen may have partly been in vain unless with the same solicitude we continue to plead for the success of the cause for which they paid so dearly.

Let us learn some bigger prayers than we said as little children. Let us shift the emphasis from ourselves and our next of kin and enlarge the scope of our interest and our supplication. We should continue to pray for the safety and the guidance of our loved ones and to believe those prayers are efficacious. But we must enlarge our outlook and have faith that prayers to God for our country and the world will be heard and answered. But here as in our prayer for kinfolk, we must cast out selfishness and honestly seek the wider good. We must recognize him as the universal Father and not a mere tribal god who would help one group or section at the expense of another.

Sincere prayer should imply a willingness to cooperate with God.

The birth and development of our democracy is the world's best example of how men can co-operate with God and displace tyranny with freedom. No doubt the skeptic sneered with derision when a few men with spiritual faith declared that "All men are created equal." From the viewpoint of the skeptic it was sheer madness, in a world of class hatred and distinction, ruled by kings and tyrants, for an isolated group to say, "We the people, with God's help, propose to rule ourselves." But what these praying men established, with heaven's benediction, is now the world's best hope.

These men became the instruments through which the prayers of millions of the oppressed of other lands were answered. The Constitution of the United States stands as unanswerable proof, not only that God rules in the affairs of men, but that men may be instruments in the affairs of God to bring about his purposes. Let us pray for the safe launching of a larger "Ship of State" whose keel they are now attempting to lay at Lake Success.

Let us pray and praise and worship—secretly—in our families—and in Church. Let us give thanks for all our blessings and seek forgiveness for our follies. Let us pray for those who love us, for our leaders, church and state. Let us pray for those who need help and support our prayers with service. Let us pray for health and strength and wisdom. Pray for faith to carry on when our strength seems insufficient, and the answer is delayed. Let our prayers go out as well as upward. We must work as well as pray. Let us pray for peace and concord, in our hearts, our homes, and country. Let us pray for other nations—enemies as well as friends. Thus we may make our little corner of the garden a productive spot of beauty, with no wall or fence or hedge between us and our neighbors. Prayer will rid our hearts of hatred; it will chasten our ambitions; until with love of God and neighbors we shall keep his two commandments. Let us pray.

The Gospel

When one has faith that God is a living personal Being and that man is a son of God and is eternal with limitless possibilities in the ages which lie before him; when one believes in scripture and continued revelation through which, by prayer and study he may come to know his Maker and be guided by him; when one evaluates life in terms of eternity and realizes that the quality of his changing status depends upon that guidance and his own endeavor; then he seeks for understanding of and harmony with life's meaning.

It was in order that we might understand life's purpose and cooperate in achieving it that God gave us the gospel, which, according to the Apostle Paul in his epistle to the Romans, ". . .is the power of God unto salvation to everyone that believeth. . ." (Rom. 1:16.) Speaking of the Savior, he says: "And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him." (Heb. 5:9.)

Salvation then seems to be the purpose or the goal of life. Obedience to its author is the inevitable prerequisite. Furthermore, according to these scriptures, there is available to us a Power, which, properly understood and utilized, will assist us to attain that goal. If the gospel is the "Power of God" our concept of his omnipotence forbids the thought that it will not be adequate to the task assigned, man's salvation.

There are those who disclaim any need for this proffered "saving." If they are in need of help, they seemingly are not aware of it. If one speaks of rescue or redemption, they ask, "saved from what?" According to some present-day philosophy, man is doing a fair job of saving himself by the gradual process of evolution, and the hope is expressed that this process will continue. The idea of divine intervention on behalf of man is often scoffed at by the skeptic.

The theory of evolution in the sense that man evolves from one stage of being to another is not inconsistent with the science of theology. That we lived as spirit children of our Father before our earth life, that earth life is preparatory to an existence after death, and that throughout eternity we may continue to progress and become more Godlike is the faith of Latter-day Saints. But we believe that man is a child of God and not an offshoot from some other species.

Salvation is a process, not a destination; it is not a goal, but an eternal journey toward a goal. On this journey man encounters death which is a tremendous and universal fact in human experience. All who have preceded us have passed through this change and all now living will shortly cease to be as mortal beings. The journey from birth to death is very short even for those who live the allotted mortal span, and at the close of life all men have a sense of incompleteness.

Man, unaided, could not break the bands of death and continue on his journey. Without the intervention of One who had power over death, its victory would have been complete and final. With that intervention the power of God is manifest, and men can join with him and say, ". . .O grave, where is thy victory?" (1 Cor. 15:55.)

On this subject I should like to quote the late President B. H. Roberts; "I happen to recall an expression made by that splendid English statesman, Cecil Rhodes, one of the most noted British figures in our modern history. His life is wonderfully interesting. At forty-nine after a most brilliant career, Rhodes lay dying and to his friend Jameson by his bedside he said: Jameson, the great trouble with life is that it is too short. You no sooner become acquainted with the game and learn how to play it, than you have to give it up."

"That might be said of all men—`Life is too short!' Men achieve so little, but some often reveal to us life's tremendous possibilities—A Cecil Rhodes, a Gladstone, a Disraeli, a Washington, a Jefferson, a Lincoln, a Wilson, and all the great leaders in our world—sculptors, philosophers, statesmen—by whatever they achieve, they reveal to our vision what life might be if only instead of the limited threescore years and ten there could be, say, five hundred years, a thousand, five, ten, a hundred thousand, a million years! What could not such minds achieve if blessed with physical vigor such as they knew in manhood's prime, with such intellectual power as they then possessed, with a constantly growing experience—having wisdom and skill with the passing years, on and on in the development of the possibilities of man's power!

"In a few million years, men might become intelligences worth while. But alas! Death steps in and cuts them off before they reach the development of the fulness of their powers. How sad it is! Oh, for some salvation from this monster death, which strikes down not only the common people but the shining examples of the better order of the sons of men!

"This gospel is the power of God unto salvation. What does it mean, this salvation? It means to be put in the way of eternal progression; to be associated with the church of the first born, both on earth and in heaven; to be associated with angels and archangels as companions and guides; increasing in knowledge and wisdom with the passing years. Having triumphed over death, physical and spiritual, there is no more fear of death, or stoppage in the path of progress. With good men for associates and God for leader and guide, men may go on and up the shining heights of God's great highway, until they make themselves masters of the surrounding universe in the midst of which they live.

"Light and intelligence and love will be aglow in their hearts then. All the beautiful relationships which were formed in earth life will be established there; husband and wife, children and parents, kindred and friends, knitted together in kinship; and brotherhood; all this will abound; touching the life of that brotherhood which binds God's moral and spiritual universe together through the union of all the great intelligences governing therein. Those who participate in this gospel, in this salvation, will be members of such brotherhood, going on in spiritual, and moral, and intellectual progress without limitation."

One of the purposes of the gospel is to redeem us from death, and to this stupendous undertaking there is harnessed the greatest power in the universe, the power of God. The Author of our salvation has assured us that the power is more than equal to the task. He promised before he was born into mortality that he would save men from the grave. "I will ransom them from the power of the grave; I will redeem them from death. . ." (Hosea 13:14.) While he ministered among his disciples, he said to them: ". . .I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live;. . .(John 11:25.) ". . .The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live." (John 5:25.)

And so to the question, "saved from what?" We answer first, saved from death. Redeemed without effort on their part and assured of a resurrection. "For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.

"For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:21-23.)

Man needs more than mere release from the endless sleep of death. It is true that the resurrection is a gift to every living soul and that immortal life, in a quantitative sense, is the heritage of all through the atoning blood of Christ. But there is another enemy, sin, against which man, unaided, seems to be impotent. Sin and the suffering it produces are realities, facts inseparably connected with human life. And this enemy, if not defeated, would partly neutralize the personal benefits of Christ's victory over death. Because of sin, eternal life may be eternal shame and in a qualitative sense, unless this enemy is defeated, we shall not have eternal life.

Sin has been defined as moral wrongdoing or "any want of conformity unto or transgression of the law of God." This of course presupposes a knowledge of the right. Some modern scholars claim the word sin is outmoded but, as Dr. Lowell Bennion tells us, "The type of human behavior it describes persists. Clothed in other words, like those of the immortal Shakespeare, sin strikes home as a considerable part of everyone's life. `If to do were as easy as to know what were good to do, chapels had been churches, and poor men's cottages princes' palaces. It is a good divine that follows his own instructions; I can easier teach twenty what were good to be done, than be one of twenty to follow mine own teachings. The brain may devise laws for the blood; but a hot temper leaps o'er a cold decree'." (Merchant of Venice.)

All the consequences of or punishment for sin are not reserved for the life to come. Sin brings its own punishment in this life apart from anything that may result in the hereafter. "The wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.

"There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked." (Isa. 57:20-21.)

The baneful effects of sin are observable on every hand and that man can be deceived continually by its allurement, in the face of its unbroken history of deceit, sorrow, misery, pain, and death, is a sad commentary on our intelligence and is final evidence that we need help if we are to overcome this enemy.

Every man is confronted with this dilemma; every man must face this conflict; and we shall only triumph, even with his help, as and when we bring our impulses, appetites, and passions under control and consecrate ourselves to the triumph of the spirit. Our progress then and our eventual salvation do not depend solely on God, but partly on our own effort. When the apostle says, "The power of God unto salvation," he does not indicate that, so far as redemption from sin is concerned, there is nothing for us to do. Even though limitless power is accessible, it is obvious that it will be unavailing to lift a load until it is somehow attached to or makes contact with that load.

It is man's job to utilize the power which is offered; to connect, as it were, himself with the power. A building adjoining a power plant may be wired for light and heat, but until it is connected with the power, it will remain dark and cold. So far as it is concerned, there might as well be no power if it is not connected there-with. In other words the law concerning such matters must be obeyed. Thus it is that we are repeatedly told we must obey the law if we are to obtain the blessing.

"There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—

"And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." (D&C 130:20-21.)

It may be asked: "Upon what law is the transcendent blessing of salvation predicated?"

If we refer to the scriptures quoted at the opening of this address, we find the answer to that question. Note the condition in the first scripture: ". . .It (the gospel) is the power of God unto salvation; to every one that believeth;. . ." and in the second: "(Christ). . .is the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him." Faith and obedience would seem to be the "coupling pins" by which we may attach our burden to this lifting power of God—the gospel of Jesus Christ.

In addition to the monster death we need redemption from the monster sin, and for this redemptive work we may enlist the "Power of God," the "gospel." "And he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world." (1 Jn. 2:2.)

Ignorance is still another barrier to our enjoyment of eternal life. It seems obvious that if we are to be redeemed from ignorance it will be accomplished by replacing it with knowledge. That is what we attempt to do for our children in our schools and universities. Knowledge dispels ignorance as light dispels darkness. But, some say, in this realm surely we save ourselves. How does the power of God or the mission of the Savior assist us in our struggle toward salvation from ignorance? It is true the gospel does not instruct men in all the realms of learning. It is also true that the Savior did not leave us any scientific inventions, nor did he teach the modern sciences.

In addition to the primary and fundamental information which we get through an understanding of the gospel its teachings instill a desire for truth. Its explanation of our source and our possible destiny creates in us an unquenchable hunger and thirst for knowledge.

What greater motive to seek learning than the conviction that we have the seed of Godhood in us and that his glory is intelligence. If the glory of God is intelligence, then man's glory, such as it may be, will be measured by his intelligence.

But the gospel does more than merely inspire us to seek knowledge. It makes knowledge available to us which can nowhere else be found, and as stated, this knowledge is fundamental. "The Spirit of Christ, the light of His intelligence, the light and power of Deity which Jesus shares with the Father and the Holy Ghost, is the life and light of men which enlightens every soul that comes into the world." Divine truths have been made known to men through revelation, and by the power of the Holy Ghost in all dispensations of the gospel. Paul says: "But I certify you, brethren, that the gospel which was preached of me is not after man.

"For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ." (Gal. 1:11-12.)

The word of the Lord in latter days is very specific in this matter. "It is impossible for man to be saved in ignorance." (D&C 131:6.) "Man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 217.) "Whatever principles of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection." (D&C 130:18.) Man can no more be saved in his ignorance than he can be saved in his sins. The gospel helps us to overcome both and here again it becomes the power unto our salvation, if we do our part.

All men are in need of salvation, of rescue, of redemption from mortality—from ignorance—and from sin. The Author of eternal salvation stands ready to assist all who will co-operate by yielding obedience to the laws upon which salvation and exaltation are predicated. Herein is shown the love and mercy of God and herein lies man's only hope of redemption and of eternal progress which, if we will, may be our destiny. May we have wisdom to understand, faith to follow, and courage to endure.

Faith

In speaking of the gospel as "The power of God unto salvation," we are reminded that obedience to its principles is a prerequisite to its blessings according to the teachings and example of the Savior. All who seek salvation must understand, believe in, and conform to the laws upon which it is predicated. "But without faith it is impossible to please him: for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him." (Heb. 11:6.)

The predominating sense in which the term faith is used throughout the scriptures is that of full confidence and trust in the being, purposes, and words of God. Such trust, if implicit, will remove all doubt concerning things accomplished or promised of God, even though such things be not apparent to or explicable by the ordinary senses of mortality; hence arises the definition of faith given by Paul: "`Now faith is the substance [i.e. confidence or assurance] of things hoped for, the evidence [i.e. the demonstration or proof] of things not seen.' (Heb. 11:1.) It is plain that such a feeling of trust may exist in different persons in varying degrees; indeed faith may manifest itself from the incipient state which is little more than feeble belief, scarcely free from hesitation and fear, to the strength of abiding confidence that sets doubt and sophistry at defiance." ( Articles of Faith , by James E. Talmage.)

Some think religious people are impractical and live in the clouds of unjustified hope. They are accused of being illogical and visionary when they have confidence in "things hoped for" and rely on evidence of "things not seen." This criticism is based on the false assumption that all of the benefits of faith are reserved for life after death.

We do not teach the principle of faith merely for what it will do for one in the next world. We believe that there is real, practical value in mental concepts which increase one's self-respect and effectiveness here and now. To believe that there is an all-wise Father in charge of the universe and that we are related to him, that we are in fact children of God with the "hall-mark" of divinity upon us is to live in a different world from those who believe that man is a mere animal concerned only with requirements for creature existence which must end at death. Because of low aim, their lives lack trajectory and vision and fall far short of their spiritual capacity.

Convince a young man that he is an eternal being, with limitless possibilities—that he is the son of the Creator of the universe—and he will appreciate and try to be worthy of his heritage. Teach him to think of life, here and hereafter, as being of one piece, continuing through from pre-mortal to post-mortal without break in the endless chain; to realize that each of the various stages of his development helps to condition him for the next; convince him that he can take nothing but himself into the next world: his intelligence, his experience, his character. If this conviction becomes real dynamic faith, it will have definite and lasting effect on the quality of his life, here and hereafter.

Eternal life means more than merely continuing to exist. Its qualitative value will be determined by what we believe and do while in mortality and by our conformity to eternal law in the life to come. Eternal existence would be most undesirable if that existence became fixed and static upon arrival in "heaven." "It is hope and expectation and desire and something ever more about to be" that gives lilt and verve to mortal life. We cannot imagine nor would we desire an eternity without opportunity for growth, development—eternal progression.

Faith in God and in the ultimate triumph of right contributes to mental and spiritual poise in the face of difficulties. It is a sustaining power when a confining or antagonistic environment challenges one's courage. When one is falsely accused, persecuted, imprisoned, one needs the penetrating vision of faith to see through and live beyond the man-made barriers to freedom and self-expression.

What a loss it would have been to the world if John Bunyan had not been greater than his environment. He dreamed the Pilgrim's Progress while incarcerated in Bedford Gaol. Think of the letters which issued from the dungeon in Rome because Paul's spirit could not be imprisoned. Think of what we in this day owe to Joseph Smith, who, while his body was imprisoned in Liberty Jail, wrote some of the most sublime sections of the Doctrine and Covenants. Many great men were refined and tempered in the furnace of adversity or seasoned by the weather of affliction.

We read in the scripture it was through faith that the great ones of old: ". . .subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions,

"Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens." (Heb. 11:33-34.)

And so we recommend faith as a present, living power for good here and now as well as for what it will do for us in achieving salvation hereafter. If one has a vivid sense of his own divinity, he will not easily be persuaded to deprave his mind, debauch his body, or to sell his freedom for temporary gain. You cannot make an abject slave out of a man who believes in the doctrine that man is made in the image of God. Possibly it was the recognition of this fact that prompted the dictators to try to destroy religion at the outset and to banish God and the idea of God from among the people.

The value of faith in God and in the fact that man was made in his image is emphasized in a recent pamphlet issued by the Indiana Council on Religion in Higher Education. We quote a paragraph:

"The first item in the creed of the Jew was his faith in a moral order to which every nation and individual is ultimately subject. At the very masthead of his scriptures he wrote a sublime declaration of faith: `IN THE BEGINNING GOD. . .' Because the Hebrew prophet believed in the final authority of God, he believed that states might perish, even though they were supported by thousands of legions, if they defied or outraged that moral order. It was according to the prophetic pattern that the Psalmist sang, `. . .The way of the ungodly shall perish.'" (Ps. 1:6.)

"Neither arms, nor treasure, nor connivance, nor cunning could save a nation or a people who had come under the condemnation of Jehovah, their God. This meant of course that there was a basic, eternal difference between right and wrong. It never occurred to a Jew that moral judgments were determined by plebiscites or pluralites. A mode of conduct might be wrong even though the entire nation embraced its folly, and another way of life might be right even though no more than a solitary prophet in the wilderness walked therein. Whole nations might be broken to pieces on the stone which the builders rejected. No immorality ever became moral because it became popular.

"The second great basic belief which went to make up Jewish theology was the doctrine that man was made in the image of God. If a man believes that he is no more than an assemblage of glands or a mere biological accident, then life settles down to the level of the brute. There is a redemptive power in self-respect which has never yet been adequately appreciated. The source of his survival powers has been the inner faith upon which he lives, his belief that he was of an higher order than the beasts of the field, that he was made in the image of God."

And speaking of the sanctity of the individual, the article continues: "It was to forever safeguard the people of the United States of America that our founding fathers wrote certain solemn sentences into the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States." We hold certain truths to be self-evident, ". . .every man is endowed with certain inalienable rights." But the amazing thing about the doctrine we are discussing is the fact that before a baby's cry is heard, it is the possessor of inalienable rights. The courts have so held, and the laws of the land confirm him in the enjoyment thereof.

The police powers of the state will be employed to protect that little one who has not yet reached the age of self-consciousness against even his own mother, if necessary. As an individual, born in the image of God, he has rights which establish claims in his behalf against the state, against society, and against the moral order of the universe. He is even the possessor of rights which God himself is bound to respect. The recognition and exercise of these rights implant faith in oneself and in the Author thereof.

Recent magazine articles written by careful students indicate that we are more spiritually illiterate as a nation today than at any time in our history. If this is true, the future does not look promising in the light of the history of the past. It was faith in God and in the ultimate triumph of right which made for stamina, character, solidarity, and enduring progress in the past. Without such faith how shall we survive the atomic age which has burst upon us overnight? We are startled by the woeful inadequacy of our preparation for what is just ahead of us. If spiritual pygmies are to wield a power greater than any ever entrusted to men, what will be the outcome? Chaos and confusion seem inevitable unless we can be aroused to the necessity of educating our children, upon whom this responsibility will rest, to believe something, as well as to know facts.

Faith is an inescapable necessity in every human life; man cannot do without it because he must take some action with regard to the future. The kind of action taken will depend upon the quality of his faith. If he does not have faith in God and in himself, and in the future, he should not be intrusted with such terrifying or glorifying power as is forecast by the birth of the atomic age.

Faith is a necessity because life is an adventure, and all adventure requires courage. Without faith, courage will not long endure. It takes stout hearts to meet the strain and stress of life. Stamina depends upon faith for sustenance. We need faith because only he who endures to the end will be saved. The "end" may at times be obscure, but we must journey on even though we cannot see our way. There is a darkness which only the eternal light of faith can dissipate.

"Because the way was steep and long, And through a dark and dismal land, God put upon my lips a song, And placed a lantern in my hand."

If we are to make moral progress, we must have ideals toward which to strive and for which we are prepared to fight and sacrifice. As Oliver Wendell Holmes put it: "It is faith in something which makes life worth living." Certainly the quality of one's life depends in large measure upon the depth and quality of his faith. Without the light of faith many lives would be dark and dreary; sorrows would be overwhelming; and death terrifying. Truly faith makes men masters of their fate.

But after one has said all that can be said on the subject of faith from the various academic approaches, after one has viewed it from the philosophical, the psychological, and the social angles, there is the one all-powerful center toward which all real faith tends and from which it will get its inspiration. That is faith in God. There is one name around which all Christian faith must center, and that is the name of Jesus Christ.

Life is a constant test of stamina and endurance. No one permanently escapes the necessity of calling up his reserves to "hold the line." Sad indeed is the plight of him who has no reserves when the crisis comes.

A reservoir of spiritual strength is needed by the sorrowing mother at the graveside of her child, the distraught wife whose husband and support has gone, the discouraged and beaten man whose fortunes have vanished, the sick and maimed, the wounded and the shutins. Spiritual reserves are needed by the average man and woman everywhere who must meet engulfing and almost overwhelming discouragement, disillusionment, doubt, defeat, sickness, and death. To all such, faith whispers: "The flame shall not hurt thee, I only design thy dross to consume and thy gold to refine." But spiritual equilibrium is likewise indispensable if we successfully cope with riches, praise, triumph, power, success. The man who has faith in God and in his own destiny can, as Kipling says, "Meet with triumph and disaster and treat those two impostors just the same."

To summarize, then, we need faith because we are moving into an uncertain future, and faith is the assurance of things not seen; we need faith in God because it engenders respect for fellow men, and we are to be intrusted with more power than has ever been utilized by man, power which may bless or obliterate the race; we need faith because there are so many millions without it, and we must share our spiritual as well as our material blessings; we need faith because we are prosperous and powerful and proud. Let us pray that it may not be the pride which goes before a fall. We need faith to accompany our efforts to establish peace in a godless world. We need faith that God is concerned in the affairs of men and of nations.

We bear witness that the gospel and the power of the priesthood are upon the earth to bless and save mankind.

Repentance

As we give further consideration to the saving power of the gospel of Jesus Christ we come by logical sequence to the first result of faith. When one becomes convinced of the existence of God and learns something of his attributes, one is immediately confronted with the difficult problem of bringing his actions up to the level of his beliefs.

Faith in God leads one to contrast his own limitations with God's omnipotence, his own weakness with divine power, and to seek earnestly to bridge the gulf between them. It confronts one with the necessity of changing his habits, giving up and forsaking all that is inconsistent with divine law, and bringing his life into harmony there-with.

The first word which John the Baptist spoke to his believing followers was, "Repent," and the Lord reiterated the call all through his ministry. Peter on the Day of Pentecost told the multitude to "repent" when they were convinced by the power of God that Jesus was indeed the Savior. Paul's first reaction, after a heavenly visitation transformed him from a persecutor to a defender, was to ask what he could do, and his repentance led him to the waters of baptism.

Repentance then is a call to action, not merely a verbal acknowledgement of wrongdoing. This principle disturbs the complacency of self-righteousness, discourages rationalizing, and calls upon the wrongdoer to forsake his evil way. It calls for a positive dynamic life, one that is not overcome of evil, but that overcomes evil with good. Its constant appeal is that we purify our hearts and purge out all pretence and hypocrisy. It makes an uncompromising demand for inner as well as outer righteousness. It requires surgery instead of salves. The Savior said: "And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee:. . .

"And if thy right hand offend thee, cut if off, and cast it from thee. . ." (Matt. 5:29-30.)

Repentance is indispensable to the growing life, since in all growth there is constant adjustment, taking on and sloughing off. We cannot replace a bad life with a good one by any single word or act; there must be a continuing process of replacing error and wrong-doing with truth and right-doing; of going from bad to good and from good to better.

The scientist does not hesitate to discard old ideas and processes in favor of new and better ones. The inventor spends much of his time correcting, discarding, improving with the hope of achieving the best. While they are concerned with the improvement of machines and technical processes, the Master is concerned with the improvement of character. They work on inanimate and non-co-operative things, he works with responsive beings who are capable of assisting or hampering his work. They depend largely upon trial and error, upon experimentation, often without a perfect model by which to gauge their progress. In religion we have a Perfect Model, and faith bids us compare, correct, and measure up.

An understanding of the life and mission of Jesus Christ inspires emulation as well as adoration. We must repent of that which is not in harmony with his teachings if we hope to become like him. Sincere repentance will lead to the waters of baptism and forgiveness; but the need for repentance will continue while life lasts. Through baptism we may obtain forgiveness for past sins but it does not guarantee against future folly. Repentance is a vital requisite to the growing life.

We must". . .go on unto perfection. . ." (Heb. 6:1) and not assume that when the foundation is laid the building is completed. Recognition of the right and a vision of what ought to be, leads to repentance. It does not begin with remorse although an honest comparison of what is with what ought to be may cause self-reproach.

But how may I be sure of what is right and wrong, asks the serviceman who has traveled in many lands? He becomes aware of varying codes of conduct in different nations and may think right and wrong are only matters of geography and social custom. Sometimes he has wondered if the standards of his home, his church, and his country should be modified to conform to customs in different lands.

There is a sense in which sin has universal meaning and which is applicable in all lands and places. Moral wrongdoing is sin in any country, if for no other reason than that it debases the sinner. The purpose of our being is to build worthy characters, to approximate the Godlike life. Obviously, then, any act which dissipates man's capacity to realize that end is sin. Any act which impedes, delays, or diverts one's journey toward a worthy goal is a foolish, an unwise, a sinful act even though it may have approval of local groups. But man does not sin against himself alone; others are always affected directly or indirectly. Man cannot sin against others without sinning against himself, nor can he sin against himself or others without thereby sinning against God.

Dante classified sinners into three groups: (1) those who are incontinent and indulgent, "carnal sinners," and the gluttonous; (2) those who sin against others as in "avarice" and "anger," and (3) those whose natures have been twisted by an inversion of their spiritual capacity, especially as in fraud or betrayal, or sinning against the light.

Let us note some of the effects of sin and see if just plain common sense does not condemn it and counsel repentance. In the first place, one cannot sin with his whole being. Sin creates conflict within oneself, makes him fight against himself. With the individual as with the state, internal conflict is always more disintegrating than anything outside enemies can do. ". . . Wickedness never was happiness" (Alma 41:10), said a Nephite prophet. Unity of action and consistency of behavior develop and preserve mental and emotional equilibrium and self-respect.

Self-respect is indispensable to successful and normal living; sin is its deadly enemy. When one does wrong, some part of his being accusingly whispers, "You are a failure, weak, incompetent, no good, and if this persists, disintegration of character is inevitable." As one overcomes sin and becomes master of himself, he has a sense of competence, integration, and quiet courage, which are reflected in his personality and character. Confucius spoke truly: "If a man looks within himself and is sure that he has done right, what does he have to fear or worry about?"

If remorse is only regret at being caught it does not lead to repentance. The remorse which is sorrow for the sin is wholesome, if followed by the unwavering resolution to abandon it and, where possible, make amends for the wrong. "Now I rejoice, not that you were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed unto repentance: . . .

"For godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented of; but the sorrow of the world worketh death." (1 Cor. 7:9-10.) "Again, when I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; if he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right;

"If the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he had robbed, walk in the statutes of life, without committing iniquity; he shall surely live, he shall not die." (Ezek. 33:14-15.)

When we speak of the continual need of repentance, let it not be understood that we refer to a cycle of sinning and repenting and sinning again. That is not complete repentance. We must see the right and follow it, recognize the wrong and forsake it with a "Godly sorrow" if we would obtain the blessings of complete repentance. A growing conception of the good life must be accompanied by constant adjustment thereto if one would achieve harmony with the will of God. Patient and persistent effort must accompany prayer; a contrite spirit is a prerequisite to forgiveness.

President Joseph F. Smith gave us a searching definition of repentance: "True repentance involves the necessity of turning away from sin, a discontinuance of all evil practices and deeds, a thorough reformation of life, a vital change from evil to good, from vice to virtue, from darkness to light. Not only so, but to make restitution, so far as it is possible, for all the wrongs we have done, to pay our debts and to restore to God and man their rights—that which is due them from us. This is true repentance, and the exercise of the will and all the powers of body and mind is demanded to complete this glorious work of repentance." (Gospel Doctrine p. 123.)

No man is justified in assuming the "Holier than thou" attitude or in saying, either by word or action, "I thank thee God that I am not as other men." (See Luke 18:11.) While all have need of repentance, there is some good in everyone. The proportion of good and evil varies, but no one is perfect. The dissipated individual may be capable of a generous nature while the morally upright person may be acrid and intolerant. Emerson said, "I have never met a man who was not my superior in some respect."

Sincere repentance does not mean that we should brood over past mistakes or continually look backward with regret. The way we are facing is more important than where we are standing. If God is good enough to give us the gift of repentance, we should turn our backs on the past and resolutely face the future unafraid. The adversary whispers to the repentant sinner: "You are lost, there is no use trying," but this is as false as his former whisperings that sin is sweet and desirable. He who has truly repented should forget as far as possible in order that his whole power may be concentrated on the promising future. "Do not insist on remembering what God is willing to forget." Let us try to rid ourselves of even the memory of sin.

Sin then creates inner conflict, causes loss of self-respect, saps moral strength, causes injury to and estranges others, makes men more susceptible to temptation, and in numerous other subtle ways retards, delays, and blocks our journey toward our goal. Its enticements tend to divert us from moral ideals and to obscure our vision of desirable objectives.

True repentance halts this disintegration and, when followed by baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost places one's feet on the highway to successful living. With the companionship of that spirit, one may release the power which is in the human soul even as men have been able to release the power of the atom. This power, when released and given divine direction and guidance will lead to immortality and eternal life.

Baptism

The whole plan of salvation is predicated upon obedience to the principles and ordinances of the gospel. When one has faith in God and learns something of the matchless life of Christ, he becomes poignantly aware of his own shortcomings. The repentant sinner is at first appalled by the disparity, the contrast of his own life with that of the Master and doubtless views as hopeless any suggestion that he might approximate that life.

We have shown that the principle of repentance, which is a gift of God, whispers hope to all who have a "Godly sorrow for sin." But it is obvious that merely acknowledging a debt does not discharge an obligation. One may acknowledge his mistakes and wrongdoings, may, in fact, overcome them and live a better life, but he must carry the burden of past sins until they are discharged by forgiveness.

There are three historical methods of seeking forgiveness and salvation through Jesus Christ. There are those who believe the sacraments are channels of divine grace through which men are purified of sin. Those who hold this view teach that men can be saved from sin by the church administering such sacraments as baptism, confirmation, eucharist, penance, or extreme unction. Others, who also believe in the grace of Deity, teach that grace comes directly to the individual and not through the mediation of the sacraments of the Church. Those who advocate this doctrine base their belief, as did Martin Luther, on such scripture as Ephesians. "For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God:

"Not of works, lest any man should boast." (Eph. 2:8-9.) At the basis of both of the above, lies the assumption that man is helpless in his own salvation. It is essentially the work of Deity, with man's participation being quite incidental.

Some Christian and non-Christian religions teach that salvation from sin is to be achieved by the faith and works of the individual, and they lay exclusive stress on the moral life of the individual and of society.

The church which I represent teaches that man must avail himself of all three means of salvation: the grace of Deity, the sacraments (ordinances) of the church, and his own faith and works. None of these has been neglected. Each is indispensable. Although we recognize the importance of all three ways of salvation, the strength of the Mormon position lies in the fact that the value of the grace of God and the ordinances of the church depend very largely upon the faith and works of the individual.

"We believe that through the Atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel." (III Article of Faith.)fn

The ordinance of baptism is (1) an expression of obedience to the will of God; (2) the doorway or portal to the kingdom, and (3) the means by which men may obtain remission of sins.

To support our belief that baptism is for the remission of sins and that repentance is a prerequisite, we quote only a few of many passages of scripture on the subject. Mark records: "John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins." (Mark 1:4.) Luke declares: "And he [John] came into all the country about Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins." (Luke 3:3.) "Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." (Acts 2:38.) After Saul of Tarsus had his glorious vision on the way to Damascus, the Savior directed him to Ananias for further instruction and was immediately told: ". . . Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins." (Acts 22:16.)

It should be unnecessary to quote scripture to prove that baptism is essential to salvation, and yet there are many who question it. They who accept the teachings of revelation as contained in the Bible should not be confused by the specious arguments of men as the Sacred Record is definite and unambiguous. John the Baptist informed the people of his day that he had been sent of God to baptize with water and to testify of him who was to come after him who was to baptize with the Holy Ghost.

Jesus recognized both the importance of the ordinance and the authority of John when Jesus himself submitted to baptism at John's hands. He bore witness to the importance of John's mission in these words: "Among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist. . . ." (Luke 7:28.) He then said that the Pharisees and lawyers, who had refused John's baptism had ". . . Rejected the counsel of God against themselves. . . ." (Luke 7:30.) Even though the ordinance of baptism is simple, refusing to obey or denying its efficacy is tantamount to rejecting the counsel of God.

Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews, came to Jesus by night to be taught of him and was astonished if not amazed when Jesus said, ". . . Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God." (John 3:3.) When Nicodemus inquired how a man could be born when he was old, the Savior made it more specific by saying: "Except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." (John 3:5.)

Jesus used a fitting analogy when he likened baptism to birth. When one is completely immersed, he lives, for the moment, in an element of water; when he comes forth from that element, he gasps for breath even as does the infant at the moment of birth, and, like the infant, he starts his new life without sin. The infant leaves its former way of life and is lighted by the spirit. Baptism to be efficacious must be preceded by sincere repentance, turning from the former life, and is followed by the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Christ left no doubt as to his estimate of the importance of this ordinance. When he commissioned his apostles on the eve of his departure, he said: "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:

"Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. . . ." (Matt. 28:19-20.)

It is evident that the apostles also appreciated the import of this charge. On the first Pentecost after it was given, when they were so richly endowed with the Holy Spirit, and when the assembled multitude were "pricked in their hearts" and asked, "What shall we do," Peter specifically instructed them: ". . . Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." (Acts 2:38.) He announced the law as being of universal application when he added: "For this promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call." (Acts 2:39.)

Christ himself did not claim exemption from this law nor did the Apostle Paul ask for an exception because of his status or the nature of his conversion. After his miraculous experience and immediate repentance, after he had conversed with the Risen Lord whom he had persecuted, and had been convinced that He was indeed the Christ, he was still required to submit to this ordinance. And it was the Master himself who directed him to the one who should tell him what to do. Ananias, who was chosen for this important mission, told Saul to arise and be baptized.

When Jesus declared that without being born of the water and of the spirit, the kingdom could not be seen or entered, he revealed the prerequisites to salvation. By submitting voluntarily to baptism he subscribed to the law and set an example which all who hope to be with him hereafter, must follow. They must be baptized with the same baptism of water and of spirit which was received by him at the river Jordan. Here is a case where the King sets the example and points the way to all who would become subjects and citizens of his kingdom.

Some have demurred because of the simplicity of the ordinance and others have asked why so much importance is attached to it, or why some other method would not be as good. The same question might be asked by an applicant for citizenship in the United States. The alien may ask: Why is it necessary to comply with the naturalization laws? Is there not some other way? Perhaps he might add: "I am a special applicant. I am rich, well-born, well-educated, can pay any price you ask; why submit to a simple ceremony?"

One of the beauties of our form of government is its democracy. The law applies to all, rich and poor alike. The answer to the question "Why" is simply this: It is the law! And the same answer should suffice for all who seek citizenship in the celestial commonwealth—it is the law, and it applies to all. At the edge of the water both king and peasant stand on common ground. Crowns and jewels have no significance here, and no one has money enough to buy his way in. The price is within the reach of the poorest but beyond the grasp of the unrepentant though he have a prince's power and wealth.

The purpose of baptism is to free the soul from sin, to prepare the repentant for the gift of the Holy Ghost which will lead him into all truth. It is an initiatory ordinance, but it is more than that. It is a covenant we make with our Father in heaven, and it implies mutual obligation, as do all contracts. The applicant promises to forsake sin; the Lord promises to forgive. The applicant promises to become a true follower of Jesus Christ; and the Lord has promised the gift of the Holy Ghost. Baptism is the cleansing process by which sin is washed away. Water, of course, cannot of itself wash away sin; but obedience typified by the water, can and does when the prerequisites have been met and the ordinance properly performed.

He who said to Nicodemus, "Ye must be born again," amplified his remarks by adding, "born of the water and of the spirit." When John the Baptist proclaimed the Christ, he said: "I indeed have baptized you with water: but he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost." (Mark 1:8.) It was baptism in both instances and baptism signifies immersion. President Lorenzo Snow said of his own baptism and the effect of the spirit upon him: "It was a complete baptism—a tangible immersion in the heavenly principle or element, (the gift of) the Holy Ghost." (The Improvement Era, June 1919, p. 654.)

Jesus often spoke of the baptism of the Holy Ghost and the power thereof. After his resurrection he said to his disciples in Judea: ". . . Wait for the promise of the Father, which . . . ye have heard of me.

"For John truly baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence." (Acts 1:4-5.) This promise was fulfilled about seven days later when, on the Day of Pentecost the disciples being assembled with one accord, in one place, "And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting.

"And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance." (Acts 2:2-4.)

When Peter instructed the pentecostal group on what they must do, he made them a promise that they should receive the Holy Ghost, and furthermore he made the promise to all who would comply with the conditions, ". . . even as many as the Lord our God shall call." (Acts 2:39.) Jesus made the unqualified statement that unless a man is born of the Spirit as well as of the water, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Through water baptism one may gain remission of past sins; but even after the sins of the past are forgiven, one is not guaranteed against future temptation. He may be inclined to yield to some of the fixed habits of the past. He will find constant need of divine aid if he is to be equal to the task of bringing himself into subjection to the will of God.

Being born of the spirit—receiving the Holy Ghost—confers of man a sanctifying grace, a strength superior to his own, upon which he may call if he is trying to be worthy of it. He said through Isaiah: "And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers:

"And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand and when ye turn to the left." (Isa. 30:20-21.)

Let it not be forgotten that the gospel must be preached and its ordinances administered by those having authority from God if such administrations are to have binding effect on earth or in heaven. "For every high priest taken from among men is ordained for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins:. . .

"And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron." (Heb. 5:1, 4.)

Many instances of divine displeasure are recorded in the Bible where unauthorized men have presumed to act in the name of God, but time will not permit citing them. You will remember the Master said to his disciples, "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that you should go and bring forth fruit. . ." (John 15:16.)

We call upon all men to give heed to the first principles of the gospel—to have faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repent of their sins and forsake them, be baptized by immersion for the remission of sins, and become eligible for the reception of the Holy Ghost. We call upon all members of the Church who have had these initiatory rites administered in their behalf to go on unto perfection and not feel secure because of having taken the first step. Satan first tries to deter those who feel impelled to comply with these ordinances, and if they resist him and become members of the Church, he then whispers to them that all is well, there is nothing more for them to do. A spirit of complacency is dangerous. Only they who continue to the end shall be saved.

Let us take the advice of the Apostle Peter who said ". . .Add to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge;

"And to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience Godliness;

"And to Godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity." (2 Pet. 1:5-7.)

My prayer is that these things may be in us and abound.

Pioneering our Second Century

A million members of the Church in almost every land have bowed their heads in prayer and gratitude for the heritage the pioneers left us, while other millions of tourists have paused here to do them honor.

Much has been said in deserved eulogy of the men and women whose faith and courage sustained them to make the long journey across the plains and over the mountains. They journeyed not "through" but "into" a wilderness where they established themselves and created their own "Promised Land."

The outstanding leaders who directed this great exodus were men of clear vision and enduring valor. They who were derided, persecuted, expelled from their country are now extolled as among the greatest men in history. Brigham Young, successor to the prophet founder of the Church and himself a rugged pioneer, an empire builder, is now heralded as a modern Moses. It took a century of time to get far enough away from his massive stature to get a true perspective. With him were many other strong and valiant men who were inured to the rigors of pioneer life. We honor them and the brave women who were their companions.

Whence the impetus and inspiration to this great religious trek? There was no promised land, with milk and honey, to beckon them; no prize awaiting them, no friends to greet them at the end of the journey, except as they might make friends of the red men. There were no flourishing cities whose walls would crumble at the sound of the trumpet; no Joshua trained in warfare to vanquish foes.

The "cloud by day and the pillar of fire by night" (See Ex. 13:21) were not always visible, but they had the steady light of faith by which they saw their way in darkness; by its power they were equal to almost superhuman tasks, by its sustenance they endured hunger and privation beyond the limits of mere human fortitude.

Their faith was in Jehovah, the God of Israel. They believed in him and in their destiny with a tenacity which inspired the admiration of even the mobs which drove them from their country. They believed they were a chosen group, chosen for a difficult task, chosen to make sacrifices, to establish the Church, to preach the gospel, to usher in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, and to set up the kingdom of God on earth.

They were men who had faith in God and in themselves, and that faith gave them undiscourageable pluck. They were ruggedly honest; they believed they could not think crooked and walk straight. Their code of honor required a quality of moral integrity which bound them beyond the limits of mere legal restraints. They were industrious and imposed upon themselves a discipline which disdained ease and luxury. They had greater pride in the quality of their work than in the financial returns. They were inventive and self-reliant because necessity was ever in advance of their facilities and appliances. Experience was the mother of their caution, but they were unafraid of untried methods or unblazed trails; they thought the words, goal and starting place were synonymous. They feared neither man nor devil, but their fear of God insured them against arrogance. They were humble but never to the point of servility.

They were loyal to their country even when exiled by their countrymen, loyal to their friends without measuring any profits on their friendship, loyal to their God even when in the furnace of affliction. They were virtuous, both male and female, and esteemed their procreative powers as God-given and therefore sacred; they believed that unchastity was an affront to their Maker and verged on sacrilege. They believed that God was "the party of the third part" in every marriage covenant and that unjustified divorce was a violation of a sacred obligation.

Our backward glance reveals one great leader who did not accompany the pioneers on this westward journey. On December 23 we observed the anniversary of his birth. This man, more than any other, was responsible for the movement that eventuated in the building of the West. The journey westward and the building of settlements in the Rocky Mountain area were seen by him in vision long before his people left Nauvoo. This man's name has been heard in almost every country in the world. It has been spoken in derision by many, but today there are one million persons living and another million who have died to whom he is "The Man Who Communed with Jehovah," Joseph Smith the Prophet.

Eminent contemporaries, who were not members of his Church, predicted that among historical Americans of the nineteenth century, he would be recognized as the one who exerted the most powerful influence upon the destiny of his countrymen. One of them wrote after visiting him in Nauvoo in 1844: "A man who established a religion in this age of free debate, who was and is today, accepted by hundreds of thousands as a direct emissary from the Most High, such a human being is not to be disposed of by pelting his memory with unsavory epithets. . .Born in the lowest ranks of poverty, without book learning, and with the homeliest of all human names, he has made himself at the age of thirty-nine a power upon the earth." (Josiah Quincy, Harvard graduate and Mayor of Boston.)

To the unprejudiced student this man's achievements are recognized as being far beyond those of ordinary men; in fact, they appear to transcend human powers. While many have reviled him; while many charges were preferred against him, none of which were ever proved; while his enemies tried to destroy his work and finally killed him; while, since his death, many men and some women have tried to prove he was a fraud; he stands today more secure in the hearts of his followers, more esteemed by those who do not agree with his religious views, than ever before.

If judged alone by his accomplishments in what men call the practical affairs of life, he was an outstanding man. He was responsible for the building of a great city which was, at the time, the most beautiful in the state of Illinois. He held high political offices with dignity. He established an economic system which today is the admiration of a world which is in economic chaos. He managed men as few men have done, and though surrounded by many who were strong leaders themselves, he was always their prophet, seer, president, and acknowledged leader.

If judged by his literary contributions to the world, he is unique in that much of what he wrote is regarded by at least one million souls as the Word of God. He gave us the Book of Mormon which, one hundred years after its publication, is still a best seller and is still baffling the literary critics.

While in England recently I received a letter from a noted professor of English literature asking, "Who wrote the Book of Mormon? Do not tell me," he said, "that it was written by Joseph Smith or any of his associates. None of them could have written it; it is a work far beyond their capacity. Who was the author?" I replied, of course, that Joseph Smith did not claim to be its author, that he was the inspired translator of an ancient record.

The volume known as the Doctrine and Covenants is accepted by all members of the Church as scripture, and they regard the Prophet as the instrument through whom it came. There have been many great authors, poets, philosophers, dramatists, and some of them have written classics, but where is the modern author whose writings are regarded as revelations from the Lord?

In this volume there are a lofty style, inspired content, profound thought, and spiritual quality which are consistent with its claim to be the Word of God. The following paragraph indicates that the writer, who had little formal education, was drawing from a source beyond himself:

"We have learned by sad experience that it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion. . .

"No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned;

"By kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile—" (D&C 121:39-42.)

Although deprived of the benefits of early schooling Joseph Smith was a consistent advocate of education and gave to it a religious incentive by declaring: "The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words light and truth." (D&C 93:36) and again, "man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge. . ." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 217.) Just after his twenty-seventh birthday he received a revelation which is known as D&C 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants from which we quote a paragraph:

"Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand: "Of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms—

"That ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling where-unto I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you." (D&C 88:78-80.)

We must look back, then, before the days of 1847 to find the inspiration for the great social and religious innovation which resulted in the exodus of twenty thousand people from the borders of "the land of the free," and in the settling, by the refugees, of the wastelands beyond her boundaries; for the inextinguishable faith in and devotion to the Constitution of the United States which they believed was an inspired document; for the heroic loyalty which caused them to raise the Stars and Stripes over a barren area adjacent to but not then part of their own United States.

Brigham Young, great and valiant as he was, repeatedly declared that he was but a disciple of Joseph Smith who was the first prophet, seer, and revelator of this dispensation. The pioneers regarded Joseph Smith as the most important figure in the Church. He was its organizer under divine direction; through him the main body of doctrine for the guidance of the Church was revealed.

In retrospect we see heroic men and women of the same caliber as the great leaders of ancient Israel. The hallmark of their faith was stamped upon everything they did. They believed with a sincerity, a deep-rooted conviction, a high sense of privilege, and a dauntless tenacity. Creative beliefs were their stock in trade.

And so let us turn from retrospect to prospect; from the backward to the forward look; from history to prophecy. Let us seriously ask ourselves, "What of the future?"

Let us decide what we must at all costs conserve and carry over into that future. Though we may not be able to see far, we are convinced that no generation ever faced a more staggering responsibility.

We shall be dealing with the destiny of nations. We shall need to believe in God with a zeal comparable to theirs; we shall need their vision of human destiny plus the valor to follow that vision if we hope to be recognized as true descendants of the pioneers. We must believe, with them, in the Old Testament exhortation, "Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life." (Prov. 4:23.)

Faith, redemptive, rational faith is more important to our future than is the question of our economic resources. We must bequeath it to our sons and daughters if they are to survive the atomic age. We must teach them how to release the energy which is packed in the human soul, and then how properly to direct and control that energy, on the basis of the highest Christian concepts, if the race itself is to be saved from disintegration. In great spiritual conviction lies the hope of civilization.

Scientific inventions and discovery may modify our thinking in some fields, but if we depart from the fundamental concepts which made our fathers great, we shall fail, in spite of our knowledge of facts, our perfected techniques, our undreamed-of power. Pioneering our second century will be pioneering on a grand scale, but it will call for the simple, inner faith, the sturdy endurance, the eternal vigilance which conquered the desert.

It is a high privilege to witness the end of an epoch and the birth of an age. May He who guided both ancient and modern Israel sustain and direct us that we may have faith in him, in ourselves, and in our destiny.

The Test of Faith

In the sixth chapter of Micah we read: "Where-with shall I come before Jehovah and bow myself before the high God? shall I come before him with burnt offering, with calves of a year old?

"Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?

"He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?" (Micah 6:6-8.)

Much of the criticism of the churches is summarized by Professor Rauschenbusch in the following paragraph; "Religion in the past has spent a large proportion of its force in doings that were apart from the real business of life; on sacrificing, on endless prayers, on traveling to Mecca, Jerusalem or Rome, on kissing sacred stones, bathing in sacred rivers, climbing sacred stairs and a thousand things that had at best only an indirect bearing on the practical social relations between men and their fellows."

Since its organization the Church has carried on a campaign of constructive criticism of existing conditions, ever seeing what is in the light of what ought to be. Its standards of personal and social living are erected upon the foundation of revealed truth concerning the purposes of life and man's relationship to Deity. Its whole organization is harnessed to the task of bringing about an ideal social order based upon economic, social, ethical, and spiritual values, comprehended in the gospel of Jesus Christ and designated by him "the kingdom of God."

In the Old Testament one finds many challenging arraignments of social behavior and severe indictments of those who relied upon their observance of forms and ceremonies to gain favor with God. The Prophet Samuel asked, "Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord?" and he answers, "Behold to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams." (1 Sam. 15:22.) Isaiah in his first chapter makes the same appeal; "To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? saith the Lord: I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he goats.

"Bring no more vain oblations; incense is an abomination unto me. . .

"Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil;

"Learn to do well: seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow. . .woe unto them that call evil good and good evil. . ." (Isa. 1:11, 13, 16-17, 5:20.)

The Church has maintained its vitality and justified its claim to prophetic leadership by coming to grips with the fundamental issues of personal and social living. Its activities are in the arena where spiritual ideals clash with the forces which would limit or frustrate human values. From its point of view, standards and institutions are means for the realization of ends. These ends have always to do with persons. Individuals are valued higher than traditional beliefs, formulas, and rituals. When Jesus was criticised for infraction of laws and precedents regarding the Sabbath, he replied that the Sabbath was made for man and not man for the Sabbath. Through its welfare plan, the Church is preparing to help meet the economic problems which the signs of the times indicate will follow the present international crisis. Through its Relief Societies it is playing the role of Good Samaritan in many of the nations and its missionary system carries the gospel of material and spiritual salvation to the world.

While the priests of his day were insisting upon conformity to the law of Moses, Jesus was concerned with individuals and social institutions, with human and spiritual values, with the more abundant life, and with a reconstructed social order. A new way of life for men meant more to him than ancient laws and authoritative precedents. He asked men to submit his doctrines to the test of experience. "If any man will do his will he shall know. . . . " (John 17:17.)

Christ's arraignment of the scribes and Pharisees was a direct and trenchant criticism of the spiritless letter of the law. He instructed his followers to be law-abiding and to respect the authorities, but he always stressed the need of personal righteousness. Note his words as recorded in the twenty-third chapter of Matthew. ". . .The scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses' seat;

"All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their works; for they say and do not,. . .

"Woe unto you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye shut the kingdom of heaven against men. . . .

"Ye make clean the outside of the cup and the platter, but within they are full of extortion and excess." (Matt. 23:2-3, 13, 25.)

That the sincerity and effectiveness of one's religion may not be judged solely by meticulous observance of some favored requirement of the law is evidenced by his chiding of the professors of his day. ". . .For ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith; these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone." (Matt. 23:23.)

His emphasis was ever upon the kind of life the individual lived and his relations with his fellows, rather than upon their regularity in making sacrificial offerings. He pointed out that man's standing with God could not be approved at the altar if his human relations were not right. "Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee;

Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift." (Matt. 5:23-24.)

In his Sermon on the Mount he drew attention many times to the sharp contrast between the "eye for an eye" rule of ancient Israel and the kind of life contemplated in his gospel. How familiar and impressive are his oft-repeated words; "Ye have heard that it has been said by them of old. . . .

"But I say unto you. . . ." (Matt. 5:21-22.) And in each case he called for a higher ethical standard of conduct than the old law required.

In his first appearance in this dispensation Jesus renewed his indictment of all professors of religion who relied upon tradition, dogmas, ceremonies, and lip service to effect their salvation. "They draw me near with their lips, but their hearts are far from me. . .they have a form of godliness but they deny the power thereof." After this denunciation of existing conditions he raised again his standard of values and called for a complete reconstruction, a new way of life.

The gospel teaches us to see the life of man as a whole, to view it in the light of eternity, and in that light to criticize its values. The gospel spirit penetrates through form and pretence and reveals to the person that is, the kind of person he might become; reveals to the society we have the kind of society we might have.

Jesus saw all people in the light of their possibilities and with his revelation of themselves they were stirred to greater effort and better living. He revealed to the woman in the street that which was fine in her while other men saw only the obvious. He saw the better self in an outraged father welcoming his repenting prodigal son in whom he still believed. He gave hope to the thief on the cross when he would have had no hope. He carried active practical religion, the gospel of help, to the top of calvary, and from the cross taught men to conquer fear. After Eastern morn the Resurrected Lord met Peter; John, and Thomas and others of his followers at the sea of Tiberias where he instructed these fishermen how to catch fish and then prepared and served them a meal. They recognized their master because he was still serving even though all power had been given him in heaven and in earth.

We must have faith if we would be truly religious, for without it there would be no incentive for action. Faith in God as our Father, the Creator of all that is inspires faith in ourselves as his children. Faith in the immortality of the soul inspires faith that the scheme of things, the plan of life, is broader than the valley of mortality and will continue and be consummated in eternity. Such faith is needed to produce the kind of courage necessary to meet the present clash between the forces of good and evil. Conviction, if it is to endure, must be converted into action. The gospel plan calls for man's co-operation with God in his avowed purpose to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. "Heaven itself waits upon human effort." The gospel is designed to help us meet and solve the problems of life and calls for active participation in its activities.

"Heaven is not reached by a single bound; but we build the ladder by which we rise from the lowly earth to the vaulted skies, as we mount to its summit round by round." True religion requires every man to make an honest effort to gain economic independence; it condemns idleness, selfishness, greed, and calls for active co-operation with one's fellows, which is a fruit of his doctrine "love thy neighbour."

Active religion deals not with one department of human activities and values alone but sees man as immortal, filled with spiritual purpose and goodwill. It is not just a creed or a profession; it leads to an evaluation of all of life's experiences. Piety must include goodness; faith must involve justice; and true worship grows out of brotherly kindness. The religious man can not be a social isolationist. If he follows the Master, he will seek contact with his fellows through all the avenues by which life may be approached. He must keep abreast of the times else his religion will become static and punctilious, losing the vitality of growth. Religion must not only be active but progressive as well for the good life which ceases to grow ceases to be good. If one keeps aloof from the practical affairs of life and does not have proper social contacts, he will become mystic; he will lose contact with reality and lack that charity which comes from sympathetic understanding of human problems. How can a man love God whom he has not seen if he does not love his brother whom he has seen?

Through religion men get faith, insight, hope, conviction by which they gain that spiritual ascendancy which is the mark of the true Christian, whose faith is evidenced by service and who, being not 'a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the word shall be blessed in his deed.
