Hugh B. Brown, Eternal Quest ( 1956)

SECTION II Building a Secure Faith

Pause on the brink of decision and compare costs with value.

The Profile of a Prophet

I should like to be a witness in support of the proposition that the gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored in our day and that this is his Church which was organized under his direction through the Prophet Joseph Smith. I should like to give some reasons for the faith I have and for my allegiance to the Church. Perhaps I can do this more effectively by referring to an interview I had in London, England in 1939, just before the outbreak of the war. I had met a very prominent English gentleman, a member of the House of Commons, formerly one of the justices of the supreme court of England. In my conversations with this gentleman on various subjects, "vexations of the soul" he called them, we talked about business and law, about politics, international relations, and war, and we frequently discussed religion. He called me on the phone one day and asked if I would meet him at his office and explain some phases of the gospel. He said, "I think there is going to be a war. If there is, you will have to return to America, and we may not meet again." His statement regarding the imminence of war and the possibility that we would not meet again proved to be prophetic. When I went to his office, he said he was intrigued by some things I had told him. He asked me to prepare a brief on Mormonism and discuss it with him as I would discuss a legal problem. He said, "You have told me that you believe that Joseph Smith was a prophet. You have said to me that you believe that God the Father and Jesus of Nazareth appeared to Joseph Smith. I cannot understand how a barrister and solicitor from Canada, a man trained in logic and evidence could accept such absurd statements. What you tell me about Joseph Smith seems fantastic, but I wish you would take three days at least to prepare a brief and permit me to examine it and question you on it."

I suggested that we proceed at once to have an Examination for Discovery, which is briefly a meeting of the opposing sides in a lawsuit where the plaintiff and defendant, with their attorneys, meet to examine each other's claims and see whether they can find some area of agreement and thus save the time of the court later on.

I said perhaps we could see whether we had some common ground from which we could discuss my "fantastic ideas." He agreed to that quite readily.

I can only give a condensed and abbreviated synopsis of the three-hour conversation which followed. I began by asking, "May I proceed, sir, on the assumption that you are a Christian?"

"I am."

"I assume you believe in the Bible—the Old and New Testament?"

"I do!"

"Do you believe in prayer?"

"I do!"

"You say that my belief that God spoke to a man in this age is fantastic and absurd?"

"To me it is."

"Do you believe that God ever did speak to anyone?"

"Certainly, all through the Bible we have evidence of that."

"Did he speak to Adam?"

"Yes."

"To Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jacob, Joseph, and on through the prophets?"

"I believe he spoke to each of them."

"Do you believe that contact between God and man ceased when Jesus appeared on the earth?"

"No, such communication reached its climax, its apex at that time."

"Do you believe that Jesus was the Son of God?"

"He was."

"Do you believe, sir, that after Jesus was resurrected a certain lawyer, who was also a tentmaker by the name of Saul of Tarsus, when on his way to Damascus, talked with Jesus of Nazareth, who had been crucified, resurrected, and had ascended into heaven?"

"I do."

"Whose voice did Saul hear?"

"It was the voice of Jesus Christ, for he so introduced himself."

"Then, my Lord, (that is the way we address judges in the British Commonwealth) my Lord, I am submitting to you in all seriousness that it was standard procedure in Bible times for God to talk to men."

"I think I will admit that, but it stopped shortly after the first century of the Christian era."

"Why do you think it stopped?"

"I can't say."

"You think that God hasn't spoken since then?"

"I am sure he hasn't."

"There must be a reason, can you give me a reason?"

"I do not know."

"May I suggest some possible reasons: Perhaps God does not speak to men anymore because he cannot. He has lost the power."

"He said, "Of course that would be blasphemous."

"Well, then if you don't accept that, perhaps he doesn't speak to men because he doesn't love us anymore. He is no longer interested in the affairs of men."

"No," he said, "God loves all men, and he is no respecter of persons."

"Well, then, if he could speak, and if he loves us, then the only other possible answer as I see it is that we don't need him. We have made such rapid strides in science, we are so well-educated, that we don't need God any more."

And then he said, and his voice trembled as he thought of impending war, "Mr. Brown, there never was a time in the history of the world when the voice of God was needed as it is needed now. Perhaps you can tell me why he doesn't speak."

My answer was, "He does speak, he has spoken; but men need faith to hear him."

Then we proceeded to prepare what I may call a "profile of a prophet."

Perhaps you would like to amplify what I must condense here—use your own standard of a prophet and see whether Joseph Smith measures up.

We agreed, that at least the following characteristics should distinguish a man who claims to be a prophet:

A. He will boldly claim that God has spoken to him.

B. Any man so claiming would be a dignified man with a dignified man with a dignified message: no table-jumping, no whisperings from the dead, no clairvoyance, but an intelligent statement of truth.

C. Any man claiming to be a prophet of God would declare his message without fear, and without making any weak concessions to public opinion.

D. If he were speaking for God, he could not make concessions although what he taught would be new and contrary to the accepted teachings of the day. A prophet bears witness to what he has seen and heard and seldom tries to make a case by argument. His message, not he himself, is important.

E. Such a man would speak in the name of the Lord saying, "Thus saith the Lord," as did Moses, Joshua, and others.

F. Such a man would predict future events in the name of the Lord and they would come to pass, as did Isaiah, Ezekiel, and others.

G. He would have not only an important message for his time, but also often a message for all future time, such as had Daniel, Jeremiah, and others.

H. He would have courage and faith enough to endure persecution and to give his life, if need be, for the cause he espoused, i. e., Peter, James, Paul, et al.

I. Such a man would denounce wickedness fearlessly. He would generally be rejected and persecuted by the people of his time, but later generations, the descendants of his persecutors, would build monuments in his honor.

J. He would be able to do superhuman things, things that no man could do without God's help. The consequence or result of his message and work would be convincing evidence of his prophetic calling . . .by their fruits ye shall know them." (Matt. 7:20.)

K. His teachings would be in strict agreement with scripture, and his words and his writings would become scripture. "For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." (2 Pet. 1:21.)

Now, I have given but an outline which you can fill in and amplify and then measure and judge the Prophet Joseph Smith by the words and stature of other prophets.

As a student of the life of the Prophet Joseph Smith for more than fifty years, I say that by these standards Joseph Smith qualifies as a prophet of God.

I believe that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God because he talked like a prophet. He was the first man since the apostles of Jesus Christ were slain to make the claim which prophets have always made: that God had spoken to him. He lived and died like a prophet. I believe he was a prophet of God because he gave to this world some of the greatest of all revelations. I believe that he was a prophet of God because he predicted many things which have come to pass; things which only God could bring to pass.

John, the beloved disciple of Jesus, declared, ". . .the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy." (Rev. 19:10.) If Joseph Smith had the testimony of Jesus, he had the spirit of prophecy, and if he had the spirit of prophecy, he was a prophet. I submitted to my friend, that as much as any man who ever lived, the Prophet Joseph had a testimony of Jesus for, like the apostles of old, he saw him and heard him speak, and like them he gave his life for that testimony. I challenge any man to name one who has given more evidence of the divine calling of Jesus Christ than did the Prophet Joseph Smith.

I believe the Prophet Joseph Smith was a prophet because he did many superhuman things. One was translating the Book of Mormon. Some people will not agree, but I submit that the Prophet Joseph Smith in translating the Book of Mormon did a superhuman work. I ask anyone to undertake to write a story on the ancient inhabitants of America. Write as he did without any source material. Include in the story fifty-four chapters dealing with wars, twenty-one historical chapters, fifty-five chapters on visions and prophecies, and, remember, when the writer begins to write on visions and prophecies he must have the record agree meticulously with the Bible. He must write seventy-one chapters on doctrine and exhortation, and, here too, he must check every statement with the scriptures or he will be proved to be a fraud. He must write twenty-one chapters on the ministry of Christ and everything the writer claims Jesus said and did and every testimony he writes in the book about him must agree absolutely with the New Testament.

I ask, would anyone like to undertake such a task? I point out too that he must employ figures of speech, similes, metaphors, narration, exposition, description, oratory, epic, lyric, logic, and parables. I ask the writer to remember that the man who translated the Book of Mormon was a young man and he hadn't had the opportunity of schooling that many today have had and yet he dictated that book in just a little over two months and made very few, if any, corrections. For over one hundred years, some of the best students and scholars of the world have been trying to prove from the Bible that the Book of Mormon is false, but not one of them has been able to prove that anything the Prophet wrote was not in strict harmony with the scriptures, with the Bible, with the Word of God.

The Book of Mormon not only declares on the title page that its purpose is to convince Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, but this truth is the burden of its message. In Third Nephi it is recorded that multitudes of people testified, "We saw him, we felt of his hands and his side, we know he is the Christ." (See 3 Ne. 11:14-15.)

Joseph Smith undertook and accomplished other superhuman tasks; among them I list the following: He organized the Church. (I call attention to the fact that no constitution effected by human agency has survived one hundred years without modification or amendment, even the Constitution of the United States. The basic law or constitution of the Church has never been altered.) He undertook to carry the gospel message to all nations, which is a superhuman task still in progress. He undertook, by divine command, to gather thousands of people to Zion. He instituted vicarious work for the dead and built temples for that purpose. He promised that certain signs should follow the believers, and there are thousands of witnesses who certify that this promise has been fulfilled.

I said to my friend, "My Lord, I cannot understand you saying to me that my claims are fantastic. Nor can I understand why Christians who claim to believe in Christ would persecute and put to death a man whose whole purpose was to prove the truth of the things they themselves were teaching, namely that Jesus is the Christ. I could understand their persecuting Joseph if he had said, I am Christ, or if he had said, There is no Christ, or if he had said someone else is Christ, then Christians believing in Christ would be justified in opposing him. But what he said was, He whom ye claim to serve, declare I unto you. Paraphrasing what Paul said in Athens, `Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you.' (Acts 17:23.) Joseph said to the Christians of his day, `You claim to believe in Jesus Christ. I testify that I saw him and I talked with him. He is the Son of God. Why persecute me for that?'"

When Joseph came out of the woods, he had learned at least four fundamental truths, and he announced them to the world: first, that the Father and the Son are separate and distinct individuals; secondly, that the canon of scripture is not complete; third, that man was created in the bodily image of God; and fourth, the channel between earth and heaven is open, and revelation is continuous.

The judge sat and listened intently, he asked some very pointed and searching questions; and at the end of the period he said, "Mr. Brown, I wonder if your people appreciate the import of your message: do you?" He said, "If what you have told me is true, it is the greatest message that has come to this earth since the angels announced the birth of Christ."

This was a judge speaking, a great statesman, an intelligent man. He threw out the challenge, "Do you appreciate the import of what you say?" He added: "I wish it were true. I hope it may be true. God knows it ought to be true. I would to God," he said, and he wept as he said it, "that some man could appear on the earth and authoritatively say, Thus saith the Lord."

As I intimated, we did not meet again. I have brought forward very briefly some of the reasons why I believe that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. But undergirding and overarching all that, I say from the very center of my heart that by the revelations of the Holy Ghost I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. While these evidences and many others that could be cited may have the effect of giving one an intellectual conviction, only by the whisperings of the Holy Spirit can one come to know the things of God. By those whisperings I say I know that Joseph Smith is a prophet of God. I thank God for that knowledge and pray for his blessings upon all of you.

Brigham Young University

Hail to the Prophet

"How prudently most men sink into nameless graves, while now and then a few forget themselves into immortality."

Standing on time's hill number 1944, we look back across the valley of the century and see the name Carthage 1844 on the distant hillside. In the valley which lies between these hills there are buried many dreams and schemes, hopes and ambitions, plans and plots, with the bones of the men who were their authors. The mist of time hides much that is buried there, but towering above that mist may be seen the giant forms of the few who were truly great.

We are again reminded that these, with those of other ages who dared to be above the average, were derided and reviled by the generation in which they lived. That the little men of their time in an effort to pull them back and down to their own rank and level sent them to a martyr's grave.

One of the most persistent lessons of the past, repeated to each generation but not yet learned, is that man's judgment of his contemporary fellow man is generally unjust, and will be reversed by the higher and unerring court of time. These little men in their attempt to justify their hasty judgment often misconstrue the facts, falsify the record, suborn witnesses, and disregard the law. The decisions of the higher court, which always hears the case immediately upon appeal, may not be published until after the appellant has left the jurisdiction of the lower court, but published they will always be showing undeviating and omniscient justice.

Distance brings things into focus, and when time clears the lens of prejudice, which distorts the image and makes a travesty of truth, great souls come into their own, and we build monuments to their memories. Looking back, we see the pigmies as they strut and beat upon their breasts, usurp and abuse authority and attempt to emphasize their own importance. Jealous and suspicious of all whose greater stature casts a shadow across ambition's path or whose teachings challenge the value and validity of what their self-seeking impels them to worship, they try to steady their tottering throne by martyrdom and murder.

The political leaders of the days of Christ were fawned upon by their lackeys for the favors which they could bestow, but later generations know of them only because of the shameful contrast to the true greatness of the Master. He transformed the cross on which they nailed him into a throne from which he will rule the world. Paul in a dungeon, when seen through the telescope of time, looms larger than Nero on his gilded throne.

And so on the twenty-seventh day of June—another day made red by infamy—we remember the great prophet of the latter days, who knowing that the death of the testator must be the seal upon the testament, with the calmness of the summer morning declared his innocence, predicted the judgment of future generations, and went fearlessly to his death.

What was the crime for which these Christians sought his life? What was the reason for their hate? He simply tried to teach them the gospel as it was taught by him of whom he testified and whom they professed to serve. He said he had seen a vision and heard a voice and that he knew of a surety that Jesus of Nazareth was indeed the Son of God, the Savior of the world.

He translated and published a book which throughout proclaims the truth that there is no other name under heaven by which man can be saved except the name of Jesus Christ. On the title page of that book he dared to say: "Written by way of commandment, and also by the spirit of prophecy and revelation—to come forth by the gift and power of God—to show unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers—and also to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God."

He gave the world two other books of scripture: one a series of revelations commanding all men to repent and serve the Living God and the other a translation of ancient writings in strict harmony with and in language like the Bible, telling of God's hand dealings with the ancients and declaring it to be, "His work and his glory to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of men."

He organized a Church, founded on faith in God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, and accepting the atonement of Christ as effective in redeeming men from sin when they are willing to obey his teachings. That Church, organized with only six members, under adverse conditions, has been the object of the worst persecution in modern times. Its members were driven many times from their homes, deprived of their belongings, banished into a wilderness, mobbed, driven, beaten, and many of them slain. Its property was confiscated, its appeals to the government disregarded or disallowed, its officials imprisoned, and some of them murdered, and its teachings and practices held up to ridicule and denounced by press and pulpit. In the face of all this that Church has grown steadily in numbers and influence, until today with more than a million members it is known throughout the world as a vital factor in the moral, religious, and economic life of the nation where it was founded, and its teachings accepted by independent thinking men in thirty one of the other nations to which its message has gone.

He had only twenty years of mature life in which to accomplish his mission, but in that time he so effectively ploughed his teachings into the consciousness of his generation that his enemies now call him great and his followers know him to be a prophet of Isaiah's stature, and a leader like unto Moses. His adopted system of revenue, tithing, his law of health, the word of wisdom, his economic sagacity and foresight, anticipating the calamities which almost engulfed the nations, his proposed solution of the slave problem, and his predictions about war, these and many other of his accomplishments proclaim him to be the great Prophet of the nineteenth century.

And yet he suffered a martyr's fate after thirty-eight years of stormy life in a world which welcomed him not, in a country which boasted of its religious freedom and at the hands of professed followers of the same Master to whom he dedicated his life. We may well ask when the world will get the wisdom to recognize the prophets while they live instead of slaying them and building monuments to the dead. Here is another prophet who was without honor in his own country while he lived but who is now heralded as a messenger sent of God. We honor and revere the name of Joseph Smith the Prophet.

Millennial Star

A Book You Should Read—and Why

More than one hundred years ago a book was published in America which excited more comment than any book of its time. It was taken to England and other European nations, and each year sees new editions published. It has been published in eighteen different languages, and today is being read in English, Danish, German, French, Italian, Maori, Dutch, Samoan, Tahitian, Turkish, Japanese, Czechoslovakian, Arabic, Armenian, and Finnish.

For over one hundred years it has maintained its popularity, and as time goes on the demand increases. This book and its messages have caused the publication of thousands of other volumes attacking and defending it.

Today this book is being read by thousands who esteem it as scripture. To more than a million people it has ranked with the Bible in interest, influence, and inspiration.

And now you ask, "What is this book? How does it hold its grip on so large a reading public? Whence its power and influence? Is it history or biography, adventure, science, or philosophy; is it poetry or prose? Has it an ancient or a modern setting? Is it worth my reading?"

Decidedly yes, regardless of your choice of literature, for this book contains all the above and more. It is both ancient and modern, being a message addressed to modern men by ancient writers. It gives the sacred and political history of two great nations over a period of more than one thousand years. Here you will find inspiring biographies of heroic men; here, too, is great adventure, inspired and directed by God himself. Here is sublime poetry and compelling prose both in biblical style. In this book you will find description, exposition, oratory, lyric, logic, parables, a marvelous philosophy; and, what is more, this book contains the words of God!

To answer this question further we shall turn to the book itself, as we would to any other book, and let it speak for itself. We find this amazing statement on the title page:

"Written by way of commandment and also by the spirit of prophecy and revelation—Written and sealed up, and hid up unto the Lord. . .to come forth by the gift of prophecy—The interpretation thereof by the gift of God."

Can you find another book with such a preface?

It claims to be an abridgment of sacred records, some of them dating from the Tower of Babel. Its object is "To convince the world that Jesus is the Christ."

If these arresting claims are justified, then surely here is a book worth reading. Written records dating back to the Tower of Babel—if this be authentic, its value can hardly be estimated. How such records are appraised is shown by the recent purchase by the British Museum of a single document for $500,000, purported to be an early copy of a translation of parts of the Bible into the Greek language.

But this book claims to have been written by command of God and under the spirit of prophecy. It claims that it was considered by him to be of such importance that he personally directed that it be hidden and preserved and that its translation was by the gift and power of God.

If the Lord thought so much of it, what think ye? Its object is to convince the world that Jesus is the Christ. Does the world need convincing? Is the Christianity of today showing the leadership of which the world is so badly in need?

What would Christians not give for some new witness for the central truth of Christianity—that Jesus is the Christ; if there could be added to the testimony of the New Testament writers that of others who were his disciples, who walked and talked with him and shared his earthly ministry? This book makes these astounding claims.

He visited others besides the little group in Palestine and they, too, have left a record, including the testimony of a multitude of people to whom he came. A whole nation speaking from the dust across oceans and continents from where he was born declares him to be the Savior of the world.

While the primary object of this book is to instruct, still it tells a gripping story of high adventure. Here we have a record of great civilizations which developed and flourished and finally ceased to be. It tells of wars and conflicts and shows again that righteousness exalteth a nation, and that sin is a reproach and leads to death.

It tells an eyewitness story of a final great conflict which resulted in the extermination of all white people. The land was left to their copper-colored brethren, who were then their mortal enemies. The descendants of these victorious, though misguided, warriors were there to great the first Europeans who landed in America. They were by then named Indians.

A great unbeliever once said when speaking of men's hopes of immortality, "From the voiceless lips of the unreplying dead there comes no answer"; but here we have a record which proves the dead to be neither voiceless nor unreplying. Out of the dust they speak with ten thousand tongues, and their voice declares the glory of God. This book has a message for you.

This book should challenge your attention, for if it be true, it is the greatest book published since the Bible was given to man. It is the Bible of another people, another nation. It is a sacred record, preserved and brought forth for the convincing of Jew and Gentile. It is a record of one branch of the House of Israel which is to be joined with the record of Judah to become one in his hand as predicted by Ezekiel. (Ezek. 37:16-17.) This book is the truth which sprang out of the earth, as righteousness looked down from heaven. (Ps. 85:11.)

No more heartening message could come to this war-weary world than that God rules in the affairs of men, that the heavens are not sealed, that he made of one blood all nations that he is no respecter of persons, that in every nation he that feareth him and keepeth his commandments is accepted of him.

This book was not written by any man, but by many men at different times—hence no one man is its author. This book records many prophecies and their fulfillment; it tells of heavenly manifestations, of earthly upheavals and calamities which bore awful witness in America of the crucifixion of the Son of God. It tells of the visit of the Master to his other sheep, after his resurrection, and of a golden age of righteousness which followed his ministry.

The concluding writer in this record, the man who compiled it and hid it away, and who, after the lapse of fourteen centuries revealed its hiding place to its translator, wrote in his concluding chapter these solemn words which are both an exhortation and a promise:

"And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost." (Moro. 10:4.)

You should read the Book of Mormon.

Millennial Star

Churches — and the Church

When traveling in Europe, one is impressed by the number and beauty of the churches and cathedrals everywhere to be seen. There is hardly a village without its spire and chimes. In each country there is at least one famous shrine of historic architecture and thrilling history.

One is struck with awe and wonder as he visits St. Peter's in Rome; St. Mark's in Venice; the cathedrals of Pisa, Milan, Florence, Naples, Palermo, Notre Dame, Antwerp, Cologne; and in England, Westminster Abbey, Canterbury, Salisbury, York, Ely, St. Paul's, Exeter, Durham. But for what do they stand, these mighty sentinels of the past? What do they mean to this scientific and materialistic age? What is their significance to the present generation.

Are they valuable only because of their history, their architectural and artistic beauty, their irreplaceable windows and their sky-piercing spires; or do they also remind us of the inspiration which called forth such lavish expenditure and noble toil?

Is the Christianity which these great churches claim to teach still vital in the earth or are they, as someone has suggested, merely "tombs in which lie buried the embalmed remains of a great religion?"

What of the vital faith and simple life of the One whose teachings inspired the builders of these grand cathedrals and the priceless works of art to be found therein? What of the doctrines and authority taught and exercised by his apostles for whom many of these are named? Is that ancient faith alive today, or must we forever look back over a dimly lighted interval to the beacons of apostolic days from which these builders caught their vision?

More important to the present generation than these "memories in stone" is the religion which allegedly was carried from the hills of Galilee into their cloistered walls. Is that religion being taught therein today, and if so, by what authority?

Has the Master so changed since he taught a simple faith on the hillsides and by the sea that he now requires this great display of wealth and pageantry to attest the faith of those who would be his followers?

With all true Christians, we express appreciation for the rich and gifted past which gave to us these noble structures. But from humble halls and by the wayside we declare again the simple story of the gospel of Christ, restored again in its simplicity. It is the gospel of a simple faith in God followed by true repentance and transformation of life; of water baptism where the repentant sinner may be "buried with him by baptism into death," that they also may walk in a newness of life; the gospel of the Son of God who promised the gift of the Holy Ghost to true believers.

The gospel is more than a book, more than an organization, more than a temple or cathedral; it is the power of God unto salvation. Without this power, our fine edifices will never accomplish the work and mission of the church, to save the souls of men. It is that men might hear and embrace the truths of the gospel and learn how to apply its power that the restored Church of Jesus Christ enunciates its simple truths.

When the Apostle John, banished on the Isle of Patmos, was permitted to view the future of the world, he prophetically declared: "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people.

Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters." (Rev. 14:6-7.)

The message of the angel was to go to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. This implies that none of them would have the gospel at that time, and so it was.

We testify that after a long night of spiritual darkness, this angel came and announced the dawn of a new day, a new dispensation. Again is heard ". . . The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight." (Matt. 3:3.)

The Apostle Paul, in his day, noted the beginning of the falling away from the gospel of the Master, and he said, "I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto another gospel:

"Which is not another; but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ.

"But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. . . . But I certify you, brethren, that the gospel which was preached of me is not after man.

"For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ." (Gal. 1:6-8; 11-12.)

As we stand in these mighty cathedrals, listening to their great organs, inspired by their masterpieces of art, we are saddened by the knowledge that within their very walls may be heard the roar of cannon and the drone of death-dealing bombers with which Christians destroy one another. We are made aware again that the gospel of the Son of God was taken from the earth, and that the Prince of Peace is being crucified anew.

Oh, that our little magazine had the distribution of the great dailies, that we could carry to the millions of their readers the simple message of the restoration of the gospel of peace, the gospel of love, the gospel of good-will. We feel to say with the apostle of old, ". . . Woe is unto me, if I preach not the gospel!" (1 Cor. 9:16.) In his words we declare to all who may read this message that they should "Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness;

"And your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace." (Eph. 6:14-15.)

"For the preaching of the cross is to them that perish foolishness; but unto us which are saved it is the power of God.

"For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent." (1 Cor. 1:18-19.) Surely the nations of the earth today should heed his warning message, "And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come." (Matt. 24:14.)

For more than one hundred years this witness has gone forth to the nations. Let those whose hearts have been touched thereby seek to carry it to their neighbors that all may be warned of his coming.

Let us pray and work for the day to come when the world shall become his great cathedral where all may worship and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ—the King of Kings—the Prince of Peace.

Millennial Star

An Invitation to Belief

There are two activities of the Church which are not only of paramount importance to the members of the Church, but are also of great and increasing interest and concern to all who hear of them. They have the same objective and the same purpose. They are a part of the everlasting and unchangeable plan of redemption. I speak of the great missionary work of the Church—the preaching of the gospel—and of the building and operation of temples—to make available to both living and dead the blessings that come through the performance of the ordinances of the gospel.

The gospel of Jesus Christ makes knowledge of and obedience to law prerequisite to the enjoyment of its blessings. The plan of redemption provides that all the sons of God must hear the gospel and be given an opportunity to embrace it, directly or vicariously.

The injunction of the Savior, given in Jerusalem and repeated in this day, ". . . Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature," (Mark 16:15) is imperative. That it must be done before his work can be consummated is evidenced by his further statement, "And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come." (Matt. 24:14.)

This gospel of which we speak is a message of goodwill, of glad tidings. It is the way of salvation in this life, and a method of exaltation in the life to come. Furthermore, it is a message of peace on earth, for which all the world is praying. The Apostle Paul defined it as ". . .the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth. . . ." (Rom. 1:16.)

Now if this gospel, this power of God, is to be effective unto the salvation of men, they must believe it, but quoting Paul again, ". . .How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a preacher?

"And how shall they preach except they be sent?. . ." (Rom. 10:14-15.)

That the preaching of the gospel is of transcendent importance is evidenced by the fact that it was enjoined in every dispensation from the beginning. Jehovah himself taught it to Adam who received it and called upon his sons to repent. Enoch and his associates taught it and lived it so effectively that their city was translated, and Enoch walked with God. "And thus the gospel began to be preached, from the beginning, being declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost." (Moses 5:58.) For one hundred and twenty years Noah warned the unheeding people of judgments to come. The gospel was known to Abraham, to Moses, and the prophets.

Jesus of Nazareth, in the Meridian of Time, went about the whole of Galilee teaching in their synagogues and preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God. (Matt. 4:23.) Peter taught it, and on the Day of Pentecost epitomized its saving principles in the memorable words, ". . .Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins,

". . .For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call." (Acts 2:38-39.) He predicted the latter-day appearance of the Savior saying, "Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord;

"And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you:

"Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:19-21.)

We have the same message, and it is taught by the same authority as that which led the apostles to dedicate their lives to it. To carry this message to Jew and Gentile Paul went from Jerusalem to Antioch, thence west to Cyprus and Asia Minor, even into Europe, and finally took his long and adventurous journey to Rome where he knew prison awaited him and where some of his greatest epistles were written. It was in Rome that he gave his life for the cause which he advocated with such consummate skill. He ended his life with a benediction, "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith:. . ." (2 Tim. 4:7.)

The early missionaries of this Church, like their predecessors, endured persecution, made many sacrifices, and were willing to die if need be in proclaiming and defending the gospel of Christ. The prophet founder of the Church, the organizer of the missionary system in this dispensation, was, like Paul of old, tried before many magistrates and judges, appealed to the highest authority, was imprisoned many times and finally sealed his testimony with his blood.

Believing as we do that this is the same gospel which Jesus taught, that in fact, as Paul said, there is no other gospel and that it must be preached to all the world as a witness, all Latter-day Saints are or should be missionaries, either at home or abroad. Let him that is warned warn his neighbor.

Since 1830 more than 71,000 men and women have served in foreign mission fields. They are literally carrying out the injunction, "Go ye into all the world." Missions have been, established in Europe, Asia, Africa, Australia, North and South America, and in the islands of the sea. We are constantly pushing back the frontiers of the mission field. Since the British Mission was established in 1837, modern apostles have dedicated many lands and countries for the preaching of the gospel. The last to be so blessed were Korea, Okinawa, the Philippines and Guam. They were dedicated for this work by President Joseph Fielding Smith in August, 1955.

The weekly broadcasts of the Tabernacle Choir have carried the gospel of goodwill and harmony unto millions during the past twenty-five years. In their recent tour of Europe, 370 members of the choir sang their way into the hearts of all who heard them. Many were led to say with Isaiah and with Paul, ". . .How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace. . . ." (Rom. 10:15; cf. Isa. 52:7.)

Other millions of strangers within the gates of Temple Square have learned of the heretofore unpublished chapters of the life of Christ—chapters telling of his visit to his other sheep on the American continent after his crucifixion in Jerusalem—also of his glorious opening of the last dispensation as he appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1820.

That the General Authorities of the Church are devoted to this work with self-sacrificing zeal is evidenced by the fact that they traveled in one year a total of more than 756,000 miles.

Let us refer to only a few of the brethren and only part of their travels. President Joseph Fielding Smith traveled over 30,000 miles in his recent tour of the South Pacific Mission. Elder Lee made a similar journey last year. Elder Kimball has just returned from Europe where he visited fourteen countries and traveled more than 50,000 miles. Elder Mark E. Petersen in his tour of South American missions covered 20,000 miles, and Elder Romney traveled 33,000 miles in visiting Australia, New Zealand, and other South Pacific countries.

All members of the Council of the Twelve spent their whole time visiting stakes and missions. The members of the First Presidency have been even more active. We all wonder at and pray for a continuation of their vitality, endurance, and inspiration.

From January 1954 to October 1955 President David O. McKay, in his eighty-third year, visited twenty-five countries on six continents on land, sea, and air journeys of approximately 100,000 miles.

Our Heavenly Father, in order, as he said, to cut his work short in righteousness, has made available to us such improved facilities of travel and communication as would have been nothing short of miraculous in the days of Peter and Paul or even to our pioneer fathers. Steamships and airplanes enable us to go further in hours than they could have gone in months. Radio and television have amplified the voice and made it possible to take the gospel into the homes of the people of almost all nations.

The day may not be far distant when there will be a world-wide re-enacting of the Day of Pentecost on such a colossal scale that people in every land may hear the message of the gospel, each in his own tongue and at his own fireside. Surely out of Zion shall go forth the law and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. He has said, ". . .he shall utter his voice out of Zion, and he shall speak from Jerusalem, and his voice shall be heard among all people;

"And the Lord, even the Savior, shall stand in the midst of his people, and shall reign over all flesh." (D&C 133:21, 25.)

But is salvation to come only to those now living who accept the gospel or to the few—always a minority—who listened to the prophets in other dispensations? No, the thought is repugnant to reason, inconsistent with the character and attributes of God. That the preaching of the gospel is not to be limited to mortal beings is attested by the scripture, "For Christ . . . went and preached unto the spirits in prison;

"Which sometime were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in the day of Noah, while the ark was a preparing,. . ." (1 Pet. 3:18-20.) And further, "For for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit." (1 Pet. 4:6.)

While the message of the gospel is being carried to them that are dead, the living have for the past 125 years been doing for them what they could not do for themselves. Jesus said a man must be born of the water and of the spirit before he can see the kingdom of God. This is a universal law applying to all, both living and dead. Water is a mundane element, and baptism is an earthly ordinance. How then shall the dead comply with the law respecting baptism?

The need and efficacy of the law of agency, of proxy, or vicarious service, was recognized before the world was created. The doctrine of the atonement could not have become operative unless it were possible for one person to do for another that which the latter could not do for himself. It was under the law of vicarious service that Christ redeemed us from the fall of Adam, ". . . As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:22.)

Since the Church was organized, more than 15,000,000 saving ordinances have been performed by the living for the dead. New temples are being built in many lands to facilitate and consummate this stupendous work. The tremendous cost of preaching the gospel to both the living and the dead and making its blessings available is met largely from the voluntary contributions of the people. The missionary and temple work of the Church is an unequaled mass demonstration of self-sacrificing service.

Yes, the gospel is the power of God unto salvation to all those that believe. There is a power available to man which, when properly utilized, will result in his salvation. This power is equal to the task because it is in fact the power of God as Paul declared it to be. Before men can use this power, they must hear, believe, and obey. There will be no arbitrary use of this power, no force will ever be applied. The keys to its use are faith and intelligent co-operation. Our mission is to declare to the world, first, that there is such a power; second, to explain the eternal and immutable laws which govern its use; third, to perform authoritatively the ordinances which by divine decree have been made prerequisite to seeing or entering the kingdom of God; and, fourth, to warn the nations of the calamities which shall be visited upon the ungodly before the second advent of the Savior.

We preach the same gospel that was taught anciently. We teach it by the same authority. That gospel, and the authority to teach it and administer in its ordinances, was restored to this earth at the dawn of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times.

Heavenly Father, wilt thou bless all of us that we too may fight a good fight, may finish the course, may keep the faith.

General Conference

If This Be True

We have recently had a number of interviews with representatives of the press who have visited seeking information about the Church and its activities in this country. We welcome these inquiries and appreciate the friendly and unprejudiced articles which have resulted.

Among the many questions asked there was one which was common to all; it was substantially as follows: "What is the distinguishing feature of your church; how does it differ from others?"

It is impossible in a brief interview or a short article to outline the distinguishing features of the church. A careful study of "Mormonism" by anyone familiar with the teachings of other churches will reveal few parallels. It stands in sharp contrast to all others in origin, organization, and doctrine, and is unique in its claims to divine authority directly conferred by heavenly personages in modern times.

The astounding declaration of the Master, "They are all wrong," made the break both sharp and complete and did away with any possibility of building on either their foundations or their ruins. The doctrine of the complete and universal apostasy from the church and finally of the church, as founded by the Master in the Meridian of Time, is recorded in history and admitted by scholars. If the apostasy be not an accomplished fact, then the term "restoration of the gospel" is meaningless.

If this be in fact the Latter-day Church of Jesus Christ, then our study will establish a complete parallel with the former-day Church. New investigators are often amazed when told that the Church as Christ established it has no successor in Christendom and that the churches are without authority. When we declare our belief in a universal apostasy and a complete restoration, interest shifts from comparisons to contrasts, and sometimes the interrogator forsakes the attempt to classify the church with any modern group and recognizes it as distinctive.

The priesthood of the Church is widely conferred upon its male members from the twelve-year-old boy to the patriarch, and thus authority is distributed and responsibility for church government decentralized. This in turn encourages general participation and insures continuing interest. Also it bridges the gap between clergy and laity by making them one. It emphasizes the dignity of the individual and the brotherhood of man. It strikes at class distinction and makes vestments, robes, and pageantry unnecessary. It, in short, restores the simplicity for which the early church was noted, as was evidenced by the presiding fisherman, the preaching tax collector, the evangelising lawyer, and the recording physician.

The unpaid ministry in the church attracts only those who love the work and are willing to "sell all and follow" (See Luke 18:22.) without hope of monetary reward. The missionary system with its army of voluntary workers functions in harmony with the Master's injunction to go into all the world and preach the gospel. To see ten thousand men from all walks of life assembled in a priesthood meeting and to know that hundreds of thousands are active in Church work is quite in contrast to the female congregations of the modern churches.

The emphasis on the sanctity of the marriage covenant and the blessing of large families, the rejection of the doctrine of celibacy, and the advocacy of the doctrine of eternal increase mark the Church as different. The building of temples and the teaching of vicarious work for the dead clearly associates the Latter-day and Former-day Saints.

The church accepts the Bible and other books as scripture and claims divine guidance through continued revelation from God. It believes in miracles and in the efficacy of prayer for the sick. It teaches the practical gospel of industry and thrift and believes work is a blessing and idleness a reproach.

Fundamental among the differences to be found in any comparison of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints with other churches is the concept of Deity. The idea of a Personal God in form like man is born in the mind of the untutored believer when he reads in Genesis. "So God created man in his own image. . . ." (Gen. 1:27.) This idea is confirmed by Jesus of Nazareth, a member of the Godhead, ministering among men on earth and ascending with his body to take his place on the right hand of God the Father.

That Jesus Christ is the "Word" mentioned in John in his first chapter is generally accepted, especially by those who read the 14th verse and find, ". . . The World was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father) full of grace and truth." (See John 1:1-14.) Latter-day Saints believe that the Word, Christ, was with God and was God. Christ has a body, therefore, God has a body, because Christ is God, one of the Godhead. Christians generally profess belief in the second coming of the Messiah as promised by the "two men in white" who stood by the disciples when he was taken up into heaven. ". . . This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." (Acts 1:11.) Latter-day Saints believe he will come again with his resurrected, glorified body to reign personally upon the earth. Furthermore, they believe his word when he said, ". . . He that hath seen me hath seen the Father. . ." (John 14:9.), which can have no other meaning than that they are alike.

We believe in the resurrection of the dead and that there are varying degrees of glory awaiting men in the kingdom of God, that all men will come forth from the grave regardless of the kind of life they lead on earth, that some will come forth to glory and honor and immortality, and some to shame and misery. That "There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for one star differeth from another star in glory.

"So also is the resurrection of the dead. . . ." (1 Cor. 15:41-42.)

Grace alone is not sufficient for those who would inherit the highest glory, it is for those only who show their faith by their works, who keep the commandments of God and live righteous lives.

To our friends then we say; the Mormon church is a practical church, caring for the needs of its people here and now. It has the financial law which was practised by the early church: the law of the tithe. One day each month its members fast and pay to the Church, for the benefit of the poor, the amount which two meals would have cost. Its theology is based upon the teachings of the Master, who, after advising his followers to ". . .seek first the kingdom. . . ." (Matt. 6:33), reminded them that the Father knew they had need of "these things."

We welcome investigation; we court inquiry; we seek to be understood; we preach the gospel of Jesus Christ and try to live it. Humbly we bear witness to all men that the gospel is on the earth with the power of the priesthood among men. We would that all men would come to a knowledge of the truth and receive of the fulness of the gospel.

Millennial Star

An Analysis of the Church

As one born and reared in the Mormon Church, in fact, representing the fifth generation of membership in that Church, I am glad to outline briefly some of its beliefs and practices. I shall refer to it as the Mormon Church, although that appellation is but a nickname. It is the "Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." The word Mormon comes from the name of a book, in which members of the Church believe; namely, the Book of Mormon. This book, however, is not our Bible, as some have thought. We accept and teach the King James Version of the Holy Bible.

This Church was organized on the 6th of April, 1830, at Fayette, Seneca County, New York, by six men who claimed to be directed by divine revelation. From this humble origin, and in the face of the most severe opposition and persecution, it has grown and made its influence felt throughout the world.

After its organization in New York, the Church was established in Ohio in 1831, where the city of Kirtland was built. The members pursued their daily lives in pursuits common to that frontier country in those early days. Here they built the first temple. Bitter opposition and persecution resulted in the Church moving its center to Jackson County, Missouri, and from there to Nauvoo, Illinois, where they built a beautiful city in 1839, which in 1845 had become the largest city in the state of Illinois, having a population of 20,000 souls. Here again they built a temple.

Joseph Smith, the founder of the Church and to its members a prophet of God, was the center of much persecution and mob violence, and finally was martyred in Carthage jail on the 24th of June, 1844. He was succeeded as president of the Church by Brigham Young, under whose leadership the great migration to Utah was made.

In spite of what men may think of his creed, informed people today recognize in Brigham Young a great organizer, a great leader, a great pioneer. He is esteemed by his countrymen today as one of the leading figures in the settlement of the West.

The Saints were established in the midst of what was then a desert, inhabited by Indians and wild beasts. Salt Lake City and the state of Utah were built, and assistance was given in the settlement of surrounding states. In the face of relentless opposition and hardship a great missionary system was carried on throughout the world, schools, colleges, and universities were established, making provision for the care of its membership, looking to the economic welfare, and extending help to all needy within its borders. The activities, the vitality, and the organization of the Church have challenged the admiration of students of modern history.

Herbert Hoover, while president of the United States, appointed a commission on social planning. After a painstaking study of various groups it reported that the Mormon Church increased its membership by 290 per cent in 27 years, the greatest proportional growth of any church during that period. It is significant and worthy of note and will doubtless be a surprise to some, that more than 50 per cent of the adult membership of the Church are men.

As might be expected the Church is most populous in the Rocky Mountain area of the United States. Its largest membership is in Utah, Idaho, California, Nevada, and Arizona, but it extends from Canada to Mexico across the western part of America, with large stakes and missions in all the states of the Union, and missions in most civilized nations including the Pacific Islands.

Where its membership is compact enough to warrant, it is organized into stakes—a word taken from Old Testament history and representing geographical subdivisions similar to a diocese. These stakes are subdivided into wards, or parishes, there being several, but seldom more than ten wards in a stake. Each ward is presided over by a bishop who is a high priest in the Church, assisted by two other high priests, known as counselors. With a corps of adult male members, their duty it is to look after the spiritual and economic welfare of the members residing within their ward. Groups of the male members known as ward teachers are assigned the duty of visiting all members in the ward regularly, once each month. They carry the messages of the presiding officers of the Church, enquiring of their economic welfare, encouraging them in the observance of the rules of the Church, teaching them the messages of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and taking from them a report to the bishop of the ward with any requests they may have for assistance. In this way the ward bishopric is in touch with all ward members and often acts as contact between employers and those seeking employment.

Each of the stakes above referred to is presided over by a president and two counselors, assisted by twelve high priests known as a high council. These fifteen men direct the affairs of the Church within the stake. The president of the stake receives from the various bishops of the wards within the stake, monthly, quarterly, and annual reports showing the spiritual and economic status of all members, as well as statistical reports of the various groups and their activity or participation in Church work. The stake presidency and members of the high council visit the wards on the Sabbath day and during the week, confer with the authorities thereof, and, have general jurisdiction of the affairs of the Church within their territory. There are 118 of these stakes in the Church, which, together with the missions, care for the entire Church membership.

The Church is presided over by a president and two Counselors, assisted by the Council of the Twelve Apostles. With the Presiding Bishopric (three high priests presiding directly over all the bishops in the Church), and the First Council of the Seventy (seven men who have charge of the seventies of the Church), and the Presiding Patriarch, these twenty-six men are collectively known as the General Authorities of the Church. They have general jurisdiction over the Church throughout the world.

Besides these constituted authorities and officers in the priesthood, there are secondary organizations established for moral, educational, and benevolent purposes. These include the following:

The Primary Association provides for the moral instruction and training of young children.

The Mutual Improvement Association, comprising separate organizations for the sexes, is designed for the education and training of the youth in subjects of practical interest. Instruction is provided in literature and history, dramatics and music, science and art, the laws of health, and numerous other branches of useful knowledge, and facilities are provided for recreational activities of wide and varied range.

The Sunday School includes graded classes for the study of the scriptures and for training in theology, in moral and religious duties, and in the discipline of the Church. Sunday Schools, while primarily designed for the young, are open to all and include kindergarten and parents' classes with all intermediate gradations.

Church schools and seminaries provide for both secular and religious instruction, and range from the grade of the kindergarten to that of the university.

The Relief Society is composed of women whose duties relate to the care of the poor and the relief of suffering amongst the afflicted.

Most of these auxiliary organizations function in each ward of the Church, as also in the missions throughout the world. Officers are appointed to preside in the several auxiliaries of the ward, and while they are under the general supervision of the ward bishopric they look to the stake and general boards of the respective organizations for detailed instruction as to the plans and methods of their particular work. In line with the principle of common consent, which characterizes the Church administration in general, officers of the auxiliary institutions, while nominated by or with the approval of the administrative officers of the Priesthood, are sustained in their places by vote of the members in the local or general units within which they are appointed to serve.

Practically every male member of the Mormon Church belongs to one of two priesthood groups called respectively the Higher or Melchizedek and the Lesser or Aaronic. In the Lesser, or young men's group, there are three divisions: priests, teachers, and deacons. In the Higher adults are ordained high priests, seventies, and elders.

The young men of the Church are ordained deacons at the age of twelve if their conduct and mode of life and intelligence warrant their being recommended to the people of the ward by the bishop. These young deacons are organized into quorums and are presided over by the boys themselves under the direction of the bishopric. When sixteen years of age, they are ordained teachers, where they have their own quorum and officers. At about nineteen, they pass into the priests' quorum, which is directly under the supervision of the bishop, but also has its own appointed officers.

Later they become elders—a division of the Melchizedek Priesthood. There are twelve deacons in a quorum, twenty-four teachers, forty-eight priests, and ninety-six elders. The next higher quorum is the seventies, with a membership of seventy, and presided over by seven of their own group, which in turn is presided over by the First Council of the Seventy—seven men who are members of the General Authorities. After the seventies comes the High Priests' quorum, which is not limited as to numbers, but there is only one high priests' quorum to each stake. This quorum is made up chiefly of the older men of the Church and has in its membership all of the General Authorities as well as stake and ward officers. The high priest is the highest or presiding officer in any of these groups.

Thus it will be seen that the Church organization makes provision for all of its members to belong to and become active members of some group within the Church from the babe in the Primary and Sunday School, to the older men and women in the Higher Priesthood and the Relief Society. Some of the older men are ordained patriarchs or evangelists, whose duty it is to go among the people and give them blessings and comfort.

One distinguishing feature of the Church is the fact that there is no paid ministry. Each member serves without pay, except in the cases where men give their entire time to the work, and then their actual expenses are paid by the Church. Stake presidencies, bishoprics, and all members of the priesthood quorums and the auxiliary officers work without remuneration. Each member is expected to take active part in the administration of Church affairs. All are bound together by a common purpose and each is charged with the responsibility of assisting his neighbor and spreading the gospel.

Outside of the organized stakes of the Church, its membership is organized into missions. In the mission the membership is divided into districts and branches. Presiding over all is the president of the mission who is usually an experienced Church officer. A president is chosen from the membership of each district and branch who acts with two counsellors and the assistance of officers in the Priesthood and auxiliary groups within the branch and district.

The British Mission includes all of the British Isles. It is divided into fourteen districts, named by their geographical location as follows: Scottish, Irish, Liverpool, Newcastle, Leeds, Shefield, Hull, Nottingham, Birmingham, Manchester, Welsh, Norwich, Bristol and London.

In addition to caring for the needs of the members of the Church in these various missions, a regular system of missionary activity is supervised by the mission president. From various parts of the Church, young men and women are called by the president of the Church to fill missions in different parts of the world. These young people go at their own expense and spend two years or more of their time in the mission field without any remuneration whatever. They are supported by their own funds or by their parents while in the mission field. In addition to teaching the tenures of their faith, they are carrying a message of peace and goodwill, teaching the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, advocating the necessity of an organization through which religion may be brought into the lives of the people to become a factor for their economic well being. All are encouraged to take part in the Affairs of the Church and of the state. All are taught to obey, honor, and sustain the law.

The Church teaches the doctrine of the immortality of the soul; that men will live after death as individuals and will go upward and onward in eternal progression. Death does not end conscious existence, nor do our spirits become a part of some undefinable, incomprehensible whole. The Church describes dignity and worth to the human personality. Believing that God is our Father and that we are his children, we dare to assert that we may become like him. The Church therefore tries to provide for the welfare of its membership here and now.

The Church does not teach that salvation is reserved for members alone, but rather that our Heavenly Father has made provision for degrees of salvation so that all people will through the atonement of Christ be saved. But obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel is a prerequisite.

The Church stands for morality of the highest order. Recognizing no double standard, it requires the strict observance of the mortal law by its men as well as its women. Deviation from its high standards results in excommunication from the Church. It has a law of health. The use of liquor and tobacco among its members is forbidden. It advises against the use of any kind of stimulants, advocates moderate habits, clean sport, physical and intellectual activity, participation in church and civic affairs, and individual and community development. It strives for that more abundant life promised by Jesus of Nazareth.

It holds that there is no other name given under heaven whereby man can be saved except the name of Jesus Christ. It accepts the Bible as the word of God and encourages its membership to become acquainted with it and live by its precepts. It believes, too, in continued revelation; is a progressive and up-to-date Church. It is flexible enough to meet the needs of a changing world, but stable enough to hold us to eternal verities. It recognizes the indisputable findings of science, the dependability of nature, the surroundings of philosophy, but appreciates the limitations of each. It tries to revaluate the value of life and bring men back to the simple teachings of Jesus the Christ. It believes that life is a growing process and salvation is eternally becoming. Knowledge brings confidence. Religion is the most complete interpretation of reality. Training in honest, clear, and reverent thinking as well as toward the expression of beautiful and worthy emotions is essential as a part of character education.

With the slogan, "The glory of God is intelligence. . . ." (D&C 93:36), the Church encourages its members to study science and philosophy, but be not over-emotional and punctilious. It encourages men to have contact with practical affairs that they may not become mystic. The Church teaches that the religion of Jesus Christ gives the most complete understanding of reality and is the only means of salvation.

Millennial Star

The Relief Society

"This is my commandment, That ye love one another,. . ." (John 15:12.)

The best story of "Religion in Action" is the story of the Good Samaritan: He did no preaching; he gathered no statistics, did not ask if the unfortunate's sad plight was the result of his own folly; he saw a man who needed help, and he took time to serve his neighbor, a stranger. He who needed help was not embarrassed by publicity. The Good Samaritan did not advertise himself.

While other organizations foster activities, teach theology, and train the youth of the Church, the sisters of the Relief Society—modern Good Samaritans—interpret religion in terms of service.

Some estimates of the value of the service rendered by this organization may be made by a study of its activities in any of the stakes or wards of the Church; this service is the very essence of Mormonism, combining as it does the qualities of love, loyalty, devotion, faith, hope, justice, mercy, and truth. No one can measure the results or extent of these daily acts of helpfulness.

Without publicity and without causing embarrassment, this army of mothers goes out into No Man's Land and feeds the hungry, clothes the naked, buries the dead, and mends the broken hearts of thousands of casualties on life's battlefield.

But more helpful even than the providing of material comforts is the atmosphere in which these sisters work where the souls of the needy are fed and mended. One who returns after the funeral service of a loved one and finds them in his home, cooking, mending, cleaning, bringing sunshine and hope, will appreciate what is meant by the "Relief Society atmosphere." They give of themselves and not only of their goods. They carry blessings of which they themselves are unaware, as Henry Ward Beecher said:

"Gifts from the hand are silver and gold, but the heart gives that which neither silver nor gold can buy. To be full of goodness, full of cheerfulness, of helpfulness, hope and understanding, causes one to carry blessings of which one is as unconscious as a lamp is of its own shining. Such a one moves on human life as stars move on dark seas to bewildered mariners."

Surely there is no more central interest in the Church than the winning of human life to the principle of live and brotherhood—reminding men that God is not dead, but living. Seeking ever for more efficient methods; keeping pace with the times and changing conditions, our sisters shed the radiance of that eternal spirit of love, most ancient yet ever new, which shone in the Master's ministry. They never substitute well-wishing for well-doing; but with aprons on and sleeves rolled up, they meet the need of the occasion. Here religion is a living, compelling fact and not a mere theory.

With a membership made up of the mothers of the Church no organization could be better fitted for its mission, i.e., to respond to the heart hunger of the shutins and the bereaved, to minister to the sick and the broken-hearted, to provide for their needs, and to train new members in the divine art of self-sacrificing service.

Here is opportunity for each member to serve in the capacity for which she is best fitted. Here are departments for the sunshine workers, welfare, literature, art, household duties, theology. Here it is learned that none is so weak as not to bear the relationship of strength to someone weaker still, and that none is so strong as not to bear the relationship of weakness to someone stronger yet.

Much honor is shown to the priesthood of the Church, and properly so; men hold responsible positions and are praised for their service, but when it comes to efficiency, devotion to a cause, selfless service, true religion, hats off to the ladies, God bless them.

"Women have a smile for every joy, a tear for every sorrow,

A consolation for every gift, an excuse for every fault,

A prayer for every misfortune, an encouragement for every hope." Saint-Foix

The Relief Society Magazine

Woman Exalted

By Zina Y. C. Brown

Ye chosen ones to bear the Gods of heaven and earth, List to his word:— "Man is not without the woman in the Lord," Think ye then that Gods are half-Gods, not whole, And reign, and make these orbs of light, and live incomplete, alone, And in celestial might make harmony with harps half-strung? The answer's thine already. Thou hast it in thy heart. "Twas Mary knew from angel bright that she was Chosen to clothe the Spirit of our Lord. Her heart Sang its exquisite joy! Told she this to the other Honored of the Lord. And found believing response from this Her woman kin. Followers of our Savior and his church were women not a few. How great their love, how complete their trust in him! E'en when the cross the Son and Master bore, and lifted, tortured, Broke the chains that bound the mortal man and had bade him sleep forever. How great I say, in that trusting humility like unto a child's, how supreme! Last at the cross were they—first at the tomb—heralds of the Risen Lord. "Not honored," say you, and "below your brother man?" Open thine eyes and see what place is given thee, O woman fair! Hold high thy head to wear its crown. Kneel thou, too, in Reverence to thy Lord. For thank offering remember thou his word— "O be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord." Prepare thy souls to bear the souls of men. When the spirits of the dark shall stalk the earth to stay his second coming's time, Fear not to array thyself in armor white, as symbol of thy state And rise in power and womanhood. At the portal of thy home Guard that which is dearer than life itself. By thy companion's side Uphold him in his priesthood and godly power. Remember thou art high priestess of the home—the home, The heart of all the world, and the altar at his throne, The heart whose throbbing life holds in its power, the molding of good or ill. And sends forth the sinner or the saint, or weak ones `tween the two. Sends the mortal-clad spirit, born of woman, to sow discord, hate, and greed. Or be messengers of light, who seek to guide their fellows Back to Him where only harmonies abide. O be ye strong, and let not the weak ones grope and find him not. Be thou a woman whole and pure, with that militant love That fights for her own, and God's. Take then thy seat in nations great and small. Still not thy voice when its clarion call should speak for him To thy sisterhood the world around, Thou champions of righteousness, thou mothers of his little ones, Thou believers of his Word. Lend to his priesthood Thy powers of purity and love that falter not. And that faith that makes their faith more strong. Daughters of Zion, ye mothers of men, hold fast these gifts of thy calling great, Lest they be lost—these priceless pearls of purity and purpose holy. Know ye not that thy place is at the side, and not below, This companion to whom thou art given of the Lord? Thou woman exalted, thou first to forgive and last to forsake, Thou priestess, queen, Thank thy God who made thee thus, that thou wast born A Woman. Millennial Star

Returned Servicemen and the Sunday School

We were in a large air base in England. A group of L.D.S. servicemen were seated around the big stove in the mess hall. A soupy fog had settled over the countryside already wet with early spring rains. Some of the men had recently returned from missions across the channel; others were to leave on similar missions before dawn. All were thoughtful and reminiscent.

A civilian visitor, after hearing the testimonies of the servicemen, suggested that each try to trace his faith back to its beginning. He said, "Just when did you start to believe and from what source has your faith been fed? When you return home, where will you go for a renewal of that faith which has been so severely tested during these war years? Do you believe the source is still available and that its waters are as healing as memory indicates they were before you went away?"

Some of the men relied on memory, and others looked within themselves as they tried to appraise the value of early experiences and forecast the effects of a renewal of those associations of youth.

A sergeant opened the discussion. "When we find it necessary to marshal all our strength in times of crisis, we marvel at the sustaining power of our reserves, and we speculate as to their source. Crises have revealed reserves of physical energy of which we were unaware. Under stress we have been capable of feats of strength and agility which were so amazing as to seem unbelievable after the crisis has passed."

"Yes," said a lieutenant, "many of us have had that experience, but I have relied more on so called intangible, or what I prefer to call spiritual, reserves. When all other sources of strength have been exhausted, we fall back upon these and are saved. In the midst of exploding shells, of dangerous flak, when one engine is gone and another is sputtering, when comrades are wounded or dead and the landing field is many miles across the channel, many of us have discovered and drawn upon vast pools of spiritual energy to meet a desperate need."

A private first class, addressing the civilian visitor, said, "You ask us to trace our faith back to its source. It seems to me that these spiritual powers, these intangible reserves to which the lieutenant has referred, had their source and were fed, not by some well-defined stream which can be tapped at will, but by numerous eddying rills from somewhere back in the hills of childhood. A little trickle of belief here, an anecdote or faith-promoting story there, a childhood prayer answered, a mother's intuition confirmed and a tragedy averted, a Bible story in a Sunday School class, a testimony in a fast meeting, these and many other experiences have, it seems to me, formed a stream or pool of faith from which we draw. For its never-failing supply we reverently thank God, for without these very real `intangible' reserves, we should have been lost."

"How we long to return to the hills where this inspiration had its source," said the corporal, "to explore and develop these little streams with the hope of increasing the flow and perhaps discovering the eternal spring from which they all are fed."

And then a veteran pilot, the captain, spoke, "One source of such inspiration and power, one fountain with connections somewhere back in the eternal, is the Sunday School, that great character-building organization to which we all owe so much. Into the lives of the very young its healing water seeps as through the pores. Its ever-flowing stream gives power to the battery-charging machinery which is noiselessly at work storing energy for later use."

"Yes," said a member of the ground crew, "this is one ration, the `SS ration' which is to be found in the kit of every serviceman who was fortunate enough to attend this great preliminary training school. Every serviceman looks forward to the time when he can take a refresher course in this inspirational institution which is staffed and equipped for all ages and grades."

These men who talked of home, of Church and of Sunday School are coming back with batteries badly in need of recharging. Spiritually they will be hungry men asking for bread. They will be thirsty men wanting a refreshing drink; wounded men yearning for the cooling waters of understanding, confidence, and faith to lave their tired souls. When they come back to us, they must find dynamos at work supplying light after an awful night of darkness.

Sunday School officers and teachers have never before had such a challenge. There will be a demand for time-tested truths and for teachers whose lives have been molded by those truths; teachers with a technique suited to an age of precision and speed, an inquiring age, a disillusioned and sometimes doubting age, but a soul-hungry age.

These servicemen will follow memory back to the Sunday School from which they feel much of their strength has come. Their hopes and expectations will be high, and they must not be disappointed. But they will also come prepared to make some contributions; they will bear testimony of faith-promoting experiences and will tell us how the gospel has stood up under the awful test of war. Their coming will be a blessing to us if we too are teachable and open-minded.

The colossal task of postwar rehabilitation will not be well done unless the Sunday Schools measure up to their assigned task of spiritual regeneration of old and young alike. Old truths must be recoined and stamped each new year without marring the hallmark of quality and truth.

We must be prepared to answer their questions when we can, but—and this is more important—we must help them to believe there is an answer though we may not be able to tell them precisely what the answer is. They and we will need the penetrating vision of faith if we are to give sight to the blinded and hope to those whose future seems so insecure. We must prove to them that the springs of faith have not run dry while they were away.

Tens of thousands of servicemen will crowd into our Sunday Schools this year and next, bringing with them many questions and some answers, some doubts and much reassurance. We and they must utilize the inexhaustible power of the gospel as we approach this task, must harness it to their fine skills and expert training, and then we shall face the future unafraid. The Master said, "And for their sakes I sanctify myself. . . ." (John 17:19.) No Sunday School officer or teacher can do less and expect to do his full part in this challenging undertaking.

The Instructor

"Teach Ye Diligently"

Moses heard the voice of God from the burning bush saying, ". . . Put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground." (Ex. 3:5.) Tonight we behold an illuminated theme, which is the word of God, and we stand on ground made holy by the feet of successive prophets through the century. Humbly and reverently we feel we should remove our shoes and say with Moses, ". . . If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence." (Ex. 33:15.) Whether it be before such an audience or in a small Sunday School class, one who teaches the gospel is on holy ground.

For a definition of teaching we turn to one of the really great teachers among us. Dr. Milton Bennion, our beloved superintendent, recently said: "All teaching is or ought to be a fine art based upon adequate scientific foundations. The teaching of religion in the broadest meaning of that term is the finest of the fine arts. . . . Teaching by example both in conduct and in attitude, is always more important than is teaching by precept alone."

Another great contemporary teacher, the dean of the Deseret Sunday School general board, Dr. Howard R. Driggs, in his book, The Master's Art, makes this challenging statement, "No more precious privilege can come to anyone than this of radiating gospel light, of illumining gospel truth, of leading souls into God's sunshine."

The Apostle Paul ranked teachers next to the apostles and prophets when he said, "And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers. . . ." (1 Cor. 12:28.) A ruler of the Jews, wishing to pay the highest possible compliment to Jesus of Nazareth, said, ". . .We know thou art a teacher come from God. . . ." (John 3:2.) The Master, when he was about to leave his followers promised them another teacher: "But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things. . . ." (John 14:26.) The Savior's injunction to his apostles was to go and teach all nations.

In considering our theme let us think together on possible answers to three questions which it suggests. First, whom shall we teach? Second, what shall we teach? And third, how shall we teach? When Sunday School teachers are asked whom they will teach, they doubtless think first of little children, for we have approximately 100,000 of them. How do you feel when you are asked to teach these who were likened unto those who are in the kingdom of heaven? The Master when praying for those whom he had taught said, "And for their sakes I sanctify myself. . . ." (John 17:19.) If sanctification was a necessary preparation for him, then what of us who are to teach? These little ones, by their innocence, call upon us to sanctify ourselves. His yearning call comes down through the centuries, ". . .Feed my lambs." (John 21:15.)

Then we have another group almost 100,000 strong. These are just a little older but tender still and teachable. They are in the schools and colleges of the land five days each week, and they come to us on the Sabbath. As they are taught to think, their thinking sometimes becomes critical of what they have been taught at home or in Sunday School. In their study of zoology, sociology, philosophy, and kindred subjects which bear some relation to religion, they think they see inconsistencies or contradictions, and they come back to the Sunday School teacher for help and guidance. But they may go elsewhere for their answers if we are not prepared to help them. This group is a challenge to the best teachers in the Church, and it is just here that we have many Sunday School casualties, many which wisdom and foresight and preparation might avoid.

Another 100,000 are coming now into various classes of our schools, and we gratefully welcome them. They were with us when they were younger, but were taken from us to defend our country and our principles. They have returned, many of them, and they will come to Sunday School. Some will have mental and spiritual wounds which need healing. Some will have scars which bear evidence of valor, and some may have stains which only love can remove. We shall need divine favor if we shall be able to restore the tender leaves of faith which the blast of war has withered. There may even be some for whom we shall need to leave the ninety and nine. Here is where the teacher becomes the good shepherd must and risk his life to carry out the Master's injunction, ". . .Feed my sheep." (John 21:16.)

And some of you will teach the more mature, they who have learned much by experience but still have need of help. They have made growth in spite of, or perhaps because of, the storms of life. They are grateful for the painful pruning which the Master knew was for their good; without it they would have gone too much to wood and would have borne little fruit. From the depth of their experiences they will call to you, and you must have depth from which to answer. Whom then do we teach? We teach His children young and old. The promise of his grace in this great undertaking is predicated upon our diligence which in large measure means preparation of head and heart and spirit.

Imagine the care with which a sculptor would act if his modeling clay were suddenly turned into gold which hardened at each touch, making each imprint permanent, each mistake irreparable. Imagine the humility of the diamond cutter into whose hands is placed the world's most precious gem to work upon. The owner of the gem would seek the best-trained craftsman in the world for such a job and would disregard the cost. But you teachers do not deal with gold or diamonds. They are inanimate, and their loss at worst is temporary. You are entrusted with the impressionable, immortal souls of our Father's children, young and old. The imprint of your touch will follow some of them throughout eternity. A Sunday School teacher who was a veteran of World War I impressed upon the members of his class by vivid anecdote the value of faith and prayer. Ten years later a member of that class was pilot on a bomber returning to England from the continent. One engine was gone and his radio equipment destroyed. He was about to order his crew to bail out over the channel where there was little hope for rescue.The memory of that Sunday School class flashed upon his mind and with renewed courage he carried on, reached England, and landed in a heavy fog. He was later heard to say, "Faith is a good engine and prayer the best of radios." That diligent teacher realized the promise, ". . .My grace shall attend you. . . ." (D&C 88:78.)

What shall we teach? In the section of the Doctrine and Covenants from which we take our text the Lord said: "And I give unto you a commandment that ye shall teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom." (D&C 88:77.) We must teach them constantly the central truth of the gospel—that God lives—that Jesus is the Christ, the only Begotten of the Father. We must teach them that they are the children of God, created in his likeness, and endowed with Godlike attributes capable of eternal unfoldment. He cannot effectively teach these things who does not profoundly believe them.

We must fearlessly and unequivocally teach them the story of the restoration without apologies and without attempts at scientific explanation. That account as told by the prophet needs no amplification, for next to the story of the birth, life, and resurrection of the Christ it is the greatest story in print.

We must beware of the present-day tendency to tolerate and condone untruth and to moderate the rugged truths of the gospel to suit sophisticated appetites. We will not adapt the gospel message to popular demands or water it down to current ethical systems. Our teachings will not be confined to biographical or traditional recitals but will be related to and integrated with the world in which we live. We shall portray to them the matchless background of the gospel story but will also call attention to its glorious vista. We shall teach them to believe all that God has revealed and to prepare themselves to accept all that he may yet reveal. We shall teach them the source through which new revelation will come to the Church and warn them against impostors, false teachers, and all usurpers of authority. We shall teach them the truths of the Old Testament while we point out the need and timeliness of the New Testament message. We shall teach them to prize the truths contained in the Book of Mormon and to read all ancient scriptures by the light of modern revelation, to recognize and make use of the fact that we have prophets, seers, and revelators today who guide the Church and that we are thus able to shine today's light on today's problems.

They must come to know that as "The glory of God is intelligence . . ." (D&C 93:36), so their glory will be dependent upon their intelligence, for they cannot be saved in ignorance. We shall teach them to be honest, true, chaste, benevolent, to honor themselves, their fellow men, and their Maker, and to serve him with full purpose of heart. We shall heed his commandment that we teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom and shall memorize and carry as a mental banner into all our Sunday School work this theme: "Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand;

"Of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms—

"That ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you." (D&C 88:78-80.)

To teach these things we shall constantly prepare ourselves by prayer and by righteous living.

And finally how shall we teach? He gave the answer when he said simply, "Follow me." He was the Master Teacher because he was what he taught. Would the Sermon on the Mount move you as it does without the life of Christ behind it? He preceded his three years of active teaching by thirty years of preparation. We must continue to prepare while we live, and that preparation must involve incorporating into our lives the truths we teach. Our lives and our teachings must not be at variance. His parables were not woven from fancy. They were word pictures of what he had observed as he lived among the people. He had seen the sower at work in the field, the shepherd with his sheep, the repentant son returning to his father, the barren fig tree; he knew the publican and the Pharisee and had attended wedding feasts where foolish virgins had no oil in their lamps. He taught from the richness of his own life, and he taught because he loved the people.

If then we are to follow him, we too must be what we teach. Our teachings and our lives must not be at variance or in any way contradictory. This will necessitate a lifetime of preparation. With this challenge before us surely no superintendent will send his teachers into their classes without calling them together for prayer. Surely no teacher will go into a class without asking that the Holy Spirit accompany him. In our text he promises his grace shall attend us if we are diligent. Moses as he talked with God asked, "For wherein shall it be known here that I and my people have found grace in thy sight?" And then he answers, "Is it not that thou goest with us?. . ." (Ex. 33:16.)

Let us make all preparation possible, organize and attend teacher training classes, adopt the best-known pedagogical methods, use all the fine tools which modern science has supplied, but never try to teach with these alone. Never try to teach without the spirit of the Master Teacher. In fact he has said in this day, ". . .if ye receive not the Spirit ye shall not teach." (D&C 42:41.)

Let us then go out eight thousand strong and carry the message to all our stakes and wards and missions that this centennial year is to be a year of better teaching in the Church that a waiting world may not be disappointed when it belatedly calls for the message of the gospel as its last hope of survival. May the pioneers of 1847 look down and see an army of Sunday School workers four hundred thousand strong in 1947, who are humbly but effectively teaching one another, and may they see that through diligence we have found grace in his sight and that he is with us, even Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Instructor

"All Thy Children Shall Be Taught of the Lord. . . ."

"All thy children shall be taught of the Lord and great shall be the peace of thy children." (Isa. 54:13.)

To teach and be taught of the Lord is the prime purpose and main function of the Sunday School. The first essential in preparation for this service is that the teacher shall sanctify himself. A college or university education could be dispensed with but not sanctification.

When the first laborers in the last dispensation were called, the Lord said to them by way of commandment, ". . .prepare yourselves, and sanctify yourselves; yea, purify your hearts. . . ."

A Sunday School teacher must have conviction as well as facts. He must be one who feels as well as knows, who teaches from within as Jesus always did. It is not enough that the Sunday School teacher be a spectator or one who is acquainted with the facts on the evidence of third persons only. Great Christian virtues—faith, hope, and love—do not come from the outside. They cannot be generated by statistical surveys, by memorizing dates and names and places. They are within us awaiting discovery and development through childlike humility and trust. Aside from the operations of the Holy Spirit, religion is communicable only by example. The students will be impressed by the sincerity and earnestness of the teacher and by his dignity and simplicity.

". . .ye will teach them [your children] to walk in the ways of truth and soberness; ye will teach them to love one another, and to serve one another." (Mosiah 4:15.)

To teach of God one must not only possess the idea of God, but he must also be possessed by it. He must teach it in such a way as to grip the heart like the touch of the hand. Here is a call to dedication, to commitment, and to the enthusiasm that comes from sincere conviction.

But let us beware lest our conviction that we have the truth appease our appetites and we no longer hunger and thirst for it and for the righteousness and freedom to which it leads. Let us quench their thirst from a running stream which is being constantly renewed and purified by study and by prayer.

Both teachers and students must realize the need for goals and ideals to unify their energies, integrate their personalities, and draw forth the potentially best in them which otherwise would lie dormant. They must have a love for and a desire to emulate the great ideal which is Jesus Christ. He prefers active emulation to passive adoration.

When one glorifies such a vision in his mind, enthrones such an ideal in his heart, it will become the blueprint by which he builds his life. Let us hold up before ourselves and our students the ideal of a perfect person in the being of our Savior, perfect in all the ways in which we ourselves seek completeness.

If we are going to say with Jesus, "Be ye perfect," the degree to which students catch the vision of perfection will bear definite relationship to the example they see before them in the class. The teacher and the truth taught must be of the same pattern. The teachings of Jesus have lived through the ages because he was what he taught.

"Labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you. . . ." (John 6:27.)

He who has Christ as his ideal is conscious of an inexhaustible source of help and inspiration. He knows his ideal is reaching down to help him. Let the teacher behold and call attention to the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ, and then, beholding his own insignificance by comparison, undertake to imitate that which he visualizes as himself carried to its highest terms. As Milton said, "The end of all learning is to know God and out of that knowledge to love and imitate him."

When the Savior said, "This is life eternal that they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent," (D&C 132:24), he gave the key to our present theme. If then it is life eternal to know God and if, as Isaiah says, the result of knowing him is to have peace, then let us "Seek peace and pursue it" through seeking and knowing him. Peace is the blessing most universally sought in the world today, and here is Isaiah's formula—"Teach them of the Lord."

The number one task of the teacher in Sunday School is the enrichment of the inner life of the individual. While we cannot measure or transmit the degree or detail of one another's belief, we can help to create an atmosphere in which vital and dynamic faith may develop and operate.

God releases their energy; we must help them to control and direct it. The scientist trembles as he releases the power of the atom. He wonders to what ends it will be used. But we here are dealing with greater power than atomic energy. We deal with the power of the human soul, a part of and related to the power of God. It is potentially more powerful than the atom and potentially more dangerous.

Let us ever keep in mind, as Jesus always did, that, " The worth of souls is great in the sight of the Lord." His interest in the remaking and enrichment of the inner lives of people is in every line of his teachings.

There are so many destructive forces in the world today, so many powers, and agencies which are divisive in their nature, tearing the world apart and leaving individuals and groups stunned, frightened, and bewildered, with threadbare garments of mind and spirit, that our personalities need some integrating force if we are to have a sense of inner well being. All that the Master said had its roots in the fact that God really cares about each individual. If we can be assured of this eternal truth, there is nothing to be afraid of—absolutely nothing. This is the cure for worry, fear, and anxiety.

The Sunday School teacher must not be tempted to take the easier way in his preparation for the classroom. He must not accept lightly, unthinkingly all that is said or written. He must be a student; he must love the Lord with all his mind as well as his heart and soul; and if he loves him with his mind he must submit every subject to inquiry, investigation, reason, and thought. But while doing this let him not be unaware of the place of the heart in the educational process. Let him not be afraid of emotion or to be moved by what he feels.

Surely no other group of teachers has such an inspiring assignment. To teach of God and of the latter-day appearance of Jesus Christ—what an opportunity, what a responsibility! No system of mere ethics can in any way approach the vitality and the impact of this message. Teach them of the Lord, and great shall be their peace!

President David O. McKay said: "Ideals that relate to God and to little children are indispensable elements to happiness and eternal life. An institution therefore that makes heven its aim and childhood its obligation is one with which every loyal heart should desire to be associated." (Gospel Ideals, page 220.)

The Instructor

The Primary

I can think of no more appropriate theme for the Primary than "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart." (Ex. 2:3.) May I refer to the beloved disciple, John, who said, "As the Father hath loved me, so have I loved you: Continue ye in my love.

"If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have kept my Father's commandments, and abide in his love.

"These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full." (John 15:9-11.)

I think the first declaration that God should come first in our lives was made by Jehovah himself through Moses, when he said, "Thou shalt have no other Gods before me."

Jesus, in speaking of this and in answer to a question, said the first and great commandment is, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind." (Matt. 22:37.) Thus did he emphasize and amplify what he had said anciently to Moses.

Cynics have said that God is not only a jealous God, but that he must also be very selfish in that he asks us to give him our whole affection. But of whom was he thinking when he asked for this adoration of himself, or of his children? Could our love for him increase his joy or happiness except as it increases ours?

Poor indeed is the man who has never loved. Void and barren is the life into which no love has come. I am sure as we sit here this morning and think of him and of his work and sacrifice for us our hearts go out in grateful praise and gratitude for his blessings.

In appraising the enduring power of the love of God, the Apostle Paul declared, "For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,

"Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." (Rom. 8:38-39.)

Of course we may by our actions alienate ourselves and deprive ourselves of his blessings, but his love "endureth forever." David had this in mind, no doubt, when he said: "If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell, behold thou art there.

"If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea;

"Even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me." (Ps. 139:8-10.)

I have wondered sometimes why the Lord would follow us, by his Spirit, wherever we are. I think it is because of his constant solicitude for our salvation and even as a good shephered follows the sheep wherever they may stray and brings them back to the fold, so our Father through The Good Shepherd follows us with his love, and when we heed his call, we find peace and tranquility.

I am quite sure that the first step in his avowed purpose to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of men, was to plant love in the hearts of his children, for love is the beginning as well as the fulfilling of the law. When he planted that love in men's hearts, he literally sowed the seeds of Godhood. We tend to become like that which we adore, and therefore he who truly loves God becomes more Godlike. "The vision that you glorify in your mind, the ideal that you enthrone in your heart, that you will build your life by—that you will become."

It is especially appropriate that Primary officers and teachers should adopt this as their theme, appropriate because they are the ones, above all others, who are favored with the glorious task of laboring among those of whom he said: ". . .Of such is the kingdom of heaven." (Matt. 19:14.) I do not doubt that occasionally some Primary teacher has wondered whether that was always true, when some redheaded, freckle-faced little bundle of dust and electricity disrupts a class. And yet I am not sure that Paul was not thinking of just such a situation when he said: "Love endureth all things, beareth all things." (1 Cor. 13:7.) And surely no one is entitled to go into a class unless in her heart there is that love which can overlook some of the things we are called upon to overlook in our little ones.

There was a time in the early history of the people of this continent when they had peace and happiness beyond anything that any people have known before or since. According to the record, that remarkable epoch resulted from the fact that the people had the love of God in their hearts. May I refer to the Fourth book of Nephi: "And it came to pass that there was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people." (4 Ne. 1:15.) It made contention impossible. "And there were no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults. . .nor lyings, nor murders, nor any manner of lasciviousness; and surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God." (4 Ne. 1:16.)

Thus we see that if we live the theme which we now repeat we may find true and lasting happiness because the love of God dominates our lives.

Dr. James E. Talmage said on one occasion: "Any man may enter the highest degree of the celestial kingdom when his actions have been such that he can feel at home there."

I think the first requisite for feeling at home in his presence is to have the love of God in our hearts, surely without that we could not feel at home in his presence.

You general and stake boards are charged with the responsibility of teaching and directing those who teach little children. You are, in a sense, the older sheep—if I may dare to suggest that women do sometimes grow a little older—you are the older sheep who have learned to follow the Good Shephered, and he has entrusted you with the sacred duty of leading his lambs into the fold. With that duty, necessarily, there comes a tremendous responsibility, for if we are to lead them we must bemeticulous in our own conduct, must be circumspect in every thought and action, because, sisters, they will follow you, whether you lead them in the right or the wrong direction. They will follow where you lead.

I think a writer recently has put it well when he said:

"'Twas a sheep not a lamb, that strayed away In the parable Jesus told, A grown-up sheep that strayed away From the ninety and nine in the fold. "And why for the sheep should we seek And earnestly hope and pray? Because there is danger when sheep go wrong; They lead the lambs astray. "Lambs will follow the sheep, you know, Wherever the sheep may stray. When sheep go wrong, it won't take long Till the lambs are as wrong as they. "And so with the sheep we earnestly plead For the sake of the lambs today, For when sheep are lost, what a terrible cost The lambs will have to pay." The Echo, C. C. Miller

If there are any differences in degree, or quality, or amount of God's love, I am sure the choicest will be reserved for you who spend your time with those whom he loved so dearly.

I think the Father knew what he was about when he chose the women of the Church to lead this great Primary organization, for it required the mother love, the tenderness, the solicitude, the willingness to sacrifice and to serve. ". . . Inasmuch as ye have done it unto the least of these . . .," he said, "ye have done it unto me." (Matt. 25:40.)

Do you remember when Abou Ben Adhem, speaking to the angel, said:

"`Write me as one who loves his fellow men.' The angel wrote and vanished. The next night He came again, with a great awakening light, And showed the names whom love of God had blest, And lo! Ben Adhem's name led all the rest." —Leigh Hunt

But is it possible that you sisters wonder why, in your service and your love of these little ones, you sometimes meet discouragement and difficulty and heartbreak? Are we going to escape from some of the most priceless blessings of life simply by serving, or must we too expect that we will be tried and tested and purified by fire?

As you give of yourself and of your talents, even as a flower breathes its fragrance into space, so shall God speak through you and through your eyes smile upon these little ones. If we are to love him with all our mind, we must know him for ". . . This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.)

One of the most beautiful and moving of all stories in literature is recorded in Third Nephi. We are familiar with the seventh chapter, but I can think of no place where it could be read with a greater sympathetic understanding than in a conference of Primary workers. Let us read a few paragraphs:

"And it came to pass that he commanded that their little children should be brought.

"So they brought their little children and set them down upon the ground round about him, and Jesus stood in the midst; and the multitude gave way till they had all been brought unto him.

"And it came to pass that when they had all been brought, and Jesus stood in the midst, he commanded the multitude that they should kneel down upon the ground.

". . .And . . .he prayed to the Father. . . .

"And after this manner do they bear record: The eye hath never seen, neither hath the ear heard, before, so great and marvelous things as we saw and heard Jesus speak unto the Father;

"And no tongue can speak, neither can there be written by any man, neither can the hearts of men conceive so great and marvelous things as we both saw and heard Jesus speak; and no one can conceive of the joy which filled our souls at the time we heard him pray for us unto the Father.

"And it came to pass that when Jesus had made an end of praying unto the Father, he arose; but so great was the joy of the multitude that they were overcome.

"And it came to pass that Jesus spake unto them, and bade them arise.

"And they arose from the earth, and he said unto them: Blessed are ye because of your faith. And now behold, my joy is full.

"And when he had said these words, he wept, and the multitude bare record of it, and he took their little children, one by one, and blessed them, and prayed unto the Father for them.

"And when he had done this he wept again;

"And he spake unto the multitude, and said unto them: Behold your little ones.

"And as they looked to behold they cast their eyes towards heaven, and they saw the heavens open, and they saw angels descending out of heaven as it were in the midst of fire; and they came down and encircled those little ones about, and they were encircled about with fire; and the angels did minister unto them." (3 Ne. 17:11-24.)

May we say to the Primary officers here, and through you to Primary workers throughout the Church: "Behold your little ones." What a priceless privilege, what a glorious opportunity, but what an overwhelming responsibility, to be met only through humility, diligence, faith, and divine guidance.

I should like to close with the prayer that Paul offered in Ephesus: "For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,

"Of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named.

"That he would grant you, according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man;

"That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye, being rooted and ground in love,

"May be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height;

"And to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fulness of God." (Eph. 3:14-19.)

Yes, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart." Do you remember Peter's answer when Jesus said: "Lovest thou me?" He said: "Yea, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee." (John 21:15.)

I wonder sisters, if you would like individually, to answer Jesus' question? Will you reply each for herself, "Yea, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee."

And he said, and is saying to you now: "Lovest thou me?" Will you repeat, "Yea, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee."

May the peace which passeth understanding be with you, and may you take into your departmental work the spirit of your beautiful theme, that the love of God may ever be in your hearts.

Primary Conference

The MIA

The Church, and those representing the Church in the MIA, recognize in every individual a child of God. The God-image quality in man's nature is the root to his dignity. You have been proceeding on the basis that each of these young persons is physical, mental, moral, esthetic, and spiritual. You have provided training in these fields, and the results of what you have been doing and are now doing are felt in the far corners of the earth. I say you have been reminding these young people of their Godlike status.

You have been glorifying in the minds of these young people in your wards and stakes, and throughout the Church, the idea of knowledge, of wisdom, of intelligence. You have been telling them, we are sure, that wisdom is not mere accumulation of fact, however encyclopedic or exact. Wisdom is not mere knowledge. It is its distillation. And as one said, "Wisdom is like honey. It results from many trips to many flowers; and like honey, it finds its function in furnishing sustenance to life."

May we say to you, and through you general, stake, ward, mission, and branch officers of the MIA, may we say to all the young people of the Church, if you would be among the noble, you must be noble. If you would be among the wise, you must be wise. If you would be among the pure in heart, you must have unsullied hearts. And if you would dwell in the kingdom of God, your actions must be such as will make it possible for you to feel at home when you get there.

Someone has wisely observed, in fact, it is an ancient proverb from Tibet, "He who knows and fails to practise the precepts, is like a man who lights a lamp in the darkness and then closes his eyes."

Yes, we plead through you, with all the young people of the Church that you will gather wisdom as you go forward and realize that with it must go virtue. If you do not or cannot have an inner peace, all your pleasures will go sour. As Hippolytus said, "Some have sinned with safety but none with peace of mind."

Now, may I inform you officers and teachers of the MIA, and the other auxiliary organizations of the Church—priesthood quorums and others—that your work flowers and bears fruit at times and in places which you little suspect—often in far places, far removed from the homes of these youths whom you teach. To illustrate that, may I cite an incident, one which I have referred to in some of the stake conferences?

I cite this incident to indicate that the young people of the Church, as represented by the boys in the service, have carried on magnificently. This incident occurred in England in 1944. I had gone to England at the request of the First Presidency as co-ordinator for the L.D.S. servicemen. One Saturday afternoon I sent a telegram from London to the base chaplain of a certain area near Liverpool, saying, "I shall be in your camp tomorrow morning and shall appreciate your advising the Mormon boys who are there that we will have a service at ten o'clock."

When I arrived in that camp, there were seventy-five Mormon boys, all in uniform, and quite a number in battle dress. The chaplain to whom I had sent the wire proved to be a Baptist minister from the Southern States. He was waiting, too, for my arrival, and as these young men ran out to greet me, not because it was I, but because of what I represented, and as they literally threw their arms around me, knowing that I was representing their parents as well as the Church, this minister said to me: "Please tell me how you do it?"

"Do what?"

"Why," he said, "I did not get your wire until late this morning. I made a hurried search. I found there were 76 Mormon boys in this camp. I got word to them. Seventy-five of them are here. One is in the hospital. I have over 600 men of my church in this camp, and if I gave them six months' notice I could not get a response like that," and then he repeated, "Tell me how you do it."

I said, "Sir, if you will come inside, perhaps you will see." We went into the little chapel. The boys sat down. I asked "How many here have been on missions?"

I think fully fifty percent raised their hands. I said, "Will you and you and you," and I pointed to six of them, "come and administer the Sacrament? And will you and you and you," and I pointed to six others, "please come and sit here and be prepared to speak?"

Then I said, "Who can lead music?" A number of hands were raised. "Will you come and lead the music? And who can play this portable organ?" There were several hands, and one was selected. Then I said, "What would you like to sing, fellows?" And with one voice they replied, "Come, Come, Ye Saints."

We had no hymnbooks. The boy sounded the chord. They all arose. I have heard "Come, Come, Ye Saints" in many lands and by many choirs and congregations, and without in any way reflecting adversely on what we usually do and hear, I think I have only heard "Come, Come, Ye Saints" sung once when every heart seemed bursting, as they sang every verse without books. When they came to the last verse, they didn't mute it, they didn't sing it like a dirge, but throwing back their shoulders, they sang out until I was fearful that the walls would burst. "And should we die before our journey's through, happy day, all is well," and I looked at my minister friend and found him weeping.

Then one of the boys who had been asked to administer the Sacrament knelt at the table, bowed his head and said, "Oh, God, the Eternal Father"; he paused for what seemed to be a full minute, and then he proceeded with the rest of the blessing on the bread. At the close of that meeting I sought that boy out. I put my arm around his shoulders, and said, "Son, what's the matter? Why was it so difficult for you to ask the blessing on the bread?" He paused for a moment and said, rather apologetically, "Well, Brother Brown, it isn't two hours since I was over the continent on a bombing mission. As we started to return, I discovered that my tail assembly was partly shot away; that one of my engines was out; that three of my crew were wounded, and it looked like it was absolutely impossible to reach the shores of England. Brother Brown, up there I remembered Primary and Sunday School, and MIA, and home and church, and up there, when it seemed that all hope was lost, I said, `O God, the Eternal Father, please support this plane until we reach a landing field.' He did just that, and when we landed, I learned of this meeting, and I had to run all the way to get here. I didn't have time to change my battle dress, and then when I knelt there and again addressed the Lord, I was reminded that I hadn't stopped to say thanks. Brother Brown, I had to pause a little while to tell God how grateful I was."

Well, we went on with our meeting. We sang. Prayers were offered, and these young men, with only a moment's notice, each stood and spoke, preached the gospel of Jesus Christ to their comrades, and bore their testimonies, and again I say with due respect to the various ones with whom I have associated and labored, they were among the finest sermons I ever heard. Then the time was up, and I said, "Fellows, it's time for chow. We must dismiss now or you will miss your dinner." And, again almost with one voice, they said, "We can eat army grub any time. Let's have a testimony meeting." So we stayed another hour and a half while every man arose and bore witness to the truth of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ, and each one in turn, in his own way, said, "I know that God lives; I know that the gospel is restored; I know that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God." Again I looked at my friend, and he was weeping unashamedly.

At the close of that meeting this minister said to me, "I have been a minister for over twenty-one years, but this has been the greatest spiritual experience of my life." And again he said, "How do you do it?"

Then it was my pleasure to tell him about the Primary and the Sunday School and the MIA, with the various activities of the priesthood quorums, the seminaries, the Church schools, and the great educational system directed by the Church board of education through the faculty of Brigham Young University. I told him of our missionary system, of the training it provides, and the testimonies resulting from such gratuitous service.

This minister said to me, "If we could accomplish something like that among the young people of our Christian churches, there would be no more war. Why, I would not dare to call on members of my congregation to speak without a moment's notice. They who do come to church know that I am going to speak and that they have no responsibility. But here it seems every man is a minister, and every one has been trained to participate."

I explained to him that those men had been taking part since they were little tots, and I told him further, and I say to you, that that experience could have been, and was in many instances, repeated in various camps in the United States and Canada, and Europe. Wherever enough LDS boys were gathered together we could repeat that experience.

MIA officers, teachers, and members, I saw the fruits of MIA in faraway places, and under difficult circumstances. I plead with you to "Carry On." I plead with you to remember that the young people of this time especially must have some knowledge of the interrelatedness and interdependence of the individual and society, of man and nature, of the world and God, knowledge of the centrality and the necessity of religion, and the reality of the living God and man's relationship to him. We must teach them that religion is no longer peripheral or incidental, but that it is the very queen of the sciences, and this is not because the Church has said so or because tradition or superstition have imposed it upon human credulity, this is true because of the nature of reality. As one has recently said, "If there be a God at all, he must be the ultimate and controlling reality, and the truth concerning him, as best men can apprehend it, must be the keystone of the ever incomplete arch of human knowledge."

Yes, I say to you and to all of us, we have a challenge, and the challenge is to recognize the potential Godlike status of these young people, and recognizing that, become more poignantly aware of our responsibility as their parents and teachers.

Referring for just a moment to Father's Day, may I remind you teachers and officers that you are, as they say in law "in loco parentis." You do, in some cases, share much of the responsibility with parents, and let this line apply to you as it would apply to any father:

"A father and a little son Crossed a rough street one stormy day. `See, Father,' said the little one, `I stepped in your steps all the way.' O random, childish thoughts that deal Quick thrusts no cost of mail can stay It touched him as a touch of steel, `I stepped in your steps all the way.'"

That will be true of you, teachers, officers, members, all who undertake to teach the truth in the Church and kingdom of God to its young membership. They may forget what you say, but they'll step in your steps all the way. This is an awe-inspiring responsibility.

Let us teach them that morality depends upon one's capacity to be aware of and to identify oneself in a wholesome way with others; that morality is an eternal quest for compassion in a world often dominated by callousness; that every human contact, whether physical, mental, or spiritual must be clean and wholesome if the memory of them is to be enjoyed. As James Barrie said, "God gave us memory that we might have roses in December." Let us teach them that the heart has a certainty which the mind cannot fully comprehend and to listen to the whisperings of the Holy Spirit. Teach them that more important than our theories is the way we act; more significant than analysis, is our capacity for faith; more valuable than our intellect is our sense of morality.

Young men and young women of the Church, we, your seniors, some of us having spent almost a lifetime among you—and we thank God for that glorious privilege—would ask for no higher appointment than to work and be associated with you. We plead with you to keep your eye on your goal which is Godhood.

Be aware of your limitless possibilities because of your Godlike status. Live worthily. Keep clean. You will need firmer and purer character, higher integrity, larger spiritual vision, unimpeachable and unshakable fidelity, and a righteous and dynamic faith as you resist the down-drag of this atomic age.

Go forward and win, and I promise you you can, but it will not be an easy fight. Be unashamed of the truth. Keep close to God. I pray that you may have the ambition to be the kind of young men and young women of whom the great leaders of the Church can justly be proud, and can hold you up to all the world and say, "This is Mormonism."

I say the way will not be easy. Eliza R. Snow put it well when she said in one of our hymns:

"Be fixed in your purpose, for Satan will try you. The weight of your calling he perfectly knows, Your path may be thorny, but Jesus is nigh you; His arm is sufficient, though demons oppose."

I could not do better, I am sure, than to bring to you officers, teachers, and members of the MIA the words of the Lord—his yearning, pleading words, coupled with a promise:

". . .let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven.

"The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever." (D&C 121:45-46.)

Brethren and sisters, I humbly bear testimony that God has been so good to me personally as to cause me to know from the center of my heart to the ends of my fingers and toes that this is the gospel of Jesus Christ, that the Church is led by prophets of God, that Jesus himself is coming again to live and to rule among men. I commend you for the fine work you are doing, and assure you of the love and confidence of the Brethren with whom I have the privilege to associate. We believe in you, and in your future.

MIA Conference
