Hugh B. Brown, Eternal Quest ( 1956)

SECTION III Faith and Our Lives

The mind and spirit are equipped with radar. Messages come back in response to impulses sent. Happiness will bounce back from any contact if the impulse is strong enough.

The Ledgers of the Lord

One of the best criteria by which to judge the faith and faithfulness of members of the Church is their tithing record. They who faithfully observe this law are generally found to be the most active, the most faithful, the most uncomplaining, the most willing workers of the Church.

Tithing is a law of God to man, with promises of rewards. To ancient Israel he said, "Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house," (Mal. 3:10; 3 Ne. 24:10.) which admonition he repeated to the Saints on the Western Hemisphere, as recorded in the Book of Mormon. Paul, the apostle, wrote to the Hebrew Saints, ". . . They that are the sons of Levi, who receive the office of the priesthood, have a commandment to take the tithes of the people according to the law. . . ." (Heb. 7:15.) In this dispensation the Lord said through the Prophet Joseph Smith, after requiring the surplus property of the saints, "And this shall be the beginning of the tithing of my people.

". . . Those who have thus been tithed shall pay one-tenth of all their interest annually, and this shall be a standing law unto them forever, for my holy priesthood, saith the Lord." (D&C 119:3, 4.)

Few, if any, consistent, honest titheprayers have apostatized from the Church. No man can retain his standing in the Church to the end if he fails to observe this law. No one who has an income is exempt. The poor widow and the millionaire get equal credit if each pays a tithe of what he has.

The Lord's ledger will show whether a member is entitled to dividends or whether he is listed as dishonest. Is a non-tithepayer then dishonest? The Father said to Malachi: "Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings." (Mal. 3:8.) Men should be sure that all their business dealings are on such a plane that that they cannot be accused of having robbed anyone, least of all the Lord.

In Britain he who has earned ten shillings and feels he cannot return one of them to the One who gave him all, seemingly does not appreciate the fact, so often proved, that nine shillings with the blessing of the Lord are more valuable than ten without.

We call attention of the Saints to the fact that each time they take the sacrament they renew their covenant with God to "keep his commandments which he has given them," and they ask "that they may always have his spirit to be with them." How many have stopped to realize that the non-tithepayer is failing to keep the commandments? The one officiating at the sacrament table witnesses for each member present that he is willing to remember the Lord and keep his commandments.

It has been said that tithing is an income tax, divinely assessed and paid as a free-will offering. It is free from all coercion, but there are definite penalties for its non-observance, material, social, psychological, and spiritual. The Lord said the idler shall not eat the bread of the worker. The law of tithing amplifies this thought. All should share the responsibility of the expenses of the Church; none should share in the blessings of the Church without making his own fair contribution. It is a debt of honor, a law of financial liberty.

The habit of paying tithing is a wholesome influence in the family unit. Where parents deal honestly with the Lord, their children will be inclined toward honesty. It is a guarantee against the soul-destroying vice of greed. He who pays his tithing will have a living, increasing faith. He draws nearer to the Lord, with whom he feels a sort of partnership.

By reference to the records of the Church, the ledgers of the Lord, its membership can be classified. Some will be on the right hand, and some on the left, some faithful, and some unfaithful. It is not enough that one shall have faith in God, repent of sin, be baptized, and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, for the Lord has said that if we offend in one point, we are transgressors of the law, and shall not be entitled to the fulness of its blessings.

If all the wage-earners of the Church in Britain would pay an honest tithing, it would be possible to build a chapel for every branch within a few years, besides paying the running expenses of the mission, much of which at present comes from the tithes in other lands. "Show me thy faith by thy works." (See James 2:18.)

A record of these works is preserved in the mission office and at Church headquarters. Each member has one page or more in these ledgers. "And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened. . . .

"And they were judged every man according to their works." (Rev. 20:12, 13.)

Millennial Star

Test of Gratitude

Harvest days are thoughtful days. The autumn is a time of reckoning and of judgment. We garner the crops and prepare for the winter. We see the fruits of our labors and realize the blessing of forethought, the reward of industry. Sometimes we think of what might have been, and we make resolutions. We look forward to the spring beyond the winter and resolve to profit by the experiences of the year which is passing.

To most of us, autumn is a time of thanksgiving, when we acknowledge the Source of our blessings, and we kneel before him and give thanks. Our sincerity may not be gauged wholly by the words we use, the tone of our voice or the regularity of our kneeling.

If someone does us a great favor, one which we cannot fully repay, we sometimes express the wish that some day we may have an opportunity to show our gratitude in some tangible way. What would our benefactor think of us—what should we think of ourselves—if such an opportunity should appear and we neglected or refused to embrace it? Suppose he should ask us to do some little favor for him, something, say one-tenth as valuable as his service to us, would we refuse the favor or complain that it was too much or too difficult? If we did, we should expect all who knew the facts to list us among the ingrates, and in case of future need, embarrassment and shame would make a new appeal to the benefactor, if not impossible, at least humiliating and probably fruitless.

But the gratitude which is worthy of us will not be prompted by "a lively sense of favors to come"—it should be akin to the charity of which the apostle wrote which "seeketh not itself." Real gratitude is compounded of many virtues and is productive of others. It is to be found among those who were named by the Master as "blessed," the poor in spirit, the meek, the merciful, the pure in heart, the oppressed. Blessed is he who has a thankful heart and a contrite spirit. To him the windows of heaven are opened until he is unable to contain his blessings. But it will take more than words to open those windows.

In spite of our losses, our trials, our hardships, our bereavements, each one of us has reason to be thankful for the blessings of hte past year. With victory assurred, with the spectre of enslavement and the terror of bondage disappearing, with the promise of a new and better world, we come to the autumn of 1944 deeply grateful for our deliverance.

Many have been blessed with material things above the average of the years. Jobs have been available; crops have been good; better pay has been received; for these and many other blessings we say, "Thank you." But our Great Benefactor has intimated that we may show our appreciation to him by returning, through the Church, one-tenth of that which he has given us.

While future need should not be the moving cause of our thanksgiving and while we should be grateful to a benefactor even if we knew he could never again help us, still God himself has indicated that to obtain a blessing we must, not merely should, obey the law upon which it is predicated. The good husbandman knows he cannot reap if he does not sow. He saves seed for next year's crop. Only the foolish fail to provide for the future. Read again the parable in Luke and examine yourself before its mirror.

"And he spake a parable unto them saying: The ground of a certain rich man brought forth plentifully:

"And he thought within himself, saying, What shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits?

"And he said, This will I do: I will pull down my barns, and build greater; and there I will bestow all my fruits and my goods.

"And I will say to my soul. Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry.

"But God said to him, Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall those things be, which thou hast provided?

"So is he that layeth up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God." (Luke 12:16-21.)

In the midst of our rejoicing over the prospects of victory and peace let us be reminded that just as sure as day follows night so also night follows day. There are times ahead which will require all our faith and fortitude, times which in some ways are even more sinister than what we have known. This is no time to "pull down our barns," but rather a time when in deep humility we should express our appreciation and pray for strength to meet the trials of the future. This is no time to eat, drink, and be merry in the spirit of the man in the parable.

There is a warning as well as a promise in his challenge, "Try me and see," and we should remember that as we try ourselves and fix our status. Tithing is not only a means of saying, "Thank you," it is an acknowledgment of our dependence and a humble plea for continued blessing. It is in a sense the seed for next year's crop. It helps to determine the size and quality of the crop for which we hope and pray, a crop of blessings for which we hope to prove worthy.

But this seed of tithing is somewhat magical in that it not only produces far in excess of the average crop, but also from it we get an endless variety of blessings. The tithepayer has more faith in time of sickness, more cour- age in time of danger, more strength when tempted, better judgment for decisions, more love of God and fellow men. It therefore leads one to the keeping of the greatest commandments and the blessings which come from obedience thereto.

Let us show that our gratitude is more than just "thank you" for past blessings. Let it be an acceptance of the challenge "try me and see," and let us claim the blessings which we shall so sorely need in the months and years ahead. One's worthiness to receive such blessings is not determined wholly by one's record in the matter of tithes, but it is the history and experience of the Church during the past one hundred years that the honest tithepayer is also the faithful priesthood member, auxiliary worker, the loyal supporter of the Authorities. He is as a rule a praying man, and one whose heart is not set upon the things of this world. In short, the record in the books will indicate the faith and faithfulness of the individual.

Millennial Star

Morality Its Own Reward

Much is being written and spoken these days concerning our post-war world and the basis of peace treaties which must be negotiated and enforced after the fighting is over.

The churches have realized their lack of leadership in their own field of moral law and, since the war began, have been trying to make their voices heard in the din of political discord. They are trying to call men back from following after false gods and to affirm a faith which they admit has been waning in all Christian countries.

At a conference of Angelicans held at Malvern College in 1941, presided over by Dr. William Temple, then Archbishop of York and now Archbishop of Canterbury, it was declared that the iniquities of society result from "loss of conviction concerning the reality and character of God and the true nature and destiny of man."

The Delaware Conference of American Churchmen adopted two basic declarations as follows: (1) "We believe that moral law, no less than physical law, undergirds our world. There is a moral order which is fundamental and eternal, and which is relevant to the corporate life of men and the ordering of human society. If mankind is to escape chaos and recurrent war, social and political institutions must be brought into conformity with this moral order. (2) "We believe that the sickness and suffering which afflict our present society are proof of indifference to, as well as direct violation of, the moral law. All share responsibility for the present evils. There is none who does not need forgiveness. A mood of genuine penitence is therefore demanded of us—individuals and nations alike."

The Millennial Star is within its province as organ of the British Mission of the Church, which has members in most of the warring nations, in joining with other church publications in calling for a return to basic principles in individual and national life, to proclaim again the supremacy of the moral law and to call for an enlightened concept of the reality and character of God and the true nature and destiny of man.

The Savior tells us that it "is life eternal to know God" (see D&C 132:24), and makes entrance into the kingdom of heaven dependent upon how we treat our fellow men. For centuries, the churches which are now calling for a conviction concerning the character of God have preached and published the hopeless doctrine that God is incomprehensible. If life eternal depends upon our knowing him and if he is incomprehensible, then there can be no life eternal for man; his quest is hopeless from the beginning!

Furthermore, if deathbed repentance, so long proclaimed as a passport into heaven, be in truth a part of God's plan, what need is there for observance of the basic moral law? If man may do as he chooses with impunity so long as he finally gives intellectual assent to God's love and mercy, then the law of the harvest is annulled, and "as ye sow so shall ye reap" becomes a fallacy!

We problem as eternal truth the Bible doctrine that God is, in a very real sense, the Father of the spirits of men, that men are brothers and, therefore, answerable to their common parent for their treatment of one another and this without regard to the fact that some of their brothers live in other parts of God's world. They are still neighbors though they speak a different language or differ in physical features, size or color. We declare, too, our belief that there is a quality of "oughtness" in individual and national life which is beyond the reach of choice, which is, in fact, a moral imperative; that knowing what we ought to do and failing to do it is the cause of most of our miseries.

Many politico-philosophical writers today are challenging the churches to produce some leadership such as was had in the days of old, when kings and rulers called upon the prophets for guidance and asked to know the will of God in their national crisis. As one of these writers puts it: "We need more of the thunder from Sinai."

But the churches are united in their denial of the likelihood, if not of the possibility, of divine communication such as was had in olden times. The age of revelation, they say, is past, and while they call for some conviction concerning the reality and character of God, they, by implication at least, deny his power to intervene. They call for leadership, but would denounce as an impostor any who might claim to be a prophet sent from God to teach the nations.

An Omnipotent God, knowing the end from the beginning, made provision for the same prophetic service as was known in olden times. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, he revealed himself anew, gave instructions for the organization of his Church, directed heavenly beings to ordain men to the Holy Priesthood, and warned the nations through his prophets that dire calamities would follow their continued denial of him. He rebuked those unauthorized professors of religion who preach for hire and divine for money and, as in time of yore, he wept over their hardness of heart, their hypocrisy in seeming to worship him with their lips while their hearts were far from him.

Conversion to the simple gospel of Jesus Christ, conversion of both clergy and laity to the doctrine of the Fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man with a relationship between them; conversion to the original old-time "pure" religion and a church with apostles and prophets—this is what is needed if the church is to exert any influence at the peace table and afterward.

Faith is needed, the kind of faith which couples vision with valor, the kind by which the apostle tells us the worlds were framed by the word of God; by which Enoch was translated that he should not taste death; by which Noah, being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear and prepared an ark to the saving of his house. The kind of faith by which Abraham obeyed and went out not knowing whither he went, and by which Moses led the children of Israel through the Red Sea; the faith of Samson, of David, of Samuel, and of the prophets who, through faith, subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, and turned to flight the armies of the aliens." (See Heb. 11.)

Unless and until the leaders of the churches will themselves believe in the God of the Bible, a God of power, able to perform miracles, to hear and answer prayer, to reveal his purposes to men and sustain them in their hours of trial, until such a condition is achieved they will not inspire faith in others, but when clergy and laity come to a unity of the faith then, and then only, will vision and reality combine and proclaim a lasting peace. Only then will men unite in a higher loyalty that will transcend mere national loyalties, and there will be a true community of nations under the King of Kings, the Prince of Peace. Only then will love rule the world and all men be brothers.

Millennial Star

Ideals of Morality

Dr. Alexis Carrell makes the statement, "Moral sense is more important than intelligence." Dr. Hudson reminds us, "Jesus is not primarily a theological dogma but a moral ideal; his kingdom is not so much a theory to be believed as a goal to be sought." And Emerson declared, "The moral law lies at the center of nature and radiates to its circumference; the sentiment of virtue is the essence of all religion." And from an-other: "Not only do the beliefs of a religion mold the morals of its period, but the moral ideals of the time remold its religion."

In this age of moral conflict and growing moral skepticism it is well to place emphasis again on certain moral standards which have withstood the erosion of time and the competition of man-made ideologies. Some maintain that right and wrong are merely matters of convention; that what is good or bad in one age may be the opposite in another; or that morality varies with race and country.

He who attempts to fix hard and fast distinctions between right and wrong or to point to absolute moral standards is liable to be accused of being old-fashioned, unliberated, unenlightened, etc., by those who profess special "open-mindedness."

The following questions are asked and analyzed by a recent author: "If there is any absolute moral standard, what is it? Custom? But there are all sorts of conflicting customs. Which of them is right? Laws of Nature? But even laws of nature change with man's knowledge; and besides, one cannot violate a law of nature even if he would. And where one can do no wrong no morals are at stake. Laws of Men? But legislators are fallible, they differ and men have never held much moral awe for them. Laws of God? But there are many supposed revelations of God's will, and each has its multitudinous interpretations. Conscience? But peoples' consciences differ surprisingly, and even the conscience of the same person is bafflingly uncertain and often inconsistent, at different times."

The hazardous results of moral skepticism may be found in the region of personal righteousness. We must have a tremendous regeneration of moral ideals if we are to have political or social regeneration. Moral skepticism must be replaced by moral faith. Our thinking must enable us to affirm great things; it is not enough to deny them.

Out of this uncertainty, this denial, this groping, there is beginning to emerge a desire for spiritual insight, spiritual regeneration, and reconstruction. But we must have a definite moral order; there must be faith in certain eternal verities. We must have faith in God, in man's freedom of choice, in immortality.

They who believe in God as the Father of the race, the Creator of all that is; and especially we who believe in the modern scripture which declares it to be God's work and his glory to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of men—these will accept his word as final in any discussion of what is right or wrong. For the task of bringing immortality and eternal life to men will require teaching men to choose the right and avoid the wrong. Wise choice involves understanding. Surely, the Creator knows what is good or bad for that which he has created. Also his appraisal will take into consideration the total life of the created one and not only a segment of it. He will view it in the light of eternity. Our problem then is to find his word on this subject of morality and ideals. Let us go to the original of his word and not depend on man's interpretation thereof, for on this most important subject we do not want a diluted or modified version of what he has said to guide his children.

Let us refer to an ancient document, written by the very finger of God on imperishable tablets, and see if what he there said is applicable to our time.

If they who would make the state supreme and submerge and depreciate the individual, if they who suppress the churches and banish God would but hear, with understanding hearts, his mandatory injunction "Thou shalt have no other gods before me" (Ex. 20:3), they would free the countless millions who now are forced to place the god of the state above the God of heaven. If individuals who worship the god of pleasure and are willing to make any sacrifice to get money with which to allure this god, could be brought to change their allegiances and worship him, they would find not mere pleasure, but lasting joy.

What richness would be added to the lives of men if they would spend one day in seven in prayer and praise and meditation; if they would hear and obey his command "Remember the sabbath day to keep it holy." (Ex. 20:8.)

In an age where the discipline of the home is being undermined by modern philosophies, where the authority of the parent is being replaced by the state, and where children are taught to disregard the teachings of parents, and in some instances not only to be disloyal to them but even to betray them, in such an age it would be well if someone could sound again with authority that commandment which carries a promise of long life, "Honour thy father and thy mother. . . ." (Ex. 20:12.) Disloyalty here will sap the roots of social life and political well-being, for this is the initial contact of the individual with authority. Let those who strike at this root be warned that they will witness the downfall of the tree of political authority.

Did ever the world so need to pause and hear again the voice of God declaring, "Thou shalt not kill"? (Ex. 20:13.) They who are responsible for the present strife, who think greed justifies aggression, must someday know there is a penalty attached to this law.

When one of the dominant evils of the age is undermining our civilization with preventable diseases and our social structure is shot through with shame, we call upon men and women to hearken to his unequivocal command, "Thou shalt not commit adultery." (Ex. 20:14.)

Let those leaders of nations who disregard all property and national rights, who in plundering weaker nations imagine a necessity and make it a law; to whom might alone determines right; who covet, misrepresent, and steal; who not only trample upon the rights of men but also seek to justify themselves by asserting that he who is "no respector of persons" has stamped them with a special favor; let them know that they are not exempt from the penalties of breaking the last three commandments, "Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness. . . (propaganda in this age), and Thou shalt not covet that which is thy neighbour's. . . ." (Ex. 20:15-17.)

These great standards apply not alone to individuals but to groups of individuals called nations as well. Let all the world realize that national dishonesty, national selfishness, national sin are as reprehensible as individual sins of the same order.

These then are some of the standards by which men and nations may gauge their actions. When free agency was made a part of the great plan for man's redemption, there was emblazoned across the heavens the great imperative "Choose," and under it the warning, "You must take the consequences of such choice." Standards, yes! They are as imperative today as when they were first given. In fact, they were reissued and given new meaning when Jesus of Nazareth breathed into them the Spirit of Christ and carried them over into the realm of thinking.

They who now advocate the doctrine of force should be reminded that God himself rejected such philosophy when it was presented to him by the original would-be dictator. If men are forced to observe the law, they would not be entitled to praise or blame. This freedom of choice is a right for which men have ever fought and it is to preserve it and other freedoms which are being menaced, that the democracies are now embattled as were the hosts of heaven when there was war there.

In the darkness of present times let us not lose sight of our standards but hold them high with confidence that we have divine approval.

Millennial Star

Higher Authority

I was on leave in 1916, staying at the Regent Palace hotel in London, just off Piccadilly. A messenger came who said, "You are wanted at a certain hospital." I had become accustomed to being called upon for favors from the men, because of the office I held; and as I received this message I thought "Some boy who is ill wants a leave, wants to return home to recuperate. He is sending for me with a request that I exercise my authority in his behalf." And rather proudly I took my cap and my crop, called a taxi, and went to the hospital; and as I went I thought, "It is a great thing to be an officer in the King's army; it is a great thing to be able to do something for someone else, because of the mark on the shoulder or the cuff of the uniform." I went rather proudly in the thought that I might be able to do something for someone because I was an officer of the King. I went into the hospital and was ushered into a little room; and there I saw a former Sunday School student of mine, one whom I had taught in the intermediate departments of the Sunday School in Canada years before. This boy was very sick. He reached out a trembling hand. He did not address me by my military title, but said, in a weakened voice, "Brother Brown, I sent for you because the doctor says I must die. You know I have a widowed mother out in Canada; you know she needs me. I sent to ask if you will exercise your authority in my behalf, administer to me, ask God to save my life."

When he asked me to exercise my authority, there suddenly dawned upon me, for I had temporarily seemingly forgotton, that I held an authority that was not to be known by the uniform I wore, that I held an authority that would enable me, if properly exercised, to ask favors, not of the King of England, not of the general in command of the army, for under these circumstances they were helpless, but an authority which enabled me to ask of God a favor for this boy; and in humility I knelt by the side of that boy's cot and exercised the authority of the Holy Priesthood. I humbly prayed God to spare his life for his widowed mother. God was good enough to hear my prayer, and he answered it.

I went into that hospital a proud British officer; I came out a humble Mormon elder.

I thank God for the testimony of the truth, for the priesthood that is ours. I thank him that he hears and answers prayers. I thank him for what my mother taught me when I was but a boy. Thank God for my parents! I thank God for the privilege of having labored under President Heber J. Grant, and thus having caught the inspiration of his words and example. I thank the Lord for the privilege of returning now to Great Britain. I love the Scottish and the English and the Irish and the Welsh, and I would like to say to you, my brethren and sisters, speaking as a farmer who comes from the plains of western Canada—I would like to say to you that after the harvest there is a gleaning time, yes, but after the gleaning, if seeds are sown, there comes another harvest. I believe we are about to reap another harvest in Great Britain. God grant that you and I may be found ready to thrust in our sickles and bring many to a knowledge of the truth, that we may exercise in humility this authority by which we have the right to speak in the name of the Lord. We testify, as did they who came here one hundred years ago, that the heavens have been opened, the truth is restored, the gospel of Jesus Christ is in the earth, and it alone will bring peace to the earth.

Millennial Star

Knowing and Loving God

". . .Thou shalt love the Lord thy God. . .with all thy mind. . . ." (Luke 10:27.) The above is but part of Christ's injunction, but seemingly a part not often stressed in print or pulpit. We hear often of the necessity of loving God with all our hearts and with all our souls, but there was a purpose in his including "mind" in his instruction.

Can one love with the mind or is its function limited to the cold processes of unemotional fact-finding? Is the extent of our love of God to be gauged wholly by sentimental reaction, lip service, physical demonstrations, forms, and ceremonies?

Jesus said, if we would have eternal life we must know God. Can one love that which he does not know? By what process do we come to know? Is love affected by knowledge? "We are saved no faster than we gain knowledge."fn Of what? Of God. As we gain knowledge of him we become like him and with this growth our capacity for love increases. As we become like him, we achieve salvation, which is, in the very nature of things, a continuing process.

Any person's conception of Deity must come within his mental horizon, which is determined by the degree of his intelligence. Man, by his reasoning, naturally endows God with his own noblest and highest ideals, which if he be studious and devout, are ever growing. Intellectual activity then produces an ever-changing, because ever-growing, concept of God. Once the mind has grasped the idea of God it will burn and glow, seek to assimilate and radiate, adore and emulate. This love of God by the mind of man when accompanied by the love of heart and soul will light the pathway of salvation, the gates to which may be unlocked by the key of knowledge.

To know God, and thereby gain eternal life, one must come to have adequate concepts of his personality in its various aspects—physical, intellectual, social, moral, and spiritual. Accurate concepts will come only as God reveals them. But here as elsewhere he rewards industry and application. In this field, too, the promise ". . .seek, and ye shall find;. . ." (Matt. 7:7), will find fulfilment. In such seeking, the heart and soul require the co-operation and guidance of the mind. Men must think about God if they would worship intelligently. But we must ever beware of the rank growth of mistaken speculation. We must ever seek this most precious knowledge by the light of revelation.

A man may approach an understanding of God physically by acquiring knowledge of physiology and hygiene, by conforming to the laws of health and observing others who so conform. He may get some hint of the physical perfection of his Creator by nothing the results of man's intelligent efforts to achieve physical fitness. Such a glimpse will not come to the ascetic who despises the human body and who feels that any idea of a God with a body is debasing. We know God as we become like him and to know him is to love him.

If one would attempt to estimate the intellectual powers of God, let him study the elements of the intellect in man. Increasing knowledge here will lead him to wonder at the power of intellect by which the solar system was created and is controlled and the earth inhabited by its myriad forms of life. Scientific instruments enable us to explore vast fields here, and our wonder increases with our knowledge as we reiterate the exclamation of the shepherd king of old.

To the scientist, whose senses are aided so magnificently by the microscope, the telescope, the spectroscope, and other instruments, more than to the ancient, who saw but little in comparison, should the heavens declare the glory of God, if only he have faith to light his learning. Tennyson had real insight when he wrote the line about the flower in the crannied wall, "If I knew you root and all and all in all, I should know what God and man is." The sociologist, if his heart be right, may see in the perfection of his science, an ideal social harmony called heaven. He may come to know God socially and add mental worship to heartfelt adoration.

If a man would know God morally and spiritually, he must discover and live moral and spiritual laws by which he may come to know a Being far greater than the one visualized by those self-persecuting beings who think their duty to him and themselves is fulfilled by mere adoration and self-debasement. To become like him, man must progressively understand him, which involves an ever-widening mental horizon bounded by experience. It is apparent that the mind may not only love, but, by the process of its acquiring knowledge of God in these various aspects, augment and glorify the love of heart and soul.

This is not to say that only the profound student may worship God. On the contrary, the poor fisherman or the peasant may know and love him more than the learned. But the injunction "Thou shalt love with all thy mind" (see Luke 10:22) applies to both. If both be devout, they will "see in part and understand in part" (see 1 Cor. 13:9) according to their capacity, and there is no limit to the possible growth of either of them. Both will be saved as they gain knowledge. However, a little knowledge intelligently used by a reverent soul will have more saving power than many cold facts unlighted by the torch of faith. It is a combination of the two for which we plead. Surely a man of high intelligence, familiar with the arts and sciences of his time, a cultured man who has profited by the lessons of history, is more like God than a primitive savage. His love of God will be on quite a different plain from that of his less enlightened brother.

We may illustrate our theme by referring to man's love of nature and note how the quality and depth of that love is gauged by his understanding. How the heart leaps with joy in contemplation of a beautiful spring scene! What feelings are aroused by the senses, the seeing eye, the hearing ear, the senses of feeling and smell! If, by study and application, he can discover in that scene myriads of hidden sounds, colors, scents, and harmonies, will he love it more or less? Will not his study of the landscape and of the family of nature housed therein result in responses from theretofore unclaimed parts of him? Will he not see new relationships between things and new meanings with unguessed qualities calling for ever greater adoration? Surely here the mind loves and is warmed by the scene, and the heart leaps in joyous response. The outthrust of his mind will beckon him on, and he will continue his quest for understanding that his love may be more perfect and his joy more full. In this realm, too, he will find that he is saved (from ignorance) as he gains knowledge.

But the full quotation counsels us to love, not in separate parts, but as a unit, the whole man. Too often we disregard the emphasis which He gives by his analysis ". . .with all thy heart,. . .all thy soul,. . .all thy mind. . . ." (Luke 10:27.) In the many mansions prepared for those who love him, allocations will be made on the basis of depth and height and breadth and quality of love, heartfelt, soul-full, mind-illumined love.

Millennial Star

With the Lord's Help

Fifty years ago there was in many countries relentless and bitter opposition to the Church; the missionaries were frequently mobbed, whipped, driven out of cities, and sometimes martyred.

Then, as now, the missionaries learned to trust in and rely on the Lord for inspiration, protection, and guidance. The following missionary experience is related to illustrate how the Lord will come to the assistance of his servants if they do the best they can and have faith in him.

A young man, twenty-one years of age, arrived in England and was assigned by President Heber J. Grant to labor in the Norwich conference. His first assignment was to the city of Cambridge.

The last missionaries to labor in Cambridge before this young man arrived had been driven out of the city by an angry mob and were warned that if any Mormon elders came there again, they would do so at their peril.

This young man and his senior companion arrived in Cambridge on a certain Thursday afternoon in November 1904. They were immediately successful in obtaining a lodging place but were made uneasy and apprehensive as they saw across the road from their lodging large posters on the billboards, where they read among other things, "Beware of the vile deceivers; the Mormons are returning. Drive them out."

Friday morning the senior companion left for France as he was about ready to return home and had permission to take a trip on the continent. The young elder, therefore, was left alone. He had been instructed by his senior companion to go tracting that day, was told which streets to tract, and advised to tract at least five days a week.

He spent the rest of Friday morning and Friday afternoon tracting a certain street and on Saturday visited the university and other points of interest to get acquainted with the city.

Saturday evening as he sat in his lodging, a knock came at the door and he heard a man's voice inquire, "does an Elder —- live here?" The young missionary, of course, thought the enemy had arrived, and he felt very lonely and somewhat afraid.

The landlady brought the man into the missionary's room, and he, producing a tract, asked, "Did you leave this at my door?"

The young man knew that his own name and address had been placed on the bottom of the tract by a rubber stamp and, though his fear almost prompted him to deny having delivered the tract, he knew that would be useless. He therefore said, "Yes, sir, I think I did leave that at your door if you live on —- street."

The man then said to the young missionary, "Last Sunday a group of us left our church. We had a misunderstanding with the minister. We are not going back. We agreed among us that we would pray throughout the week that God would send us a new pastor. When I found this tract under my door as I came home this afternoon, I felt sure the Lord had answered our prayers. I communicated with my friends, and they agreed that I should come and see you. We wish you would come and be our pastor tomorrow night. I have a large home and a room big enough to accommodate my friends. There are seventeen of us in all, and we believe the Lord has sent you to us."

The young missionary was relieved to find the man was not an enemy, but in a sense he was more frightened at the prospects which lay ahead than he might have been if they had come to warn him to leave the city. He had not been in the mission field a week, had never attended a meeting in the mission field, had never presided in a meeting before going into the mission field, had never preached a sermon. To be now suddenly confronted with the prospect of holding a meeting without anyone to help him, without a companion, without preparation, took all the courage he could muster to say to the man, "Yes, sir, I will be pleased to come and be your minister tomorrow night." The man thanked him and left.

As the young man sat alone in his room after his visitor had gone, he was both excited and depressed. He knew that he had come three thousand miles for the express purpose of preaching the gospel and now an exceptional opportunity had presented itself, but he felt wholly inadequate, wholly unprepared, so completely dependent that he almost wished he had not promised to undertake the task.

When the landlady came in to prepare his evening meal, he told her he thought he would not eat that night. He went to his bedroom early. He knelt by his bed and talked with God. He did not say, "Now I lay me down to sleep." He told the Lord what his problem was and how he was there alone with no other Latter-day Saint within a hundred miles to his knowledge, that here were people seeking for the truth, and he pleaded with the Lord to come to his assistance.

Several times during the night he got out of bed and knelt again in prayer. He could not sleep as he tried to visualize himself standing before a strange group who looked to him as a trained minister and expected more of him than he could possibly deliver.

After spending the long night alternately tossing on his bed and kneeling in humble prayer, daylight came, and he notified the landlady that he would not have breakfast. He walked out through the park, by the university, past King's College. Christ's Church. He saw many happy people, young and old, seeming to be without worries or responsibilities. He felt that the weight of the world was upon his shoulders.

Upon returning to his room at noon he again gave instructions he would not eat. He took another long walk in the afternoon and as he walked, continued to pray. So sure was he that he could not meet this situation that he actually prayed that God would send such a rainstorm that no one would come to the meeting. But that prayer was not answered.

Time came for the evening meal, but he was not hungry. The time set for the meeting was 7:00 o'clock, and the clock ticked on. Finally he put on his long Prince Albert coat, his high silk hat, took his Bible and his walking cane, and started for the address which the man had given him.

The young man had been a cowboy before his mission. He felt very awkward in the missionary clothes and if, "Home on the Range," had been written at that time he likely would have been humming it as he longed for the freedom of the western prairies.

Upon arrival at the address he knocked on the door rather timidly. Apparently the man had been watching for him out of the window because almost before he knocked, the door was opened. The man bowed courteously and said, "Come in, Parson," and ushered him into a large room where seventeen of the man's friends were sitting. They all arose in honor of their new minister. He was shown to a little table and chair, and the people all sat expectantly.

In all his worrying he had not really thought just what he would have to do. It had not occurred to him that no one there would know a Mormon hymn, that he could not call on any of them to offer the opening or the closing prayer. He had not realized how completely that meeting was to be up to him. In desperation he announced the first hymn as, "Oh, My Father" and was stricken with a sense of loneliness as he suddenly realized he would have to sing the song alone. This he tried to do, and the result was awful.

After singing two verses of the hymn he thought it was time to pray and was really afraid to stand before that congregation and offer prayer. He therefore suggested that they all turn around and kneel at their chairs while he knelt and prayed. This they did.

The opening words of that prayer were, "Our Father who art in heaven. These people who are kneeling here before thee have come to hear thy word. I came from Canada to England for the purpose of teaching thy word. Without thy help, oh, God, they will be disappointed, and I will be disgraced. Please, God, speak to them through me."

As the boy thus prayed, all fear left him. There came over him a sense of peace and a feeling that all would be well. They arose from their knees, and he thought it best to dispense with the second hymn and began to speak. Through the inspiration of the Lord he spoke forty-five minutes to that group, and many times they shed tears as he bore his testimony. At the close of the meeting they came, all of them, and each in turn said much the same thing, "Why have we not heard these things before? This is what we have been praying for. This, we know now, is the gospel. Thank God for sending you to us." His tears mingled freely with theirs as together they worshiped God and thanked him for his blessings.

Before many months every man, woman, and child who attended that meeting joined the Church. Many of them are living in America now, and hundreds of others have heard and embraced the gospel through them.

The young man who had come to that meeting with dragging feet and heavy returned to his lodging seemingly walking in the air and with a heart bursting with praises to God for His goodness. He knew that he had only been the instrument which God had used that night to sow seeds of the gospel. Surely God does hear the prayers of His servants.

Millennial Star

Life's Purpose

"He has achieved success who has lived well, laughed often, and loved much. Who has gained the respect of intelligent men and the love of little children. Who has filled his niche and accomplished his task, who has left the world better than he found it, whether by an improved poppy, a perfect poem, or a rescued soul. Who has never lacked appreciation of earth's beauties, nor failed to express it. Who has always looked for the best in others and given the best he had. Whose life is an inspiration, whose memory a benediction."

—Robert Louis Stevenson

"Life has meaning; and to find its meaning is my meat and drink," said Browning. Doubtless to every mature person has come the question—why am I? what is the object of my being? Sages and philosophers have attempted to answer, but they give us a stone when we ask for bread. One says life is endless pain leading only to a painful end; says another, it is an adventure leading only to resignation and despair. Some see in life a great adventure in which good fortune and ill follow each other with bewildering variety; some say it is a game of chance without a chance of winning, that the fall of Adam resulted in man's earth—life being altered to his detriment if indeed it did not thwart the plan of the Creator.

One gets a pessimistic outlook on life if he relies alone on the writings of philosophers. We need that vision and inspiration which came to and through ". . . holy men of God [who] spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost" (2 Pet. 1:21) if we are to escape the mental down-drag of these unhappy days.

Contrasted with the juiceless and dusty straw which some philosophers would feed to the people, is the life-giving grain discovered and declared to the world by an ancient optimist and prophet, ". . .men are, that they might have joy." (2 Ne. 2:25.)

What is your outlook on life today? Have you courage to face the future? Are you hopeful, contented, helpful, and optimistic? To whom do you look for your inspiration? Have you reserves of valor behind the front lines of your vision? Does your faith make you unafraid of that "No Man's Land" across which the general plan of campaign requires you to go?

A new Day of Pentecost awaits the world and will renew its mighty powers among us and overcome the drought that the paganism of war seems wont to spread on Christendom. But such a Pentecost can come only when men again become converted to the truth as Christ taught it, and seek that upper room and be all ". . .with one accord. . . ." (Acts 1:14.)

The gospel of Jesus Christ restored in our age beckons today as anciently, and promises joy to all who will yield obedience to its teachings. Obedience—that word from which the timid flee and to which the valiant look for their deliverance! "Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered;

"And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him." (Heb. 5:8-9.) Obedience is an integral part of the gospel plan. Though we have a perfect plan, divinely inspired, if it is not accepted and obeyed, it will never be effective. It is not self-operating but requires intelligent application. The best-constructed automobile is of little value unless the mechanical laws governing its various parts are understood and observed, and it is put to work.

If we accept the gospel, we must comply with its ordinances, must perform the symbols which stand for its realities, must observe its laws and obligations. Thus this word obedience, which to some seems to whisper slavery, is seen to be the emblem of true liberty. It is an ingredient of the joy we seek.

Obedience, however, involves restraint and self-control. One may find temporary pleasure in the gratification of an appetite, in the indulgence of desire, but lasting joy comes only to the man who is willing to pay the price of self-denial to achieve self-realization. "Everything worth while in life must be bought and paid for by giving up some habits and indulgences which are irreconcilable to its possession."

The man who rightly answers the question, "Why am I?" will strive to increase his power of appreciation. Too many go through life with eyes closed, with ears stopped, with sense of feeling deadened or never awakened, and with the shutters closed to the windows of the soul; so absorbed in material things that they miss the beauty and the richness which lies about them. God's glory is intelligence, and we must climb the ladder of knowledge if we are ever to share that glory.

"Fools believe," says the philosopher, "that if they can only achieve wealth their wants will be completely gratified. A man of means is supposed to be a man with means for the fulfilment of every desire. A life devoted to the acquisition of wealth is useless unless one knows how to turn it into joy and that is an art which requires culture and wisdom. A succession of sensual pursuits never satisfies for long. One must understand the ends of life as well as the art of acquiring means. Men are a thousand times more intent upon becoming rich than on acquiring culture, though it is quite certain that what a man is contributes more to his happiness than what he has; not wealth but wisdom is the way."

He who finds joy in life does not speak of its relationships as duties, obligations, and responsibilities. To him life is a privilege and an opportunity to serve. Service leads to love, and love, the fulfilment of the great commandment, leads to immortality and eternal progress. Here alone may joy be found.

The road to this desirable goal may lead through valleys of sorrow and pain and disappointment but the prize is worth the price. Great souls in all ages have been willing to accept poverty, obscurity, and persecution rather than forsake the quest. They knew the joy of self-sacrificing service.

Yes, man is that he might have joy—the joy of conquest over self, the joy of achievement, the joy of having fought the good fight, of having kept the faith, the joy of a peace that is earned, the joy of increase, the joy of living that more abundant life exemplified by the Master, the joy that comes from patient continuance in well-doing, the joy of comradesh, the joy of awareness and appreciation.

That joy which is the purpose of our being could not have been achieved without the refining fires of life's experience. If man had remained in that untried, innocent state of pre-existent infancy, he would have done no good, for he knew no evil, would have had no joy, for he knew no sorrow.

Man is, then, that he might have the joy which comes through understanding and obeying those eternal laws upon which all blessings are predicated.

"They are they who received the testimony of Jesus, and believed on his name and were baptized after the manner of his burial, being buried in the water in his name, and this according to the commandment which he has given—

"That by keeping the commandments they might be washed and cleansed from all their sins, and receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of the hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto this power:

"And who overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true." (D.& C. 76:51-53.)

Millennial Star

Reverence

"The soul of the Christian religion is reverence."—Goethe.

In our consideration of this subject we might with profit paraphrase the words of Shakespeare's Cassius and say, "The fault, dear teachers, is not in our students but in ourselves that our schools lack reverence."

If the officers and teachers of any Sunday School wish to encourage the spirit of reverence, they themselves must have that spirit. It is atmospherically diffused and is radiant and contagious. A reverent teacher seldom needs to speak of reverence, as his attitude and conduct will, like a banner to marching men, attract attention and inspire orderly and unified response.

If all the officers and teachers of the Sunday School came to their several duties with programs, lessons, and details so well-prepared that whispered consultations in the chapel would be unnecessary, then the members of the Sunday School would observe and copy this example of dignified orderliness, quiet calm, and unhurried efficiency. We may show or teach reverence even by our posture—the way we walk and sit—or by our general appearance, careful grooming, and modulated speech. The mind and spirit of the individual are reflected in physical attitudes and habits, and in Sunday School these should always indicate high regard for sacred places and religious assemblies. The spirit of reverence should radiate from the center of the heart and give flavor and color to every activity.

When the superintendent and his counselors walk quietly to their places on the stand after having completed the program for the preliminary service, including music, prayers, short talks, Sacrament gem, and the administering of the Sacrament, when an air of reverence pervades the rostrum, it attracts and holds the attention of the members of the Sunday School and will carry over into the classes.

Where the teacher is in his place before the organ prelude begins; where the teachers and senior classes refrain from noisy greetings and quietly take their seats; where no one speaks above a whisper and only whisper when necessary; where such subjects as politics, business, sports, and social events are never discussed in the chapel; where the officiating lesser priesthood are scrupulously neat and clean, appropriately dressed—not necessarily in uniform—where they sit at or facing the Sacrament table with decorum; where all present, with closed eyes and bowed heads, thoughtfully follow the blessings on the emblems and then partake in respectful, grateful remembrance of his sacrifice and renew their covenants; where each one acts as though he were really in God's house, there the spirit of the Lord will be felt and reverence will prevail.

When we repeat the Lord's prayer we say, ". . . Hallowed be thy name. . . ." (Matt. 6:9.) We should help to make his house also a hallowed or holy place as we worship in his name. That his spirit is grieved by lack of reverence is shown by the fact that Christ displayed righteous indignation when he found irreverent men desecrating his Father's house. To desecrate is to divert from a sacred purpose, to violate the sanctity of or to profane or put to an unworthy use that which is sacred. Consecrate is the opposite of desecrate, and our houses of worship are dedicated and consecrated.

Houses dedicated for religious purposes are sacred places to which we have frequent access. If we are guilty of thoughtless, rude, or irreverent conduct in our chapels, charity may prevent our being expelled or excluded, but we may find that his spirit has withdrawn either from us or, if such conduct is general, from the chapel. The Holy Spirit is very sensitive and may be "tuned out" by inconsiderate or irreverent conduct or by thoughts, attitudes, or expressions which are inconsistent with the delicate beauty of spiritual communion.

We are permitted to visit the temples of the Lord only when we can present a recommend signed by the bishop and stake president certifying our membership and fitness. No laughter, loud talking, or improper conduct in the temple is tolerated. One feels that he has come in from the boistrous world to a blessed haven of spiritual association.

While temples are dedicated for sacred purposes and are not used for such public worship as is conducted in our wards and stakes, still we should remember that our chapels are also houses of the Lord. It is here we sing sacred hymns, offer prayers of supplication and gratitude, partake of the Sacrament, teach and are taught the word of God, bear testimonies to one another and to Him. Our attitude and deportment should at all times indicate sincerity, humility, and reverence, and respectful silence and meditation will color and flavor these qualities.

In our opening prayers in Sunday School and other meetings we invoke the spirit of the Lord to be with us. In other words we invite him to meet with us in his house, but really we are there at his invitation as he said to all of us, "that thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world, thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day." (D&C 59:9.)

He said to his disciples in Jerusalem that "For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them." (Matt. 18:20.) He renewed that promise in this dispensation as recorded in the D&C 6:32. If we have the proper attitude he has promised to be with us. If, however, we are guilty of irreverent or boisterous conduct, we may grieve his spirit and cause it to withdraw, and when it is withdrawn, the purpose of the session will be defeated.

Reverence for a place of worship indicates that we recognize it as the house of God. This inspires awe and counsels silence and meditation. Reverence not only shows profound respect for him but also respect for the rights of others and for accepted rules of conduct. Furthermore, it indicates quite and sincere self-respect which is the cement of character. A reverent person is a humble person, and humility is never noisy or rude. One's attitude toward sacred things and places reveals the depth and quality of the inner self while flippant irreverence denotes a shallow soul.

Visitors may properly question our sincerity if we go through the forms of worship without the spirit thereof, and the chapel may cease to be his house if our conduct offends and expels his spirit. When this happens, our attempts to worship are frustrated; we become aware of a lack of warmth; we lose spiritual contact and can neither effectively teach nor be taught. Each individual present either contributes to or detracts from the atmosphere or spirit of the place and the occasion, even as the contribution of each member of a symphony helps to create harmony or may be responsible for dissonance.

At this time when so many new chapels are being dedicated in the wards and stakes of the Church, there should be a concerted effort on the part of the various quorums and auxiliary organizations to create and maintain a spirit of reverence at the time of the dedication and thenceforth in every meeting held therein. There should be a uniform resolution observed in every ward and stake that all visiting, hand shaking and conversation shall take place in the recreation hall or foyer and never carried on in the chapel.

Reverence is an attitude of heart and mind expressed in conduct. It indicates or results from feelings of respect, awe, or love and is a vital ingredient of true worship. The irreverent person reveals a lack of culture and refinement. He will not be long tolerated by the group if his attitude and actions detract from the spirit of true worship. No one has a right to mar the beauty and harmony of a group engaged in worship, in prayer, in praise, or in administering sacred emblems. The respectful and reverent attitude of those present gives meaning, significance, and inspiration to the spoken word. During every religious service there should be the kind of humility which brings the soul to its knees. Let each individual and each family group on Sunday morning, having been sanctified at the family alter before the members left for Church, bring to the chapel the true spirit of worship having in mind the sacramental refrain:

"Reverently and meekly now Let thy head most humbly bow; Think of me, thou ransomed one; Think what I for thee have done."

The Instructor

The Gardener and the Current Bush

In the early dawn, a young gardener was pruning his trees and shrubs. He had one choice currant bush which had gone too much to wood. He feared therefore that it would produce little, if any, fruit.

Accordingly, he trimmed and pruned the bush and cut it back. In fact, when he had finished, there was little left but stumps and roots.

Tenderly he considered what was left. It looked so sad and deeply hurt. On every stump there seemed to be a tear where the pruning knife had cut away the growth of early spring. The poor bush seemed to speak to him, and he thought he heard it say:

"Oh, how could you be so cruel to me; you who claim to be my friend, who planted me and cared for me when I was young, and nurtured and encouraged me to grow? Could you not see that I was rapidly responding to your care? I was nearly half as large as the trees across the fence, and might soon have become like one of them. But now you've cut my branches back; the green, attractive leaves are gone, and I am in disgrace among my fellows."

The young gardener looked at the weeping bush and heard its plea with sympathetic understanding. His voice was full of kindness as he said, "Do not cry; what I have done to you was necessary that you might be a prize currant bush in my garden. You were not intended to give shade or shelter by your branches. My purpose when I planted you was that you should bear fruit. When I want currants, a tree, regardless of its size, cannot supply the need.

"No, my little currant bush, if I had allowed you to continue to grow as you had started, all your strength would have gone to wood; your roots would not have gained a firm hold, and the purpose for which I brought you into my garden would have been defeated. Your place would have been taken by another, for you would have been barren. You must not weep; all this will be for your good; and some day, when you see more clearly, when you are richly laden with luscious fruit, you will thank me and say, `Surely, he was a wise and loving gardener. He knew the purpose of my being, and I thank him now for what I then thought was cruelty.'"

Some years later, this young gardener was in a foreign land, and he himself was growing. He was proud of his position and ambitious for the future.

One day an unexpected vacancy entitled him to promotion. The goal to which he had aspired was now almost within his grasp, and he was proud of the rapid growth which he was making.

But for some reason unknown to him, another was appointed in his stead, and he was asked to take another post relatively unimportant and which, under the circumstances, caused his friends to feel that he had failed.

The young man staggered to his tent and knelt beside his cot and wept. He knew now that he could never hope to have what he had thought so desirable. He cried to God and said, "Oh, how could you be so cruel to me? You who claim to be my friend—you who brought me here and nurtured and encouraged me to grow. Could you not see that I was almost equal to the other men whom I have so long admired? But now I have been cut down. I am in disgrace among my fellows. Oh, how could you do this to me?"

He was humiliated and chagrined and a drop of bitterness was in his heart, when he seemed to hear an echo from the past. Where had he heard those words before? They seemed familiar. Memory whispered:

"I'm the gardener here."

He caught his breath. Ah, that was it—the currant bush! But why should that long-forgotten incident come to him in the midst of his hour of tragedy? And memory answered with words which he himself had spoken:

"Do not cry. . .what I have done to you was necessary. . .you were not intended for what you sought to be,. . .if I had allowed you to continue. . .you would have failed in the purpose for which I planted you and my plans for you would have been defeated. You must not weep; some day when you are richly laden with experience you will say, `He was a wise gardener. He knew the purpose of my earth life. . . . I thank him now for what I thought was cruel.'"

His own words were the medium by which his prayer was answered. There was no bitterness in his heart as he humbly spoke again to God and said, "I know you now. You are the gardener, and I the currant bush. Help me, dear God, to endure the pruning, and to grow as you would have me grow; to take my allotted place in life and ever more to say, `Thy will not mine be done.'"

Another lapse of time in our story. Forty years have passed. The former gardener and officer sits by his fireside with wife and children and grandchildren. He tells them the story of the currant bush—his own story; and as he kneels in prayer with them, he reverently says to God, "Help us all to understand the purpose of our being, and be ever willing to submit to thy will and not insist upon our own. We remember that in another garden called Gethsemane the choicest of all thy sons was glorified by submission unto thy will."

As they arose from prayer, this family group, they joined in singing a familiar hymn which now had for them new meaning.

"It may not be on the mountain height, Or over the stormy sea, It may not be at the battle's front, My Lord will have need of me. . . . So trusting my all to thy tender care, And knowing thou lovest me, I'll do thy will with a heart sincere, I'll be what you want me to be."

The father closed "Home Evening" with the lines:

"My will not thine be done," turned paradise into a desert.

"Thy will not mine," turned the desert into a paradise, and made Gethsemane the gate of heaven.

Millennial Star

Adversity, Too, Has its Proper Place

I believe, my brethren and sisters, that adversity is a very important part of the lives of most men. Surely it has formed the background of the lives of some of the greatest men of the earth, men who have written their names indelibly upon the pages of history, who have carved themselves into the consciousness of the race, and have done so in spite of, or perhaps we should say because of, their acquaintance with adversity, with sorrow, with difficulty and disappointment.

I believe we often overlook the fact which was pointed out by the Savior of the world. When he was instructing his followers, he said there was a certain foolish man who built his house upon the sand, and the floods came, and the rains descended, and the winds blew and beat upon that house, and it fell. And there was another man who built his house upon a rock, and he was called a wise man. But we overlook the fact that on this other house as well as upon the first the rains descended, the floods came, the winds blew and beat upon that house but it fell not.

Men sometimes labor under the false impression that reverses, disappointments, tragedies come only as the result of sin and disobedience. This is not true. Sometimes they may come as a result of that undoubtedly. But it is not right to say that because a person suffers loss of one kind or another, it is necessarily a result of disobedience. The trail perhaps may come to him to teach some of the great lessons of life. And so we must remember that the winds blow and the rains beat upon the house that is built upon the rock. The promise is not exemption from the storm but that they who so build shall have strength to withstand it.

So I believe, as we look back over history, as we contemplate the past and think of what has happened in the lives of great men, we find comfort in the fact that they too have endured disappointment. I doubt if there is one under the sound of my voice who has not suffered disappointment and adversity. Each man seems to have a date with adversity which he must keep. As we look back we think of blind poets in their cells writing sublime epics; we think of philosophers with crippled bodies, sitting perhaps in dungeons giving to the world sublime thoughts. We think of great historians who because of physical handicaps must put a hundred times more effort into their work than the normal man. We think of prophets in exile preaching the word of God. We think of emancipators and liberators doing the world's work largely because of the training they had in adversity.

It is with nations as with men. We read the history of Israel, and we find that the most radiant, courageous, and enduring faith among the children of Israel came in the days of their adversity rather than in the prosperous days when King Solomon was on the throne.

We read too in the Book of Mormon, a wonderful history of a wonderful people where again and again is depicted the demoralizing effect of prosperity and the soul-cleansing life-building power of adversity.

So all through history we find that God has cleansed people through adversity. We cannot think of the history of the past and bring to our minds examples of adversity without thinking of the one who stands as the central figure of all time, the Master, the one who was prophetically referred to before he was born as "man of sorrow," (Isa. 53:3), who was acquainted with grief, the one to whom Paul referred as he who learned obedience by the things he suffered. (See Heb. 5:8.) And as we think of what he did and his accomplishments in the earth, we are led in all of our difficulties to feel that God knows best.

I am reminded now of what someone has written concerning the Master and what he did in spite of the difficulties that surrounded his life:

"Here is a man who was born in an obscure village. He worked in a carpenter's shop until he was thirty, and then for three years he was an itinerant preacher. He never wrote a book. He never held an office. He never put his foot inside a big city. He never went two hundred miles from the place where He was born. He never did one of the things that usually accompanies greatness. He had no credentials but himself. He had nothing to do with in this world except the naked power of his divine manhood. While still a young man, the tide of popular opinion turned against him. His friends ran away. One of them denied him; another betrayed him. He was turned over to his enemies. He went through the mockery of a trial. He was nailed on the cross between two thieves. His executioners gambled for the only piece of property he had on earth while he was dying, and that was his coat. When he was dead, he was taken down and laid in a borrowed grave through the pity of a friend.

"Nineteen wide centuries have come and gone, and today he is the center of the human race, and the leader of the column of progress. I am far within the mark when I say that all the armies of the world that ever marched and all the navies that were ever built, and all the parliaments that ever sat, and all the kings that ever reigned put together have not affected the life of man upon this earth as has that one solitary man, Jesus of Nazareth." (J. A. Francis.)

Can you picture his life without this background of adversity.

We do not need to go back so far in our search for examples of what adversity has done for men. There are men among us who have come up through the school of adversity. As we think of our leaders, men whose hands we clasp, men into whose faces we look today, they are what they are because of the schooling they have had in adversity. Men who have had the courage to go out and face life, men who have had the faith in God that sustained them in the hour of trial, men who have refused to give up and have continued on faithfully performing the duties assigned to them. Courage and fidelity being the outstanding characteristics of these men, they have risen to prominence and are admired by all who know them. I believe that these men if they were asked today, "What has made you what you are?" would say, "I am what I am because of the storms and the winds and the rains of life that have beaten about me, that have driven my roots into the ground of faith."

So I believe, my brethren and sisters, that we who have come here today to worship God, looking back over what we call an unprosperous year, coming out of a depression in financial matters, should take comfort in the fact that adversity builds character. Of course all of us are trying to make a success in life as men count success generally. We are not unmindful of the fact that men desire to have material wealth, but if we are wise I believe that as we accumulate this world's goods, we will thank the Giver of those goods and not forget the hand that is responsible for the gifts.

I believe that faith in God the Eternal Father is the important thing in life. What have the men today, who placed all their affections upon material things? "Where a man's treasure is there will his heart be also," said the Master. These men whose treasure consisted wholly of material things, what have they now when the material things have been swept away? We thank God for faith in the restored gospel of Jesus Christ on which we can fall back in the time of our troubles—faith that God our Father hears us when we cry—faith enough to enable us to sing: "How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord," enabling us to sing some other verses of that same hymn which it seems to me give comfort in times like these.

"When through the deep waters I call thee to go The rivers of sorrow shall not thee o'erflow: For I shall be with thee thy troubles to bless, And sanctify to thee thy deepest distress. "When through fiery trials thy pathway shall lie, My grace, all-sufficient, shall be thy supply. The flames shall not hurt thee, I only design Thy dross to consume, and thy gold to refine."

I hope that we will come to appreciate the fact that while the fire continues to burn there must be some dross to be consumed; that the gold of our characters will be refined by the heat of the fire itself. I trust that none of us will come out of these experiences filled with rebellion, despair, and bitterness; but rather with a triumphant faith in God our Father.

I draw your attention for a moment to an example of a man whose father prepared the way before him. One, Philip of Macedonia, had a son. Philip was ambitious, he was successful as men count success, but he laid out a great plan for his future. His plan was so big and extensive he realized it could not be compassed in the life of one man. So he said, "My son shall begin where I leave off and complete my work."

And so he proceeded to give to his son everything that money could provide. He placed him under Aristotle, a pupil of Plato. He gave him training to qualify him for life as he thought life should be lived. He gave him gold and silver, servants and attendants. He gave him everything that we seem to be striving for today. Philip thought that his son because of these things would be made happy. Alexander, the son, was restless when he was qualified and prepared, as he thought. Impatient even for the death of his own father, that he might assume his place. When he came into power, he went forth to conquer, ruthless, cruel and heartless. He pressed on in his conquest of nations until he subdued them all and had conquered the world. And then, before he was thirty years of age, he gave himself over to drink and gluttony and to other excesses, seeking contentment where contentment has never yet been found, and he wept that there were no more worlds to conquer. In a drunken brawl he died, in sadness and in misery, and poverty of soul.

May I point out that there is a difference between sorrow and misery. Sorrow is a hallowed thing. The loss of loved ones brings sorrow to the heart, but it is purifying in its effect. "Misery," someone has said, "is nature's protest against degeneration."

I think now of another man, a man who lived many years ago, one, too, whose path had been prepared by mortal men, a man upon whom we look today as being one of the great men of the age. And he was. But this man seemed to have placed much of his thought upon the accumulation of material things. This man who lived before Jesus said:

"A man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth." (Luke 12:15.)

One man, the preacher, the son of David, King of Jerusalem, said of himself:

"I said in my heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth, therefore enjoy pleasure; and behold, this also is vanity.

"I said of laughter, It is mad: and of mirth, What doeth it?

"I sought in my heart to give myself unto wine, yet acquainting my heart with wisdom; and to lay hold on folly, till I might see what was that good for the sons of men, which they should do under the heaven all the days of their life." (Ec. 2:1-3.)

He found no satisfaction there. Then he decided that he would build great buildings, that he would seek satisfaction in the accumulation of great wealth, and he said:

"I made me great works; I builded me houses; I planted me vineyards;

"I made me gardens and orchards, and I planted trees in them of all kind of fruits:

"I made me pools of water, to water therewith the wood that bringeth forth trees:

"I got me servants and maidens, and had servants born in my house; also I had great possessions of great and small cattle above all that were in Jerusalem before me:

"I gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of kings and of the provinces: I gat me men singers and women singers, and the delights of the sons of men, as musical instruments, and that of all sorts.

"So I was great, and increased more than all that were before me in Jerusalem: also my wisdom remained with me.

"And whatsoever mine eyes desired I kept not from them, I withheld not my heart from any joy; for my heart rejoiced in all my labours: and this was my portion of all my labour.

"Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on the labour that I had laboured to do: and, behold, all was vanity and vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the sun." (Ec. 2:4-11.)

Those lines seemed to me rather a sad commentary of one who had had in his possession most of the things that many of us are trying to acquire. Is it not true that many of us are giving our time trying to accumulate wealth thinking foolishly, in spite of the history of the past, that the accumulation of material things alone can bring joy and satisfaction to men?

I think just now of another verse that this same man wrote in the fifth chapter of Ecclesiastes. He says:

"He that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver. . ." (Ec. 5:10.)

I suppose there never was a time when that was truer than it is today.

"He that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver; nor he that loveth abundance with increase: this is also vanity.

"When goods increase, they are increased that eat them: and what good is there to the owners thereof, saving the beholding of them with their eyes?

"The sleep of a labouring man is sweet, whether he eat little or much; but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep." (Ec. 5:10-12.)

This comes from a man who speaks out of the book of his experience.

My brethren and sisters, it seems to me that the great need of the world of men today is a rehabilitation of religious faith. It seems to me that men need to go back to fundamentals. It seems to me that we Latter-day Saints in many instances need to go back to the faith of our fathers. We need the faith that brought them across the plains, the faith that enabled them in this desert wilderness as it was then, to establish an intermountain empire.

I thank God that the faith of my fathers enabled them to accept the gospel of Jesus Christ. I thank the Lord for the faith that has come to me as a heritage from them, that there is an overruling Providence who is interested in the affairs of men. I thank the Lord for the faith that enabled these gray-haired people that I see before me here to go to the house of God and there find comfort and solace in their sorrows. I thank the Lord for the faith of some of our early men and women who today are aged and infirm, who, it seems, are ready and anxiously waiting for the time to come when they may pass on to their reward, and yet they linger. As I talk to them and look into their faces (and to some of them I am talking now as they lie on their beds listening over the radio) to them may I extend this thought of greeting, that God is their friend, and though they suffer and though they cannot understand, they with all of us thank the Lord for the faith that prompts us to say: "There is an explanation, though we know not what it is."

I like the words of Robert Louis Stevenson. This man, too, was acquainted with sorrow: this man had days when he wondered, and this is what he said:

"If I from my spy-hole look with purblind eyes upon at least a part of a fraction of the universe, yet perceive in my own destiny some broken evidences of a plan and some signals of an overruling goodness, shall I then be so mad as to complain that all cannot be deciphered; shall I not rather wonder with infinite and grateful surprise that in so vast a scheme, I seem to have been able to read, however little and that little was encouraging to faith."

Samuel Johnson has said:

"It is by affliction chiefly that the heart of man is purified and that the thoughts are fixed on a better state. Prosperity unalloyed and imperfect as it is has power to intoxicate the imagination; to fix the mind upon the present scene; to produce confidence and elation and to make him who enjoys affluence and honors forget the hand by which they were bestowed. It is seldom that we are otherwise than by affliction awakened to a sense of our imbecility or taught to know how little our acquisitions can conduce to safety and quiet and how justly we may inscribe to the superintendence of a higher power those blessings which in the wantonness of success, we considered as the attainments of our policy and courage."

More than anything else, it seems to me, as we face this new season, as we look forward to the coming of another year, we must revise our estimate of values, we must come to appreciate what the Savior meant when he said: "Lay not up for yourselves treasures on earth." We must come to appreciate values as he saw them, he who had nowhere to lay his head.

It seems to me, my brethren and sisters, that of all places the church is the place where men gather courage to face life. There are men who start out boldly, rather promisingly, to meet life, but unless they have the faith in God on which they can rely in the hour of trial, when life overtakes them, when the great impact of trouble comes, these men crumble under the adversities of life. God grant that we may in our lives appreciate what the gospel means to us, that we may not seek the evil way, that we may be willing to turn our backs upon influence, affluence, power and prosperity, if by following them we must leave the path of truth and faith in God. I trust that we may come to realize the benefits that come through meeting life courageously. I have here the writings of a man who speaks of what happens to men when they lose their faith. One paragraph from his writings impressed me as I read it:

"One who has walked with families through long illnesses where desperate prayers rise like a fountain day and night, who has seen strong men break down in health or lose the fortune of a lifetime, who has stood at children's graves and heard mothers cry, 'How empty are my arms!' does not need long explication of life's tragic suffering. The staggering blows shatter the hopes of good and bad alike. Whether one's house be built on rock or sand, on both as Jesus said, the rains descend, and the floods come and the winds blow. In this experience of crushing trouble nothing but religious faith has been able to save men from despair or from stoical endurance of their fate. To face the loom of life and hopefully to lay oneself upon it, as though the dark threads were as necessary in the pattern as the light ones are, we must believe that there is a purpose running through the stern, forbidding process. What men have needed most of all in suffering, is not to know the explanation, but to know that there is an explanation. And religious faith alone gives confidence that human tragedy is not the meaningless sport of physical forces, making our life what Voltaire called it, 'a bad joke,' but is rather a school of discipline, the explanation of whose mysteries is in the heart of God. No one who has lived deeply can ever call such faith a 'matter of words and names.' To multitudes it is a matter of life and death."

I bear testimony to you, my brethren and sisters, that this is the gospel of Jesus Christ. I bear testimony that there is comfort in the Sermon on the Mount; that there is comfort in studying the life of the Master. I bear testimony that in the hour of trial, in the hour of test, in the hour of disappointment and disillusionment, one can turn always with hope and confidence to the Father of the race, to our Father who is our Friend. I trust that we may go forward today with renewed courage to face life, believing that after life is over all that has come to us in a disciplinary way has been for our good, believing in the words of the Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith, recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants, wherein the Prophet, while in Liberty jail, raised his voice to God and said: "How long must these things be?" The Lord said: "My son, peace be to thy soul. . ."

"All these things shall be . . . for thy good.

"The Son of Man has descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?" (D&C 121:7, 122:7, 8.)

Let us then take courage from the thought that the disappointments of life that may come to us may be for our good, if we will accept them in the proper spirit, if we will go through them with firm faith in God. Let us teach our boys and girls that they must have a store of resignation and of faith. Let the younger people of the Church be prepared for the tests that shall come to them. Sometimes we think the history of the Church is pretty well written so far as hardships are concerned, but the testing time, the time that tests men's souls, has only begun. These boys and girls of ours must meet hardships and testings. We must teach them to prepare for trouble; teach them to have faith in God and not alone in material things; teach them also to have faith in themselves.

God grant that we may have a better outlook upon life, that we may continue to worship him, that we may have faith in the ultimate triumph of right, and that in that faith we may conquer, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

Deseret News

In God's Image

On this first Sabbath of June we salute the students of America who have recently received diplomas from high schools or degrees from institutions of higher learning. We, with you, are grateful for the opportunity provided in America for elementary and higher education.

You have been learning facts, perfecting skills and techniques, preparing for active citizenship. Your value to the nation and to the world will depend upon the interpretation you place upon the meaning and purpose of what you have learned.

There may be more peril than profit to a nation if its students and future leaders obtain only a purely scientific education. The late Dr. William Temple, Archbishop of Canterbury, warned us that a:

". . . purely scientific education must produce a generation adept in dealing with things, indifferently qualified to deal with people, and incapable of dealing with ideas. We hope your knowledge—which is of the head—will be motivated by wisdom—which is of the heart—; the one is determined by what you know, the other by what you do with what you know. Surely, 'Out of the heart cometh the issues of life.'"

Our annual and increasing school budget indicates the extent of our interest in education. We are determined that our young people—all of them—shall be given a favorable opportunity to learn, to become educated, but we are even more concerned about their beliefs and convictions. There is an increasing tendency in the business and political world to ask applicants for jobs, or for citizenship, not only, "What do you know?" but—and with searching emphasis—"What do you believe?"

Our fighting men in the South Pacific saw what beliefs can do to men. They met an enemy who fought from treetops, crevices, and foxholes with a fury and a fanaticism seldom encountered on the field of battle. Many of them preferred suicide to surrender. Others voluntarily manned their strange little planes, which were really guided torpedoes, and flew them into our ships, knowing they must die with the explosion.

These men were driven to an almost superhuman effort by their belief that their emperor was "the son of Heaven" and that to give their lives for him was to achieve the highest glory.

On the opposite side of the globe, others of our veterans met armies of young men who, forsaking the faith of their fathers, had with awful oaths sworn allegiance to an alleged "superior race." Many of them had been transformed into such subhuman beings as could witness and assist in the atrocities of concentration camps, transformed by the evil virus which had been injected into their young minds.

Do not forget that many of these young people were college graduates, scientists, technicians. But because of their perverted beliefs, their education tended only to increase the scope of their malignity.

If such amazing results as were witnessed in the recent war could be obtained by indoctrinating the minds of youth with evil, if such enthusiasm and loyalty could be aroused to support utterly false concepts, if a kingdom of evil almost strong enough to rule the world could be established by systematic indoctrination of the youth, what might be done if, with equal thoroughness and zeal, we teach that God, our Father, is at the center of a moral order in the world; that he is the Father of all men, and therefore all men are brothers?

In this land dedicated to true liberty, we have wisely provided for complete separation of church and state. Tax-supported schools, colleges, and universities are forbidden to teach religion. We must therefore provide means for organized, efficient religious instruction if we are to meet the desperate need of the world for spiritual and moral anchors.

Many of you graduates of '48 will be the parents of the graduates of '68. Unless you and we find a way to keep the religious education abreast of their secular training, we shall have a generation of spiritual illiterates, a generation which will have lost a whole dimension of life—the spiritual dimension.

I am privileged to represent a church today whose theology embraces education, which teaches that man cannot be saved in ignorance, that salvation depends upon the intelligent use of knowledge, inspired by faith in God; and that "the glory of God is intelligence."

Too many of the young people of America have been left to discover for themselves those moral and spiritual truths whose value has been proved over and over again by the experience of past generations. The traditions and habits of conduct inherited from our forebears cannot long survive the beliefs from which they grew. A new emphasis on old values is imperative as we enter the atomic age. Power without adequate controls may be disastrous.

It is important that you continue to believe that there is a basic and eternal difference between right and wrong, that sin is hideous and destructive, even though it may become popular; important that you think in terms of purity of life, of the value of virtue and honor, that you practice self-control and respect the rights of others. There are some things which do not become oldfashioned or obsolete. Habitually to disregard the mandates of the moral law is to surrender to a slavery as complete and as abject as any which can be physically imposed. Goodness is primarily intelligent behavior. "Wickedness never was happiness," said an ancient prophet.

Let us renew our emphasis on the value, the dignity, and the sanctity of the individual human soul. This concept is stated in Genesis, "So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them." (Gen. 1:27.) It is this religious concept which forms the basis of our freedom; it is the bedrock of our democratic way of life.

Our founding fathers were men who were familiar with the Holy Bible, and they took from its pages the eternal truths upon which our Constitution was founded. It was their faith in God and in man's relationship to him which caused them to write into the Declaration of Independence as a self-evident truth that "all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights.

If your generation fails to live and to teach the Christian way of life, you may expect your children to forsake the American way of life. If the children of Christian parents come to maturity without Christian beliefs and convictions, there will be a resultant agnostic vacuum into which false and foreign ideologies will rush with devastating consequences—consequences having to do with personal, group, and national morality.

Washington warned us long ago to "indulge with caution the idea that morality can long survive without religion." All who are interested in the morals of future generations should ponder this inspired wisdom from the father of our country. If morality cannot survive without religion, we must be on guard against the passive as well as the active enemies of religion. It is one of the first casualties in totalitarian states, but let us also be warned that it will die if it is not nurtured at home.

We must not assist the enemy by neglecting our front-line defenses—moral and religious defenses. An irreligious nation is an easy prey for godless propagandists of foreign ideologies. Their doctrines, which are recognized as sinister and ominous by men of faith in God, may seem to be entirely innocuous to those who do not have that faith and cannot, therefore, note the contrast.

Future generations of Americans can only preserve their freedom and continue with our democratic institutions, if they retain their faith in God and in those inalienable rights with which they were endowed by him. They must, by conscientious study and prayerful meditation, bring their religious knowledge up to, at least, the level of their learning in other fields. That knowledge, if reverently pursued, will inspire faith in God, and in the ultimate triumph of righteousness.

In the war of ideas now being waged, we face foes who are painstaking and thorough in indoctrination, expert in propaganda, cunning in dissimulation, ruthless in discipline, and avaricious for power. This war of ideas took on new impetus when the shooting war was over, and it has ominous possibilities.

We ourselves must sincerely believe—we should know—that Christ, the Savior, is a living reality and not an ancient myth, that his life and mission on earth, his death and resurrection were part of an eternal plan inaugurated by the God of heaven for the good and benefit of men; that both the Father and the Son are still interested in the success of that plan. It is their work and their glory "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

We should study and believe in the predictions of the prophets, many of which refer to the times in which we live. We should study and heed the signs of the times and the admonitions of the Master. The war and famine, the pestilence and tribulation which now afflict the world were predicted by the Savior as preliminary to his second coming.

He promised that after these troublous times. . . the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his works." (Matt. 16:27.)

"And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations and then shall the end come. . .

"And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory." (Matt. 24:14, 30.)

If we as Christians really believe these predictions, are really looking forward to the coming of the Messiah, then indeed will the power of our beliefs more than match the man-made ideologies of the world. If we live and preach "The gospel of the kingdom" with the conviction and enthusiasm of a Peter, John, or Paul and if we catch the fire of their zeal, there will be no need to fear the advocates of atheistic "isms."

Humbly and sincerely we bear witness that the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ is on the earth today, with its power and authority, and that it is as potent as it ever was. May his holy spirit preserve and guide the youth of America to their glorious destiny.

"Church of the Air" Address

The More Abundant Life

The inspiring theme of the mission conference, "We Seek the More Abundant Life," was treated from various angles by able advocates in different fields of activity. We were inspired with a desire to achieve that life. We were shown various ways by which to approach it, such as through physical fitness, mental preparedness, and spiritual harmony.

And now what is the abundant life, and why should we seek it? Is it a state of being which may be achieved at any given time? Can it be bought and paid for at one time and price? Is it reserved for the few, or is it available to all who qualify to enjoy it?

The abundant life is eternally becoming. It is not fixed and static, but of necessity is ever changing. What might be abundant life to the child would, if unchanged, become progressively less abundant as he matures. It is a state of being, where constant adjustments are necessary; where one is ever preparing for the changing conditions of tomorrow.

The abundant life is the joyous life. One must be healthy to be happy. The Lord's law of health promises physical fitness and radiant life. It is the teachable life, the life of awareness and of appreciation; therefore, education helps to determine its quality. One prepares for more abundant living by gaining knowledge, and intelligence will be his glory.

A candidate for this life must be spiritually responsive and in tune. he requires diligence, faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, Godliness, brotherly kindness, charity—if his life is to be abundant rather than barren.

It is a discerning life where price is not confused with value; where tomorrow's happiness will not be marred by today's folly; where one does not mortgage the future in an attempt to enjoy immediate unearned pleasures. One may find it necessary to resist some desires today in order that tomorrow's joy might be full. Living the abundant life today involves preparation for its enjoyment tomorrow.

The past as well as the future determines the measure and the quality of life today, and each holds something to make it more abundant. No measure of time may be isolated with the view to treating it as independent of what was and is, and is to be, for the abundant life is eternal life, and eternity is now.

The life we seek is lived in harmony with law and is in tune with God. It is ever active, but not impatient. Because of its eternal nature it is lived and measured by eternal standards.

In order fully to live one must believe in the gospel of Christ as a plan formulated for his good and operative both before and after his earth life. It is a plan which requires his participation and determines his dividends by the nature of his daily investments. Life is not a matter of a day, a year, a period, or a lifetime, but is a part of that eternal plan in which each day is conditioned by the preceding one, and in turn conditions that which is to follow.

The candidate must believe in the gospel of free agency and accountability. He must recognize the inexorable law of the harvest and those other irrevocable laws upon which all blessings are predicated, and let obedience be his watchword. He must seek to know something of what lies beyond the hills on both sides of the valley of life. He will seek inspiration and be guided by revelation.

With this conception of the abundant life, one comes to see the possibility of enjoying it here and now. Though he may not have all the things he desires, and though some of his best-laid plans may not succeed, his life may be rich and radiant if he will get the broader view afforded by higher ground. His life is abundant if he is making the best use of the experience of the past and proper provision for the future. The abundant life is a growing life—virile, positive, hopeful, healthful, achieving—where each today is better than yesterday; where there is no stagnation or decay; where the better self controls desire; where "there is a sound mind in a sound body, controlled by a God-filled soul."

This life is available to all, for ". . . men are, that they might have joy," (2 Ne. 2:25), and there is complete respect of all persons with God.

The gospel of Jesus Christ marks the way to this life which all men desire. The Savior came that we might have it. He gave us the faultless formula. He demonstrated by his own life that it may be achieved under conditions which men would term adverse. He lived the abundant life. His hunger was to give, and not to get. He did not seek material things but reminded us that ". . . a man's life consisteth not of the abundance of things which he possesseth." (Luke 12:15.) Abundance of things is not essential to abundant living.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints provides ways and means for all its members to live the more abundant life. It fosters education. It encourages participation. It is guided by revelation and holds high the ideal of perfection. Daring to declare "As God is, man may become" and being willing to pay the price, we seek the more abundant life.

Millennial Star

Discover and Actualize Your Potential Self

President McKay, members of the Board of Trustees, President Wilkinson, faculty members, honored guests, student body and graduating class, and your friends and relatives, or to use a comprehensive salutation and one I like better, my brothers and sisters.

This is at once an inspiring, terrifying, and humbling experience. Inspiring because I am standing before a large group of dynamic young people who are looking forward to the future with "hope and expectation and desire and something evermore about to be" terrifying and humbling because I am expected to direct your thinking for a few moments! But I am comforted by the thought that I have your sympathy. I am encouraged by the faith that divine assistance is available. For that I humbly pray.

And now may I say you look a bit grim. Wouldn't you like to loosen up just a bit? I know you have had many "vexations of the soul" through the last few weeks, tests and examinations; love affairs and—professors, if I may refer to the two extremes of emotional reaction. You have come now to another test, not a test of knowledge, or of skills, not a test of agility or of strength, not a test for which you have had to prepare—and I suspect when this is over you may conclude that no one has prepared—but this is to be a test of patience, where you are required to have respect for an ancient custom and for a slightly less ancient speaker.

I think, perhaps, I should at this point announce my subject. A subject that is dear to the heart of every young woman present, i.e. MAN. I suspect you young women think you know quite a lot about that subject, but may I dare to suggest that you have something yet to learn and that you will learn and be wiser. I remember hearing of one young lady who on her wedding day gave the bridegroom a book. It was entitled The Marks of a Perfect Gentleman, and one year later she gave him another book entitled Wild Animals I Have Known.

But, seriously, I should like to talk with you tonight for just a few moments about the soul of man which includes spirit and body. The Psalmist said.

"When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained;

"What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?

"For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour.

"Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou hast put all things under his feet:" (Ps. 8:3-6.)

Now you students have been studying theology and religion, among other things. You have been taught that you were intelligences originally, that intelligence is not nor can it be created, that man is spirit, that the elements are eternal and that spirit and element inseparably connected receive a fulness of joy. You have also been taught that creation is an on-going process, and that man has the high privilege of co-operating with God, in the great drama of creation. You have noted already in your other studies that the world is not yet fully created or finished, that the Creator left it largely as raw material to set us thinking, experimenting, risking, and adventuring.

As Dr. Stockdale said: "God left oil in the Trenton rock. He left the electricity in the clouds. He left the rivers unbridged and the mountains un-trailed. He left the forests un-felled and the cities un-built. He left the laboratories un-opened and the diamonds uncut. He gave us the challenge of raw materials, not the satisfaction of perfect, finished things. He left the music unsung, and the dramas un-played. He left the poetry undreamed in order that men and women might not become bored, but engage in stimulating, exciting, and creative activities that keep them thinking, working, experimenting, and experiencing all the joys and durable satisfactions of achievement. Progress comes not by some magic word and not by government edict, but from the thoughts, the toil, the tears, the triumphs of individuals who accept the challenge of raw materials—and by the grace of God-given talents produce results which satisfy the needs of men."

We say that the world is left, in a sense, unfinished. Changes have come through the ages. You have learned something of the various ages down through the industrial age. Each age has dawned more or less gradually. Some preparation has been made for its coming. But this age into which you have come—and I am not sure you didn't bring it with you—known as the atomic age, this age, true to the nature of the atom when it is disturbed, burst upon the world with a suddenness and a fury that threatened to destroy it and all the people in it. I need not remind you of what was in the headlines recently, but I would like to read what was said by one who witnessed it. A writer for the New York Times reported as follows:

"From a hydrogen fusion device there occurred the most stupendous explosion ever released on earth. Dropped by a B-52 bomber from 50,000 feet altitude and exploding at 15,000 feet, the fire ball reached the diameter of more than four miles and from forty miles away the luminosity exceeded 500 suns. The cloud continued to rise to a height of 25 miles and spread over a distance of more than a hundred miles, and the explosive yield of this hydrogen fusion bomb was from ten to fifteen megatons, meaning ten to fifteen million tons of TNT."

When we in World War I spoke of TNT, we spoke of it in terms of pounds and later in terms of hundred weight. And in World War II we learned more about the power of TNT. Those of us who were in London during the bombings were aware and amazed that some of those war heads carried as much as several tons of TNT, but now we are speaking of ten million tons.

I speak of this great force, this power that has been hidden through the ages because I should like to ask and say with David, in the midst of all this, "What is man?" Is it not possible that there is hidden in man's soul a power which if it could be released would be greater than all the energy of all the atoms in the universe?

Is it not likely that man, the discoverer, and to a degree the controller of these mighty forces, is himself possessed of power and resources as yet undiscovered or only partly developed? Is the atom with its hidden power more intriguing or miraculous than the intelligence which discovers and utilizes, directs and controls this power? The thoughtful study of man and his Godlike status inspires awe, reverence, and humility.

I should like to bring to you again what many of you heard sometime ago from President J. Reuben Clark, Jr. It is in a little pamphlet now entitled "Man, God's Greatest Miracle." I read just one paragraph, but it is pertinent to what I would like to say. President Clark said,

"It is not possible for me even to suggest the infinity of physical detail known only through the microscope that makes up the universe of physical man. They form worlds of marvels upon marvels of greatest beauty and artistry, and the mind stands aghast at the microscopic immensity of their creation. The wonders of our majestic, material universe, stretching out through space across billions of light years, with its billions of galaxies seem to my own mind, with its great limitations, no more wonderful, and as thus far discovered and known, not so complex or so intimately related as the cellular (all but infinitely small) universe that build this body of ours—each organ and gland and circulatory system, and bone and muscle and sinew and tendon, a galaxy all bound together in a most intimate relation that baffles the human mind to comprehend."

And then I should like to read to you a paragraph from the past President of the New York Academy of Science, A. Cressy Morrison. He said,

"No atom or molecule ever had a thought. No combination of elements ever gave birth to an idea. No natural law ever built a cathedral, but, obedient to certain impulses of life, certain living structures had been made which contained something to which the particles of matter are in turn obedient, and we see as a result all the wonders of civilization."

What is this living structure? Atoms and molecules. Yes, and what else? An intangible something that is so superior to matter that it dominates all things and so different from the material of which the world is made that it cannot be seen, weighed or measured. The soul of man is master of its destiny, but it is conscious of its relation to a supreme source of its existence.

After the explosion over Hiroshima, one writer, Herman Hagedorn, observed that that explosion rocked not only Hiroshima, it rocked America, too. It terrified not only the Japanese, but it terrified one hundred and thirty-five million Americans; Americans, who like blind men were groping into the atomic age, bewildered and boastful, cowardly and courageous, grasping and generous. These Americans, he said, must grow up overnight if mankind is to be saved from destruction. I have permission to quote from his dramatic poem "The Bomb That Fell on America," but rather than quote I shall paraphrase a bit. He said,

"I called on the Lord when my head was full of one hundred and thirty-five million Americans having to grow up overnight, and I said, `Lord, if ever a people needed a miracle—' the Lord looked at me as a mountain might look at a molecule. He said, `You want me to come down to perform a miracle, you want me to turn a hundred and thirty-five million self-willed egoists overnight into one hundred and thirty-five million co-operative angels? `Brother,' said the Lord, in a voice that shook the windows, `that isn't the sort of universe you are living in, and that is not the sort of God I am.

"`There is only one miracle,' said the Lord, `all else is cause and effect. All else is law. There is only one miracle and it is already accomplished. That miracle is the human soul.'"

The soul is much like the atom, the atom so minute no lens you can make can enlarge it to a point where the eye can see it, and yet there is a whole solar system inside it whirling around a nucleus, like the planets round the sun. So feeble in its unreleased state yet actually the greatest force save one in creation! The writer points out there must be faith in God. He points out that Jesus of Nazareth is the source of power and that if the power of the soul is to be released, man must overcome his pride and arrogance.

"`I have given you a soul,' cried the Lord, 'And you ask me to come down and do a magician's trick. The people who smashed the atom didn't beg me to come down with a thunderbolt and split the nucleus for them. They knew there was power in the atom and they set to work to release it. They succeeded and shook not only New Mexico, they shook the world!'

"`There is power in the human soul,' said the Lord, 'when you break through and set it free, like the power of the atom, more powerful than the atom. It can control the atom, the only thing in the world that can. But,' said the Lord, 'the power must be released as the atom breakers released the power of the atom.'

"The Lord He looked at me and His eyes pierced like hot wires. Silence rose out of the ground straight, thick and hard as a wall. The wall was so cold it sweated and I began to sweat too. I felt a hand on my collar, a hand that made me remember the wood shed and the shingle and the glint in the father's eye (you graduates will not know anything of the wood shed and the shingle, but with the older ones on this stand I assure you the shingle was a stern reality).

"The Lord He lifted me up and set me down. In a desert He set me down, wilder and darker than anything in New Mexico. And there was a cross in the desert and a man on the cross and I was alone in the world, alone with the man on the cross, alone except for the Lord and the Lord a voice in my heart, a voice and no more.

"`Look at the man,' it said, 'and look at yourself, sons of the same father but who would dream it? The firefly and the sun are no more unlike than you two. The firefly can't do anything about it. You can. That is part of the miracle of the soul I was telling you about, that the human creature can change, become different, grow out of the nature of the firefly, grow into the quality of the sun. The worm and the moth, the cocoon and the butterfly—you and what God wants you to be.'

"I stood in a desert and there was a cross in the desert and a man on the cross. 'Look at Him,' said the voice, 'And look at yourself. Look at Him and be still. Look at yourself and be honest. How do you appear to yourself beside Him?'

"I looked and it seemed as though the earth dropped from under my feet and I was hanging in space between currents that pressed me down and currents that pushed me up.

"I felt a chasm open and stood on the edge and shrank back. 'Lord, let me go,' I cried, 'Let me go back to my world.' 'Not yet, look again, look deep and say what you see.' I talked about love but I myself never loved. I talked about Christ, but I worshipped only myself. I talked about truth but I never dared look her in the face. 'Oh, why, man, why,' cried the Lord, 'why did you not dare?' Truth I knew was a fire, truth I knew was a whip, truth burned and truth drove, truth demanded thought, and I was timid. 'The man on the cross' said the voice, 'was not timid.' I sank at the foot of the cross, 'Truth is not in me, I have fed on lies.'

"I leapt up like a rabbit before the hounds. Ten thousand miles I ran through the desert wastes. Ten thousand miles I heard the voice in my ear. Ten thousand miles and knew that flight was vain. (This reminds us again of the psalmist who said, "Whither shall I flee from his presence. If I ascend into heaven thou art there, if I make my bed in hell, behold thou art there, and if I take the winds of the morning and fly to the uttermost parts of the sea there shall thy hand guide me'). And I fell and heard the voice tender as bird song at daybreak in the boughs of millennial sequoias asking 'What else do you see?' I sank amid thorns, broken and torn and choked. 'I am unclean.'

"Across the worlds I heard the voice of the Lord, and I leapt up once more and ran and fell, and always where I fell there was the cross, and there was the voice asking 'What else, what else,' until at last stripped, naked, and afire with all the self-will broken, shaking, sobbing I lay alone in space, alone save for the cross.

"I said, 'This is the end. I am dust and the wind will scatter me. This is the end. Who shall look truth in the face and live?'

"But the voice said, 'This is the beginning. This is daybreak. Give me your life and day shall be like a new world. The unclean shall be clean; the cowardice courage, the weakness power. Give me your life and I will make it a spade to dig the foundations of a new world, a crowbar to pry loose the rocks, a hoe to mix sand and cement, a trowel to bind stone on stone and make them a wall. Man without God is a bubble in the sea, a single grain of sand on an infinite beach. God and man together, we are such power as not all the atoms in all creation can match.'

"I laid my hand there in the hand of God, and the desert floor was singing, the rays of the Lord shot past the electrons, the rays of the Lord split the nucleus. The rays of the Lord released the power of the soul."

My young brethren and sisters, we congratulate you tonight on the high privilege that is yours of living in the atomic age, but I should now like to congratulate you on a higher privilege that is also yours. You have come to this earth—and I dare to suggest that your spirits were held in reserve for this time—you have come to this earth at the time of the restoration of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. And what is that gospel? Some might be surprised if I refer to it as power greater than that which we have been talking about. The Apostle Paul defined the gospel as the Power of God, and he said the purpose of that power is your salvation. It has been said in our own day that it is the work and the glory of God to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of men.

Now the scientists as they began their work on the atom had faith that there was power there. They added works to their faith. They proceeded, made mistakes, corrected them, and carried on.

The apostles, the prophets, the Savior have advised us that we too must have faith and works. We are told that repentance is a gift of God and is an eternal principle, that as they made mistakes and corrected them, so we, if we make mistakes, can look to him for correction and forgiveness. But be not deceived; God will not be mocked. We may not sin today and repent tomorrow and sin the next day. Our repentance must be sincere. It must be wholehearted. It cannot be, for instance, like the repentance of a certain man who made a false income tax return. He got to worrying about it and couldn't sleep; so he sat down and wrote a letter to the collector of Internal Revenue, and said, "As I made a false return and can't sleep, I am enclosing herewith a check for $100.00." And then he added a P. S. and said, "If I still can't sleep, I will send you the balance."

Now that kind of repentance won't do us any good. There are certain fundamental, simple rules and laws that govern in the realm of science, and however far you may go in that field you still will have to abide by the rule of two times two. And in this other realm, if you are going to utilize this power, you must abide by certain fundamental rules and laws, for it is an irrevocable decree of God our Father that every blessing is predicated upon obedience to law. And if you will obey the law, the blessing will come through the release of the power that is in the human soul.

Speaking of fusion, I think the Apostle Paul knew nothing about atoms or hydrogen fusion. I think the Prophet Joseph Smith knew little about those things as they are known professionally today. And yet, these men not only taught of, but themselves achieved a fusion which made them supermen, prophets. It will change and revolutionize the world and save the souls of men. That fusion is the fusion of the spirit of man with the spirit of God that is made possible through faith, repentance, baptism, and the gift of the Holy Ghost.

We salute you students. We almost envy you. We think of the future, and it is yours. We believe in you. We think you are going to be equal to your task and to your time. We congratulate you in living in these great times. We congratulate you that God thought enough of you to hold you in reserve and permit you to come when the gospel of his Son was upon the earth, when you could help to revolutionize and save the world.

If you will learn and observe the teachings of the gospel of Jesus Christ, practising honor, honesty, virtue, integrity, love of God and fellow men, you will have a lifetime of useful service here and eternal life and eternal increase hereafter.

The Lord said, ". . .let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven.

"The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever." (D&C 121:45-46.)

We who are growing older are praying that the time may come, and we believe it will, when it will be said of you, the Class of '56, and classes that are to follow from Brigham Young University, in the words of the Master, "These are they whose bodies are celestial, whose glory is that of the sun, even the glory of God, the highest of all, whose glory the sun of the firmament is written of as being typical." (D&C 76:70.)

Young men and women, you may be what you will to be, the decision is yours.

I pray that you may have faith in God, faith in yourselves, and the courage and wisdom to keep the law, to discover and actualize your potential selves as the sons and daughters of our Heavenly Father; I pray that you may go forward, onward, and upward to salvation in the celestial kingdom, and I promise you that you may achieve it if your actions have been such that you can feel at home there. God bless you all I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

Baccalaureate address, Brigham Young University

Freedom and Personal Restraint

Upon being discharged from the army a young man was heard to say: "Now I shall have liberty. Give me freedom from duty as well as freedom from fear, want, etc. Let me think and act as I choose, go and come as I will. Now that I am rid of the sergeant I shall be free."

All of us have at times resented ethical conventionalities, moral restraints, codes, rules of conduct, parental supervision. "Why," we have asked, "should prohibitions and inhibitions, stand like robot policemen at the corner to tell me when to stop and go, when to turn right or left? Why may I not express myself in action without someone shouting 'Don't?'"

The desire to be free, to express oneself, to be unrestrained, is innate and normal and, within certain limits, necessary to growth. When men lose this desire or ambition or lose the hope that it may be realized, they become negative and ineffective. This tendency to express oneself by independent action is noticeable in the very young and, unless crushed by oppression, persists throughout life. As children begin to notice, they begin to explore their little world. As they discover their hands, they try to use them; as they become acquainted with their nursery, they desire to open doors into other rooms. So we go through life pushing back our horizons. We resent barriers and bunkers and stop signs. We sing, "Don't Fence Me In," we cry with the patriot, "Give me liberty or give me death!"

Many of the mistakes of the past have had to do with our failure to realize that freedom, however complete, liberty, however untrammelled, can never release us from the obligations imposed by the nature which made us brothers. True liberty is made complete by loyalty. Loyalty involves restraint and control in the interest of the object of that loyalty. He is really a free man who finds and dedicates himself to a cause which he believes is bigger than himself. He does not resent the limitations which his love for that cause imposes. The mother glories in the limitations of motherhood, in the freedom to serve, in the liberty of self-denial.

The young man while he was a soldier thought some of the restraints and army regulations were necessary because he felt he was related to other servicemen and, at times, responsible for their safety. When on sentry duty, he was told that the success of a battle or even of a campaign might turn on his devotion to duty. He did not resent, he was proud of, the responsibility thus imposed and would have died rather than leave his post to seek or assert his freedom.

Returning to civilian life may release us from some of the immediate controls of military discipline, but being a civilian does not release us from our relationship to society. It may soft pedal the "must" but it emphasizes the "ought." His reaction to his restored free agency will determine his qualification for transfer to a higher plane. As he contemplates some deed which convention has proscribed, he will consider its effect upon those to whom—for whom—he is or may be responsible. He will anticipate the memory which must inexorably follow the act and will avoid the slavery which haunting memory may entail.

Not alone by its effect upon others may the rightness of an act be determined. The act itself, if repeated, may bind a man to a habit as the galley slaves were bound to their oars. Men have lost the ability to act as they wish because they have lost the power to stand by a choice when made. They are forced shamefully to bite the dust before the enemy, when but for their mistaken idea of liberty, they would have won the battle.

Many men have passed the stage where they could stop if they would and, too late, would give their lives to stop if they could. They lost their priceless liberty as the dog lost the bone when he jumped at the shadow. One may say he is free to extend his hands to the manacles, but we ask, "Is he wise?" May we not determine his fitness for liberty by nothing how he uses it?

No, it is not the code which binds us. It is our relationship to others and to Him who said, "Take my yoke upon you," and, "The truth shall make you free." His yoke is not a burden, but the means by which the burden, which is as universal as life—which is life—is made easier and lighter.

The robot policeman at the corner with its red and green lights and its warning whistle or bell does not abridge your freedom. It guarantees it against the thoughtless or wilful intrusion of others. No, young man, you have not been released from duty nor will you be while life lasts. When you draw your ration of rights, you must take with it an equal ration of duties.

To say "I want freedom from duty" is to ask for rights without obligations, freedom to act without responsibility for action, to be allowed to get without giving, to buy without paying, to insist on having what I am unwilling for others to have. Let us define our terms and discriminate between liberty and license. Let us listen for the voice of the "sergeant" of conscience and voluntarily keep in step while the drumbeat of our hearts sets the pace.

Millennial Star

Thoughts on Faith

Men and women in training for service with the armed forces have had their attention focused upon material processes, techniques, and physical efficiency. This emphasis should not exclude consideration of spiritual values. The impact and dislocation of war must not be allowed to dampen our interest in those spiritual values which were esteemed in pre-war experiences or cause us to lose our sense of direction or make life's meaning vague. All servicemen should re-examine their concepts concerning the worth-while things of life, and place proper emphasis upon social and personal idealism, and upon the moral and spiritual ends of living.

The conflict in which we are now engaged has made us all conscious of modern methods, eager for new truth, anxious to employ it properly. Men everywhere are in search of better techniques and a more efficient way of doing things. Contemplation of personal efficiency and usefulness coupled, as inevitably it must be, with the consciousness that death may end it all at any moment, leads man to examine his thoughts regarding his beliefs, his philosophy, his religion, to think of the meaning of life and try to understand its purpose, to consider seriously the subject of immortality and eternal life, to know something of God. The scriptures tell us, "This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.)

An officer in command of a landing party in Italy said to his men as they were about to storm a beachhead, "This is an experience which will separate the men from the boys." The intensive and vigorous training which is necessary to prepare a man for combat duty weeds out the unfit, physically, but it is also a test of the man, a test of character and stamina. It makes for mental as well as physical maturity. This maturity should result in sober thinking, in an analysis of one's life, one's thoughts, one's ambitions and desires, in an effort to know oneself.

The studious man, when he thinks clearly, knows that the spiritual is not only as real as the material, but also is more enduring and vital. His serious thinking reveals the fact that instinctively he is religious, and he comes to feel that religion is very important and is of deep concern to all intelligent people. Whoever says he is not religious is probably a stranger to himself. He may discover his real self when suddenly confronted with a situation where all seems lost, where hope flickers, where intangible reserves are relied upon, and faith is born.

Every human being is guided in his actions by a set of beliefs. He may not be able to express them in words; but, if he will honestly search his consciousness, he will find they do exist. They motivate his actions, color his life, and determine his quality. Goethe tells us, "The struggle between belief and unbelief is the only thing in the memoirs of humanity worth considering." As he seeks for truth and attempts to put it into action, man responds to an inner urge and seeks to be his better self. He realizes that he must be true to himself if he would be true to any cause he represents.

Man's religion should be such as to satisfy his needs, to sustain him in a crisis. It should color his intellectual, mental, and spiritual life. It should be a supporting power, giving meaning and direction to his ambitions and desires. His beliefs, his philosophy, his religion should be a compass or chart for life's voyage. How fortunate is the young man who is possessed of such a compass to give him an assuring sense of direction, to keep him on his course, to lead him to a safe and happy landing.

Religion confirms his innate conviction that although he is temporarily tabernacled in a mortal body he is an immortal spirit destined to live eternally. This longer view will make him anxious to live efficiently, to have a sound body, enjoy physical health, maintain a stimulating mental outlook, and be spiritually responsive and alert. He will come to know that health and growth are results of proper living, effects of causes compatible with immortality, and that lax morals result in disease and degradation and are a bar to happiness. Religion teaches him that there is no double standard of morality, that he must be as clean as he expects his sister, sweetheart, wife to be. The truly religious man holds a high opinion of himself as a child of God and seeks to be worthy of his heritage.

The thoughtful young man, in the quiet of his own tent, on the hillside, in the trench, in the airplane, on the battleship, will recognize a directing Power behind the law and order which are everywhere apparent despite the din and clangor of man-made war. From the very depths of his consciousness he will wish to be in harmony with that power. This inborn certainty that there is an overruling Power is common to all humanity, is rooted in the truth, and has persisted through the ages. As he notes the operation of the law of cause and effect, as he finds there is no effect without a cause, and that every cause is the effect of another cause, his reason supports his native faith, and he sees that behind all causes there is God, the Creator of all that is.

Throughout the ages God has spoken to man. The prophets have so testified. Their vision and prophetic power is evidence of such divine direction. But he who searches his own spiritual outreachings finds a more personal evidence of God's existence. Through earnest prayer he will find comfort, courage, and assurance. Millions of intelligent, honest men have had faith and have been guided by the Holy Spirit in answer to prayer, while "The fool hath said in his heart, 'There is no God.'" (Ps. 14:1, 53:1.)

Jesus the Christ who was born in Bethlehem of the Virgin Mary is the central figure of Christianity. His mission was divine. His influence is world-wide. His simple, clear doctrine transcends all the blessings of men. The enduring greatness of his teachings and the invincible power of his life are admitted by friend and foe alike. He lived before the earth was, in the spirit world with his Father. He, having passed through mortality, knows its problems and can understand and help each man with his.

Jesus Christ is the Son of God the Father. He is a member of the Godhead and was present at the creation of the world. In the first chapter of the Gospel of John we are told that he was in the beginning with God and that he was God, that all things were made by him and without him was not anything made that was made. "In him was life; and the life was the light of men . . .

"(He) was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the Only Begotten of the Father,) full of grace and truth." (John 1:4, 14.)

This truth concerning the spirit existence of Jesus of Nazareth before his body was born in the stable in Bethlehem poses the challenging question to every thinking man, "If Christ lived before birth, what of me? Was birth my beginning?" And this leads to the question, "Why was I born? What is the purpose of my life? If death is not to be my end, then where do I go from here?"

God our Father devised an eternal plan for the salvation of his children. It involved the coming to earth of deathless spirits, to be clothed in bodies which are subject to death. Forgetful for the time of their previous existence, they are charged with the responsibilities which life entails, to resist evil, to earn worth-while things by sacrifice and effort, to choose wisely, to develop power, to learn to do things the right way, or in other words, to become obedient to the laws of God and gain greater fitness for future eternal progress. Life then, is to test the temper of this eternal spirit. It is a schoolroom, a period of learning. It is a training camp where men are prepared for service over there. But the training is not the end; it is a means to an end, a part of the larger plan. It conditions the trainee for future activity.

Man is deathless. Birth is not his beginning, and death is not his end. He passes from earth-life to a world of spirit which is matter more refined. He recovers his body, purified and immortal, through the resurrection made possible by Jesus Christ who is the key figure of the whole plan of salvation. Man retains his power of thought, learning, action, faith, and obedience. He retains his free agency and is ever responsible for the consequences of his choice. He will persist throughout eternity as a separate identity, a person, a child of God.

By example Jesus taught us how to live. He desires that all men shall have joy and teaches that eternal joy depends upon definite conditions, upon controlling desire, and resisting the temptation to act in opposition to eternal truth. He teaches us that joy is an effect of causes over which we can exercise conscious control. He suffered the hardships of life, rejected the gifts of earth, and made the supreme sacrifice that all may be put in the way of eternal happiness. He suffered and died for men because he thought they were worth dying for, and in this lesson on sacrifice he has shown us the power and glory of self-mastery. If we are to follow him, we must be willing to sacrifice temporary pleasures for enduring joy.

The plain tendency of religion today is toward an emphasis upon the dignity and worth of the individual human soul, whose value is regarded as such that it would not profit a man to exchange it for the whole world. Sometimes men serving in the army come to feel that they individually, are of little importance, that the part they play is so minor that they are of little consequence. But if each one does his part well, he fits in with the larger scheme. It is the aggregate of individual effort, properly directed, that makes an effective army.

So in life, the individual pattern is of great importance because, if properly fashioned, it fits in with the divine plan. Though your role may seem to you infinitesimal, remember that the great plan of the Master would be marred without it. You, having left home in response to your country's call, have moved out into the frontier regions of responsible choice. This is a tremendous responsibility, for the consequences of deliberate choosing carry over into eternity.

As you think of these things on the battlefield, in the air, or on the ocean, trying to orient yourself, searching your soul with these questions of life and its meaning and purpose, you may feel like a pilot over a strange country, searching the map and the landscape for evidences of location and direction. Sometimes you may feel that you are just a dot on that map, but being a child of God, you must remember that there is a divine purpose in life, and that your Heavenly Father is mindful of you. Yours is the priceless privilege to contact God through prayer. You are his son. He is your Father. He invites you to talk daily with him. He is all-wise, all-powerful, everywhere present by his Holy Spirit. He will hear you when you call, will guide you as you strive to serve him, and will be your companion wherever you may go. Cling to these eternal truths, and there will come into your being a quiet courage which is born of faith, which will transcend all the confusion, doubt, and danger that may assail you, and make of you the kind of man you want to be, an unconquerable free agent, an immortal soul. May He bless you in your prayerful meditation and enable you to translate your convictions into action, and to know if you live worthily, you, with his help, can meet unflinchingly and triumphantly any situation that may arise.

Millennial Star

Thoughts on Repentance

When in prayerful meditation a man confirms his faith in God and sees that his world is essentially spiritual, although superfically it seems to be wholly material. He sees evidence everywhere of plan and purpose and design; he tries instinctively to relate himself to that plan, to find his place in the scheme of things. He becomes anxious to bring his life into harmony with God's will. This necessitates some changes in his habits. He wishes to forsake the wrong way—evil, the cause of misery—and seek the right way—good, which leads to happiness, to rich and radiant living. This changing of one's course, forsaking bad habits, and adopting new and better ways of living, is in gospel language called repentance.

Repentance follows faith as effects follow causes. If repentance is genuine, it will lead to positive action. Admitting an obligation does not pay the debt. The debtor, wishing to clear the record, asks, "What shall I do?"

Saul of Tarsus, who later became the Apostle Paul, came suddenly to the point where he saw the error of his ways. He did not simply say, "Yes, Lord, I admit my error." He knew his conversion carried a definite obligation. He inquired of his heavenly visitor, ". . .What wilt thou have me to do?. . ." (Acts 9:6.) The Master, who had appeared to him on the way to Damascus, instructed him as to his future course. His faith was followed by true repentance, which necessitated an about-face, and called for the courage which is needed by all who espouse a new cause and forsake old habits and companions.

The method outlined in the first principles of the gospel is similar to the method employed in other problem solving: There is first a sense of need because one does not have all the facts; then as he discovers these facts, he finds them incompatible with some of his illusions or with some things he esteemed as good. He must cast away his illusions, though he may have prized them as precious and must accept what he had mistakenly esteemed as hateful. Such was Paul's experience, and such is the experience of all sincere searchers after truth whether in scientific or religious fields.

Problem solving in the field of religion, however, differs from that in other fields because it has to do with the ultimate character of events rather than with superficial facts. It affects the whole personality for time and for eternity. It transformed Saul, the persecutor, into Paul, the apostle. After being instructed and seeing the light, Paul realized that his persecution of the Master was more harmful to himself than to anyone else. Jesus pointed out his folly and said, ". . . It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks." (Acts 9:5.) From that day until the present, men have been learning that wrongdoing is really kicking against the pricks or injuring oneself. It is the folly which leads to sorrow, and if persisted in, to degradation.

Men sometimes give up in despair when they find they have yielded to wrongdoing. Sometimes they say to themselves, "What is the use of trying? I might as well go on in this course now that I have been overcome and have yielded to impulse and desire." This wily attempt by the adversary to drug his victims into complete surrender is as old as the story of Adam, and as false as its author.

All servicemen know that many battles may be lost before a war is won. How reprehensible would be the soldier who would give up at the first unsuccessful encounter with the enemy. The courageous man, the hero, fights on in the face of odds, changes his tactics, improves his skill, musters his courage, and attacks the enemy even though his sword be broken, but he never loses faith in final victory. He knows the quitter has no friends in either camp.

He who does wrong knowingly, intentionally, is a traitor to himself and to the cause he represents. It is unthinkable that any serviceman would deliberately give the advantage to the enemy by surrendering his arms or carelessly walking into a "booby trap." Unnecessarily exposing oneself to danger or being the victim of self-inflicted wounds is considered cowardly and is a punishable offense in all military organizations. Proper regard for one's own safety so that he may continue to be a valuable fighting unit is enjoined on all servicemen. The enemy would gloat if he could deceive our men into an ambush by false promises of security. The wise soldier never forgets that the enemy seeks only to destroy him.

So in life there is a cunning, wily enemy whose whole business is to prepare "booby traps" and lure men into them. He not only teaches the fool to say in his heart, "There is no God," but he also beguiles him into thinking that evil is desirable and inevitable. Sin is the devil's "booby trap," and no amount of bravado will change the sinner's status. He who deliberately walks into a "booby trap" is a "booby."

Do not allow either desire for the bait nor curiosity to know the mechanism lure you into any of his deadly traps, which often are cunningly camouflaged to deceive the unwary. And do not be deceived, if what you have been taught to recognize as such a trap does not seem to spring at the first contact. Many of them are time bombs, but there are no duds in the armory of sin.

Some men are led to think that because the punishment is not immediate, the danger of sin has been exaggerated or avoided. We may be sure that all the devil's "booby traps" will explode eventually with deadly and undiscriminating effect.

Men sometimes feel that they can yield to what they are pleased to term some minor sins without danger of eventually being overtaken by others, unmindful of the seductive power of the author of sin. Others seem to think they have found the safe way to avoid the consequences of their acts, and they advocate the false doctrine that effects do not follow causes. They should hearken to the voice of the Master, "As ye sow, so shall ye reap." (See Gal. 6:7.) This law of the harvest is inexorable, eternal, and applies to all.

Be not deceived by the Satanic sophistry that all desires and appetites must be gratified. Remember that vice and vigor have nothing in common, that nothing is necessary that is wrong. Being true to one's self is evidence of character and requires courage and stamina, fortitude and faith.

There is a tendency among servicemen, as well as among civilians, to adopt the false notions of fatalism, to feel that it doesn't matter much what men may do, that when their time comes, they will be taken, and that death ends all anyway. Such people are deliberately limiting themselves to a narrowed outlook and a shorter view.

Life is eternal, and the law of cause and effect is operative beyond the grave, causes here becoming effects there. Let us remember that all we think and say and do goes on forever, that what we are determines what we are to be, that we are masters of our fate, and that we will be held accountable for our actions.

Each man should consider his heritage, and have sufficient pride to attempt to be worthy of it.

Experience teaches that no life can be strong or effective unless the voice of conscience is clearer than the voice of desire in that inner region where motives are formed. But conscience, if it is to be a safe guide, must be kept in tune with truth. For this purpose prayer — a two-way radio—is available to all.

Prayer is a source of power through which we may enlist the aid of the Almighty in attempting to solve our problems. He who prays daily has an unseen but all-powerful friend and companion who will comfort and encourage him, protect and guide him. He finds a source of unfailing strength which gives mastery for the present and assurance for the future. Young men should neither be afraid nor ashamed to pray wherever they may be. While they will not flaunt their religious convictions or practices for purposes of notoriety, certainly they will not be ashamed to admit their faith in God. There is no better preparation for the day's battle with the enemy, seen or unseen, than to begin it with a prayer. To have spoken to God at the beginning of the day and to be mindful throughout the day that you are to talk with him again at its close is to enjoy a companionship which not only gives strength and courage for the conflict but also helps to reveal the enemy for what he is and to unmask his agents and reveal his plots.

We have a fine example of this abiding faith in the life of Abraham Lincoln, who, upon undertaking his tremendous task, prayed that the same divine Power which had guided Washington would be with him, and said, "With that aid I cannot fail; without it, I cannot succeed."

We, who face such staggering problems today, cannot hope to succeed unless we, too, seek guidance of the same Power on which he constantly relied. The fathers of our country achieved unity under the slogan "In God We Trust," and laid the foundations for a new world.

May your thoughts and actions be such as to enable you to enjoy in full measure the glorious homecoming which awaits you. Your loved ones at home believe in you. Believe, therefore, in yourself.

Millennial Star

Thoughts on Obedience

To a group of pilots and cadets in an army chapel, the speaker read the scripture, ". . . God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him. . . ." (Gen. 1:27.) "God gave man certain instructions called commandments," said the speaker, "and told him that all blessing are predicated upon obedience to law." He spoke of the immutable, inexorable law of the harvest, "As ye sow, so shall ye also reap." (See Gal. 7:6.)

"God is the Master Builder, the Great Scientist, the Loving Father, all-powerful, all-wise; but he, too, observes law. He has said it is his work and his glory to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. Just as the glory of God is intelligence, so man's glory will be measured by his intelligence, and this in turn will be shown by his knowledge of and obedience to law."

At the close of the meeting, some of the men asked the speaker some questions regarding laws and rules and regulations, and obedience, not only in military service, but also in life.

One of the group, requesting permission to be entirely frank, said in effect, "We think there are too many rules and regulations anyway. Too much time must be spent in finding out just what one is supposed to do or refrain from doing. If there were fewer rules in the army there would not be so many men in guardhouses, less K.P. duty as punishment, and there would be much better feeling between the men and their N.C.O.'s and officers, whose duty it is to see that discipline is maintained." Continuing, he said, "I am not so much concerned about the matter as it effects us while we are in the service, but the same line of reasoning bothers us when we think of the laws of life, when we hear the gospel preached and reference made to sin and its consequences. On every hand and each hour of his life man is confronted with some law or regulation, some edict or commandment, each with its own punishment, each threatening dire consequences with seeming disregard for the sinner's knowledge of the law."

Another of the group took up the argument and said it seemed to him that the Creator had arbitrarily written down a lot of "thou shalt nots" and then spent his time throughout eternity spying on violators and bringing them to judgment, all for his own glory. "What we want is freedom to do as we please, so long as we respect the rights of others. We object to prohibition, restriction, regulation, restraint; just let us be, to live our lives as we choose, and we'll risk the consequences."

Then the speaker undertook to teach by parable.

A great airplane builder, after years of study and experiment, perfected a plane. He invented and fitted together all the operating parts into a mechanical symphony. He had put much time and thought and love into its creation, and when it was completed he looked upon his work and called it good.

The builder called his son to him, showed him what he had made, explained to him the purpose of its creation, the importance and function of each working part, and their inter-relatedness and interdependence; told him that during the creation of this marvelous machine out of existing materials he had observed certain laws. He told of the fine adjustments necessary, and the need of exact tolerances. He explained that the success or failure of this airplane would depend upon how strictly the pilot observed the laws upon which its flight depended.

The builder told his son that he was entrusting the plane to his care. He should become its pilot, and that therefore he should learn how to fly, and operate the plane in all kinds of weather.

If the builder had used Bible language, he might have said, "Thou shalt," or "thou shalt not." He would have given him at least ten commandments, probably each with its reward or penalty. And, among other things, he doubtless would have said, "Thou shalt not take the plane into the air without first checking the oil and gas, nor permit them to be diluted or contaminated.

"Thou shalt not attempt to leave the ground without first obtaining a certain speed or to land at a greater or less speed than that which experience has shown to be safe.

"Thou shalt always take oxygen and a mask when intending to fly above a certain altitude, and in that higher altitude never fly for prolonged periods without using the oxygen.

"Thou shalt make sure that the pipes between the gas tank and the engine are free from dirt, are not clogged or broken, for your life will depend upon an uninterrupted flow of power from that source.

"Thou shalt be constantly vigilant about altitude and speed, studying your maps and compass every hour. Seek frequent reports from headquarters on the weather, and always heed the warnings given.

"You will frequently have access to radio beams by which you may check your location and direction. Observe the warning signals that you may not veer too far to the right or left or lose contact with your base. Remember the personnel at the home base are your friends. They have access to information not available to you. Do not question the wisdom of their decisions."

Many other instructions and commandments were given to the pilot before he took off, and the father bade him Godspeed and happy landing, with one last caution, "Thou shalt not strike a match near the gas tank. You have your free agency to do as you choose, but remember if you disobey these rules, you and others will suffer or die."

The pilot noted all that his father had said but thought him a bit old-fashioned and whimsical. He had his own ideas regarding the many instructions he had received and the need for their observance. He took great care at first, as he knew his father was watching him, but soon he felt the thrill of release from restraint, and of the exercise of power, the pride of independent decision and achievement, and he began to wonder why his father had spent so much time on foolish rules and regulations. "Now that I am on my own," he said, "I shall fly the plane in my own way. The kind and quality of oil and gas I shall use is my own affair. I'll pay little heed to altitude or speed, nor will I be bound by foolish rules regarding the physical care of the engine, or its relationship to the source of power." So he flew into the higher altitudes, and momentarily enjoyed the intoxication of a rarified atmosphere. He discarded his oxygen mask, and in his delirium went into a dive and drunkenly enjoyed the exhilaration of the speed. Recklessly, he said to himself, "I am the favorite son of my father; nothing can happen to me, he is so powerful that he can rescue me even from my own folly. These rules and regulations may be all right for the common run of pilots, but see who I am."

What would you men think of a pilot who acted in such a manner? How would you like to be one of his crew? Would you sympathize with his arguments if, after a crash, he should contend that the rules were useless anyway and that the effect of disobedience was disproportionate to the cause? Would you agree that a tiny spark should not cause a great explosion when it reached the gas fumes?

Righteousness, which is obedience to law, exalts an individual as well as a nation; while sin, which is the folly of disobedience, the deliberate taking of the wrong road, is a reproach to any man.

Each man is the pilot of his own life, charged with the responsibility of the flight across the valley of life and over the hills of eternity. Keep this in mind as you ponder the thought that the Creator is your Father—heed his warnings, for his purpose is to help you make a happy landing. For this purpose he has made known the laws of life. He is the Master Builder who made man in his own image.

Millennial Star

Personal Liberty vs. Social Control

The problem of human relations is always with us. Learning to get along with people involves discipline from infancy to old age. At first, of course, the discipline is more or less rigid because we at an early age are not able to judge or act for ourselves. We are soon permitted, however, because of the law of free agency, to choose between various courses of action. We learn that each choice is accompanied by obligations and followed by consequences.

It is not necessary for me to tell anyone who has been in the military service what discipline means or what follows violation of rules and regulations. He at least knows the definition of "guard house" and "brig."

It is essential early in life to have goals, ideals toward which to work—ideals that unify our energies, integrate our personalities, and bring out the potentially best in us. Each individual early in life should have an ideal to guide him as he approaches maturity. Each individual must take control of his own life. When he was a child, it was necessary for an anxious mother to snatch him back from crossing the busy street. Later he is free to decide whether and when to cross the street, and his decision will determine whether he is to be among the quick or the dead.

As we attain that position in life where we are permitted to choose, to decide for ourselves, it is essential that we understand the difference between right and wrong, good and evil. We come to know that we are children of God, that he knows us—knows why we are here, and expects something of us. We find that he too has established laws, rules, regulations governing life, and these we try to observe because we love and honor him and have confidence that his laws were instituted for our good and happiness.

Sometimes young people get the idea, and it is erroneous, that they are just a little different from the other fellow, that the rules that apply to the masses do not apply to them. Be assured that the author of this universe, the God of this world, our Father, is not capricious, he has no favorites—his laws are universal, eternal, inexorable, and anyone who violates the law must pay the penalty. I prefer the positive approach, however. All who obey the law will get the blessing. He has said, "There is a law irrevocably decreed in heaven, before the foundations of this world upon which all blessings are predicated; and when we obtain any blessing from God it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." (D&C 130:20-21.)

Having been a lawyer, I will tell you there are laws, regulations, ordinances established in our land which grow out of the experience of the race and which are established for the benefit of the people. They who will not obey the law must pay the penalty. They who observe the law will find freedom within the law, for obedience to law is liberty. I think there is no question but what, as we go forward through the various steps in life, we come more and more to realize the wisdom of conforming to the law, not in any slavish way, not because we are afraid to disobey but because we recognize the importance and necessity of law in civilized life.

In our student life, as we come up through the grade and high schools, our deportment is regulated, quite rigidly at first, but progressively becoming more optional. We gradually learn to use our agency with intelligence and judgment.

Each school also has regulations and rules, laws if you will. Certain standards have been established to which all are invited to subscribe. When one comes to the university and signs his name as student, he tacitly, if not expressly, agrees to conform and to uphold the standards of the university. This he does because this is the university of his choice, and he likes the things for which the university stands. Otherwise he would have gone elsewhere.

As I came in from a stake conference appointment this week-end I observed the big "Y" on the mountainside above the campus, and as I looked at that big letter I thought, "What would the student body do if some gangster or prankster undertook to tear it down or to paint it yellow or red. The student body to a man would go out and fight for the 'Y' and for that for which it stands." And for what does it stand? I think there is an invisible inscription on the hillside surrounding that "Y"—invisible in a sense but really emblazoned for all who have eyes to see. This inscription spells out some traits of character for which the letters BYU stand—honesty, integrity, loyalty, industry, courage, spirituality.

What would individual students or the student body as a whole do if someone undertook to sully, besmirch, or tarnish that inscription? Would you not fight with even greater zeal in defense of these standards than to protect the physical "Y" on the hillside? Each one of you has it in his power to burnish or tarnish the spirit of the "Y."

First as to honesty. Washington said, "I hope I shall always possess firmness and virtue enough to maintain what I consider to be the most enviable of all titles, 'The character of an honest man.'"

Honesty, it seems to me, is fundamental. Lying is an accomplice of every other form of vice, or as someone has said, "Sin has many tools, but a lie is a handle that will fit them all." Deceit, insincerity, cheating are forms of lying, and cheating doesn't refer only to examination time. A man who, having signed his name as a student of a university which has certain ideals and standards, who professedly approves and accepts them and then is clandestinely untrue to them, is not only a cheat but a coward. Is that too harsh?

A man said, "He who says he is positive is a fool." Another asked, "Are you sure about that?" and he replied, "I am positive." Now there are some things of which I am positive. I am sure that Dr. Karl G. Maeser, a great educator, was right when he said, "The man who cheats another is a knave, but he who cheats himself is a fool." Anyone who lowers his standards cheats himself. Let us inscribe the hallmark of integrity upon our souls and let us pledge allegiance to that hallmark every day.

Within the framework of this corporation, this legal entity, there is another organization set up and administered by the student body. One purpose of this organization is to help students do the things they know they ought to do, to assure them that their own sense of right and wrong is supported and sustained by the sanction of the group. Many of the great universities today have student councils, student body organizations, which pledge themselves to the honor system, and ask all members of the student body voluntarily to bring their lives into harmony with the rules of the institution. These organizations have directive rather than punitive powers.

Just as in grade schools there were retarded students who needed special help, as in the high schools there were those who were not mature enough to stand alone, so in the universities there are those who need help, students who are retarded in moral development, who lack the stamina it takes to do the things they know they ought to do. It is for their benefit and for the honor of the institution that the student body organization is set up and the student council appointed.

Now sometimes very good students, loyal, honorable, virtuous students, get the mistaken idea that of all the sins of the world, tattling is the worst. This fallacious attitude is developed, no doubt, from picture shows, radio, and TV programs, where the gangster shoots the stool-pigeon.

In other words, there seems to have grown up among us a feeling that it is our duty to keep our mouths shut about what the other fellow does. Now to an extent that may be right. I am quite sure that I must be more concerned with my own life than with that of my brother. I am quite sure that I will never be called upon to confess his sins, but I am also sure that if there comes a time when there is a conflict between my loyalties, my loyalty to the institution, to civilization, to our society, if there is a conflict between these and my loyalty to a chum who doesn't have the stamina or good sense to observe the law, I am going to stand by the institutions.

Some students have said to me, "Do you think I ought to report so and so for doing this or that?" Let me be a lawyer for a moment and answer that question by asking another, "What would you do if one of the students should deliberately undertake to destroy a beautiful work of art, a sculpture or a painting? What would you do if you found someone clandestinely starting a fire in the library? Would you defend him or would you report him? I think I know your answer. You would report a man who would deface a building, who would report a man who would deface a building, who would befoul the campus or destroy the equipment in the science building. You would report him because you wish to protect that which belongs to all of you, the university. Now I ask you, "Is the body more important than the soul? Are the physical assets of this institution more important than its spiritual standards?" Ask any member of the basketball team what he would do if one of his teammates refused to observe the rules of the game. Of course we all know if he persisted in defiance of the rules he would be dropped from the team. In life, as in basketball, if we break the rules of the game, we lose.

I think the Savior answered our question as to what we ought to do in these circumstances. He said, "If thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that the whole body should be cast into hell." (Matt. 5:30.) Think that over when you find someone endangering the moral health of the group. Your duty may not be to report him immediately. You should befriend him, labor with him, teach him, reclaim him. If that is impossible, if your work with him proves to be ineffective, then you must report him just as you would report a subversive if you are a good American citizen.

In our democratic government, allowing subversives to live among us, knowing them to be subversives, and, to an extent, becoming fellow travelers with them is very close to treason and that is the highest crime, while loyalty is one of the greatest of virtues. He who has not the courage to help weed out subversives is not a good citizen.

Treason is treachery, perfidy, betrayal, breech of faith, or betraying the state or institution to which one owes allegiance. God help us that we may never be guilty of treason, that we may never betray a trust.

We all feel the thing we ought to be, beating beneath the thing we are. Each of us wants to do better and be better and to help others along the way. The idea of being my brother's keeper must function. I am not a good member of the student body if I withdraw into myself and just live my own life and do not try to help those about me. I need their help and support, and they need mine. We have a united job, a job that only united action can accomplish.

So I bring to you the thought, young men and women, that in this institution you have responsibilities and obligations to yourselves to your friends, to the institution and to God and only he who is qualified to take command of himself, who refuses to come down, to sell out, to be unclean, common or cheap, only such are really loyal. Others, in my opinion, if they cannot be reformed, should be weeded out. Now I trust there are none such here. This is a time when purity of thought, honesty of purpose, integrity and courage are demanded if we are going to survive in this world where the opposites of all these things are seeking supremacy.

I plead with you young people, keep not only your actions clean, upright, and aboveboard, but also live so that there may never come a time when you are afraid to have the light turned on, afraid of being found out. Remember the eternal law of God is the law of the harvest—"As ye sow so shall ye reap."

And in attempting to keep your minds and actions clean and sweet I pray you, watch your language. Do not contaminate the air as some men do with profanity. He who uses profanity gives evidence of poverty of intellect and vocabulary. I hope the young men and women of this institution will never permit themselves to be so disrespectful as to pray to God in the morning and evening and use his name in a curse during the day. Also I hope no student on this campus will ever indulge in the filthy habit of telling unclean stories. I think mental halitosis is far more disgusting than BO or bad breath.

I leave you now with the beatitude, "Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God." May he help us to be so blessed I pray, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

B.Y.U. Assembly

Marriage Loyalty

We have all been inspired this morning by the stirring appeal of our President and by the reports we have heard. We have all been encouraged in our work. I hope what I shall say will not seem to be a discord. President McKay closed with the words, "Let loyalty to the marriage covenant pervade the home." We who are favored with the privilege and charged with the responsibility of speaking at the general conferences of the Church wonder through the months what phase of the gospel, what subject we should discuss. Because of some work I have been asked to do, there is only one subject I can think of to talk about, and on that I am very poorly qualified.

In introduction, may I read some scripture which I think is pertinent:

"And the Lord God said, It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him an help meet for him.

"So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them.

"And God blessed them, and God said unto them. Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth." (Gen. 2:18; 1:27)

And in another scripture:

"For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and cleave to his wife;

"And they twain shall be one flesh.

"What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder." (Mark 10:7-9.)

And again:

"Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord." (1 Cor. 11:11.)

Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence and likewise also the wife unto the husband. Paul speaking:

"Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord.

"Husbands, love your wives even as Christ also loved the Church." (Eph. 5:22, 25.)

Inasmuch as many of this congregation are holders of the priesthood, I remind all of us that we submit ourselves unto the Lord in righteousness and because of righteousness. This requirement of the wives to submit to their husbands presupposes righteousness on the part of the husbands.

"In the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees;

"And in order to obtain the highest a man must enter into this order of the priesthood (meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage);

"And if he does not, he cannot obtain it." (D&C 131:1-3.)

In the Old Testament scripture, the prophet said on one occasion: ". . . to your tents, O Israel," (1 Kgs. 12:16) and again, "Lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes," referring to their tents or homes and their need of support.

Throughout the world today there are confusion, apprehension, danger. In our own land we are spending billions to fortify and defend our country and protect our homes. Not only are we stock-piling armaments and atom bombs and other instruments of war, but we are also building a radar system, sky high and continent wide, extending across Canada and up into the Arctic Circle, all with the idea, basically, of defending our homes.

Sometimes we, as individuals, feel weak and helpless in the face of all this and wonder what we might do to help. May I call your attention to the fact that right in the inner citadel of our defensive system, the home, which is the very bulwark of our strength and solidarity, right there the enemy is making inroads which truly are frightening. In what I have to say on this subject, I hope no one will feel that I am chastising or blaming or condemning. I think I realize, because of recent experiences, that there are many innocent victims of desertion and betrayal. My heart goes out to many lovely women who are left to rear their children alone, and certainly to them we say a word of encouragement, and we pray God's blessings upon them that they may be given strength to carry this added burden. And yet we must say some things about this evil—its source and possible conquest.

In the last issue (October 1954) of the Reader's Digest, this startling statement is made, "One thousand times every day in the United States a judge's gavel falls and with two words, 'divorce granted,' somebody's love story comes to an end." And may I add. some home becomes a casualty. One thousand of them a day in the United States, 365,000 in a year! May I say, regretfully, that the Intermountain States in this list are above the average in the number of divorces granted. May I also say that even among those who are married in the temple, the serpent, who first made his appearance in the Garden of Eden, creeps in and continues his attempt to separate man and woman against the decree of God that they should be one flesh.

According to statistics there is one divorce for every three marriages in the United States. What would we think if 33 1/3 percent of all the ships that set sail on the ocean were doomed to shipwreck and to failure? And what would the board of directors of the company do if the cause of that failure could be traced to the captain and the mate, who could not agree and work together?

Many divorces start before marriage. We who wrestle with this problem have traced some of the causes, and in many cases they lead back into the childhood homes of the young couples, who are now divorcees. We believe, brethren and sisters, that proper parental example and training in the home would help stem this tide of divorce. Parents should teach their children, by example and by precept, the sacredness of the marriage covenant, should teach them that there is no joy in all the world comparable to the joy that comes through happy wedlock. But like all blessings, this joy is predicated upon obedience to law.

Parents who fail to teach their children and to demonstrate to them what happy wedlock can mean and does mean are sowing where their children must reap. If they fail here, the ancient edict will operate: the sins of the parents shall be visited upon the children.

Fathers should teach their boys that there is no freedom except through obedience to law. Children should be reared in disciplined homes where rules are obeyed and the rights of others are respected. Parents should "reprove betimes with sharpness" and then show an increase of love. The child that is pampered in the home will expect to be pampered after marriage. Among the seeds of divorce one of the most prolific is overindulgence. It produces extreme selfishness.

There are certain weaknesses in all of us which we say are inherent. I shall not attempt to list them but refer to one or two that men and women should recognize in themselves and overcome before their spouse discovers and magnifies them.

I think now of self-control. Many of the cases which I review started with uncontrolled appetites and tempers, leading often to cruelty, mental and physical. When in a temper, the tongue may be venomous. The Apostle James said, ". . . it is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison." (James 3:8.) That is only potential, but it is often true. The tongue, with which we say our prayers and pledge our troth, is sometimes used to wound those we love best.

"Boys flying kites haul in their white winged birds:

We can't do that when we're flying words."

A middle-aged couple on the farm had a violent quarrel at breakfast time. Later in the day they started for town in the buggy with a fine team of horses to sell their vegetables and eggs. As the horses trotted along, Mary said, "John, why can't we travel together like these horses do? They don't quarrel and fight." John said, "Mary, we could if there was only one tongue between us."

Oh, the unkind things we say to those we love.

"We have kind words for the stranger And smiles for the sometime guest, While oft to our own The bitter tone, Though we love our own the best!"

Of course, and this is the saddest part of what I have to say, there are evil intruders, more deadly sins, which strike at the very foundation of our homes. Infidelity, love's counterfeit, is the most disintegrating influence that can enter a man's life. It is to the home what treason is to the nation. Lust is fatal to love. It sometimes causes men in military service to destroy the very home which they would die to defend on the battlefield.

In a recent U. S. News and World Report, there is an article on "Why Teen-agers Go Wrong." Divorce is high on that list, and it is reported that one-half of all the adult criminals begin as juvenile delinquents, and most juvenile delinquents come from broken homes. Let people who are considering divorce pause and consider possible consequences.

But let us think of some positive aspects of this subject. I should like for the next minute to talk to the young people who may be listening in; to tell them that though the enemy is extant, and though they must meet situations where they must face and overcome difficulties, they can train and prepare themselves for this glorious experience with the same promise of success as awaits the well-trained and disciplined person in any field of activity. Marriage is life at work.

I speak, first, of love. I am not thinking of that flutter of the heart or the droop of the eyelash which you young folk may identify as such, that may well be the beginning of love, but I am thinking of the love that "suffereth long and is kind, that envieth not, vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil; the love that beareth all things, endureth all things, the love that never faileth." (See 1 Cor. 13.) And I remind you that the Master who loved most of all, endured the most and proved his love by his endurance. Yes, "there is beauty all around, when there's love at home."

I speak next of prayer. The husband, who will kneel every day in the home and thank God for his wife and list her virtues in his supplication to be entered on the credit side of the family ledger, will overlook or be unmindful of her little weaknesses and will never seek the divorce courts. The woman who kneels with her children in the home and humbly thanks God for a kind, loving, and wonderful father and husband, even though at times that prayer may be only a wish, will still impress upon the souls of the children an image and hold before them an ideal which they will try to realize in themselves. Sister Benson on a recent TV program said, "The family that prays together stays together."

Young people of the Church, read the seventy-sixth section of the Doctrine and Covenants. Here is the prize which you may earn and enjoy, with God's help. You who have been baptized and receive the Holy Spirit, you who have testimonies of Jesus, who keep the commandments and overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, shall become priests and kings of the Most High and dwell in the presence of God and Jesus Christ forever and ever.

Your bodies shall become celestial whose glory is that of the sun. You shall have joy in your posterity here, eternal family union and association hereafter, immortality, eternal life, and eternal increase.

God help us that we may put on the whole armor of God, having our loins girt about with truth, and having the breastplate of righteousness, the shield of faith, the sword of the spirit, and go forward in the fear of God and protect our homes. Yes, to your tents, or homes, O Israel, lengthen the silken cords of love, and strengthen the stakes of faith and righteousness to the glory of God and our own salvation in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

General Conference

Freedom to Choose

During a half century of active service in the Church, I have never felt so wholly inadequate, so totally dependent on divine guidance as I feel right now. For that guidance I humbly pray.

We sang yesterday, "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet." This hymn referred originally to the Prophet Joseph Smith. In a meeting not long ago when President McKay announced that the congregation would sing, "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," he said, characteristically, "I wish you would have in mind the Prophet Joseph Smith when you sing today."

I should like to offer a prayer that has been in my heart for years, a prayer which I believe is in the heart of every Latter-day Saint throughout the world. "We thank thee, O God, for the Prophet, David O. McKay, to guide us in these latter days. We thank thee that through thy blessings he has had the vitality, the vigor and the health to carry the message of the gospel to the four corners of the earth. We thank thee that his influence and his presence have revitalized the Saints whereever he has gone and have given them courage and hope. We thank thee that he more than any man among us, more than any of his predecessors, has carried the inspiration and the message of the gospel to the greatest and to an ever-increasing international audience. We pray that thou wilt bless him continually and spare him to us, that we may enjoy his great leadership for many years to come."

From the bottom of my heart I sustain and support these men, the President of the Church and his Counselors, the President of the Council of the Twelve and each individual member of that Council, and the Patriarch as prophets, seers, and revelators to the Church. I am grateful for the privilege of meeting with them occasionally.

Some of our friends have said we are inclined to worship the General Authorities. We love them; we listen to their counsel; we thank God for them; but they would not permit us to worship them. If we should be so inclined, they would be the first to rebuke us. They would doubtless say to us what the angel said to John on the Isle of Patmos, when he was about to kneel before him, "See thou do it not: I am thy fellowservant. . . . Worship God. . . ." (Rev. 19:10.)

But it is our privilege to be guided by their inspired counsel. I pray that God will help us never to lose sight of and ever be grateful for the outstanding leadership in the Church today.

Eastertide is the season of the year when we know spring is coming; it is the season of the year when things are revitalized and renewed, and it is the time of year when Christians everywhere celebrate in commemoration of the resurrection of the Lord.

As I speak of these men and of their leadership, I am reminded of some additional reasons why we should be grateful for the Easter season. Through the restoration of the gospel we have knowledge and assurance regarding the actual resurrection of the body of the Lord Jesus Christ. Not only was he resurrected from the dead but he also ascended into heaven with his glorified body, and he will come again in material form and substance. We are grateful for the comfort and the hope which come with this assurance.

The revelations concerning the nature and attributes of our Heavenly Father and of his Son, Jesus Christ, are of transcendent importance to all men everywhere. Modern confirmation and elucidation of biblical evidence on this all-important subject began with the first vision in the Sacred Grove in 1820, and it was renewed and continued in that glorious vision in 1832 in the Kirtland Temple when the Lord declared, "Hear, O ye heavens, and give ear, O earth, and rejoice ye inhabitants thereof, for the Lord is God, and beside him there is no Savior.

"Great is his wisdom, marvelous are his ways, and the extent of his doings none can find out.

"His purposes fail not, neither are there any who can stay his hand.

"From eternity to eternity he is the same, and his years never fail." (D&C 76:1-4.)

The restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ came pursuant to prophetic promise, and was a necessary sequel to the great apostasy. It was during the apostasy that an attempt was made to harmonize pagan philosophy with Christian truth. This task was undertaken at the behest of non-Christian emperors and resulted in un-inspired declarations in which God was defined—or rather denied—by declaring him to be immaterial, incomprehensible, and without body or parts, occupying no part of finite or infinite space, in other words, nonexistent.

We thank God for the restoration of the gospel which refutes such doctrine. In their attempt to incorporate Jesus the Christ into their pagan concept of the Godhead the Roman emperors, through their appointed delegates to various councils, undertook to have him divest himself of his body, that body which came from the tomb when the angel rolled the stone away, that glorified body with which he ascended into heaven before the wondering gaze of his disciples. Obviously this resurrected body, being material, could not become a part of their immaterial God which had no parts. They would have him shed that body and thereby deny everything that Easter stands for. For if he is incomprehensible and immaterial then he is not a resurrected being, and if he is not a resurrected being, Easter is meaningless.

Again I say let us thank God for the clarification that has come through modern revelation concerning the personal attributes of the three members of the Godhead.

Jesus Christ revealed the Father to us and said, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father." (John 14:9.) The Son was in his express image. He revealed a compassionate Father, a divine Parent, one in whom were incorporated the attributes of justice, judgment, mercy and truth. He revealed a God of love, of forgiveness, and understanding. The restored gospel supplants the motives of fear and awe with faith and trust. The beloved disciple tells us, "Perfect love casteth out fear." (1 Jn. 4:18.) Love as a dominant attribute of God and a saving quality in man is reasserted and emphasized.

The new commandment which Jesus gave was "That ye love one another even as I have loved you." His love for us is eternal. Nothing can separate us from it. Sin may separate us from him but his love endures forever. Listen to Paul's testimony: "For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come.

"Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." (Rom. 8:38-39.)

I should like to speak to these young people who have been singing for us, and to other young people of the Church, for like others who have spoken, my heart is with the youth of Zion. I should like to say to these young people that God is their Father, that the Savior is pleading for and with them to keep clean, clean in their thinking, in their speaking, in their conduct, that he expects them to be worthy of him and of the sacrifice he made for them and for all of us. He is the Good Shepherd who gave his life for the sheep. He evinced the solicitude of the Good Shepherd in his last injunction to Peter, "Feed my sheep."

I should like to add another word to the young people. One of the most lethal weapons which the Adversary has devised to destroy the young people of the Church and of the world is to persuade them that if they have made a mistake they are lost, there is no hope. According to that doctrine, if a young person, in a weak moment, becomes guilty of some misdemeanor, he might as well go on to juvenile delinquency and crime and felony because he is lost anyway. So the devil would have them believe and thus lead them down to hell.

Young people, your Father in heaven loves you; he loves you with a love beyond what your earthly parents can know. If you make mistakes—and you will and all of us have—our Heavenly Father stands ready to forgive and to welcome you when you come to yourselves and turn your backs on the husks and your faces toward home. He will embrace you and say, "For this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost and is found." (Luke 15:24.) But let no one think he will not have to pay for his folly. The Father could not in justice say to the prodigal what he said to his older son, "All that I have is thine." (Ibid. 31.)

Our Father is kind and loving and forgiving, but there is an inexorable law which has not been repealed. It is the law of the harvest. As ye sow, so shall ye reap. We cannot sow thistles and reap figs, nor plant thorns and harvest grapes. But when we have had enough of thistles and thorns, we may have the grapes and the figs if we are willing to pay the price—and they costless. While ours is a world governed by rigid and unwavering law, man has free agency; he may choose to obey or disobey the law, but he must of course abide the consequences of his choice.

One other thing to the young folks—sometimes you come to us with problems when you are perplexed and confused and feel that you are inhibited, not free to think or express opinions. When we talk to you of free agency and explain that it refers not only to actions but also to thoughts and opinions, you wonder if that is always the case. Some of you have said to us, "But our right to express our own opinions is trammelled or abridged by the authoritative statements of parents, teachers, and others."

Young people, we will protect your freedom to think, to express your thoughts, and to search for truth. We want you to continue that search fearlessly. We promise you will be uninhibited in that search. You should remember, however, that God has given us sources through which we may have some authoritative answers. Not all the answers, no. If we had all the answers, there would be an end to the search. We must not expect to have all the answers immediately for God himself, in his wisdom, has withheld some of them. We believe in continued and continuing revelation, and that means that we believe there are things to be made known which we do not know. We believe it is a good thing to reserve judgment on problems that are difficult of solution until more light comes. This principle of withholding judgment and waiting for new revelation should apply in all fields of learning. Scientists make rather definite statements at times, but some of us have lived to see them either amend or abandon their findings in the light of newly discovered truth. As long as scientists are still searching and discovering, and as long as new revelation is promised, why insist upon answers now? It is my conviction that new revelation will come when we have learned to live according to the truth we now have. Wisdom counsels patience.

And so, with respect to some things that now seem difficult to understand, we can well afford to wait until we have all the facts, until all the evidence is in. Now do not misunderstand me. There will never come a time when any revelation of truth from God will be in conflict with any other truth revealed from him, whether it comes as direct revelation or as reward for diligent search. If there seems to be conflict, it is because men, fallible men, are unable properly to interpret God's revelations or man's discoveries.

May he help us that we may go forward fearlessly but reverently in our search for truth and have due respect not only for our parents and our teachers, but also for those through whom God has promised his revelations.

By the same token, we should not undertake to state the time nor the order in which the gospel shall be given to any of the races or nations of the earth. We should not attempt to regulate God's program by our little wristwatches, nor insist that he be governed by our schedule of events. He has promised the gospel to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, and he and only he knows when they are ready for its message and its blessings. When that time comes, I bear you my witness, prophetic witness if you will, that he will reveal his will to the leaders of the Church concerning all of his people. He has said, "Remember the worth of souls, (all souls) is great in the sight of God; For, behold the Lord your Redeemer suffered death in the flesh; wherefore he suffered the pain of all men, that all men might repent and come unto him. And he hath risen again from the dead, that he might bring all men unto him, on conditions of repentance. And how great is his joy in the soul that repenteth!" (D&C 18:10-13.)

Brothers and sisters, I humbly bear my testimony to you that I do know that God is my Father, that Jesus of Nazareth is my Redeemer and my Friend. I thank him for the blessed privilege of engaging in the ministry, and I praise his Holy Name that through his servants he has shown his willingness to use the weakest of us to do some little good in that ministry.

God bless us to recognize him as the Good Shepherd and to go forward with faith, unafraid of the future, and with complete confidence to say with the Psalmist:

"The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.

"He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: he leadeth me beside the still waters.

"He restoreth my soul: he leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for his name's sake.

"Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.

"Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies: thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over.

"Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life: and I will dwell in the house of the Lord forever."

(Psalm 23.)

We pray this may be true for all of us in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

General Conference

Walking by Faith

Moses heard the voice of God from the burning bush and removed his shoes in reverence. His limitations, his weaknesses, his past misdeeds seemed revealed and magnified as, in the presence of God's majesty, he listened to the call to service.

At this most beautiful and inspiring season of the year the thoughtful traveler in the countryside is constrained to remove his shoes—and his hat—as he sees the resplendent evidences of God's handiwork and from a thousand burning bushes he hears a call to co-operate with him in freeing his people from bondage.

But, even as in Egypt, it seems necessary to display his power and his displeasure to those responsible for our slavery. How many plagues must come upon the world before his chosen people can be released from their task masters and seek the promised land? And to what extent do we contribute to our enslavement by adopting as our own the alien ways of the "Egypt" in which, for a time, we are compelled to live?

Have we developed such an appetite for the "fleshpots" that we somehow prefer them to the freedom which is promised to all who are willing to follow divinely appointed leaders through the wilderness? Or do we resist instructions and guidance if our established ways of doing things are disturbed? Have we the faith and courage to go down to the shores of the great sea knowing that he will command, and it will obey or do we prefer the cramping security of slavery to the freedom which may be had for the price of sacrifice and effort?

Human nature has not changed much since the days of ancient Israel. Moses was taken from them for a brief season, and the Israelites made and worshiped a golden image. At the first turn in the road they insisted on looking backward. They could no longer see the familiar evidences of worldly power on which they had relied, and so they complained that Moses had betrayed them. They lacked the vision and the valor which all adventurous living demands and had to be sustained along the way by miracles, by food from heaven and water from the rock.

After years of devastating plagues on a scale which ancient Egypt never knew, the world seems little nearer to a day of deliverance. We have harvest festivals and observe thanksgiving days; our leaders set aside days of prayer and among the victor nations we sing praises and give lip service to our great Deliverer. But is there less of hatred in the world? Do greed and selfishness still dominate our motives? Are we amenable to counsel when to follow it seems to be against our immediate personal interest? Are we willing to follow inspired leadership even when it leads through the valleys which inevitably lie between the mountain peaks which mark the course to the promised land?

At a time when social, political, and economic systems are being challenged, when new and alien ideologies are being advocated, when tried and established methods are being forsaken, and when people in large numbers follow after strange gods, it is well that the Latter-day Saints be reminded that, for them, there is but one voice of authority, that to them there is always open a safe passage through the sea if they will but harken to The One who said, ". . . They shall be my people, and I will be their God." (Ezek. 11:20.)

Students of church history, ancient and modern, and they who have had the responsibility of leadership have called attention to the contrast between the ways of God and the methods of Satan and have urged all to cultivate the spirit of discernment, of humility, of obedience. All history demonstrates how fatal it is to the individual or the nation to follow leaders who are either uninspired or are inspired only by selfish ambition, lust for power, desire to dominate.

Gradually such usurpers of authority in some countries have gained control of the machinery of government and have not only enslaved the people but have led them down to destruction. The Apostle Paul warned the people of his day of the danger of yielding to the dictates of usurpers. "Know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness?" (Rom. 6:16.)

Brigham Young, the inspired leader of the modern exodus, courageously warned his people of the reality of the forces of evil; he said, "The devil's forces are particularly marshalled against us. The adversary presents his principles and arguments in the most approved style, and in the most winning tone, attended with the most graceful attitudes; and he is very careful to ingratiate himself into the favor of the powerful and influential of mankind, uniting himself with popular parties, floating into offices of trust and emolument by pandering to popular feeling, though it should seriously wrong and oppress the innocent."

Members of the Church have never been asked to follow blindly and without question. The great principle of free agency has been emphasized since before the fall of Lucifer who was determined to employ compulsion and deny the right of choice. And yet there are times when we must walk by faith and not by sight alone; when we must believe without seeing. They who thus believe were classed as "more blessed" when the Savior submitted to the unbelieving examination of the doubting Thomas. There are times when it is not given to us to view the whole plan, to know all of the details of a proposed campaign, to be consulted on general policy, and it is then that we should show our faith in inspired leadership by subjecting our opinions and our will to those who, because of their wider contacts, more complete information, and elevated viewpoint, can see the whole field of action while our own vision is limited to the little sector to which we have been assigned.

The few men in a pillbox at the crossroads may come to look upon their little concrete house as the nerve center of the battleline. If the commanding officer should send down word to withdraw and take another position with details as to time and place, the wise N.C.O. will without question obey orders. He is aware that disobedience here might result in his being cut off with his men or perhaps his position will be shelled or bombed by his own artillery or planes.

And so in church leadership. There are times when from our limited horizon we cannot see the wisdom of some move or policy. If we persist in holding to our own views and refuse to join in the general scheme, we are liable to find ourselves isolated behind the lines and included in the casualties. Quoting a prophet of modern times; "Every son and daughter of God is expected to obey with a willing heart every word which the Lord has spoken, and which he will in the future speak to us. It is expected that we hearken to the revelations of his will, and adhere to them, cleave to them with all our might; for this is salvation, and anything short of this clips the salvation and the glory of the saints."

And so, as the glory of this autumn time is translated into a prophecy of the spring which is to follow, let us listen to the voice from the burning bush and reverently remove the shoes of our unbelief and stand on holy ground. ". . .Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord." (Isa. 52:11.)

Millennial Star

Religion in Action

Some of our friends and others who have made only a cursory examination of the theology and religion of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (the Mormon Church) have criticized it as being radically unsacramental and pre-eminently practical. They have felt that we put undue emphasis on the here and now, the practical and the material, as distinguished from the spiritual or sacramental.

While the members of the Church are taught to observe certain sacraments as part of their religion, we do not believe that such observance alone, in this or any other church, will insure salvation. We believe rather that the next life will begin where this life ends and that what a man is in his heart is more important than his perfunctory attendance at religious service or his meticulous observance of the various rites and ceremonies or so-called sacraments of the Church.

Experience has shown that a scoundrel, a fraud, or a sinner, in order to gain preferment, recognition, or profit, or for other ulterior motives, may attend church regularly, perform or have performed for him all the rites and ordinances prescribed for the observance of the truly converted, but we know, of course, that without Godly repentance he will fall far short of the Savior's approbation.

What a man thinketh in his heart—and this is best evidenced by what is translated into action—is more important than what may be on the glib lips of the dissimulator, the insincere obeisance of the knave or the boastful observance of the letter of the law. The parable of the Pharisee and the publican is a case in point. (See Luke 18:10-14.)

We know that we are saved by the grace of Christ, that faith in him is prerequisite. His teachings and practices convince us that some of the sacraments or ordinances of the Church are essential to acceptance into the fold of Christ. "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God." (John 3:5.) Church attendance and partaking of the Sacrament are vital to man's spiritual health and vigor. What goes on in the Church or chapel is important, but what goes on outside the Church may be more effective in shaping and conditioning the life of the individual. If we observe a man's conduct when he is away from the Church, we may evaluate the quality and sincerity of his formal worship. ". . .shew me thy faith without thy works, and I will shew thee my faith by my works." (James 2:18.)

And to those who think we are grossly materialistic and inordinately practical, may we point out that when the Word, or Christ, was made flesh and dwelt among us as we read in John's Gospel, he sanctified the material, glorified the human body, and demonstrated the essential connection between spirit and element, both of which are eternal. A fulness of joy may be received only when spirit and element are inseparably connected. One function of spirit is to control and glorify matter, and the function of matter is to serve spirit.

Not only did the Master glorify the human body and sanctify marriage when he condescended to tabernacle in the flesh, but he intertwined the spiritual and the material as he went about blessing the poor, healing the sick, and showing people how to carry a cross and be lifted up and glorified by it.

That he considered the common things of life sacred is shown by the fact that he used bread made from wheat and wine from the grape of the vine as fit emblems for the renewing of covenants and insuring the constant companionship of his Holy Spirit. He taught and practised baptism in water, a mundane element, and declared that entrance into the kingdom was conditioned upon its authoritative administration. Though the parables he taught the greatest truths about the human spirit by calling attention to such things as the sowing of seeds, the beauty of the lilies, the birds, the soil, the sheep, and the lambs. He was acquainted with the use of the carpenter's bench, and his pulpit was the hillside and the seashore. While he taught his disciples to be fishers of men, he also showed them the best place to catch fish to eat; and he ate with them even after his resurrection.

We believe that man's whole life should be a sacrament, that he should pray as he works and work as he prays. In this sense our religion is intensely practical. There must be a revival of the sacramental nature of work if our industrial and economic problems are to be solved.

We believe that marriage is sacred, eternal, and God-ordained and therefore is more blessed than barren and unnatural celibacy; that our children are born innocent and should be taught to worship God in the home, at school, at work and play, amidst all of life's insistent demands, not only in the chapel or the cloister.

Religion should not be departmentalized or be practised only on one given day, but by its very nature it should be a practical and everyday affair. We remember with pride and gratitude the practices of our ancestors in the early days of the Church. They worked early and late on their farms, and then they took their whole family into the field at seedtime and again at harvest where together they kneeled down on the good earth and thanked God for his mercies, prayed for his continued blessings and dedicated their land and crops and themselves to him. This is often done in Mormon families today.

Men can best show their love for their fellow men by helping them to live more abundantly, by co-operating with them in a practical way, and by making available to them the knowledge and experience of the larger group, and, when needed, divide among them the fruits of the toil of others. When men ask for bread, a stone will not suffice nor will mere words satisfy hunger.

The practical aspects of the Mormon concepts may be better understood by our friends if they become acquainted with the Church welfare plan and know of its benefits and blessings in many lands. Some of the readers of the Star will remember the great service the Church, through its welfare program, rendered to the Saints in Europe following World War II. The store-houses of the Church, being well stocked, were immediately open to the cry of the poor, and the Saints in Zion gave a wonderful demonstration of what it means to ". . .love thy neighbour as thyself." (Matt. 22:39.)

Remembering the prophecies concerning the calamities that are to come, the great welfare program should be promoted and developed in the mission fields where it can be made to operate successfully and assure to the Saints in the troublous times ahead some measure of security.

We call attention also to the Church's vast colonization program from its inception; its leadership in irrigation, in establishing sugar factories and industries to provide work—all in the hope of bringing the affairs of ordinary life into the divine frame of the Church and religious worship. We try to meet the people where their interests lie and not merely lament and wring our hands because some of them do not go to church. Many members of the Church who class themselves as "not very religious" respond gladly to an invitation to go on a work mission to New Zealand or Australia, Switzerland, England, or elsewhere and spend several years without pay to help to build a college with its gymnasium, a chapel with its recreation hall, or a temple built with the spirit of ". . .Holiness to the Lord." (Ex. 28:36.)

We believe that all members, either in the stakes or missions of the Church, should respond to the call to assist in the great welfare program in whatever way their training, talents, skills, or labor may be used.

We believe in the gospel of work, of free enterprise, of love for fellow men. We believe with one of the prophets of old that when a man is engaged in the service of his fellow men he is only engaged in the service of God. (See Mosiah 2:17.) And furthermore, one of the final tests for admission into "the kingdom" will be our answer to the question asked by the Savior: "Did you feed the hungry, clothe the naked, visit the sick and imprisoned?" And then he will say, "Inasmuch as ye did it unto the least of these my brethren ye did it unto me." (See Matt. 25:34-40.)

Millennial Star

The Way of Life

I wonder if sometimes our people think when they hear a speaker ask for divine guidance that it has come to be just a habit. If you were asked to occupy this position, you would know that that is not the case. For that guidance I humbly pray.

I should like to follow the example of being brief which was set yesterday by President Joseph Fielding Smith. I think he demonstrated the truth of the statement that for a speech to be immortal it does not need to be everlasting.

Since our last April conference, reporters, editors, commentators, and others at home and abroad have given considerable time and space to the Church and its activities. As has been intimated, this results partly at least from the tour of the choir, the dedication of the Swiss and Los Angeles temples, and the announcement of other temples to be built. We appreciate the uniform friendliness and general accuracy of these reports and comments. They have ranged from learned discussions of various phases of the gospel to such brief and inaccurate generalizations as that, "To be a Mormon simply means that one does not drink tea or coffee or use tobacco or liquor."

Now, we do accept and try to live the Word of Wisdom, a law of health, first because the Lord thought enough of it to give a revelation on it and also because for a hundred years we have proved its worth. But there are other things we would like our friends to know about the Church, and so for a few moments I would like to discuss some phases of Mormonism which are not so generally known.

Because of limitation of time and of the speaker, any attempted exposition will be inadequate and incomplete. I should like first, however, to say to you that the conduct of a typical member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints or Mormon, is influenced not so much by prohibitions, inhibitions, or Church discipline as by his own inner convictions regarding the essential dignity and possible glory of the individual, the meaning of life, man's origin, purpose, and possible destiny.

Mormonism is not just a code of ethics; it is not merely a set of inhibitive injunctions; it is not just a theoretical system of doctrine and philosophy. It is rather a way of life, based upon a concept of God as our Eternal Father, and of man, created in the bodily image of God—a son of God, who has all of the obligations, opportunities, and potentials of heirship. The Mormon concept of Deity with its accompanying concept of man's potential Godlike status, should cause believers to resist the down-drag of habits and indulgences which are inimical to or would impede or delay man's progress towards his goal.

Perhaps you would like to take a quick look at Mormonism through the eyes of a non-member of the Church who has taken time to study it. I have the author's permission to read some paragraphs from a pamphlet recently published by the department of humanities of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology under the general caption The Sociology of Mormonism. These studies were made and written by Dr. Thomas F. O'Dea, who has a distinguished academic career at Harvard, at Stanford, and at M.I.T. These writings show careful study, keen analysis, and an enviable facility of expression. I shall read some excerpts:

"Of the many churches founded in the regions south of the Great Lakes in the first half of nineteenth century, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latterday Saints or the Mormon Church alone avoided the stagnant back-waters of sectarianism. The need to start over again four times in sixteen years contributed to the flexibility and avoided sectarian atmosphere and culture."

And again he says,

"In 1847 the Mormons, harassed and persecuted, dispossessed of all but faith, leadership and a superb organization, crossed the plains and settled in the Utah desert. . . . The Mormon leadership deliberately chose an unattractive region to gain the necessary respite that isolation would give, and resisted the seductions of more pleasant prospects."

And then speaking of our Americanism, he said:

"Their American patriotism is an Article of Faith with them. . . . The development of a nationhood was inhibited by American patriotic convictions on the part of the Latter-day Saints themselves. Mormonism sees America as a chosen land and holds that the second coming of Christ will be to this continent. America is a divinely-preferred country and the previous periods of history were preparatory for the Mormon restoration. Thus the Mormons, while exalting America and exulting in it, could at the same time feel called out of Babylon to build the city of God. . . . The Mormons are preeminently practical and are the typical American religious movement. As such Mormonism presents a heightening, a more explicit formulation and summation of the American experience of time and of America's timeliness.

"The Mormon Church defines itself as a restoration in the latter days of the original gospel of Jesus Christ, which had been corrupted and lost in part for the past fifteen centuries. Its restoration is conceived in terms of Christian history, . . .It is a new interpretation of Christianity itself. A unique prophet and a unique and timely moment as well as a uniquely appropriate place are part of this conception. Mormonism holds itself to have been revealed in the fulness of time—a fulness of time which involves the destiny of the Western Hemispere and the American nation. The discovery of America and the development of the political institutions of the United States are seen as prepared by divine guidance for the restoration which was to be made through the agency of the orignial prophet, Joseph Smith.

"Within this larger framework the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has its own history, a record of wandering and persecution, of construction and conquest over hostile elements coming to fruition in the building of Zion in the mountain tops. . . . Mormonism lived its Exodus and Chronicles not once but many times. It had its Moses and its Joshua. Circumstances had given it a stage upon which its reenactment of Biblical history was neither farce nor symbolic pageant."

Yes, our history has been in part a reenactment of biblical history, but what is more important, our doctrine is a reaffirmation of biblical truth. We believe in the God of the Old Testament—Jehovah, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. We believe that that Divine Personage became Jesus the Christ of the New Testament, the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world. "We believe that through the atonement of Christ all mankind may be saved by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel." We emphasize "all mankind" and "obedience" because the gospel and its saving ordinances are to be made available to the living on this earth, and to the living elsewhere, with obedience as prerequisite to blessings.

"For for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit." (1 Pet. 4:6.)

Believing as we do in the great vicarious service of the Master which is the very foundation of Christianity, we undertake to do for our dead, what they cannot do for themselves, and therefore we build these temples which you, our friends, have seen and of which you have heard.

We believe in a pre-existent state where we exercised free agency, where there were individual differences, where life was purposeful and progressive, and where man in his original state existed as intelligence.

After referring to "the inestimable contributions to the settlement of the West and the planting there of a viable and vital American civilization," Dr. O'Dea says: "How remarkably familiar are the basic elements of the Mormon gospel, how remarkably like the general apprehension of America by other Americans when it sheds its theological poignancy." He refers to Mormon theology as

"A distillation of what is peculiarly American in America and that by incorporating the goals of the present world into a vision of eternal progression the Church succeeded in annihilating for its followers the line of demarcation between time and eternity in quite a new way.

"For Mormonism the world is uncreated and God and men are winning mastery over other uncreated elements. God has become a demiurage once again. . .which means one who works on existing material, a craftsman."

All that is, in process, that is marked by two main characteristics: It is becoming increasingly more complex; and intelligent beings, God and men, are collaboratively gaining increasing mastery over it. Man's life on earth is seen as one of an infinity of episodes characterized by increasing development and mastery of the other elements of nature. This concept of God's purpose and method respecting man's existence was clearly stated by the late Dr. John A. Widtsoe, himself a great scholar and a profound student of the gospel,

"The law of progression is then a law of endless development of all the powers of man in the midst of a universe, becoming increasingly more complex. No more hopeful principle can be incorporated into a philosophy of life." (A Rational Theology.)

The Lord revealed in the Doctrine and Covenants,

"Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be. . . .

"For man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy;. . ." (D&C 93:29, 33.)

On this point Dr. Widtsoe wrote as follows:

"In the beginning, which transcends our understanding, God undoubtedly exercised his will vigorously and thus gained great experience of the forces lying about him. As knowledge grew into greater knowledge by the persistent efforts of the will, his recognition of universal laws became greater until he obtained at last a conquest over the universe which to our finite understanding seems absolutely complete."

We proclaim the scriptural and inspring doctrine that man should look up and not down for his source, for he is of divine lineage; that man is innocent at birth, which is the antithesis of the ball and chain doctrine of original sin and innate wickedness.

"Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God." (D&C 93:38.)

Man faces a vista of limitless development, eternal progression, if he will co-operate in winning mastery over himself and the universe. We believe that man's earth life was made possible by Adam's role in a fore-ordained plan which included the provision for man to come face to face with both good and evil, and, under the eternal law of free agency, elect good or evil without compulsion, knowling however that under the immutable law of the harvest he must abide the consequences of his choice, must reap as he sows. Free agency is prerequisite to any character-building plan, and while with free agency any plan is inevitably crammed with risk, we, with all the sons of God, accepted that risk and shouted for joy at the prospect of earth life. The Lord said to Job,

"Where was thou when I laid the foundations of the earth?. . .

"When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?" (Job 38:4, 7,

If God is in fact our Father, then we, Father and children, belong to the same society of eternal intelligences. Among them he is supreme, he is the most advanced, most powerful, and most intelligent.

"Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones."

". . .I am the Lord thy God, I am more intelligent than they all." (Abr. 3:22, 19.)

When we say man may become like our Father, we do not mean to humanize God, but rather to deify man—not as he now is but as he may become. The difference between us is indescribably great, but it is one of degree rather than of kind.

"But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God,. . ." (John 1:12.)

To the Latter-day Saints salvation or being saved does not imply a sudden transformation or metamorphosis into something entirely unlike one's nature nor can it be achieved by mere mental assent or sudden conversion. It is rather a continuing process of becoming or unfolding pursuant to law and divine plan, of bringing one's life into harmony with eternal and inexorable law.

We believe that in his infinite and eternal development toward a Godlike status, man moves toward and through a turnstile called death; that there is no interruption of life at this portal, for eternity is indefinitely prolonged time. We believe that man, after passing through this turnstile, will continue his enternal journey from the point where his actions in this life have brought him. "Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection." (D&C 130:18.) To deny the possibility of eternal progression is to accept the awful alternative of eventual stagnation which would be damnation.

We believe that being saved involves education, that man cannot be saved in ignorance any more than he can be saved in ignorance any more than he can be saved in sin, for as ". . .the glory of God is intelligence, or light and truth," so the degree of our intelligence will be the measure of our glory. Neither the ignorant nor the sinner would be comfortable or at home in heaven. This concept glorifies intelligence as well as righteousness. But let us not confuse mere knowledge with intelligence. The knowledge of which we speak must seek enlightenment and be applied with wisdom. The knowledge that will save us is not mere know-how, certainly not cunning or mental agility or sagacity; it is not just erudition. The wise man may not be learned, and the learned are not always wise. The intelligence which is the glory of God is all knowledge (and knowledge is power) applied with supreme wisdom and total righteousness.

Time will not permit a further discussion of our teachings with respect to some of the things that Dr. O'Dea has mentioned. Suffice it to say, that Mormonism, among other things, is an eternal quest for knowledge which is power, for truth which is joyous because it makes us free, for intelligence, which is the glory of God, and for the righteousness which will enable us to feel at home in his holy presence.

God help us to live worthily and to go forward fearlessly in our search for truth, I pray, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

General Conference

1 See Teaching of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 217.
