Hugh B. Brown, Eternal Quest ( 1956)

SECTION IV Faith in our Country

If you claim the rights of freedom, you must undertake to assume its duties and responsibilities. Freedom is a test of will, trial of moral strength.

To the Girls behind the Men behind the Guns

"All day long the sheep and swine graze in the same pasture, drink from the same stream. At eventide the sheep go to the fold, the swine to the sty."

In times of war, life's smelting process is accelerated by the concentrated heat to which all are subjected in varying degrees of intensity. In this fire much dross is consumed, but there are refined such precious metals as courage, constancy, fidelity, loyalty, valor, and heroism. We appreciate these virtues when they appear on the battlefield, where the individual is supported by the group, "with soldiers to shout and praise," but when they emerge under less conspicuous circumstances without the heat of battle or the bellows of music or cheers or clangor of war, then they are nuggets indeed.

Some young women feel that their part in the program is so insignificant as to leave little opportunity to develop these qualities which we applaud in our fighting men. They, too, wish to serve, to help, to do more than merely cheer on the sidelines. They do not agree that "men must fight and women must weep."

In this world conflict the front lines are often "behind the lines." Civilians are playing a larger part than in any war in history. It is a war against the individual, where truth and error are locked in conflict, right opposed to wrong, good opposed to evil, Christ opposed to anti-Christ. The first and most important duty of every soldier is to "choose whom he will serve." You, young women, also, must decide which side you are on and then you will have ample opportunity to prove your quality.

In spite of, or because of, our highly mechanized methods of warfare, manpower is the chief factor in determining the strength of an army. The total manpower of an army is the sum of the strength of the individuals. The fighting strength of a soldier is not a matter of physical fitness alone. Now, as never before, do stamina, morale, and character count in the struggle. Despite all our scientific progress and our modern methods, there is more opportunity for individual initiative and skill than ever before. With the coming of tanks and airplanes we turn again to the kind of fighting where man meets man in terms of quick decisions, co-ordination, and split-second timing.

Anything, then, which will sustain and strengthen the individual serviceman will aid the cause of the United Nations. Any act or influence which lowers his morale or impairs his physical fitness is an act of sabotage. You can make your greatest contribution by making sure that every serviceman you contact is strengthened by your influence, made better by your presence; that when he leaves you, he will respect you and retain his own self-respect, which is indispensable to high morale.

These Latter-day Saint men with whom you associate have high ideals, great hopes and ambitions, limitless possibilities, all predicated upon the observance of certain rules of conduct. Anyone who encourages one of them to forsake his ideals and yield to temptations so prevalent in all armies, thereby weakens his armor, makes him vulnerable to the enemy, contributes to the downfall of one of our fighting men.

Remember, the days of chivalry are not over. Men still go into the joust with their "ladies' colors fastened to their lances," and they do their best to live up to what those ladies expect of them. These men want to feel as they go out to fight that there is something in the world that has not gone to pieces. Their thought of home, family, and the verities of life include you, the girl friend, the fiancee. They want to believe that there is still something sweet and clean and pure in the world. To them you symbolize an ideal.

Imagine, then, the awful letdown if you have become a victim of the fiendish folly that passions and appetites must be ministered to and that you are guilty of whimpering, "We can't say `no' to a soldier." He may put you to the test, but all the time he prays you will prove true. If he is weak, he will thank God that you are strong.

These men, finding themselves in a new and strange environment, surrounded by influences which challenge their concepts of right and wrong, may sometimes waver in their determination to come out clean. Some of their companions make light of what they have always held sacred. In cities, towns, and villages, alcoholic beverages are available to them and certain of your sex who dishonor the name of woman prey on their loneliness. These and many other temptations they must meet and conquer, but imagine how their world will fall apart if, when on leave, they find that you too are yielding to the downdrag of these devil-dominated days.

You also, perhaps with less vehemence, are engaged in the conflict, battling against the animal appetites that "claw at the soul." You too must struggle against the temptation of crudity and mediocrity. You must not be cheap or crude—you must struggle against the suction of war's whirlpool and not strike your colors and surrender to the enemy, for to surrender is to "rob existence of its value and personality of its sanctity." You must win this battle with yourself if you would be ready for the great opportunity to strike a blow at the enemy when you are with a man in uniform. You can restore his faith in himself and in his ideals and send him back a better soldier, or you can take away the last remaining prop which sustains his character and send him back the most pitiful of casualties, one wounded by his friends, betrayed by those he loves.

When they visit you while on leave, you must be strong and give them of your strength. Renew their faith in the right by your own unwavering loyalty. Raise high the standards which perhaps they have allowed to droop. Send them back recharged with faith and hope and courage and self-esteem, knowing there is something fine to fight for, to live for, to come home to. Send them back stronger men for their contact with you. Every man you touch must be better for that touch, or you should be in quarantine as an enemy of the state.

Someone spoke an eternal truth when he said, "Honest love is the most powerful influence for good that can enter into a man's life; so love's counterfeit is the most disintegrating."

We must remember that this war, too, will pass, will end, and there will be a return to such normalcy as is possible. Then life must be lived and must endure the acid test of reality. Uniforms with their fading glamor will go into the discard, the boys will be civilians again. You and they must take up the business of living in a world which will seem to be out of focus. Your world and theirs will endure the ordeal if you and they refuse to surrender to mediocrity. Bombed cities may be rebuilt, devastated areas may be reclaimed, bodily scars of honorable battle may be healed, but the stains of ruined character are the most lasting of the terrors of war.

We who remember the aftermath of the last war have not forgotten the wreckage and devastation every-where to be seen—colossal waste on every hand—and yet in the intervening years we were able to repair, rebuild, and reclaim much of that loss. But time has not effaced the havoc of wrecked homes and disillusioned lives where Satan had convinced some that love could spring from the ashes of lust. Here the armistice did not stop the process of disintegration.

You must say "No" to a soldier if he proposes anything which will help the enemy. You would say "No" and stop him with your life if he should propose an act of treason, and treason is giving help and comfort to the enemy. What, then, if he proposes that you join him in an act which un-mans him? If you yield, have you not been untrue to your Americanism, to your womanhood, and to him? Have you not thereby helped the enemy? If in his delirium he calls for that which is harmful, you must have the courage and the good sense to deny him, even as a nurse would refuse a harmful drug to her patient in the hospital. What would you think of a nurse who instead of courageously doing her duty, and saving her weakened patient from his folly, should add contagion to his wounds and then whimper, "I thought he wanted me to, and I tried to make him happy." Do you know what the soldiers call those foolish girls who give themselves to them under the false banner of patriotism? They are known as "patriotic prostitutes."

We want our men to come out of this war with faith in God and in themselves, faith in the American way of life and a determination to preserve and improve it, faith in the future and courage to face it. Yours is the opportunity to hold up to them the hope and assurance that when this is over there will still be much to live for, provided they themselves are true to their ideals.

Will you young women help to stem this avalanche which threatens to engulf the future homes of our country and wreck and destroy the pillars of our society? The old cry of Cain, the murderer, "I am not my brother's keeper," cannot apply to you who are the keeper of some other girl's brother. That other girl may be with your brother now. What would you have her do for him? Then apply the golden rule.

You girls behind the men behind the guns form a line of defense which must not weaken. While that line holds, the front lines will remain impregnable. There must be no compromise, no going over to the enemy, no lowering of standards—no traitors in this line.

This is not a line to be defended with ships and tanks and guns and airplanes; it will not be assaulted by troops with fixed bayonets. But it is a line constantly under fire, being attacked from all directions, a line where it is sometimes difficult to tell friend from foe. From these lines there must come reserves for the front—not armed recruits, but the very essence of the fighting man's strength, namely, courage and faith and that "tenfold strength" of the pure in heart.

There must come up from these lines an atmosphere of home, of love, of fidelity and purity, an atmosphere free from contamination, free from nicotine and alcohol and lust.

From this line there will come an unseen companion to march at his side, ride with him in his tank or plane, be with him on his battleship. The memory of that last sweet time together will give him strength and fortitude and renew his faith in God.

Yes, girls, you are called to serve, and when the war is over the heroines will be as numerous and entitled to as great credit as the heroes of the war. Your medal of honor may not be pinned on a uniform, but it will be the highest honor won on life's battlefield—a clean, courageous heart. God himself will reward your valor.

The Improvement Era

To the Parents of Servicemen

In 1918 the Giant Mars was wounded, and some thought permanently disabled, but by 1939 he had regained his strength, and in blind fury is now straining at the pillars of civilization.

Never before have so many been called to resist him. Never before have so many parents, wives, brothers, sisters, and friends had a personal interest in great and unpredictable events. Modern efficiency places the most intelligent, the physically soundest, the fittest of our youth, in the greatest danger. In 1918, there were fewer than 20,000 Latter-day Saint men in the service. In 1943, we have more than double that number.

You who have prayed with and for these men and have taught them how to pray, to read the scriptures, and to believe in God, know that they had high ideals and lofty ambition when this call came. They and you had planned their lives in peaceful pursuit of worthy achievement, and to this end you had supervised their training.

This sudden changing of their course and way of life; this separation from those they love, with its accompanying loss of inspiration and the supports and safeguards of home environment; this sudden impact with a world at war, with its challenge to all they had believed and known, is subjecting that training to a test more grueling than anything you or they anticipated.

We who have observed them in this test, being transformed from boys to men, carrying tremendous responsibility and harnessed to a course of training which only the strong can endure, fearlessly preparing to meet the enemy and to look into the face of death—we know something of the struggle which each man has in that smaller, but no less dangerous sector of the conflict where the enemy would destroy him from within. We who have seen their reaction to the down-drag of temptation, as well as to the uplift of high resolve—we know that you parents have reason to be proud. They were taught at your hearthstone, inspired by your example, and with pride and honor they carry the banners and standards of home and Church to all parts of the world in numbers tenfold greater than our normal missionary corps.

Though their duty calls them far from home, and though their present discipline and training is in other hands, though they have reached maturity in a day and are strong and self-reliant and unafraid, still they want to feel that you are near them. They look to you for encouragement and faith. Being reminded that someone believes in them, is praying for them, is a real safeguard in the hour of temptation, an effective spur to high morale.

They must know—and you must tell them—that they are trusted, that you have no doubt of the quality of their manhood and the integrity of their character. They will respond to the trust you place in them, will strive to be worthy of your confidence. They will spread their wings to the lifting power of your faith in them.

They hunger and thirst for word from home and anxiously watch for the arrival of the mail. If you could be present at a mail delivery in a desert camp and see their eager and expectant faces as they wait for their names to be called; if you could note, as we have done, the dejection and utter loneliness of the few to whom no mail has come and see them crawl into their pup tents, homesick to the marrow of their bones; if you could know, as Satan knows, that at such moments their resistance is at low ebb, and that it is then he can get in some of his most effective work, you would make sure that every week would see at least one letter on its way to them.

We need not urge the mothers to write to their sons, as they are usually prompt and constant, but too often we hear young men say, "Gee, I wish Dad would write." Fathers, they need the strength which your words will bring to them. Your letter may arrive at a moment when it will save your boy from ruin.

As we waited at midnight for a train in a small town near a camp, we saw a lad sitting on the station platform. We asked him why he was alone, and where his buddies were. "They have gone for a night of revelry," he said, "and I am waiting to ride back to camp with them." When asked why he had not gone with them, he took a letter from his pocket and said, "It's from my dad." He read one paragraph to us, which in substance was as follows: "I'm proud to have a son who can be trusted, who will meet every temptation manfully. Your mother and I believe in you."

"I'd be a traitor," said the lad, "if with this letter in my pocket, I'd disgrace those who trust me like that. I'd rather die than let them down."

What would have happened if that father had not written? Who would have shared the blame, if the boy had gone astray? Here, as elsewhere, there are casualties because of too little and too late. It is a soul-searching experience to have your letters returned with a notation that your son has gone where letters cannot reach him.

A good mother, in a small town, before she bade her only son good-bye, embroidered her initials on the inside of his inner coat pocket. She did not say anything about it. When the boy got to camp, he saw the letters and recognized them as his mother's initials. That evening he wrote this sentence: "Dear Mom: I want to thank you for putting those letters inside my coat pocket. I'll try to see to it that the coat does not go any place where your name could not go." That boy is safe in the army.

The Church is doing much to keep contact with these men. They have received tickets of identification and servicemen's Church directories. We are now distributing the special pocket-size edition of The Book of Mormon and Principles of the Gospel. These are sent free to all men in the service, and New Testaments are furnished by other groups. Wherever it is possible, these men are being visited by members of the priesthood, who organize them into groups that meetings may be held wherever they may go. We get word that Church services are being held by them on various battlefronts, in Australia, Alaska, Africa, Asia, Europe, and America; but nothing which the Church may do can take the place of letters of love and encouragement from home.

But we must not write letters which have a depressing effect upon our sons. We should not emphasize the worries and despondencies which may annoy us at the time of writing. Nor should we criticize the conduct of the war or our leadership in our letters, as confidence and loyalty are basic to effective military service. Our letters should be buoyant, cheerful, full of hope. They should carry the contagion of a triumphant spirit.

For their sakes, we must guard our inherited forms of freedom and preserve the kind of society for which they are fighting. We must resist with all our power every attempt to introduce "alienisms" into our american system. It is neither necessary nor wise to harrow up their feelings with political irritations, nor plant seeds of doubt where courage waits on faith.

Keeping contact with them during their service with the armed forces, understanding something of their problems, retaining their confidence by keeping them assured of our love, will insure their co-operation in the stupendous and delicate task which will confront all parents when the boys come home.

These 30,000 to 40,000 Latter-day Saint men will not return the same boys who went away. Some will have done a lot of sober thinking, will have discovered that in material and scientific fields old methods and the thinking which went with them do not suffice to meet the new demands. Their strong young minds will demand not only answers but also reasons for those answers. They will feel the need of an assuring hand. We must be prepared to guide when the way seems dark, when heavy strain has impaired their vision; to help solve their problems, economic, educational, and spiritual; to convince them that truth is ageless and unchanging, and that there are some eternal, intangible verities. Others will have become accustomed to acting on emotional impulses, will almost have forgotten how to think.

They may not be willing to accept as true all that has authoritative sanction. An up-to-date knowledge of our changing world, an appreciation of their viewpoint will be needed, if these bewildered and soul-hungry young men returning from the battlefield are to be given bread and not a stone. Some of them will have yielded to temptation and will need help to regain self-confidence and the courage to try again. As they come back to the reserve lines which are held by us, they must find understanding, confidence, courage, intelligence, and faith. We must keep the spiritual home fires burning by which to warm them back to vigor when they come in from this awful storm. Now is the time to begin to prepare for their coming, to take thought of the future—clear, rational, prayerful thought—before it is too late.

Those of them who return with physical wounds will be scientifically treated in the best institutions in the world with specialists in attendance. Everything possible will be done to restore their health, to heal their wounds, to compensate for lost abilities by establishing them in some suitable activity.

But upon the parents and the Church will rest the responsibility, not only of supplementing what the government may do, but also of re-establishing their faith in life and in themselves. Spiritual hospitalization also calls for specialists who are dedicated to their tasks. Your tasks may be difficult and your problems baffling, but when we consider the Master's promise to those who "do it unto the least of these," we may know our first duty is to guard and guide our own, if we are to hear his approving, "Well done."

Our greeting, then, includes a plea to keep in touch with our servicemen, to write only such letters as will buoy them up and give them hope and confidence and courage, to start today to make provision for their homecoming, and to pray for guidance as we undertake the task of postwar rehabilitation. While they are in foreign lands, fighting to defend democracy, we will hold her banners so high at home that when they come marching—sailing—flying back to a chastened but triumphant America, in gratitude to God they'll say, "Surely this was worth fighting for," and they whose sons will not come back will humbly say, "Amen."

The Relief Society Magazine

The Constitution of the United States — "A Heavenly Banner"

"Therefore, it is not right that any man should be in bondage one to another.

"And for this purpose have I established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose, and redeemed the land by the shedding of blood." (D&C 107:79-80.)

No item of inspiration is held more sacred by the Latter-day Saints than the Constitution of the United States. Our statement that the Lord inspired the authors of the Constitution does not mean to imply that this document came as a direct revelation from God. It is an inspired charter of liberty, written after a long series of events and centuries of struggle by freedom-loving men.

We believe the Lord overruled events in the affairs of nations down through the ages, that he inspired the hardy men who, in 1215, forced King John to give them the Magna Charta, the "great charter" of personal liberty. And, again, in 1628 when members of the British Parliament forced Charles I to sign the Petition of Right which was approved, in 1628, by William and Mary.

We believe that he was at the controls when, in 1787, the delegates to the Constitutional Convention sensed the importance of their task and determined the form of government under which they and their posterity should live; ". . .a standard," as Washington said, "to which the wise and the honest can repair"; that Gouverneur Morris was inspired when he said, "The whole human race will be affected by the proceedings of this Convention."

When ascribing, then, to our Heavenly Father the inspiration which led the Founding Fathers to formulate and adopt the Constitution, we mean to include the solid foundation upon which this Constitution was built. This foundation was laid by courageous men, block by block through the centuries, as they fought and died for liberty.

Inasmuch as The Relief Society Magazine is published for the benefit of members of the Church in all countries, it should be pointed out that the Constitution of the United States advocates nothing which would preclude a Latter-day Saint living outside the United States from being loyal to the laws and standards of his own land, nor does our belief that the Constitution was inspired of God imply that other freedom-loving people have not had his help in securing in their own countries such liberties as they enjoy.

Church members who live in other free countries join us in thanking him for freedom: in England, although they have no written constitution, there is great respect for law and dogged insistence on liberty; in Canada, the people are grateful to God for their freedom and confederation under the British North-American Act of 1867.

We are grateful, then, not only for the Constitution of the United States as it is, but also for the series of blessings from our Heavenly Father which led up to it, for the countless sacrifices which were made in preparation for it.

We venerate the memories of the signers of the Declaration of Independence and the authors of the Constitution. We think of them as great patriots and inspired statesmen, but let us not forget the price they were prepared to pay for the action they were taking. This took courage of the highest order. They were revolutionaries. What they did was treason, and they knew the penalty. Franklin was not jesting when he said, "We must all hang together, or assuredly we shall all hang separately."

Benjamin Franklin drew the attention of the members of the Constitutional Convention, who seemingly could not agree, to the need for divine guidance. He said on the floor of the convention, June 28, 1787, among other things:

"I have lived, Sir, for a long time, and the longer I live, the more convincing proofs I see of this truth that God governs the affairs of man, and if a sparrow cannot fall to the ground without his notice, is it probable that an empire can rise without his aid? We have been assured, Sir, in sacred writings, that except the Lord build the house they labor in vain that build it." (Cited in Benjamin Franklin, Carl Van Doren, p. 747.)

Let us be reminded that all blessings which come from God carry with them responsibilities and obligations. If we are to enjoy the blessings vouchsafed by the Constitution, we must preserve it. It has been, and it will continue to be attacked by foes, both foreign and domestic. Freedom is not a thing that can be won and secured at a given time and be thereby guaranteed to all future generations. We have a responsibility to protect and safeguard the Constitution, a responsibility not only to one another and to our posterity, but also to God.

The Constitution may be weakened and eventually destroyed by:

(1) Approving laws which place in the hands of elected or appointed officials the powers which, under the Constitution, belong to the people.

(2) Such entangling alliances with other nations as will limit or curtail our own power of self-government. If by treaty or covenant or by the adoption of national policies we place in the hands of foreign countries the power to impose upon us unwise commitments or heavy obligations or to plunge us into war; if by entangling alliances, against which Washington warned so eloquently, we lose the right and the ability to make our own decisions, to formulate our own policies, and map our own national course, we thereby and to that extent vitiate the Constitution. One sentence from Washington's farewell address indicates how clearly he saw this danger:

"Against the insidious wiles of foreign influence (I conjure you to believe me, fellow citizens) the jealousy of a free people ought to be constantly awake, since history and experience prove that foreign influence is one of the most baneful foes of republican government."

(3) The founding fathers wisely established three divisions of government and set bounds to the authority of each. If we permit any of these divisions to infringe upon or usurp the powers properly belonging to another, or if the officers responsible for the exercise of the rights of these divisions of government should abdicate or surrender their powers to others, then indeed will the Constitution be in danger.

President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., in a radio address over KSL, September 17, 1946, outlined the two basic judicial systems in the so-called civilized world today, the common law system and the Roman or civil law system, and in that address he warned us in the following words:

"Now, in the last years, we in America have gone a long distance towards the adoption of the Roman concepts, and the abuses against property rights and human freedom and liberties which are possible under that system. And let me say here and now, that in the whole history of the human race, from Adam until now, tyranny has never come to live with any people with a placard on his breast bearing his name. He always comes in deep disguise, sometimes proclaiming an endowment of freedom, sometimes promising help to the unfortunate and downtrodden, not by creating something for those who do not have, but by robbing those who have. But tyranny is always a wolf in sheep's clothing, and he always ends by devouring the whole flock, saving none." (Church News, September 21, 1946, p. 2.)

Not only were the founding fathers wise in the various provisions they made for a federal system of government, but they seemed to have a vision of the nation's future greatness, the vastness of its area, and the complex problems which would arise between the states and the federal government, as well as among the states themselves. To forestall the awful consequences of competition, antagonism, and rival loyalties among citizens of various states, the founding fathers established distinct divisions of powers between the state and federal governments. In this complex structure it was necessary that bounds be set to authority and that the written Constitution, perfectly definite as it is, be preserved by "formidable difficulties of amendment against inconsiderate change." It became the written fundamental law of the land.

Every American owes allegiance to both the state and the national government, pays taxes to both, is granted certain rights and privileges under each, is subject to two sets of laws, under dual legislative, executive, and judicial departments, state and federal.

The preamble to the Constitution says it was ordained and established by the people of the United States

". . .in order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, insure domestic tranquility, provide for the common defence, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity. . . ."

It is obvious, therefore, that anything which tends to destroy this perfect union, or to rob the people of their "domestic tranquility," or to interfere with "the general welfare," anything, in other words, which tends to weaken or to tear down or to vitiate this greatest of all charters of liberty, should be guarded against, and be vigorously opposed by all who love and value liberty.

The attitude of the Church with respect to the Constitution has been set forth by each of the Presidents of the Church in turn. Some quotations will indicate the unwavering tenor of our faith in and our unflagging determination to support what Gladstone called, "The most wonderful work ever struck off at a given time by the brain and purpose of man." It is, in fact, the greatest charter of religious liberty ever written, but it must be supported by freedom-loving people who, by their actions, prove their worthiness to live under this "heavenly banner."

In the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple, March 27, 1836, the Prophet said:

". . .may those principles, which were so honorably and nobly defended, namely, the Constitution of our land, by our fathers, be established forever." (D&C 109:54.)

And again in a letter written in Liberty Jail, he said:

"The Constitution of the United States is a glorious standard; it is founded in the wisdom of God. It is a heavenly banner." (D.H.C. 3:304.).

Each President of the Church has likewise stressed the greatness of the Constitution.

Quoting Joseph Smith, President Young said:

"The time will come when the destiny of the nation will hang upon a single thread; and in that critical juncture, this people will step forth and save it from the threatened destruction. It will be so." (Journal History, July 4, 1854, p. 7.)

He further said:

"To accuse us of being unfriendly to the government is to accuse us of hostility to our religion, for no item of inspiration is held more sacred with us than the Constitution under which she acts ." (Cited in Liahona 12:644.)

President John Taylor stated:

"It was through and by the power of God that the fathers of this country framed the Declaration of Independence, and also that great palladium of human rights, the Constitution of the United States." (Cited in ibid.)

President Wilford Woodruff said:

"The Lord inspired the men who framed the Constitution of our country, and have guarded the nation from its foundation." (Cited in ibid.)

President Lorenzo Snow stated:

"We trace the hand of the Almighty in framing the Constitution of our land and believe that the Lord raised up men purposely for the accomplishment of this object—raised them up and inspired them to frame the Constitution of the United States."

President Joseph F. Smith said:

"I hope with all my soul that the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will be loyal in their very hearts and souls to the principles of the constitution of our country. From them we have derived the liberty that we enjoy. . . . I believe that the Constitution of the United States was and still is an inspired instrument. The Lord God Almighty inspired the minds that framed it, and I believe it ought to be most sacredly preserved. . . ." (Gospel Doctrine , p. 408.)

President Heber J. Grant stated:

"From my childhood days I have understood that we believe absolutely that the Constitution of our country is an inspired instrument, and that God directed those who created it and those who defended the independence of this nation. . . . Allow me to announce further that we are patriotic Americans to the core, and that we have learned it, many of us, at our mother's knees, where we said our prayers. We believe absolutely in the inspiration of God to the men who framed our constitution." (Gospel Standards, p. 128.)

President George Albert Smith said:

"When our Father in heaven inspired men to write the Constitution and give unto us the great charter that vouchsafed to us the liberty we enjoy, he did it in order that men might develop and be free, as the gospel of Jesus Christ intends that all men shall be."

President David O. McKay stated:

"Without freedom of thought, freedom of choice, freedom of action, within lawful bounds, man cannot progress. The Lord recognized this and also the fact that it would take man thousands of years to make the earth habitable for self-governing individuals. Throughout the ages advanced souls have yearned for a society in which liberty and justice prevail. Men have sought for it, fought for it, and died for it. Ancient freemen prized it, slaves longed for it, the Magna Charta demanded it, the Constitution of the United States declared it." (Gospel Ideals, p. 288.)

In April conference, 1950, President David O. McKay also said:

"I repeat that no greater immediate responsibility rests upon members of the Church, upon all citizens of this Republic and of neighboring Republics, than to protect the freedom vouchsafed by the Constitution of the United States. . . .

"To sum up this whole question: In these days of uncertainty and unrest, liberty-loving people's greatest responsibility and paramount duty is to preserve and proclaim the freedom of the individual, his relationship to Deity, and. . .the necessity of obedience to the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ—only thus will mankind find peace and happiness." (Conference Report, April 1950, p. 37.)

The Constitution, then, is:

(a) The world's greatest Charter of Liberty.

(b) It is our basic law.

(c) Its framers were inspired of God.

(d) The principles set out in the Constitution form a part of the over-all gospel plan for the freedom and salvation of men.

(e) It must be defended, protected, and preserved for future generations.

(f) It imposes obligations and responsibilities.

Let us humbly thank the Lord for our country, for her laws and institutions. Let us pray for the men who have been chosen to guide her destiny in these crucial times. Let us strive to be worthy of our glorious heritage—to live under the banner of the Constitution of the United States of America.

The Relief Society Magazine.

The Citadel Within

A Word to Soldiers about Their Own Private Battle

They who served in the last war, though now unable to participate in combat units, are among the most interested of the spectators who watch from the sidelines. They note the new and improved mechanized equipment as well as the revolutionary strategy and tactics employed. They would not attempt to give military advice, knowing that the folly of applying the rules of 1917 to the operations of 1942 would cost thousands of lives and result in humiliating reverses.

However, there are some constants in life which remain fixed whether one is in military or civilian activity and regardless of one's age. Of these we should like to speak.

Rather than address the youth of 1942, let the man of today talk to himself as one of the soldiers of 1917. Let him attempt, through his own eyes twenty-five years later, to see the road ahead of that young soldier. He might say something like this:

You, young man, have answered the call of your country. You offer to her your time, your talents, your strength—your life. How well-equipped are you as you present yourself for this service? What do you bring to the task and what do you propose to take out of it? You have passed your physical tests, but what of your intangible internal fitness?

First, there must be undeviating loyalty. Your country is at war. She has called for your help. She is faced by cruel and cunning foes who seek her destruction. You will not give less than wholehearted, enthusiastic support to the national effort. While your right to free speech is one of the things for which you fight, your intelligence will regulate the exercise of that right. You'll listen more and talk less.

You will obey orders, submit to discipline, become a part of a great military organization—how important a part is largely up to you!

Into this new experience you bring yourself—your physical, mental, moral, and spiritual self. You bring also your ideals, principles, aspirations, hopes. You bring all these into a new and strange environment where there will be terrific impacts. To some the environment will be used as an excuse for weakness, for abandoning their course of life and yielding to the down-drag of a murky current. Others will see in it a challenge to their strength and will face that challenge as manfully as they will face the foe on the battlefield, realizing that to yield here is as cowardly and infamous as to be untrue or traitorous when entrusted with a military assignment.

If you would give your best to your country, you must maintain your highest standards and ideals. You will bring out of the struggle a stronger man or a weaker one according to the fidelity with which you guard the citadel of your inner self.

You find yourself in uniform, one of millions, and may feel that your identity has been lost, that you are just a number, or perhaps a cipher. You will be tempted to become a fatalist and adopt a "don't care for consequences" attitude. Every day's work will be outlined, every effort regimented. You will listen to shouted commands and curt orders and will find your freedom restricted as never before. You will be inclined to feel that you are no longer the master of your fate and will wonder if you are wholly subject to the whims and caprice of chance.

You must resist this inclination to lower your guard. In spite of the complete regimentation of your life and the interruption of your plans by this sudden reversal of things, you must hold on to the truth that you are still, in large measure, the master of your fate. Keep faith in yourself,in your destiny; keep your hand upon the controls of your life. You are still in command of your own spirit.

Do not believe that some bomb or shell has your number on it and that it will get you regardless of what you do or refrain from doing, for with this thought too often goes the query, "What difference does it make what I think or say or do? Why not `eat, drink and be merry, for tomorrow we die'?" You shall not die tomorrow! You shall live. Most of the men who go to war live to return home. No shell has your number on it. No bullet is marked for you. Most of them are marked: "To whom it may concern," and most of them are wasted. Live, then, each day as if you were confident of returning to your home and loved ones and let that thought light your pathway and control your conduct.

Having decided to keep control of the course of your life you must make decisions daily. You must choose, elect, decide. Each decision implies a knowledge of values. Your good sense would not allow you to pay ten thousand dollars for a Model "T" Ford. Your pride will not permit you to be cheated. Before you close any deal, you will count the cost. If you are sure the thing offered is worth the price, if you are sure you will be satisfied with your bargain next month, next year and always, then take the offer. But be very sure you are not being deceived by the vendor. The first payment may bear little relation to the final cost. Often men go on paying long after the item is worn out and useless or has become hateful and abhorrent.

I need not remind you that you must pay for what you get, that you must reap what you sow, that the law of the harvest is inexorable, that the temporary gratification of an appetite, though it may give momentary satisfaction must not be the criterion of value.

In business we sometimes write off bad deals and forget them, but many of life's bargains are for time and eternity. Many of them must be paid for on the instalment plan, and as you go on paying through the years you will experience pride and gratitude or sorrow and shame, depending upon the wisdom of your choice.

You will be tempted to regard as old-fashioned and out of focus with modern times some of the rules and regulations of your childhood. You will be told that to continue to observe the standards of conduct which have guided your life thus far is to admit a lack of maturity, is evidence of childishness. A slight deviation from the line of conduct which you have believed to be right may be called trivial and of little consequence. Looking back from 1942, we can see that the point of departure from the highway of conduct marked the beginning of a detour for some which took them far from the goal for which they so courageously set out.

When an air pilot is taught to fly on a beam, he will not be tempted to go it blind by some promise of thrills or new adventure. He knows that there is only one course to follow if he would be safe. He is an enemy who would seek to divert his course and lure him away from the beam which is his safety. Fly the beam, pilot, for the headquarters from which it comes will guide you safely to a happy landing.

In this new adventure you will need courage, not only courage to meet the enemy who is visible but also courage to meet and vanquish enemies more subtle and more persistent, more insidious and more deadly, and of these we warn you. Have courage, then, to make your choice, and then pray for stamina to stand by that choice. He who loses courage will not long defend the other virtues.

You who started your life structure on the foundation of the Ten Commandments and the Beatitudes, may be somewhat bewildered when in this awful business of war you are taught how to kill. The very cornerstone of your moral structure has been respect for the lives and rights of others, and when you see the word "not" stricken from the injunction "Thou shall not kill," you may find difficulty in attempting to uphold any of the other moral standards. Remember this: the arch-enemy of life has set out to destroy the human family, has enlisted human agents to assist in his purpose. That purpose must be resisted. Force must be employed to conquer force. But through it all you must not forget your obligation to your fellow men, your relationship to them. They are all sons of God. Hate must not get into your heart. You must not be degraded by the business at hand. You must remember that you are going to return home, become a part of civilized society, build a home, and rear a family. You must remember that twenty-five years hence you may have sons. Above all else you will, at that time, be grateful to God if they can safely follow in your footsteps.

Yes, young man, you are going off to war, and it is up to you whether you win or lose. Regardless of the outcome between the nations, you yourself have a battle to fight, and all who know and love you believe you're going to win it. They know you will not let them down. They who connect your name with the name of God each day have confidence in your quality, in your integrity, in your fidelity, your purity of thought and purpose, your loyalty to your country. They knew you will be true to yourself and to them with God's help.

Then they will see "by the dawn's early light" that the banners for which they fought are still flying and are worth all it cost to defend them. Together we pray that they may live to have sons who may be spared the perils of another war.

Millennial Star

Upon Returning to England — 1944

Greetings to the Saints and servicemen in Great Britain. The opportunity and responsibility accompanying this appointment are accepted in humility and gratitude. The conditions existing and the size of the task is sobering. The unusual field for service makes one anxious to thrust in his sickle however narrow may be his swath. The parable of the talents is most encouraging, as blessings are measured by the increase upon what was given rather than upon grand totals.

The evidences of faith and fidelity, everywhere apparent, among local members and visiting servicemen, make us proud to submit the Church to the test of "By their fruits." (Matt. 7:16.) Your hardihood and stamina and undiscouraged pluck spring from a native faith in divine guidance. The illumination of continued revelation has been as a torch which you have carried with you to light your pathway step by step. How grateful we are that we need not rely only upon God's words to other generations. They who must so limit their light are often in darkness as is the traveler who comes to the end of the street lamps and must march on beyond the limits of their glow.

But to carry the torch involves grave responsibility. If the torch bearer falters or fails, others may charge their consequent misfortune to him. By the aid of such light we should face the future unafraid, though there may be sharp curves, steep hills, and concealed traps. He who is so equipped does not face the alternative of stopping in the light or going on in darkness. He carries his light with him and therefore can whip the blackout and defeat the enemy who loves and lives in darkness.

As pilgrims and soldiers we must learn the lessons of the march, of the bivouac, of the patrol and of the battlefield, and be on guard against the wiles of the enemy at all times and in all places. The hardening process of these experiences, where muscles are toughened, minds adjusted to hard facts, and souls strengthened to meet sudden impacts, can be character building. But if in the process the inner man also becomes hardened, the mind cynical, and the soul flinty, then indeed has the enemy won a victory, and the victim, so far as he personally is concerned, has lost the war regardless of the outcome of the struggle between the nations.

Ancient and modern revelation combine with recent history to warn us against the sabotage of unseen enemies, against the inevitable disintegration which follows in the wake of false philosophies and alien ideologies. During and immediately after the war, the enemy of men's souls sows and plants seeds (the Bible tells us he prefers the night for his dastardly work of planting weeds and tares) which grow and ripen and bear fruit in after years.

General Giraud, in reciting the causes of the downfall of France, told his countrymen that they were reaping the harvest from the planting done when victory was in sight and during the soft years which followed. He lists egoism, personal interest, hatred, atheism, disobedience, laziness, envy, unchastity, and godlessness as some of the thistles and tares which choked out the grain, ruined the harvest, and brought spiritual famine to that fair land.

It is now, while the struggle is still on, that each individual should examine those inner regions of his being where motives are formed, and honestly appraise himself, see how far he has gone since the war began, from the position he took on vital questions of conduct. When his character, his spirit, his soul are beset on all sides by disintegrating forces, when there are so many agencies tearing life apart, it is well that each individual do what the ship's captain does during and after a storm at sea, examine the points of greatest stress, the weak places, the parts which have been subjected to direct onslaught. He repairs and strengthens and rebuilds and tries to put his ship in as good condition as when she left the dock. He knows that a slight springing of a joint now may mean the loss of the ship when the next test comes.

We need now, more than at any other time, to enlist those integrating and cohesive forces which hold life together and give it meaning and purpose, power and mastery; those doctrines and influences which lead to the salvation of the soul. You in the forces have moved out into realms of responsible choice where in a very real sense you make the blueprints of your future character. Excuses that the strain was unusual, the conditions abnormal, the downdrag terrific will not change the result, except as mercy may temper justice; but mercy cannot change facts. The law of the harvest is inexorable. "As ye sow so shall ye reap." (See Gal. 6:7.) All blessings are predicated upon obedience to law, and God is no respecter of persons.

We come into a war zone with direct commission to bear the torch of the gospel of Christ, to bring light into the darkness, and to remind men that God is still on the side of right and justice. Our predecessors of former years, speaking with the voice of prophecy, warned the nations of the very events which we behold. The prophecies of those days are the biographies of today. All nations are again warned that sin is a reproach, and only righteousness exalteth a nation. Only individual and national repentance will save the people and the world. Victory at arms without soul regeneration will but ensure another crop of misery.

All Latter-day Saints should be leaders in international understanding and goodwill because the gospel of Christ knows no national or racial boundaries, and further that in every nation he that feareth Him is accepted of him. There can be no place in the heart of a Latter-day Saint for a feeling of "holier' than thou," nor can he replace the doctrine of love which Christ gave with that of hate which is of the devil.

"Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an hill cannot be hid" (See Matt. 5:14) said the master to his followers. His words are as applicable today as when they were spoken and should be heeded by all who would be his followers. The inspiration of your light, the influence of your example, the responsibility which accompanies your testimony, these are daily challenges which must not be disregarded. Your light should keep you ever on the highroad and be a beacon to all who come within its glow. No greater opportunity was ever presented to men—tens of thousands of them in the forces—to "let your light shine among men," (See Matt. 5:16) no greater challenge to Saints in the mission field to "love your neighbour" than is given by the present world upheaval.

Each one where he is may be a force for good, a bit of leaven, a teacher, an inspirer of men, and a dauntless enemy of all unrighteousness. The demands of the times have sifted us among the nations. History will record the answer to the question, "Was the leaven strong enough to affect the lump?" (See Matt. 13:33.) With the help of the Lord let us go forward, in humility, but with enthusiasm, and show by our attitude and actions that we believe in Him whom we serve, and that regardless of the strength of the enemy there is no question in our minds of ultimate victory, because Christ is our Captain, and the legions of heaven are ever on the side of right.

Let us be steadfast in defence and confident in attack. As Latter-day Saints we have the sure and certain knowledge that the power of the Lord Jesus Christ is with us and for us and that no power in earth can ultimately withstand him. Our duty is plain and clear. If we obey and live the laws and commandments of the Lord our God, his will be the victory, and his enemies will be routed and destroyed, thus preparing the way for his coming and the establishment of the kingdom of heaven upon the earth.

This is the cause for which we fight, whether serving in the forces, as missionaries, or whatever our duties as members of the Church.

May we all be entitled to be present when He names his valiant ones, and be numbered among those who "fought a good fight, who kept the faith, and finished the course." (See 2 Tim. 4:7.)

Millennial Star

* The above by Ian Maclaren is quoted in a little book entitled The Evening Altar by Carl Wallace Petty and published by Cooksbury Press, Nashville.
