Hugh B. Brown, Eternal Quest ( 1956)

SECTION V Days to Remember

The elixir of life is expectancy.

A New Year's Greeting

Another annual eventide, and we sit in retrospect. We remember many things for which we are thankful. We have all had blessings, some of them in spite of, rather than because of, our actions. We remember, too, some mistakes which we made, remember them only as a warning for the future.

But let us turn our faces toward the dawn of a new year. What may it hold for us? Let us turn from reminiscence unto prophecy; the kind that depends on us to make it come true. May the year be sweetened by—

Gratitude—Let us be thankful for all blessings which come to us, and show our gratitude by living worthily. Let us be grateful for health, for friends who understand us, and for the common comforts of life; for our heritage and the great work done by those who went before us. Let us conserve the best they left to us and build on that best. May our appraisal of their work and sacrifice result in—

Humility—Remembering the lessons which life has taught, let us be ever mindful of our limitations, making sure that our feet are on the ground, though our eyes may be fixed on the stars; willing to give credit to the Master for any success which may come to us and not esteem ourselves above our brother. With the spirit of "Thy Will" guiding us, we'll go forward with—

Optimism—We shall be concerned only that our actions warrant His friendship. We'll not mortgage the future and pay interest on troubles which may never come. We'll pray for keener vision to pierce the clouds and see the sunshine. May we realize that too much sunshine made the desert and not ask for fair weather all the time. This optimism will give us—

Courage—Remembering how He gave us strength equal to the burdens of the past, we shall not fear the future. We shall continue to believe that back of the design there is a designer, back of the created, a Creator. We'll trust that Creator, confident that his plan will succeed; we'll be unafraid to travel. Though our torch may "light our pathway but one step ahead," we'll take that step and fear not. We'll keep a—

Sense of Humor—Knowing from experience that human contacts create friction, we'll carry the oil of humor and not allow old friendships to wear out for lack of lubrication. We'll go forward with a smile, believing in a happy and triumphant future. We'll enrich our lives with—

Temperance—Be moderate in all things and refrain from that which is forbidden. Seeking the power to say "Get thee behind me, Satan" (Luke 4:8) we'll gain health, happiness, and liberty through self-mastery and obedience to the law; never condemning others for their weaknesses while we ourselves are imperfect, nor casting a stone until we can qualify under His divine rule "he that is without sin." (John 8:7.) So let our temperance be combined with charity for those whose habits have weakened their will. May our observance of the law never be colored by the dye of "holier than thou." Then our temperance will lead to—

Patience—Remembering that God does not measure time by man's calendar, that he is not in a hurry, we'll abide his time with assurance that eventually right will prevail. We'll plant acorns of love and watch the slow-growing oaks until time shall prove again that the law of the harvest is inexorable. And to this patient faith we'll add—

Diligence—Faith without work is barren. The only thing He ever cursed was the barren fig tree. This is a challenge to us to be fruitful. No passive virtue ours, but charged with virility, valor added to our vision! We'll ask for blessings, but will first obey the laws upon which they are predicated. May we know the joy of work, have work to do and a will to do it. Observing the new commandment we must—

Love—We'll show our love of God by the way we treat our fellow men, not only loving those who return our love, but enlarging the circle to include our enemies.

This new year will find us grateful, humble, hopeful, fearless, happy, temperate, patient, diligent, charitable, and with the love of God and our fellow men we'll have a more abundant life throughout the year.

To you, our fellow workers, we send greetings, love, and blessings. May you all have health and the kind of prosperity which is real. May He who is responsible for our being, guide all of us, until one year from now we shall sit again in retrospect, in prospect, in reminiscence, and in prophecy.

Millennial Star

Looking Forward

It is exhilarating and challenging to stand upon an intermediate hilltop as one is climbing toward great peaks beyond. He can look back into the valley from which he came and forward across canyons through which he must pass to reach his goal. He has learned something from the gains and losses made and suffered. Pleasant memories recall the beauty spots he passed along the way, and, if he tarries too long, nostalgia tempts him to return to them. The rule of his Alpine Club, however, is, "Onward and upward until you reach the peak." He reviews with alternate satisfaction and regret the difficult and dangerous cliffs he has scaled and the lost time and energy involved in getting back on to the trail after making a wrong decision or risking an unnecessary and costly hazard.

Each evening is, in a sense, a pausing place where we can "mark the distance run," and with each dawn comes the challenge of the climb. But more especially at the dawn of the New Year we find ourselves upon a hilltop where we pause to have a look, to tighten belts and make adjustments and plan the course ahead. What do we see in retrospect and prospect as we stand at the dawn of a new year? Not one, but years of war lie behind; war with its colossal toll of death, its world-embracing sorrow, and its irreparable waste. It seems difficult to look ahead when one stands in such a shadow, and yet even these times have their lessons, and it is to some of these that we would direct attention at the beginning of the year.

First, in reminiscence as well as in prophecy, we find our horizons have been pushed back; we see farther in both directions, and our thinking is on a grander scale. We have become accustomed to include as part of "me and mine" the millions of our fellow men who now are close companions in this climb toward the mountain peaks of freedom.

We look back upon an era in which millions of the youth of this generation have been standing at the gates of death. Before they attained their majority, they offered, and many of them gave, their lives for a cause. Other millions are and will be cut off from many of life's joys through the loss of sight or hearing, of limbs or even sanity. All this and more has been burned into our consciousness until, unless we stop to search among the ruins for some remaining values, we'd count the journey as a colossal loss with nothing on the credit side.

But there are values to be found as we uncover seeming paradoxes in our search. We note, for instance, that amidst the whirlpools and the down-drag of the epoch, many have risen to the sublimity of vicarious sacrifice and in this mass undertaking have demonstrated the truth of the Master's statement that we really find life only when we are willing to lose it. Many who left humdrum occupations with their ego at freezing point, have been transformed by the fire of zeal, urge of loyalty, and the lift of vision, into beings of such heroic stature that they and all who know them stand amazed. They have found latent in themselves a joy in service more satisfying than any self-seeking undertaking in their pre-war lives. A great resilience is evoked by the very dangers which they face. And these are not isolated cases, but in varying degree may be counted by the hundred thousands. Men and women, both on the battle-field and in the factories, on the sea and in the air, have been heroic far beyond anything imagined. That exhilaration and hope replace fear and frustration when one is motivated by love for others, is a fact which many have discovered for the first time even though the precept has been mouthed for two thousand years.

Figuratively, we seem to have drilled into a vast pool of heroism and have been amazed to strike so rich a flow among the common men and women. The important thing is the discovery that these qualities of greatness were there among the ordinary folk with whom we lived and worked in office, farm, and factory. That it needed only to be realized seems evident to us now, but the terrific cost of that release is a reflection upon sanity, especially when it is remembered that One who knew from personal experience had told us not only of the presence of the riches but also how they could be obtained.

Having seen what human beings are capable of under stress, when life is compressed into a fraction of its normal space, when young men live a decade in an hour, having witnessed the release of much of the finest as well as some of the worst in human nature, let us undertake in the years ahead to find less drastic and more natural ways of developing these resources and of controlling those other forces which break forth periodically into volcanic eruptions.

These vast undeveloped resources of human greatness are available to us in times of peace. The war had no more to do with their creation than the winepress has in making grapes. War is the antithesis of the Creator's plan for discovering and utilizing human personality. These tragic experiences should teach us what the prophets long have known: that in religion we find the greatest intrinsic force for the motivation of human conduct.

One important objective, then, as we face the morrow of the New Year is the recovery of a faith on which we can rely as we undertake the climb ahead. Faith in ourselves and in our fellow men as being, in very deed, the off spring of Deity. Let us try to maintain and improve the quality of our loyalty to our country and the causes which we and our allies strive to serve. But we must have such faith in ourselves and in our destiny that we shall become conscious of an obligation which goes deeper than the obligation we owe to collective relations in which modern community life involves us. It is an obligation to that inner self in each of us which we must never yield to anyone's keeping if we would be true to the individual human dignity which we have come to recognize as the most valued treasure in our keeping. To rejoice in victory will not be enough unless in our inner selves we feel that the victory is for a cause which we can approve and to which we can dedicate our lives. The moral responsibility of personal decision is ours alone.

We who are members of the Church of Jesus Christ are favored in having an inspired leadership. The Church is not confined to nationalisms or political opinions, but, because of its prophetic power transcends them as it points the way ahead, provides the kind of leadership which down through the ages has saved the people when they were willing to listen and to follow. With courage unabated and with renewed faith in God we face the future. The past has revealed unbeatable qualities in the human spirit and has, we hope, renewed our faith in Him who is still overruling in the affairs of men and nations.

Millennial Star

A Day of Inventory

On this New Year's day, let us, each for himself, take inventory, add up the debit and credit columns of our lives, and carry the balance forward with resolution. Let us be grateful for the lessons of the past but spend no time in useless regret. Let neither memory of the past nor anticipation of the uncertain future deprive us of full enjoyment of the present.

A valuable lesson may be learned as one sits before the fireplace. It is a lesson on the need and value of cooperative effort and mutual helpfulness. Each lump of coal, aflame and aglow with warmth and light, adds its bit to the service of warming the household, while each in turn is warmed into action and kept burning by the combined heat of all.

If one lump of burning coal, though it be the brightest, should be separated from the others and isolated on the hearth, it would immediately begin to cool and dim, to smoke instead of flame, its light would give way to darkness. A single piece of coal, left to itself, could not long continue to radiate either heat or light or indeed retain enough of either to realize its destiny. But if we can assist it back into the grate, encourage it to participate again in the common effort, it may soon regain its former usefulness here.

So it is with members of the Church. If, for any reason, one withdraws from active participation, neglects to attend Sacrament, quorum, or auxiliary meetings, shuns the group, and attempts to live by himself alone, he will soon become lukewarm and lose the faith. Jesus constantly emphasized the fact that his gospel is one of co-operative action.

This meditation on the tragedy of lost opportunity reminds us of the Master's summary of his parable of the Sower. It is found in Matthew: "Hear ye therefore the parable of the sower.

"When any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and understandeth it not, then cometh the wicked one, and catcheth away that which was sown in his heart.

"This is he which received seed by the way side.

"But he that receiveth the seed into stony places, the same is he that heareth the word, and anon with joy receiveth it;

"Yet he hath not root in himself, but dureth for a while: for when tribulation or persecution ariseth because of the word, by and by he is offended.

"He also that receiveth seed among the thorns is he that heareth the word; and the care of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, choke the word, and he becometh unfruitful.

"But he that receiveth seed into good ground is he that heareth the word, and understandeth it; which also beareth fruit, some an hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty." (Matt. 13:18-23.)

This reading takes our minds away from the fireside for the moment, and we find our lives being likened unto soil in which seeds are planted. He judged the quality of the soil by the crops it produced. We may ask: "What will the harvest be at the end of a life of inactivity?" Each should ask himself: "What am I doing with the soil in which the gospel seed has been planted?"

Just as the garden needs fertilizing, cultivating, weeding—constant care and eternal vigilance—so our lives, if they are to be productive of good, must be constantly renewed by increasing knowledge, cultivated by activity, and weeded by repentance and good works. The rankest weeds in the garden may be found in the most fertile soil unless desirable crops are planted, watered, nurtured until the harvest. The prairie farmers in Canada have learned that it is better to leave the native sod unploughed unless one is willing to follow through with continued cultivation and constant war on weeds.

One of the errors of sectarianism, with which the restored gospel is in direct opposition, is the doctrine that a man may be saved by a single act or declaration of allegiance. Sometimes even Latter-day Saints seem to think that, having been baptized and confirmed members of the Church, they are assured of salvation without further effort.

We need to remind ourselves as we contemplate the future that salvation is an on-going process, not a goal; that eternal life as He taught it is qualitative—becoming more Godlike—not merely continuing to exist; that faith and repentance are as necessary after baptism as before. "Be ye therefore perfect" (Matt. 5:48) was his challenge, and he was neither asking the impossible nor taunting human nature. This was a call to continued activity. He who hopes for eternal progression must pay the price of eternal effort. There is no such thing as "inactive faith" if it is not active it is mere belief; action distinguishes faith from belief, hence we must show our faith by our works.

Hear again the words of the Savior as recorded in John: "Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away: and every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit.

"Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you.

"Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself," (like our coal, fallen out of the fire) "except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me:

"I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing.

"If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth and is withered; and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned." (John 15:2-6.)

Returning then to our fireside and our meditation, let us examine the fruit of our church life in 1948 and begin now to prepare for the crop of 1949. Religion once a week—one hour a week as some folk take it—will have a difficult time surviving six days of weed growth between the rows of Sundays. The Master requires "patient continuance in well doing" of all who seek for glory and honor and immortality. Let us resolve to abide in him through 1949 and pray that he may abide in us that we be not withered, separated, and cast into the fire.

Whether it be an appraisal of the past or a resolution for the future there is no better way to serve God than to serve our fellow men. In fact the Savior has specifically made such service the criterion of worthiness to enter the kingdom. They who serve their fellow men are classified as the sheep on the right hand, while they who failed to serve their fellow men—and thereby failed Him—are the goats on the left.

This message, recorded in Matthew chapter 25, should be encouraging to the missionaries in the field who are spending their time in serving their fellow men. But there is opportunity for all to serve without special appointment or ordination. "Yea, whosoever will thrust in his sickle and reap, the same is called of God. . . .

"Seek not for riches but for wisdom, and behold, the mysteries of God shall be unfolded unto you, and then shall you be made rich. Behold, he that hath eternal life is rich.

"If thou wilt do good, yea, and hold out faithful to the end, thou shalt be saved in the kingdom of God; for there is no greater gift than the gift of salvation." (D&C 6:4, 7, 13.)

There are many among us, wherever we may live, who are spiritually humble, thirsty, sick, and in prison. All who minister unto them are in the service of the Master and will eventually hear him say: "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you. . . ." (Matt. 25:34.)

This call to service is to all who have a testimony of the truth: the returned missionaries, the Saints who have emigrated, the members who were born in the Church, and the new converts, who still live among former friends and associates. The torch of truth is given, not only to light the pathway of the bearer, but also—and especially—to light other torches and help dispel the darkness. Light, like love, is multiplied when divided.

The gospel promises no crown without a cross, no triumph without a battle. Its light will show us through, not around, our troubles. "The flame shall not hurt thee, I only design, thy dross to consume and thy gold to refine." He taught one of his most magnificent lessons when he showed us how to carry a cross.

Let each of us then at this season of retrospection and resolution express in words and deeds the gratitude we feel for the priceless privilege of membership in his Church. Let us bring our actions up to the level of our beliefs and preach the gospel by living it. Let us resolve that "virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly" that we may be entitled to the promise He made: ". . .then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven.

"The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever." (D&C 121:45-46.)

The Greatest Victory

There is one day or more in almost every nation that is set apart for the observance of the anniversary of some great event—an occasion for national pride, a day of remembrance, of thanksgiving, of celebration. It may be the birthday of a nation, or of a patriot, the anniversary of a great victory or triumph of a great cause. It is fitting and proper that we should have such days, "lest we forget."

There are some days which have almost world-wide observance and are significant in every country. There are times of merrymaking, celebrated with parades, public gatherings, games, and contests, oratory, feasts, and fireworks.

But at this season of the year, the whole Christian world unites in the quiet observance of the anniversary of the most significant, the most far-reaching, the most important fact in history. Easter is the anniversary of the resurrection of Jesus of Nazareth. "But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept.

"For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.

"For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:20-22.)

The interest in this event is more universal than in any other: first, because it affects every soul, living and dead; and secondly, because it secures the priceless gift for which men yearn instinctively—life everlasting. Each year multitudes come to appreciate anew its import. Each stands sorrowing by the bier of a dear one, hopeless except for the glorious promise contained in the words spoken on Easter morn—"He is risen!"

The first Easter was the springtime of all history. It was a prophecy of new life, new hope, eternal growth, and immortality.

The world needs reminding of this great event. In the midst of error and superstition; with international hatred, fear, and misunderstanding in the land; with nations arming themselves and preparing for war: with death and destruction lurking in the shadows; we need the hopeful message of Eastertime. We need to be reminded again of his heartbroken appeal to the people of his day: "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children together,. . .and ye would not." (Matt. 23:37.) So today he calls to the world, beckoning to the heights where hate is dethroned, where life defeats death, and love rules supreme. His plan, his system, his gospel, is the answer to the problem of how to save the world.

With Christians everywhere, we bow this day in humble gratitude for the priceless gift of God to men. The gift of eternal life is vouchsafed to us through his sacrifice and guaranteed to all by the only One who could pay the price.

Salvation is assured to all; the degree of salvation depends upon individual effort and conformity to law. "There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial; but the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another. There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: for one star differeth from another glory of the moon, and another glory. So also is the resurrection of the dead. . . ." (See D&C 76.)

He came forth from the tomb and broke the bands of death, so that all men might be resurrected and be "judged out of those things which were written in the books according to their works. . . ." (D&C 128:7.) Easter will only be fully effective to the individual when he realizes that mere resurrection is not enough. In the eternities that are to follow, his status will be determined by the course he pursues in earth life, where he has his agency to choose obedience unto righteousness or sin unto death.

Easter, then, is a promise and a challenge. "And if their works are evil they shall be restored unto them for evil. Therefore, all things shall be restored to their proper order, everything to its natural frame—mortality raised to immortality, corruption to incorruption—raised to endless happiness to inherit the kingdom of the devil, the one on one hand, the other on the other." (Alma 41:4.)

In spite of the unpromising outlook of the world today, the efforts of the enemies of righteousness, and the machinations of wicked men and devils, Easter morn proclaims its joyful promise to all who tabernacle in the flesh and gives assurance of the final triumph of right. "If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable." (1 Cor. 15:19.) Easter gives hope and assurance beyond this life. "So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory." (1 Cor. 15:54.)

And so, we celebrate victory. It is a permanent victory, the greatest victory of all time, the victory over death. For this occasion we have no bands or banners; no banquets or displays. But rather in humility we are impelled to bend the knee and bow the head and in gratitude for the greatest gift of God to men, we join in singing, "O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?" (1 Cor. 15:55.)

Millennial Star

History's Most Eventful Week

This is the beginning of the week before Easter, commonly known as Holy Week. The story of that eventful and final week of Christ's earth life occupies more than one third of the entire gospel narrative. The Sunday before Easter is annually celebrated by many Christians as Palm Sunday in commemoration of our Lord's triumphal entry into Jerusalem.

This memorable procession resembled in some respects the triumphal march of a monarch into a conquered city. The people, mostly Galileans, carpeted the way before him with their cloaks and other raiment. They waved fronds from the palm trees which, among the Hebrews and the Greeks, were symbols of victory and rejoicing. They covered the mountain road with palm and myrtle branches and clusters of olives as the King of Kings entered the holy city riding on a donkey.

After spending a night in the home of Simon, he instructed two of his disciples: "Saying unto them, Go into the village over against you, and straightway ye shall find an ass tied, and a colt with her: loose them, and bring them unto me. . . .

"And the disciples went, and did as Jesus commanded them,

"And brought the ass, and the colt, and put on them their clothes, and they set him thereon." (Matt. 21:2,6-7 According to John the disciples did not realize at the time that this incident was in fulfilment of prophecy. Zechariah had foreseen the day and with prophetic accuracy had written: "Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion. . .thy King cometh unto thee:. . .lowly, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the foal of an ass." (Zech. 9:9.)

While descending from the Mount of Olives Jesus had a magnificent view of the city. He was stirred, no doubt, by nostalgic boyhood memories of this city and of the temple in which he as a youth had astonished the doctors with his understanding answers. But a vision of the future dispelled the vivid and joyous memory of the past, for he beheld the dark and melancholy fate of his beloved Jerusalem and of his Father's house. "For the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side.

"And shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee; and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another; because thou knewest not the time of thy visitation." (Luke 19:43-44.) Forty years later the armies of Titus unwittingly made sure that every word of his prophecy was fulfilled as they, in search for treasure, leveled the temple stone by stone.

As they descended toward the city, the crowd which accompanied him was swept by the rapture of what seemed to be his hour of triumph. Bursting with hope and adoration they shouted hosannas to the Son of David. His disciples, who had been warned that this was to be the beginning of the end, were, for the moment, carried by the tide of enthusiasm.

Jesus did not join in this jubilation, for he knew the week would end in the tragedy of crucifixion; but he kept these thoughts of death in his own heart.

Agents of the scribes and Pharisees who were lurking in the crowd were disturbed and scandalized as the jubilant multitude shouted in harmony: "Blessed be the King that cometh in the name of the Lord,. . .glory in the highest." (Luke 19:38.) To their learned ears and suspicious hearts such words of adulation to an impostor were bordering on blasphemy, and they admonished Jesus to rebuke his disciples, but instead he justified their enthusiasm by saying: "I tell you that, if these should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out." (Luke 19:40.) This was an assertion of his right to be called the Christ. All who read the story must be moved by the matchless, majestic courage of the man. He could have turned back to the home of Lazarus and Mary and Martha, his usual abiding place in Bethany. But he voluntarily chose to do his Father's will to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.

After his descent from the mountain road he scourged the money changers from the temple, for they had turned his Father's house into a den of thieves. Jesus knew that this violent action would antagonize the powerful priests of Jerusalem and further alienate the large commercial middle class whose God was mammon; but he was not deterred by fear of consequences.

And so began the most eventful week in history. Through the restoration of the gospel the significance of Holy Week, the cruel crucifixion, his glorious resurrection, ascension, and promise of return are all attested by his own reaffirmation. He said to a multitude on the American continent: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world.

"And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning." (3 Ne. 11:10-11.) We humbly testify that he is the Christ, the Son of the Living God; that he was in fact resurrected from the dead, ascended into heaven, and that he will return even as he promised. May we gratefully remember the events of Holy Week and be ever grateful for his sacrifice in our behalf.

Radio Address

Motherhood

In this age of selfishness and greed, of birth control and barrenness, of easy divorce and broken homes and juvenile delinquency; in this age of cheap amusement, idleness, and lack of discipline, it is well to search for basic values, to call attention to the fact that the home is the nation's most fundamental institution and that mothers are the first professors in that character-building school.

Let us hold the ideals of motherhood before the young women of the land. Teach them that womanhood is glorified by motherhood and place new emphasis upon the spiritual factors which make not so much for extension as for depth.

In a world where moral growth is lagging in the race with desire for gain in this vaunted scientific age, we still must have consecrated motherhood, spiritual quality, idealism, religious faith, both cleansing and ennobling, else the culture of which we boast may prove to be our own undoing.

"We need the touch of the hand that rocks the cradle to steady and guide a rocking world."

We join today in paying tribute to mothers and motherhood. The season seems most appropriate — springtime—new birth—love and sunshine—Easter time when our hearts are tender from reminders of the greatest love of all. On Mother's Day we think of the springtime of our lives when, following the winter of their travail, we budded into being.

Wherever human beings live, whether in palace or in cottage, there is universal homage paid to mother. Around her and her memory there is woven the tenderest and most beautiful, the sweetest and most wistful, the finest and most enduring fabric of human relationship.

On this day we say with flowers, with poetry, with oratory, and with song, that we will not forget their self-effacing love.

They whose mothers are still living should be reminded of their blessed privilege to let them know they are remembered, for mothers, too, must be told that they are loved and not left always to assume it.

They who can no longer speak or write to mother, can best show the genuineness of their appreciation by living lives of nobility and of dignity, for, "They truly mourn the dead who live as they desire."

From early childhood, when their tender touch dispelled the fear of darkness or healed a tiny wound, even unto maturity and old age, when their counsel seemed the very fountain of wisdom, mothers have been the central figures in the home and hence the most potent factors in the nation's moral life.

Mothers alone have the art of making the truths they teach and the lives they live all one pattern. They live the sermons which we try to preach. They are just but always merciful, their love is never feigned; they are purity personified and are never too busy to be kind. What a mighty force for good is the army of mothers in nations where individual character is still the state's best guarantee.

When sorrow, disillusionment, defeat, beset our path, we go to them for comfort, faith, and courage. Even when we must pay the price of folly or of sin, they never lose their confidence. Their trust inspires another effort; their faith in us makes our repentance real.

A mother's love may be observed from both sides of the valley of life. It was there before we breathed and will endure beyond the grave. Neither birth nor death can break the cord which binds our lives to theirs. When they precede us through the veil their love becomes an advocate with God. Their memory whispers, "Follow me." They go to prepare a place for us. May they labor not in vain. The best evidence of our love will be our fitness to abide with them.

Millennial Star

Mother — Guardian of the Citadel

Mother's Day: How appropriate it is that we should have at least one day in the year in which to pay special homage to our mothers. They do not need our encomiums nor can our words add anything to their lustre. God himself has honored them by making them partners with him in his great work of bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. His plan for the salvation and exaltation of his children involved an earth life where, in mortal tabernacles, they could qualify for the endless progress for which that plan provides. Mothers were indispensable to that plan, and here, as always, "Whom God calls he equips."

If we should attempt to list the virtues of a real mother, we could exhaust the vocabulary of any language and still not do her justice unless we use the word by which the Apostle John defined God when he said, "God is love." In cottage or in palace, when women respond to its sacred call, Motherhood is synonymous with love. It was with this supreme endowment that he equipped our mothers for their work.

The love which inspires and sustains our mothers was properly esteemed by the Apostle Paul as greater than faith and hope. The gift of tongues and prophecy, the understanding of mysteries, the gaining of knowledge, and even the faith which can remove mountains are as nothing without this part of himself with which the God of love has endowed our mothers.

Others may bestow their goods to feed the poor and even give their bodies to be burned and have little credit for their sacrifice. Men have been made rulers of nations and of empires, have led armies into victorious battle, made laws, administered justice, written books, discovered the secrets of the universe hidden behind the distant planets, and released the energy of the atom in their laboratories. But mothers exert an influence in the world which is felt wherever human life exists, and it will endure throughout eternity. They are co-authors of the great men to whose memory we build monuments; but, vaunting not themselves and seeking not their own, they are content to labor in the shadow, envying not, suffering long, rejoicing in the truth, and bearing all things, they achieve a radiant majesty which is peculiarly their own.

"Motherhood" is the inscription on the gate through which the spirits pass to enter the realm of mortal men. The Son of God hallowed and glorified that inscription when he bowed through that gate and called a mortal woman, "Mother." And again when he beheld their handiwork in the forms of little children, he likened it to the kingdom of heaven and thereby implied a partnership with God.

Some nations have recently made the experiment of taking children from the homes and assigning to the state the job which God assigned to mothers and leaving them the mere mechanics of their birth. The awful consequence of this impious innovation may be seen in occupied countries. The whole world has had to pay for man's assault upon the citadel of the home, while because of war millions of women must be deprived of the blessed privilege of motherhood and endure the stigma of barrenness for which they are not to blame.

The declining birth rate in many of the nations of the world is a sad and ominous portent. In some cases the economic upheaval is blamed for this condition, but in many cities it is evident that selfishness is depriving the world of thousands of children while many women sacrifice eternal joy on the altar of satisfaction and easy comforts.

The Church teaches that marriage was ordained of God and that children are "an heritage of the Lord." It teaches that the place of woman in the home is an honored and a hallowed place and deplores the attitude of some men which indicates that women should be servants. Even men who hold the Holy Priesthood sometimes get a wrong impression of the relationship of husband and wife, father and mother. No man can fully honor his priesthood if he does not honor his wife, for their union, if properly solemnized, makes her a partaker of its blessings with him, and entitles her to stand by his side.

The highest blessings of the celestial kingdom are reserved for those who honor motherhood—parenthood—who are willing to pay the price in service and sacrifice. That ". . .man is not without the woman in the Lord" (1 Cor. 11:8) has long been a Christian doctrine, but its full import was not recognized until it was amplified by modern revelation. The concept of celestial marriage, marriage for time and all eternity, exalts motherhood to an eternal throne and reveals how atrocious and degraded they must be who violate its sanctity.

When in one of our hymns, we ask the question, "In the heavens are parents single?" we intimate a new concept of motherhood and a new relationship to God. We were not "made by him" in the sense that the earth, the stars, etc., are the workmanship of his hands. He is our father and we were begotten by him. But Fatherhood denotes motherhood, and when we get a glimpse of that relationship in the heavens, we can begin to understand what is meant by eternal increase. If God is eternal, and God is love, then love is eternal. Next to the greatest love we know is mother love, and that, too, is eternal.

On this Mother's Day, let us remember them with a greater understanding of their role in life. Let us honor mothers by being the kind of sons and daughters that they visualized when they held us in their arms. Let us show our gratitude by taking their work back to them "added upon," and let us add to their joy by being willing to pay the price of honored parenthood ourselves.

Through the Prophet Joseph Smith the Lord revealed the true status of women in the world. He was among the first to advocate their franchise and the first to authorize them to preside in meetings of their own. While the power of the priesthood is exercised by men, they may have its highest blessings only when their wives are at their sides. There will be no celibacy in the highest kingdom of the Lord, and they who deliberately avoid the duties of parenthood may never know the joy of presiding over kingdoms of their own.

May we enjoin all on Mother's Day to honor the mothers of the church, of the nation, and of the world. We salute them with the words the angel spoke to Mary, "Hail, thou that are highly favoured, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou. . . ." (Luke 1:28.)

Millennial Star

The Living Christ

"And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven . . . and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory." (Matt. 24:30.)

Before another Sabbath, we shall have celebrated again the birth of the Messiah. As we worship together, let us contemplate a deeper significance of the life, the death, the resurrection of Jesus of Nazareth.

Christmas is not primarily the celebration of a past event. Its observance is, in a deeper sense, a continual heralding of the triumphal re-appearance of the Lord. We celebrate not only the birth of the child, Jesus, but in anticipation, the coming of Christ, the King of Kings, the Prince of Peace, the Son of God.

The amazing vitality of the hope that a Messiah was to come is difficult to explain. It persisted through the Old Testament history where the people of Israel, in spite of an overwhelming tide of calamities, maintained the confident assurance that a king and deliverer of the line of David would be sent of God.

The signs that should precede his coming were held up before the people like a banner to keep their hope alive. Let us refer to a few predictions.

Isaiah said Jesus should set up an ensign for the nations and assemble the outcasts of Israel and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.

In Psalms we read that fire should devour before him, while Joel saw as signs of his coming that the moon should be darkened, that the stars withdraw their shining. To Zechariah it was revealed that his feet should stand upon the Mount of Olives which should cleave in the midst thereof to the East and West, and Malachi predicted that he would suddenly come to his temple and that he should be like a refiner's fire and like fuller's soap. Job saw our day when he said, "I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth." (Job 19:25.)

As Christians we believe that all of these predictions, and others recorded in scripture, refer to Jesus of Nazareth, but his mission is not yet complete. He will come again and fulfil the hope of all who believe in him. While these prophecies were made prior to his coming, certainly the events to which we have referred did not precede his birth, nor were these predictions fulfilled during his lifetime.

When thinking Christians speak of him as the Messiah, the Redeemer, they use the past, the present, and the future tense. They believe he was and is and is to be the Savior of the world.

Through the centuries since his birth, men have been trying to appraise him. Their estimates of him have ranged from blasphemous denunciation to self-sacrificing worship. Some say there never was such a man, that he was a myth. Others refer to him as an opportunist, sentimentalist, a social revolutionist. To others he was a man of genius, a wise man, a doer of wonderful works, a great teacher. And so men have tried to classify him among other men, but to those who were closest to him, the men who followed him onto the Mount of Transfiguration, he was "the Christ, the Son of the Living God." (Matt. 16:16.) In the Gospel of John he is referred to as the Word who was with God in the beginning, who was God, by whom all things were made, the life and light of man: who was made flesh and dwelt among us. (John 1:1-3, 14.)

In referring to Jesus of Nazareth, the Apostle Paul wrote in the first chapter of his epistle to the Hebrews, "God. . .hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds. . . ." (Heb. 1:1-2.)

". . .unto the Son he saith, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever: a sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of thy kingdom." (Heb. 1:8.) His apostles recognized him as the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world, and he had taught them to look forward to his second coming. In the 16th chapter of Matthew he said to them, "For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his works." (Matt. 16:27.) And again in Matthew, we read: "When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory:

"And before him shall be gathered all nations: and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats:

"And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left." (Matt. 25:31-33.)

In his talk to his disciples, as recorded in the 21st chapter of Luke, he seemed to describe the times in which we live: "Then said he unto them, Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom:

"And great earthquakes shall be in divers places, and famines, and pestilences; and fearful sights and great signs shall there be from heaven. . . .

"And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolks, and friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. . . .

"And then shall they see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory." (Luke 21: 10-11, 16, 27.)

The apostles seemed to be looking for the literal coming of his kingdom on the earth while he was with them. They inquired of him regarding the restoration of his kingdom and asked,

". . .Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?

"And he said unto them, It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power. . . .

"And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up; and a cloud received him out of their sight.

"And while they looked stedfastly toward heaven as he went up, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel;

"Which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." (Acts 1:6-7, 9-11.)

Christmas reminds the thoughtful Christian of the Babe of Bethlehem, of the Man of Galilee, of the Savior on the cross, but it should also renew in our minds and hearts the assurance that he still lives. What a beneficent influence this one life has had upon the collective life of mankind. Because he lived and still lives there will always be reverence for human personality. Knowing him makes for self-respect, for fearlessness, for education, for intellectual confidence and courage; men are concerned for the poor and the sick and the unfortunate. Because he lives and still lives, men refuse to believe that the lights have gone out in the world of human happiness. Many of us in 1939 felt that the lights were going out all over Europe, and some wondered if they would ever be rekindled. In the cities of Europe during the war the lights did go out, the blackout seemed complete, but it was never wholly so, for behind the blinds the lamps still burned, kept aflame by the stubborn faith of those inside. Just so today, while some would enslave the bodies and minds of men, and effect a blackout of truth, justice, and freedom, still the light of faith burns in the hearts of men who look forward to the promised coming of the Prince of Peace.

Perhaps since the time when he was a Babe in Bethlehem, his power and leadership have never been challenged with such audacity and presumption as they are today. And perhaps never in the history of the world have men felt the need of faith in his divine leadership as we feel it now. Our faith is supported and justified by the prophetic words of John on the Isle of Patmos. Looking into the future, he saw the great events of the times in which we live, and describing one of them he said: "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred and tongue, and people." (Rev. 14:6.) Remember what the Savior said in answer to the question of his disciples about his second coming: "And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations: and then shall the end come." (Matt. 24:14.) The preaching of the gospel in all the world is one of the signs of his coming, and it goes on with accelerating speed.

It was revealed to the Apostle Paul that before the second coming of Christ, a man of sin, the son of perdition should arise, one who "Opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshiped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God." (2 Thes. 2:3-4.) We make no statement as to who this man of sin might be, but certainly there are men and nations who are attempting to displace God, to ban religion, and to set up a Godless state. The present war of ideologies, which is a battle between Christ and anti-Christ, is a fulfilment of prophecy and a precursor of his coming.

But there are also signs of the times which should be noted in our own land and in other Christian nations. The Savior said, "As the days of Noe were, so shall the coming of the Son of man be. For as in the days that were before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage. . .so shall also the coming of the Son of man be." (Matt. 24:37-39.)

While we are grateful for our material prosperity, for the freedom we enjoy, and for the blessings of modern science, we are saddened by the daily reports of crime and juvenile delinquency, by the increase of divorce with its sorrow and heartbreak. We and Christians everywhere should be reminded at this Christmas time that the blessings of the millennium can come only when the conditions have been fulfilled. Our lives should support our testimony that we believe in him. The best way to show that we recognize and value his leadership is to follow it. Surely the world is far from being redeemed. His work is not complete nor will it be until his gospel is written in the lives and hearts of men. Christmas reaffirms the fact of his birth. His resurrection proves that he is immortal. Prophecy, including his own promise, assures us that he will come again to rule and reign as King of Kings and Lord of Lords. Reading the prophecies of scripture and nothing the signs of our own times, we are persuaded that we are living in the last days, that the great events foretold by the prophets have been and are being enacted on the stage of contemporary history.

The Church which I have the honor to represent today, gratefully, solemnly declares that the promised angel has flown in the midst of heaven, that while the man of sin, the son of perdition, is opposing all that is called God or that is worshiped, the Prince of Peace and other heavenly messengers have appeared on the earth preparatory to his glorious second coming, and he is at work on his avowed purpose to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. We testify that in fulfilment of the prophecy of Daniel, the God of heaven has set up his kingdom on the earth, and of that kingdom, Christ is king. This, if it be true, is the most joyous Christmas message which can be broadcast to the world. That it is true we humbly bear testimony in his name.

"Church of the Air" Radio Address

The Star of Bethlehem

The Star of Bethlehem still shines upon the world. Its beacon light penetrates even the thick darkness of these awful years. He whose birth is heralded became the Prince of Peace and is still the most potent factor in world affairs. His arch enemy had hoped to make the night of war so long and black that they who had believed in the Master's promise of final victory would lose faith and perish before dawn.

There is new hope in the world each Christmastide, a buoyant and dynamic hope. The new pattern of world affairs which has emerged, has steeled the courage of millions and caused prayers of gratitude to ascend from every tongue under heaven. There is increasing evidence of a Master design behind the puny plans of our great men.

While the Prince of Darkness almost achieved his boasted victory, there were some brave souls who had not forgotten the majestic assurance of the Master as he was about to leave his small but loyal band of followers. He said: ". . .All power is given unto me, both in heaven and in earth." (Matt. 28:18.) This declaration was made at the beginning of the awful night of darkness which followed his departure, and was given to fortify the disciples' faith and steel their courage for the conflict.

The triumphant resurrection of the Lord was a beacon to which they could look, and by which they could chart their course through the storms and nights which were to follow. He wished them to know that though at times the rough seas and thick fog might obscure that light, there would never be a time when it was not shining. Amidst all the storms of centuries and the recurring sieges of satanic hordes, this light has remained secure on the immovable rock of eternal truth.

Through the centuries which followed his departure, the people of the world lost their way, not because that light had ceased to shine but because of sin and transgression, and of false prophets and teachers who led them astray. There was indeed an apostasy from the truths Jesus taught. Apostasy from the Church was followed by apostasy of the Church. Millions thought they were following him when, in fact, they were following only leaders who had usurped authority and presumed to speak in his name. There was meticulous observance of forms and ceremonies which were never instituted or approved by Him. They had his name on their lips, but their hearts were far from him. They wandered to and fro in the earth, seeking the truth but not finding it. They were lost in the night whose darkness covered the earth as the waters cover the deep; they could not see the eternal beacon light because they had gone beyond the horizon where the prince of darkness reigned supreme.

In anticipation of the times through which we now are passing, the gospel was restored. Jesus came personally and afterwards sent heavenly messengers to announce the dawn. He directed those who had the authority at the time. He left them to ordain men so that, in his final struggle with the adversary, there would be leaders endowed with power from on high, by which they could match and overcome the agents of the adversary.

The prophecies, declarations, and announcements of the Prophet Joseph Smith as recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants are recognized in the light of history as inspired. The Lord said through the Prophet on many occasions: "A great and marvelous work is about to come forth unto the children of men." (D&C 4:1; 6:1; 11:1; 12:1; 14:1.) Something of the grandeur of this work is glimpsed as one reviews the accomplishments of the century which followed this declaration. It was the most wonderful century of which we have record: the most prolific in new discoveries, the most generous in revealing Nature's secrets and her wealth. It was the era in which men learned to co-operate with nature and to utilize her power for their good and benefit.

But he also warned of dangers to come, of wars and contentions in which these inventions and discoveries would be used by Satan's agents to further his purposes and to bring sorrow, destruction, and death to the world in unprecedented measure. But he gives the assurance that he will not forsake his people and that his purpose shall not fail. Hear him as he reminds the Prophet that God is omnipotent. "The works, and the designs, and the purposes of God cannot be frustrated, neither can they come to naught.

"For God doth not walk in crooked paths, neither doth he turn to the right hand nor to his left, neither doth he vary from that which he hath said, therefore, his paths are straight and his course is one eternal round.

"Remember, remember that it is not the work of God that is frustrated, but the work of men;" (D&C 3:1-3.)

The prophets of former times never failed to warn the people of perils to come, but were just as definite in their assurance of final victory. Note the words of John while on the Isle of Patmos as he alternately gives warning and encouragement in the unfolding of the Lord's glorious vision. It is "The Revelation of Jesus Christ which God gave unto him. . .and he sent and signified it by his angel unto his servant John. . .": (Rev. 1:1.) "And I saw when the lamb opened one of the seals. . .

"And I looked and beheld a pale horse; and his name that set on him was Death, and Hell followed with him. And power was given unto them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with hunger, and with death, and with the beasts of the earth." (Rev. 6:1, 8.)

One could almost imagine John was witnessing an air-raid as he describes "locusts." "And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared unto battle; and on their heads were as it were crowns like gold, and their faces were as the faces of men. . . .

"And they had breastplates, as it were breastplates of iron; and the sound of their wings was as the sound of many horses running to battle.

"And they had tails like unto scorpions, and there were stings in their tails. . . ." (Rev. 9:7, 9-10.)

After relating in some detail the great and terrible things which were to come to pass, the vision changes, and he tells us: "And after these things I heard a great voice of much people in heaven, saying Alleluia: Salvation, and glory, and honour, and power, unto the Lord our God. . . .

"And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand.

"And he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and bound him a thousand years.

"And cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him. . . .

"And I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away, and there was no more sea. . . .

"And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself will be with them, and be their God. . . .

"And he shewed me a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and of the lamb.

"In the midst of the street of it, and on either side of the river, was there the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her fruit every month: and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations. . . .

"Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have the right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city." (Rev. 19:1; 20:1; 21:1; 22:1, 14.)

Surely every nation today is in need of the promised healing, but here, as elsewhere, every blessing is predicated upon obedience to law. It is not enough merely to last out the battle; all who would share the blessings must earn their reward.

And so at Christmas time we look forward hopefully to the promises which were made by the men of God who so unerringly foretold events which have come to pass. Yes, the Star of Bethlehem still shines upon the world.

Millennial Star

The Gift Supreme

Yuletide is a season of gifts. We remember our friends and those whom we love, and we try to express the love in some measure by giving presents. In appraising the value of any present we give or receive, we take into account the motive which prompts it, its value to the one who receives it, and the cost to the giver. Does love inspire the giver, does he give of himself? What sacrifice does the giving entail? Also, its value may vary according to the situation or condition of the recipient. Obviously if he is hungry or naked and we give him food or clothing or if he is in prison and we visit him and bring succor and release, the value of our gift to him cannot be measured in terms of money. His need determines the value.

Imagine yourself under sentence of death with no right of appeal, no hope of a pardon, unable to do anything to save yourself; doomed in the darkness to await the execution, desiring without hope. Imagine, too, that all whom you love are sentenced to a like fate and together you sit in dreadful longing, helpless, hopeless, and forlorn. What would an opportunity to escape from such a fate mean to you?

Suppose the judge had an only son who was able and willing to purchase your freedom with his life. The judge, his father, can give or refuse this costly gift, the life of his son. Would not such a gift make all things of a material value appear insignificant? Would not you and your descendants celebrate with proper observance such relief and redemption?

Because of the transgression of Adam, all men are sentenced to a twofold death: death of the body, and spiritual death—separation from God through sin. Men were doomed to await the night of death with no hope of a morning to follow that night. The tomb was a blind alley and death a dread monster. Death which separates man from all he has learned to love—wealth, fond association, friendship! When it beckons, husband and wife must part; children and parents are separated. How universal and how sad! It comes to childhood, to youth, and to old age; but whenever it comes, it is a terror to the human heart. There is the dread of the unknown, and yet into it we all must go. Life is so short and so disappointing even to the most fruitful of lives, and until Christ came, life was hopeless, death permanent.

In addition to the sentence of mortality and physical death which resulted from the fall of Adam, sin and spiritual death came into the world. As physical death is a result of the separation of the spirit from the body, so spiritual death results from the withdrawing of the spirit of God from man. "Wherefore, it came to pass that the devil tempted Adam, and he partook of the forbidden fruit and transgressed the commandment, wherein he became subject to the will of the devil, because he yielded unto temptation.

"Wherefore, I, the Lord God, caused that he should be cast out from the Garden of Eden, from my presence, because of his transgression, wherein he became spiritually dead, which is the first death, even that same death which is the last death, which is spiritual, which shall be pronounced upon the wicked when I shall say: Depart, ye cursed." (D&C 29:40-41.)

On the subject of spiritual life and spiritual death, Elder B. H. Roberts has written: "Spiritual life, being union with, relation to and participation in all the higher and better things: the good, the true, the beautiful, the pure, the refined, the noble, the courageous, the unselfish, the merciful; united with perfect justice, knowledge, wisdom, power, intelligence. To be identified with and to participate in these moral and spiritual qualities and the life of it, is and must be God, and to so deport oneself that he is thrown out of harmony with all this, separated from it, means separation from him who is the life of all this volume of higher and better things, this body of soul qualities, this ocean of righteousness—to be separated from it, I say, is death indeed! Yes, spiritual death; death as real as any physical death can be. For what would consciousness amount to if it were only a consciousness of evil that had befallen it?"

In this situation then, man was helpless. There was no price that he could pay which would redeem him from the fall. The Judge, in this case, God, had a Son who could satisfy the demands of justice, redeem men from the fall and open the gate to immortality. Our Father made this priceless gift; our Savior paid the debt. "Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.

"But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed." (Isa. 53:4-5.) ". . . The gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord." (Rom. 6:23.)

"For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.

"For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:21-22.)

The full benefit of the atonement, however, comes to us only upon condition of our obedience to the gospel plan. We must accept this plan and comply with its ordinances by "performing the symbols which stand for its reality." We must repent of sin, return from it, sin no more, and when we have fully repented and complied with that other requirement of the gospel, namely, water baptism, immersion of the entire body, representing death, burial, and the resurrection, when we have done these things and have been confirmed by those having authority and have received the gift of the Holy Ghost, we are in the way to become recipients of all the blessings of the atonement of Jesus Christ and to have that continuous fellowship with him which shall be the reward of the faithful. Obedience is as necessary as the plan itself. Obedience is evidence of acceptance, and no plan, however perfect, is fully effective unless accepted and worked. But while it is necessary that we accept and obey the gospel, it is a free gift to all men, beneficial in part without regard to their own action, and in full by obedience to the laws upon which its blessings are predicated.

What then of the value or importance of this gift of God—the gospel plan, including the atonement of Christ? "What does it mean, this salvation? It means to be put in the way of eternal progression; to be associated with the church of the Firstborn, both on earth and in heaven; to be associated with angels and archangels as companions and guides; increasing in knowledge and wisdom with the passing years. Having triumphed over death, physical and spiritual, there is no more fear of death, or estoppage in the path of progress. With good men for associates and God for leader and guide, men may go on and up the shining heights of God's great highway, until they make themselves masters of the surrounding universe in the midst of which they live. Light and intelligence and love will be aglow in their hearts then. All the beautiful relationships that were formed in earth-life will be re-established there; husband and wife, children and parents, kindred and friends, knitted together in kinship and brotherhood; all this will abound; touching the life of that brotherhood which binds God's mortal and spiritual universe together through the union of all the great Intelligences governing therein. Those who participate in this Gospel, in this salvation, will be members of such brotherhood, going on in spiritual, moral, and intellectual progress without limitation!" (B. H. Roberts.)

Without the atonement of Christ, man would have remained in darkness, not only without a hope of resurrection from the dead but doomed to suffer that spiritual death which comes through sin. His position, then, was desperate, was hopeless, and without a Redeemer he was lost. But the gospel plan, the gift supreme, inspired by the love of God—involving a supreme sacrifice on the part of the giver brings life everlasting, eternal joy, and endless progress to all who accept its benefits.

"Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a propitiation for our sins." (1 Jn. 4:10.)

"Thanks be to God for his priceless gift." (2 Cor. 9:15.)

The Relief Society Magazine

Warrior Prince

A Christmas letter to Servicemen.

The Prince of Peace was also a Warrior Prince. He fought valiantly against sin in its varied from and prevailed against the prince of evil who thrice tried to disarm him and thus gain supremacy. The Master was too wise to allow his adversary the advantage of catching him off guard. He knew better than to go on to enemy territory. He knew the tempter's invitation to follow a certain course had some sinister motive and, therefore, refused to take the first step, though in itself it seemed harmless. That it was proposed by the enemy was enough for him. Though hungry he would not eat bread on Satan's terms. Neither personal pride nor spectator's praise could tempt him to exhibit his power where duty did not require its use. And again he knew a promised gain would be a total loss, though all earthly power could be his, upon stated terms. In other words, he was a skillful strategist and more than a match for the chief of the hosts of Beelzebub.

Too many of us are inclined to say, "What harm is there in that." "I must be a good fellow." One should never try to be a "good fellow" with "bad fellows." The enemy territory is always sown with mines and traps to destroy the unwary. Every step taken into enemy territory, which has not been swept and purified, is taken at the peril of one's life. Hitler's best craftsmen in the art of camouflage are novices in comparison with the unseen agents of the arch deceiver. His invitations are so seemingly inoccuous, so patently harmless, that sometimes they appear to be advantageous. This enemy has no power over us unless we deliberately go on to his ground.

Christmas, in addition to all of the thoughts of home and family which it will inspire, should remind us of the Great Leader whose birth it celebrates. And, while the New Year presents a clean white page to write upon, we do not recommend making boastful resolutions or announcing decisions reached. Each man should thoughtfully examine himself at this milepost in his army service and compare the man he was when he left home. This checking on one's position with relation to his starting place will reveal his course. An extension of that line will indicate his goal.

If he is going in the wrong direction, now is the time to change his course. There is hope for a man as long as he has stamina enough to repent and fight on.

You came out of a home which was lit by faith, where there was a quiet courage even in the face of death. Perhaps it was just the sort of simple trust a child has when he takes his father's hand and goes out into the darkness. Home is a shrine to which your thankful recollection turns at this season of the year. One must "look up" to see that shrine. With lifted head and steady eyes he may see a beacon light which calls him to a new dedication, for behind that shrine is the shadow of the Warrior Prince whose wounded hands reach out with the proffered help, such as can come only from One who has himself met and overcome the tempter. Now is the opportune time quietly to resolve that this next year will be the best year yet lived, for then the lights will come on again, and the home port will appear. May we all get on the beam and follow it to a happy landing.

Millennial Star

The Christ Child

It is with deep humility that I approach the Radio Pulpit tonight knowing, as I do, that great sermons have been preached today in Christian churches on "The Nativity of Christ," and knowing also that at this Christmas season there is so much misery in the world; that millions are without life's necessities and that other millions live in haunting fear because of "man's inhumanity to man."

While in our own land we have everything for which to be greatful, there are many places where the words, "Peace on Earth, Goodwill to Men," sound like mockery. In the light of present-day conditions can we still believe in Christ and in his message of faith, hope, and charity and the brotherhood of man? Can we accept as prophecy the message which the angels sang when Christ was born and believe that his coming meant eventual peace on earth?

There are two reasons why I undertake to speak to-night on the meaning of the birth of Christ with an accent slightly different from the customary vein: first, because the usual things have been better said than I can say them; secondly, because it seems to me that if we are to celebrate this season in the spirit of its origin, we must look back and trace, though briefly, the long and valiant struggle of the Savior against the powers of darkness; a struggle which has continued since long before the birth in Bethlehem when he became the Christ Child.

Why the sudden rage of Lucifer at the first herald of his coming? Why his call to arms of all the host of hell, "his hated habitation"? Why did the prince of darkness tremble when the Prince of Peace was born? These questions form the dark background against which to view this Yuletide.

For a partial answer to these questions let us search the sacred records and from them learn the deeper meaning of the day we celebrate.

In a realm far antedating man's earliest recollection, there was one who challenged God and coveted his glory. There was one who asked permission to force all men to do his bidding. He was called, "The Son of Morning," and was high among the angels; he it was whose vain ambition visioned Godhood based on conquest; visioned heaven ruled by tyrants with all spirit children bondmen. His proposal was submitted and our unborn spirits listened.

Chief among that vast assembly was the Spirit of the Christ Child, and he also saw and listened. He was the Firstborn among the spirits and by birthright was their leader. Then, as always, he was loyal, and he opposed the plot to unseat God the Father and make eternal slaves of men.

Moved by his loyalty to Father and his love of fellow spirits, this most heroic of all the sons of God made a counter proposition. The unborn spirits waited anxiously for the verdict which involved their destiny. All the spirits then in heaven cast their ballots on the issue, and Jehovah won the verdict by a vote of two to one.

All who favored the Messiah would be given mortal bodies with free agency to choose their course in life. Christ the Savior volunteered to do the thing which mortals could not do and to make the great atonement through which men could be redeemed. He thus became the Author of the spirit of the Yuletide, and his proffered gift fored gift foreshadowed Christmas and raised a standard for all men.

The proud, defiant Lucifer led a great rebellion, and one-third of all the spirits followed him into perdition. He who had been Son of the Morning joined issue with the Firstborn Son of God, and there was fought a mighty battle of a war which still continues.

Christ was then Jehovah, and with Michael, under Elohim, prepared a world where men could prove themselves and establish their allegiance. Adam was friend and colleague of Jehovah, but he had a special mission which involved his leaving Eden. The gateway from the garden was the door which led to earth life, and that door was closed behind him and all who were to follow. It precludes the light of heaven so completely that even the memory of what has been becomes a feeble echo.

With mortality came death, and the tree of life was guarded by a flaming sword. The fate of all seemed hopeless when death and sin joined hands to shut them out forever. Satan, long since expelled, leered in triumph at what seemed to be Christ's failure. Men had no power to conquer death and without divine assistance would be slaves of ignorance and sin.

But men were not left in doubt as to the wisdom of their choice when by vote they chose Jehovah. The atonement was foreshadowed when Adam offered sacrifice, and each prophet who succeeded him was told about Christ's mission. So the scene of battle shifted, and the war in heaven ended, but the war on earth continued among the sons of men.

It raged for generations. and each side had its innings; sometimes "Truth was on the altar and wrong was on the throne." But men's hopes were kept triumphant, for Jehovah moved among them, and his prophets all predicted a Redeemer was to come. Christ, who had power over life, was to come and conquer death by himself becoming mortal and passing through the valley. He would reach across the valley and himself become the highway by which men could pass from death to life. He would become a bridge, one end of which would be anchored in mortality and the other fixed in heaven.

And so Christ was born in Bethlehem of the Virgin Mother Mary, and through that birth the Master entered the arena which Beelzebub had thought belonged to him alone. The battle lines were drawn again with the Messiah and the loyal sons of God on the one side, and Lucifer and his cohorts on the other.

The adversary rallied his infernal crew at the moment of the birth of Christ and plotted his destruction. Maddened by hate, he tried by force to thwart the mission of the Christ Child. But the rule of force, of which he was the champion, had been vetoed by the Father. Vetoed to protect him who now lay helpless in the arms of mortal woman.

Satan had willing agents among the sons of men to carry out his orders. Herod's jealousy and vain ambition were goaded by the devil, and the sacrifice of infants made even Satan blush. But he hoped to kill the Christ Child and prove God's plan abortive.

But this Babe of mortal mother and the Monarch of the heavens was not to be defeated at the beginning of his mission. Satan found the Child was guarded and protected by his Father, and he cunningly decided to bide his time until the Child had grown to manhood, and then he hoped by artifice to succeed where force had failed him.

But here again Satan blundered, for he thought Christ wholly mortal. He thought his own power at last would more than equal his opponent, and he hoped his wiles would snare and bind Him and thus defeat his mission. But he overlooked the fact that though Christ's mother was a woman, the Father of his body was immortal and divine.

When Christ had forty days of fasting, the wily one suggested that Jesus could satisfy his hunger by making bread of stones; and further, if he yielded, it would manifest his power and thus feed pride and arrogance, two vices of his own. But Christ disclaimed dependence upon bread alone for sustenance and lived by every word proceeding from the mouth of God.

Having failed to make an appetite for bread a strong temptation, Lucifer thought appetite for power would be appealing—love of power, the very rock on which he himself had come to ruin. But Christ disdained this offer and refused to tempt His Father. The third and last attempt to lure him was to offer worldly wealth in exchange for his allegiance. And Satan heard the final words: ". . . Get thee behind me, Satan. . . ." (Luke 4:8.)

But though he could not tempt the Lord, he still had hope of victory if he could induce the sons of men to follow him in vile deceit, in love of gain and hate of fellow men, and thus betray the Master. His first recruit was from that little group who were closest to the Savior. This he thought a master stroke, as one traitor who is thought a friend can do more harm than a hundred who are known as enemies.

Judas thought, like many since, that worldly wealth is gain, no matter how procured. He sold his Master for a price and transferred his allegiance for which he received full pay in Satan's coin of misery and death. How strange that men throughout the centuries have failed to learn the lesson that fraud and treachery. perfidy and sin are the merchandise of Satan!

The fight went on, and Christ was crucified, not because he was defeated, for he held power over death. He yielded of his own volition that, dying, he might conquer death, and thereby open the door again which Adam had closed at Eden. Here again Christ was victorious, for the one purpose of his coming was to insure man's resurrection.

His little band of followers were faithful unto death, and death it was for all of them including the apostles. Apostasy again was rampant, and Satan reveled in his thoughts of victory, reveled throughout the Dark Ages when he thought his sovereignty established.

But special messengers were sent to earth to start a reformation and prepare the way for the final scene and the promised restoration. These messengers fought valiantly, and many gave their lives in skirmishes before the final battles. They were opposed by all apostate groups who, fulfilling prophecy, had enlisted with the

". . . Son of perdition;

"Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God." (II Thess. 2:34.)

John, while on the Isle of Patmos, saw in vision things to come, saw an open door in heaven and was lifted near the throne. There he saw the throne's Incumbent with a book of seven seals; heard ten thousand times ten thousand angels singing praises to the Son of God. And they joined with every creature in earth and heaven and in the sea all with one accord were saying: ". . . Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto him that sitteth upon the throne. . . ." (Rev. 5:13.)

And he saw another angel in the midst of heaven flying; saw him bring to earth the gospel for all nations, tongues, and men. He saw the lake without a bottom, and the dragon bound with chains, saw one thousand years of concord, peace, and amity and rest. And he saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from the Lord God out of heaven, with the earthly kingdom to be joined.

Then he saw the small and great ones stand before the throne of God to be judged out of the records each according to his work. Death and hell released their captives, and the sea gave up its dead, while the angels sang hosannah to the Prince of Peace their Lord.

What then is our Christmas message? Dare we talk goodwill and peace, in a world where all seems chaos, where enslaved millions seek release? Was the angels' anthem a vain promise when they hailed the Savior's birth? Or was their song inspired prediction of eventual peace on earth?

This is our Christmas message: "The Christ Child of Bethlehem is the Messiah, Christ the King." So let us on this eve of Christmas join the heavenly choirs and sing: "Glory to God in the highest, peace on earth, good-will to men." (See Luke 2:14.)

And may God bless you every one at this Yuletide and forever.

Radio Address
