Hugh B. Brown, Eternal Quest ( 1956)

SECTION VI Browsings and Musings

All beauty mirrors something of the one who beholds it.

Browsings and Musings

All the water in the world cannot sink a ship unless it gets inside the ship—

All the sorrow in the world cannot sink a person unless it gets inside the mind.

How foolish to invest today in what must cease to be tomorrow.

Faith equips the vision with both microscopic and telescopic power.

Repentance is a gift from God, but we should try to avoid the need for it.

Some of us do not need a bushel to hide our light; a thimble would suffice.

The arrows of truth are deflected by the armor of conceit.

When the light of truth shines on dull fact, it makes it luminous.

Trouble breeds amid the dead leaves of melancholy. The sunshine of a cheery soul will kill its germs.

We reach the far shore only that we may cross the intervening land and sail again with Autumn.

Air castles are valuable only if they inspire us to hard work on solid foundations to put under them.

Even when running with head down and muscles tense the football player keeps his mental eye upon the goal.

The rubble of regret can be turned into concrete blocks if mixed with the cement of high resolve.

Snap judgment, like a bear trap, may catch the one who baits it.

Only one who has been over the road may become a guide.

He who made you expects his work to succeed and will answer a call for help.

The Master learned obedience through suffering. Do you expect its blessings at a cheaper price?

Today is the link which joins the chain of our yesterdays to the chain of our tomorrows. No chain is stronger than its weakest link. Make this one strong.

When powered by Will, Mind masters Matter.

"Endure to the end" is life's constant and inexorable decree.

A torch was given to me that I might light the lamps of others as I seek to see the road ahead.

The harvest, and not the master, will accuse the slothful servant.

Life is a journey, not a camp.

Let neither the background of memory nor the foreground of anticipation dominate the picture of Today.

Self-appraisal is based on evidence not available to the onlooker.

Being conscious of my source, I cannot doubt my destiny.

My own fallibility is a constant reminder of my kinship to other men.

When we handicap a runner by giving others an advantage we acknowledge his superiority. Nature's handicaps are often compliments.

Opportunity is always within the reach of the arm of preparation.

Lack of faith in one's self is a criticism of one's Maker.

The unpruned tree bears little fruit.

The heart colors what the eye beholds.

Speak to God first thing each morning, then through the day remember that you are going to talk to him again at night.

Unless you are willing to give everything for the gospel you are not worthy of it.

His love makes us ashamed of what we are—but jubilant of what we can become.

Every day is the beginning of a new year.

The Lord always takes people as they are, then leads gradually to what he would have them be.

The stewardship of our families is the most important of all.

Try to bring your mind into harmony with the eternal law of things.

Carry always a mental picture of God. Bring it out and look at it when things seem dark.

Worry causes a dry rot of the soul.

It is no use trying to shine your lamp if you do not take time to fill it.

Take on mental nourishment every day.

Rake up the cluttered garden of your mind.

We need a filter on our listening processes.

It takes a lifetime to learn to think out.

Mascots cannot pull back a bad shot.

The most disheartening thing in all the world is to get to the point where you think God does not care.

God does not judge men until the end of the journey.

The base of the Church is broad enough to support any superstructure.

The quality of one's intelligence may be related to his sense of humor.

Use the past as a warning for the future.

In all life, character will count more than ability.

The first job of any student is to realize that he does not know.

Is your mind like fresh cement? If it is you are able to determine what shall be impressed upon it.

God delights in diversity.

If you try to imitate another you are wasting your time—emulate certain good habits, but don't waste time copying—be yourself, your better self.

Keep green—green things grow.

The mind does not grow old while it is working.

Make a living—but in creating a living don't forget to create a life.

In a sieve only the fine things come through.

He who obeys with modesty may someday be worthy to command.

It takes God's weather to produce God's flowers.

Make truth yours—you will reveal it better to others.

Prayer is the attempt to move from darkness into light.

Rain, sun, light, soil . . . and a Gardener are needed to produce flowers or grain.

The gift, however great and wonderful it may be, will not be acceptable unless the giver is acceptable.

It takes a courageous man to go to his death. When a denial of truth would save him.

Once lost, salt cannot be made savory again.

Live so that your body and spirit are in harmony.

When you fast righteously you become sensitive to the Spirit.

"Can't do it," is a sort of mental intoxication.

Whom God calls he equips.

You will not be remembered by those whom you teach if you shun contact with their hopes and fears and questionings—if you avoid commitments and allegiances and seek merely to be literary and academic.

The teacher must have background and a vista; he must have courage, and conviction as well as information. Your steady faith must hold them on their course when cross currents and winds of doubt and cynicism assail them.

Does the light of your torch flicker at every breath of doubt or can you make it shine into and make radiant the darkened avenues of uninformed souls?

A study of botany may teach all that can be known about the tiny leaf on the mighty oak, but if it is to finish guiding you on the quest, it must lead you back to its stem and along the twig to the branch, and back to the trunk and then you'll want to know something of how it is rooted to the earth and why; the source of its life, the purpose of its being and how it is to be perpetuated.

We cannot afford to adapt our message to popular demands and water it down to some nebulous ethical system. We have a gospel adequate to human needs.

Thoughts, if you have the proper mixture, will congeal into an idea. Ideas revolutionize the world—Think.

Sometimes during solitude I hear truth spoken with clarity and freshness; uncolored and untranslated it speaks from within myself in a language original but inarticulate, heard only with the soul, and I realize I brought it with me, was never taught it nor can I effectively teach it to another.

The man who wants his dreams to come true must wake up.

Remember that the hardening process of military training need not extend to your soul. Your muscles must be toughened; your mind must be adjusted to the hard facts of modern warfare—and your soul must be strengthened too, but not made flinty.

There is no more stimulating thing in life than to know that someone trusts you.

Life is the childhood of our immortality.

What a man is wields a power of conversion that no force of argument can equal.

The best way to prepare a child for adult life is to help him to live his child life efficiently.

The value of approval depends on who gives it. Sometimes I am not satisfied because of the people who approve.

Foster sweet memories of childhood. No one can be happy who does not appreciate. The happiness of the world would be greatly increased if people would appreciate.

The harness is a symbol of co-operative service.

All of us are expected to function successfully in some particular field—some in more than one but all in one.

We grow just as big as the things that concern us.

Everyone should strive each day to beat yesterday's record—not someone else's.

Freedom, like life, is a process, a growth where the new is perpetually crowding out the old. There is a constant wearing away and renewing. The beautiful blossom of today is by tomorrow wilted and dry and must fall by the next tomorrow and be forgotten while the new bud comes and is heralded for its brief day. So the freedom of today if not kept up to date by adjustments to suit new seasons and occasions will soon be dry and musty and may actually become serfdom. The rose which was so fragrant becomes a stench if its petals are allowed to decay in the vase. New buds must be added if we wish to enjoy continuing beauty. So must we keep our freedom up to date.

Freedom without discipline is the delusion of license, where law is not respected and where decorum is not known. When however, in the name of discipline, men are robbed of their right to think or speak or act; when the will of the few is imposed upon the many; when the dignity of the individual is denied and responsibility to God rejected; then Nazism and Fascism flourish and the people become slaves.

Any declaration of independence, whether individual or national, implies something of maturity, presumes the capacity to use that independence wisely.

If you claim the rights of freedom, you must undertake to assume its duties and responsibilities. Freedom is a test of intelligence, a trial of moral strength.

If you are to enjoy those inalienable rights with which you are endowed by the Creator, as referred to in the Declaration of Independence, you will not fawn before flattery, nor cringe before denunciation; nor will you yield to your own lawless impulses.

Beware of those little pests called termites which weaken the superstructure and live on the product of their ruin.

The strongest possible incentive to high endeavor is a proper concept of our source, purpose, and destiny. It refutes the false philosophy of fatalism, that whimpering doctrine of inertia and defeat which assigns control of our lives to blind, impersonal forces, robs man of his power and his dignity, and accomplishes his final degradation by relieving him of responsibility for his acts.

The atheist would take from the man of faith that which has sustained him and give nothing in return. But the believer should re-examine the basis of his faith in the light of new knowledge and bring it up to date. When faith ceases to grow it ceases to be faith for faith must be active and dynamic. We should add to our faith knowledge.

The thinker loses something when he loses his doubt of the truth of his conclusions. So of the moral man who loses his temptations. "It needs must be that there is opposition in all things."

When I find myself tempted by desire or appetite to step down to a lower level I discover that there is something about me which disapproves and beckons toward a nobler course. In thus discovering my dual nature I am encouraged by an instinctive feeling that, basically, I am spiritual and that some divinity within myself is seeking to affirm its power over the earthy.

When inclined to boast about becoming broadminded, self-examination may reveal it is only your conscience stretching.

Every exit is also an entrance—including death.

Within the close-shut petals of her bud-like self was all the glory and the mystery of life concealed. He who would contaminate the sacred waters of the holy grotto would be guilty of an infamy hatched beneath the floor of hell.

We usually hear enough truthful things said about us to overcome the flattering things said to us.

Learning leads to culture which is the cream of conduct.

Sometimes we are called upon to validate our faith in the crucible of suffering.

There is an inescapable intuition that within ourselves there is something that death has no dominion over.

Across the centuries no experience has been more universal than the sense of someone greater than ourselves dwelling with us.

Religion is communicable, aside from the sacred operations of the Holy Spirit, only by example.

If you wish them to be Latter-day Saints, you must take the trouble to be Latter-day Saints yourselves.

Religion gets into the blood atmospherically. They will be impressed by convictions and earnestness and the dignity and simplicity that go along with being earnest.

If your knees knock, kneel on them.

We should attempt to appear worthy in the eyes of our ancestors. Let us dig deep into our own history and we will feel the eyes of Joseph and Hyrum, of Brigham and John, of Wilford and Lorenzo, of Joseph F. and Heber J., of George Albert, and then let us avail ourselves of the priceless privilege of grasping the hands and gazing into the eyes of David O. McKay, the living prophet.

Ours is one of the smaller churches. We have become accustomed to being in the minority, but every majority in a free society was not long ago a minority. Every belief worthy of an individual must be hammered out by that individual on the anvil of experience and cannot be packaged and delivered by radio or television.

You are one of those born with an inner urge to a life of quest be not afraid of venture.

We must have faith enough to regard our convictions as more important than our lives.

All of us need goals and ideals to unify our energies, integrate our personalities, and draw forth the potentially best in us that otherwise would lie all too dormant.

But God is more than an ideal; else he would be but a shadow. He is real and personal to be not only idealized but realized. We must not only possess this idea of God but we must be possessed by it.

We do not evaluate human life by what it is during the final moment before death. We evaluate it in terms of the whole life as it was lived from first to last.

In terms of the immortal life there can be no last deed—no goal at which we "arrive" and arriving, abide. It is an infinite search leading ever onward.

The search for the ideal must not be selfish, it is necessarily social, we must include others and herein lies the opportunity of the MIA. Whatever perfection we seek must include the perfection of our fellows. I may teach a class in science, in art, in any of the subjects offered in a college course and may teach them as one acquainted with the facts on the evidence of third persons. I am in a sense a spectator. But if I am to truly and effectively teach religion I must teach from within, from experience, teach as one who is a possessor of the fact and I must transmit not only through sight and sound but by feeling. Teach them to believe as well as know. We must not make the mistake of the ancient Greeks who subordinated heart to mind, the spiritual to the intellectual.

There are times when insight is more to be trusted than logic.

Not only the bare bones of thought but the flesh of the meaning is essential.

We must seek for the meanings. Some men have said and written profound things which require much study if we would comprehend them. Then study what God has said. Have we sought the real meaning behind the words? Yes, the gospel is simple, but is there anything as profound as the simple?

Each one of us is seeking to release the energy locked up within himself and to satisfy the unquenchable thirst for knowledge which is born in each breast.

It is a strange anomaly that we should spend so much of our academic years in careful studies of the lives, words, and works of the great ones in arts, sciences, letters, etc., and neglect almost wholly a study of the life, mission, and character of Jesus of Nazareth. While we tell our children that he was the greatest by far of whom we have any knowledge and believe our very salvation depends upon an understanding of his message as it applies to us, still there is in the average university hardly any mention of this greatest of them all.

Righteousness is the cause of which peace is the effect. If it is peace we really want, we can get it only by setting the right causes into operation.

God wishes us to respond to opportunities, but we must not confuse privilege and merit.

Our only source of supply for material with which to make the men of tomorrow, is the boys of today.

What have I learned from my failures and mistakes that will be of service to me in the future? What have I done to entitle me to a higher position in life? What have I done to make the world a better place? What is education and how can I educate myself? Does it profit me to strike back at those who have injured me? How can I find happiness? How can I succeed? What is success? Lastly, what main achievement do I wish to attain before I finally lay down the tools with which I am tinkering and pass over the great divide. What is my definite aim in life?

When crossing a stream on a log if you look down you will fall in. Keep your head up and your eye on the shore—so with purity and impurity, it is not necessary to look down to see how awful impurity is to keep us from it—look up and keep away from sin.

We are, at the end of life's race, the product of our thoughts.

The earth is like a road, a poor place for sleeping in—a good thing to travel over.

One step up the mountain widens the horizons in all directions.

Do not regard as personal prerequisites the honors that belong only to the office.

The surly bird catches the germ.

A used mind is one item that has more value than new.

He is the wise man who for all his life can keep his mind and soul and body clean.

A man ought to be stronger than anything that can happen to him.

Sin, as a short-cut to happiness, promises pleasure without the effort of earning it; a promise never fulfilled.

By two things a man is lifted up from things earthly; by simplicity and purity.

There is a thirst which nothing but religion satisfies.

It is best not to tell all you know, you may have to respond to an encore.

When love and skill work together, expect a masterpiece.

One cannot think crooked and walk straight.

Better be bent with honest toil than be crooked trying to avoid it.

Too many have smothered all possibility of fine living under unnecessary anxiety over worldly goods.

A man's age can be measured by the degree of pain he feels by coming in contact with a new idea.

We need resistance to raise us as it raises the airplane or the bird.

If a time comes when you have to assert your right, the strongest ground upon which you can stand is the claim that you have done your duty.

You may have grievances, but never allow them to lower the standard of your work.

Knowledge which is acquired under compulsion has no hold on the mind.

Learning, undigested by thought, is labor lost. Thought, unassisted by learning, is perilous.

Worry is a complete circle of inefficient thought whirling about a pivot of fear.

Of all things you wear, your expression is the most important.

A most important truth about a man is that he has been entrusted with himself, capable of dismal failure or of high adventure.

Happiness does not consist in getting something; it consists in becoming something.

The greatest foe to truth is tenacity in clinging to unjustified beliefs.

The gospel sheds light on the whence, the why, and the whither of life—seek and ye shall find.

Men live best when they neither deny themselves the verdict of the head nor the intimations of the heart, but seek a working harmony of both.

Come to know religion in its depths and you come to realize how indispensable it is to rich and radiant living.
