Prayerfully select and read from this message the scriptures and teachings that meet the needs of the sisters you visit. Share your experiences and testimony. Invite those you teach to do the same.

President James E. Faust, Second Counselor in the First Presidency: “Holiness is the strength of the soul. It comes by faith and through obedience to God’s laws and ordinances. God then purifies the heart by faith, and the heart becomes purged from that which is profane and unworthy. When holiness is achieved by conforming to God’s will, one knows intuitively that which is wrong. …

“… We should go to the temple, among other reasons, to safeguard our personal holiness and that of our families.

“In addition to temples, surely another holy place on earth ought to be our homes. …

“… May the Lord bless each and all of us in our special responsibility to find holiness to the Lord by standing in holy places. That is where we will find the spiritual protection we need for ourselves and our families” (“Standing in Holy Places,” Liahona, May 2005, 62, 67–68).

Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles: “Developing Christlike attributes in our lives is not an easy task. … The reality check comes when Christlike attributes need to become visible in our lives—as husband or wife, as father or mother, as son or daughter, in our friendships, in our employment, in our business, and in our recreation. We can recognize our growth, as can those around us, as we gradually increase our capacity to ‘act in all holiness before [Him]’ (D&C 43:9)” (“Christlike Attributes—the Wind beneath Our Wings,” Liahona, Nov. 2005, 102).

Kathleen H. Hughes, former first counselor in the Relief Society general presidency: “Which one of us does not long to be cherished, watched over, comforted, and instructed in the things of God? How does it happen? One kindness, one expression of love, one thoughtful gesture, one willing hand at a time. But my message is not to those who receive such acts of charity but to all of us who must practice such holiness every day. To become like Jesus Christ, the Prophet Joseph taught, ‘you must enlarge your souls toward others’” (“That We May All Sit Down in Heaven Together,” Liahona, Nov. 2005, 110).

Bonnie D. Parkin, former Relief Society general president: “Covenants—or binding promises between us and Heavenly Father—are essential for our eternal progression. Step-by-step, He tutors us to become like Him by enlisting us in His work. At baptism we covenant to love Him with all our hearts and love our sisters and brothers as ourselves. In the temple we further covenant to be obedient, selfless, faithful, honorable, charitable. We covenant to make sacrifices and consecrate all that we have. …

“The Lord has called us to do all that we do with ‘holiness of heart’ [D&C 46:7]. And holiness is a product of covenant living. … Holiness prompts the words ‘Here am I; send me’” (“With Holiness of Heart,” Liahona, Nov. 2002, 103, 105).
