Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Life Beyond ( 1986)

Preface

From time immemorial no subject has captivated the interest and attention of men like that of the life beyond. Kings and princes, philosophers and scholars, theologians and Saints, laymen and peasants-all have sought, with Job, to know, "If a man die, shall he live again?" (Job 14:14). And if there is a future state, what is its nature? And how best may mortal man prepare for it? Indeed, death has ever remained life's most awesome mystery. In the absence of revelation, man's would-be gaze into future worlds is unable to penetrate the darkness of the grave.

The spring of 1820 heralded the dawning of a brighter day, as celestial light pierced the blackness of the long night of heaven's silence. In the midst of that light stood two eternal beings whose very presence attested to the reality of the life beyond, as would the subsequent appearances of various messengers who would be sent to bestow the knowledge, keys, and powers pertaining to the eternal worlds. With the restoration of these heaven-sent truths, the shadows of doubt and skepticism have fled, and once again the warmth of heaven's light, with its glad tidings of great joy, is felt by men of peace and good will. Thus the living and the dead break forth in anthems of eternal praise to their King Immanuel. The mysteries of God have begun to be unfolded, and the Saints of the Most High are made partakers of that knowledge which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath entered into the heart of unillumined man.

Let there be no mistake. Because of the opening of the heavens-the Vision of the Glories, the Vision of the Celestial Kingdom, the Prophet's discourse at the funeral of King Follett, the Vision of the Redemption of the Dead, our latter-day prophets and current prophecy-those of the household of faith have their perceptions and understanding extended beyond the bounds of the Bible and of the visions of earth's most noble and inspired writers and religious leaders. We rejoice in the teachings and testimonies of all who have been commissioned to bear witness of heavenly things, but we owe a special debt of gratitude to the Prophet Joseph Smith and President Joseph F. Smith for their unique contributions to our understanding of these precious verities.

In that which we have written, we have sought to say "none other things than that which the prophets and apostles have written, and that which is taught" us "by the Comforter through the prayer of faith" (D&C 52:9). We alone assume responsibility for what follows, believing the principles contained herein to be true according to the best of our knowledge.
