Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Life Beyond ( 1986)

1

Parting the Veil

The power and authority of the higher, or Melchizedek Priesthood, is to hold the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the church-to have the privilege of receiving the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, to have the heavens opened unto them.

-D&C 107:18-19

Thanks be to God-the heavens have been opened! With the restoration of light and truth and sacred priesthood powers have come the keys which enable man to glimpse into past and future and which provide a divine perspective for the present. Through prophets and priesthood the Lord's people have been invited again to both comprehend and stand in the presence of their God. "This greater priesthood," the revelations state, "administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God" (D&C 84:19). In another revelation on priesthood given to Joseph Smith, the Lord explained: "The power and authority of the higher, or Melchizedek Priesthood, is to hold the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the church-to have the privilege of receiving the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven" (D&C 107:18-19).

Our Invitation to the Divine Presence

Enoch was caught away to a high mountain and shown things from his time to the end (Moses 7). Moses was likewise "caught up into an exceedingly high mountain" and saw the Lord Jehovah and the works of his divine hands (Moses 1). Peter, James, and John beheld marvelous things on the holy mount, including the eventual transfiguration of the earth and its inhabitants (Matt. 17:1-9; 2 Pet. 1:16-19; D&C 63:20-21). The message of the Restoration is that God has opened the heavens again and has called holy men to stand with him on the high mountain, that he might make known his mind and will and purposes. As the ancient prophets and Apostles were permitted a view of eternity, so also in our day have modern oracles penetrated the veil, been witnesses of the world beyond this sphere, and beckoned us to come and be partakers also of that knowledge which both saves and satisfies the soul.

All men know they must die. It is but appropriate that God should reveal something on the subject. And so he has. That which he has revealed constitutes a perfect witness of the restoration of the everlasting gospel and the attendant truths which manifest to man his eternal nature and glorious potential beyond the veil of death. Again the heavens have been opened, the veil parted, and men and women of faith invited to look beyond and know of that which awaits them hereafter. As Lehi in dream partook of that fruit which was sweet above all other, so we too may feast upon that which is most joyous to the soul. Through those precious truths contained in such revelations as the Vision of the Glories (D&C 76), the Vision of the Celestial Kingdom (D&C 137), the King Follett Sermon, and the Vision of the Redemption of the Dead (D&C 138)-each plucked from the tree of life -we are invited to feast upon that same fruit.

The Vision of the Glories

Less than two years passed from the time of the formal organization of the restored Church until the God of glory chose to open the heavens and expand the spiritual horizons of the Saints in a transcendent manner. It was the winter of 1832. Joseph Smith had Been engaged in his work of inspired translation of the Bible since June of 1830, and since April of 1831 had concentrated on the New Testament. Joseph and Emma were then living in the home of John Johnson in Hiram, Ohio. On February 16 in the year 1832 Joseph the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon his scribe prayerfully pondered the fifth chapter of John's Gospel, particularly verse 29. By the power of the Spirit the translators felt impressed to alter the King James verse so as to refer to the "resurrection of the just" and the "resurrection of the unjust," instead of the resurrections of life and damnation. This change "caused us to marvel," the Prophet said, "for it was given unto us of the Spirit. And while we meditated upon these things, the Lord touched the eyes of our understandings and they were opened, and the glory of the Lord shone round about." (D&C 76:18-19.)

Philo Dibble has given the following description of the occasion:

The vision which is recorded in the book of Doctrine and Covenants was given at the house of "Father Johnson," in Hyrum [sic], Ohio, and during the time that Joseph and Sidney were in the spirit and saw the heavens open, there were other men in the room, perhaps twelve, among whom I was one during a part of the time-probably two-thirds of the time-I saw the glory and felt the power, but did not see the vision.

The events and conversation, while they were seeing what is written (and many things were seen and related that are not written), I will relate as minutely as is necessary.

Joseph would, at intervals, say: "What do I see?" as one might say while looking out the window and Beholding what all in the room could not see. Then he would relate what he had seen or what he was looking at. Then Sidney replied, "I see the same." Presently Sidney would say: "What do I see?" and would repeat what he had seen or was seeing, and Joseph would reply, "I see the same."

This manner of conversation was repeated at short intervals to the end of the vision, and during the whole time not a 4 word was spoken by any other person. Not a sound nor motion was made by anyone but Joseph and Sidney, and it seemed to me that they never moved a joint or limb during the time I was there, which I think was over an hour, and to the end of the vision. [^1]

That which burst upon the minds and hearts of Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon also burst the shackles of ignorance and fear and provided specific doctrinal instruction concerning the "Great Plan of the Eternal God." The Vision of the Glories consists of a series of manifestations: (1) a glorious vision of the throne of God, Christ at his right hand, and holy angels praising and worshiping their God; (2) a dramatically contrasting scene-the fall of Lucifer and the sons of perdition, those who chose to deny and defy the Lord and his plan, and who with malevolent mentality seek to crucify the Christ anew; (3) then, as the glory of the day follows the darkness of night, a vision of the celestial world, as well as an understanding of those who qualify for such wonders and blessings; (4) a vision of the terrestrial world with its honorable hosts; (5) a vision of the telestial world and its inhabitants, those who lived in dishonor and were untouched by spiritual truths; and (6) an understanding of hell-its composition and duration. The Vision takes us from premortality to residence in the eternal worlds and thus provides through its breadth and depth the answers to a multitude of questions. "Nothing could be more pleasing to the Saints upon the order of the kingdom of the Lord," Joseph Smith exulted, "than the light which burst upon the world through the foregoing vision."

Every law, every commandment, every promise, every truth, and every point touching the destiny of man, from Genesis to Revelation, where the purity of the scriptures remains unsullied by the folly of men, go to show the perfection of the theory [of different degrees of glory in the resurrection] and witnesses the fact that that document is a transcript from the records of the eternal world. The sublimity of the ideas; the purity of the language; the scope for action; the continued duration for completion, in order that the heirs of salvation may confess the Lord and bow the knee; the rewards for faithfulness, and the punishments for sins, are so much beyond the narrow-mindedness of men that every honest man is constrained to exclaim: "It came from God." [^2]

The Vision of the Celestial Kingdom

The headquarters of the Church moved from New York and Pennsylvania to Ohio. By 1831 two Church centers were organized, one in Kirtland and the other in Missouri (Zion). A commandment came as early as 1833 to build a temple. The Lord instructed that they "should build a house, in the which house I design to endow those whom I have chosen with power from on high" (D&C 95:8). The sacrifice of the Saints to erect the holy edifice was not ignored by that Lord who knows all, and the blessings of heaven were poured out upon the Latter-day Saints in the form of a remarkable period of pentecost. In summarizing this period, Milton V. Backman has written:

During a fifteen-week period, extending from January 21 to May 1, 1836, probably more Latter-day Saints beheld visions and witnessed other unusual spiritual manifestations than during any other era in the history of the Church. There were reports of Saints' beholding heavenly beings at ten different meetings held during that time. At eight of these meetings, many reported seeing angels; at five of the services, individuals testified that Jesus, the Savior, appeared. While the Saints were thus communing with heavenly hosts, many prophesied, some spoke in tongues, and others received the gift of interpretation of tongues. [^3]

Joseph and his brethren commenced meeting in the temple even before its completion, where they participated in washings, anointings, and Blessings. On Thursday, 21 January 1836, the Prophet and a number of Church leaders had gathered in the third (attic) floor of the Kirtland Temple. Joseph Smith explained concerning this occasion:

At early candle-light I met with the Presidency at the west school room, in the Temple, to attend to the ordinance of anointing our heads with holy oil; also the [High] Councils of Kirtland and Zion met in the two adjoining rooms, and waited in prayer while we attended to the ordinance. I took the oil in my left hand, Father Smith being seated before me, and the remainder of the Presidency encircled him round about. We then stretched our right hands towards heaven, and blessed the oil, and consecrated it in the name of Jesus Christ.

We then laid our hands upon our aged Father Smith, and invoked the blessings of heaven. I then anointed his head with the consecrated oil, and sealed many blessings upon him. The Presidency then in turn laid their hands upon his head, ... and pronounced such blessings upon his head, as the Lord put into their hearts, all blessing him to be our Patriarch, to anoint our heads, and attend to all duties that pertain to that office. The Presidency then... received their anointing and blessing under the hands of Father Smith. And in turn, my father anointed my head, and sealed upon me the blessings of Moses, to lead Israel in the latter days, even as Moses led him in days of old; also the blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. All of the Presidency laid their hands upon me, and pronounced upon my head many prophecies and blessings, many of which I shall not notice at this time. But as Paul said, so say I, let us come to visions and revelations. [^4]

Joseph then said: "The heavens were opened upon us, and I beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof" (D&C 137:1).

The doctrinal restoration which commenced in the spring of 1820 (and will accelerate even through the Millennium [^5]) continued. In this vision, Joseph the Seer-having been anointed, the symbolic representation of the outpouring of the Spirit-again became witness of the majesty of the celestial world. He saw the throne of God and envisioned that which would yet be, as prophetic personalities and members of his own family stood in the divine presence. The Vision of the Celestial Kingdom is, in addition, a confirming witness of the law of justification. Just as no person will achieve exaltation without a willing and obedient heart, even so no person will be denied a blessing or opportunity because of circumstances beyond his or her control; no person in all eternity will be held accountable for a law or will be denied privileges of which he or she was ignorant. We glory in the reality that God judges men according to the desires of the heart, as well as the works done in the flesh.

The King Follett Sermon

On 9 March 1844 King Follett, a faithful member of the Church, was killed while digging a well in Nauvoo. Joseph the Prophet was obviously deeply touched by the death of Brother Follett. His passing evoked from Joseph the greatest discourse of his prophetic ministry. At the general conference of the Church (7 April 1844) the Prophet honored King Follett, and in the process delivered a masterful discourse, a sermon plain but profound in its implications. The setting for the conference has been described as follows:

In the weeks immediately preceding April conference, a conspiracy developed against the Prophet. Those involved in the intrigue claimed that Joseph Smith was a fallen prophet, citing as evidence the practice of polygamy, the monopolistic economic policies of the Church, and the increase in his personal power. Hoping to raise popular support for their cause, the conspirators desired to confront the prophet during the conference.

Good weather was a blessing for the Saints because their meetings were held outdoors. In fact, the Mormons did not build any meetinghouses in Nauvoo. Virtually all of the public meetings were held outdoors in areas referred to as "the groves." The Saints held meetings in three different groves located on the edges of the bluff to the northeast, west, and south of the temple. The sloping contours of the bluffs provided a natural amphitheater, to which the Saints added wooden benches and a speaker's rostrum. [^6]

The Prophet rose that Sunday morning and spoke for over two hours to a crowd of from ten to twenty thousand people. One citizen of the "city of Joseph" who was present on this occasion has left her recollections:

I was very small when we lived in Nauvoo, but I always attended the meetings. The most striking thing I remember was a prophecy Joseph Smith made, which I saw fulfilled immediately. I was at the funeral service of King Follett, in the Nauvoo Grove. A heavy thunderstorm arose. The people became frightened and started to go home. But the Prophet arose and told the multitude that if they would remain still and pray in their hearts the storm would not molest them in their services.

They did as they were bidden, and the storm divided over the grove. I well remember how it was storming on all sides of the grove, yet it was calm around us as if there was no sign of a storm so near by.

I thought as I sat there that the Lord was speaking through Joseph. [^7]

Those who came to the grove with dark motives and doubtful hearts found sufficient ammunition to perpetuate their claims of "fallen prophet." Those, on the other hand, who were loyal to their leader and entered the grove with eyes and ears of faith were richly rewarded. They witnessed their beloved Prophet at the zenith of his ministry, eloquent in his presentation of deep and penetrating doctrine, and bold in defense of his own prophetic calling. It was on this occasion that the veil was parted for the Saints once again, and the Prophet Joseph beckoned to the members to see what he had come to know by revelation. Brother Joseph opened the scriptures to the understanding of many and expounded upon several doctrinal points during the time he occupied the stand, including the nature of eternal life, dwelling in everlasting burnings, the manner in which the Gods planned and created the earth, the eternal nature of man and element, and the unpardonable sin. Most important, however, Joseph Smith lifted his hearers to a loftier level of comprehension concerning Deity: he explained how God came to be God, the mystery associated with the fact that "God himself was once as we are now, and is an exalted man, and sits enthroned in yonder heavens." [^8]: In addition, the Prophet taught those assembled that through righteousness man is exalted, coming to know 9

The Vision of the Redemption of the Dead

During the last six months of his life, President Joseph F. Smith, nephew of the Prophet Joseph Smith and sixth president of the Church, suffered from the effects of advancing years (he was in his eightieth year). He spent much of his time in his personal study in the Beehive House. President Smith did manage to attend the October 1918 general conference. On Friday, 4 October, President Smith opened the conference with these words:

As most of you, I suppose, are aware, I have been undergoing a siege of very serious illness for the past five months. It would be impossible for me, on this occasion, to occupy sufficient time to express the desires of my heart and my feelings, as I would desire to express them to you ....

I will not, I dare not, attempt to enter upon many things that are resting upon my mind this morning, and I shall postpone until some future time, the Lord being willing, my attempt to tell you some of the things that are in my mind, and that dwell in my heart. I have not lived alone these last five months. I have dwelt in the spirit of prayer, of supplication, of faith and of determination; and I have had my communication with the Spirit of the Lord continuously. [^9]

Joseph Fielding Smith indicated that his father was here expressing the fact that during the preceding half year he had been the recipient of numerous manifestations. One of these-the Vision of the Redemption of the Dead-had been received just the day before.

Joseph F. Smith's attention was drawn to the world beyond mortality by his frequent confrontation with death. His parents, Hyrum and Mary Fielding Smith, had both died by the time Joseph F. was a young man. His soul wrenched as he delivered a number of his own small children to the grave. Joseph Fielding Smith has written: "When death invaded his home, as frequently it did, and his little ones were taken from him, he grieved with a broken heart and mourned, not as those who mourn who live without hope, but for the loss of his 'precious jewels' dearer to him than life itself." [^10] On 20 January 1918 Hyrum Mack Smith, oldest son of Joseph F. and then a member of the Council of the Twelve, was taken to the hospital for a serious illness, where the physician diagnosed a ruptured appendix. Despite constant medical attention and repeated pleadings in prayer, Hyrum M.-then only forty-five years old-died on the night of 23 January. This was a particularly traumatic trial for President Smith, "one of the most severe blows that he was ever called upon to endure." [^11]r

Standing in the twilight of life, men of nobility have been able to view existence with divine perspective, and thereby the finite mind has been opened to the things of infinity. "If we live our holy religion," Brigham Young taught, "and let the Spirit reign," the mind of man "will not become dull and stupid, but as the body approaches dissolution the spirit takes a firmer hold on that enduring substance behind the vail, drawing from the depths of that eternal Fountain of Light sparkling gems of intelligence which surround the frail and sinking tabernacle with a halo of immortal wisdom." [^12]

On Thursday, 3 October 1918, President Smith, largely confined to his room because of illness, sat meditating over the universal nature of the Atonement, and the Apostle Peter's allusions to Christ's postmortal ministry in the world of spirits. Thus a lifelong preparation responded to the readiness of the moment, giving birth to a heavenly endowment-the Vision of the Redemption of the Dead. Understanding was added to understanding, faith to faith: additional knowledge came forth and already available truths were confirmed, clarified, and expanded. Our grasp and perspective on such matters as the nature and composition of the spirit world, as well as the administrative and instructional ministry of the Savior to that realm in the meridian of time, were broadened and strengthened.

Conclusion

The Lord warned the early Saints that their minds in times past had been darkened because of unbelief and because they had treated lightly the things they had received, namely, the Book of Mormon and the revelations of the Restoration. We live in a day when the glorious gospel light shines with a brilliance unknown in past ages, a time when "the dawning of a brighter day majestic rises on the world" (Hymns, 1985, no. 1). Unless we pay careful heed to "those things which are communicated" to us in this day and time, we proceed through life with less than optimal illumination: we find ourselves "walking in darkness at noon-day." (D&C 84:54-61; 95:6.) Our knowledge of things beyond the veil comes from latter-day revelation and living prophets. Through the revelations given to Joseph Smith and Joseph F. Smith the particulars of which we will consider more completely hereafter as we construct the house of our understanding-we too may be able to see with prophetic eyes and have seerlike vision of the purposes and possibilities of that world beyond the grave.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bruce R. McConkie, Conference Report, October 1976, p. 157.
[^2] Diary of Charles Lowell Walker, 2 vols., ed. A. Karl and Katherine Miles Larsen (Logan, Utah: Utah State University Press, 1980), 1:465-66; italics added.
[^3] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), 1:7.
[^4] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 326; italics added.
[^5] Parley P. Pratt, Key to the Science of Theology, 9th ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1965), pp. 126-27; italics added; see also Brigham Young, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), 3:367-69.
[^6] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards & Sons, 1855-86), 3:368.
[^7] Orson Pratt, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), 16:365.
[^8] Gospel Truth, 2 vols., comp. Jerreld L. Newquist (Salt Lake City: Zion's Book Store, 1957), l:73.
[^9] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards & Sons, 1855-86), 3:112-13.
[^10] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards & Sons, 1855-86), 3:369.
[^11] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards & Sons, 1855-86), 2:150; cf. Parley P. Pratt, Key to the Science of Theology, 9th ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1965), pp. 127-28.
[^12] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977), p. 448.
