Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Life Beyond ( 1986)

2

The World of Spirits

Now, concerning the state of the soul between death and the resurrection-Behold, it has been made known unto me by an angel, that... the spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness, which is called paradise. ... And then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of the wicked... shall be cast out into outer darkness; there shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth .... Thus they remain in this state, as well as the righteous in paradise, until the time of their resurrection.

-Alma 40:11-14

Might we ask with Alma: What becomes of man-the eternal spirit-at the time of death? Does it remain forever in a grave of darkness? Or does it continue to exist, and if so, does it retain its individuality? Does the spirit return immediately to the divine presence? And what of the world of spirits-where is it and what of its nature? Do all spirits-the good and the evil-commingle together, or have their works and desires led to a separation at death? And what of such a state-is it endless or will the spirit again reclaim its body? All such questions and many more are answered with clarity by the revelations of the Restoration, from which we learn of this afterworld, this life beyond the grave.

Life and Death

Birth and death are inextricably intertwined, the words being defined in terms of one another. First, we are born to die and die to live. Mortal birth is tantamount to a death in regard to premortality: we die as to things as they were in order to enter the realm of mortality. In so doing, we move from "eternity" into "time." Second, having been cut off from the presence of the Father through birth in our journey from the divine presence to this fallen world and thus having died as pertaining to the things of righteousness, we are in need of a new birth. To use Paul's language, we must crucify the old man of sin and come forth in a newness of life (see Rom. 6:6) in order to go where God and angels dwell. Finally, we must pass beyond this veil of tears to inherit a far greater and grander existence; it is in dying that we are born unto eternal life. In mortal death we leave the realms of "time" and return to those of "eternity."

Life's starkest reality is death. Death is "a subject which strikes dread-even terror-into the hearts of most men. It is something we fear, of which we are sorely afraid, and from which most of us would flee if we could." [^1] It is a universal commonality, one thing which every mortal shares with every other mortal, this in spite of earthly status and accomplishments. Every man or woman is born and every man and woman must die. All are born as helpless infants, and all are equally helpless in the face of death. Even among those who see by the lamp of gospel understanding, death is frequently viewed with fear and trembling. Joseph Smith is reported to have taught that "the Lord in his wisdom had implanted the fear of death in every person that they might cling to life and thus accomplish the designs of their Creator. " [^2] The severance of fraternal and familial ties is of all things most painful for those who remain, bringing with it an avalanche of loneliness and sorrow. Such are the feelings even of men and women of faith. He who has the panoramic vision and the broadest perspective on life and death is aware of such agonies. The God of us all has said: "Thou shalt live together in love, insomuch that thou shalt weep for the loss of them that die" (D&C 42:45).

Life's bitter winters may find us walking alone. During these cold and dark seasons of solitude, we wrap ourselves in the protective clothing of faith and its perspective and are warmed by precious memories. Thus we move on, seeking always to view things as God views them. "Precious in the sight of the Lord," the revealed word declares, "is the death of his saints" (Ps. 116:15). "Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord," for they shall "rest from their labours; and their works do follow them" (Rev. 14:13).

Entrance into the World of Spirits

The transition from time into eternity is immediate. As the physical self breathes its last breath, the spirit self passes through a thin veil separating this world from the next. In the words of Parley P. Pratt: "The outward tabernacle, inhabited by a spirit, returns to the element from which it emanated. But the thinking being, the individual, active agent or identity that inhabited that tabernacle, never ceased to exist, to think, act, live, move, or have a being; never ceased to exercise those sympathies, affections, hopes, and aspirations, which are founded in the very nature of intelligences, being the inherent and invaluable principles of their eternal existence." [^3] The powers of intellect and the feelings of the heart reside within the spirit of man, or what is most frequently called the soul. (See 1 Ne. 15:35; Mosiah 14:10; Alma 36:15; 40:7, 11-14, 18, 21, 23; 42:16; D&C 101:37; Abr. 3:23.)

Location of the Spirit World

And where is it that the spirit of man goes at death? Where is the world of spirits? Joseph Smith taught: "The spirits of the just are exalted to a greater and more glorious work; hence they are blessed in their departure to the world of spirits." The Prophet then added that "they are not far from us, and know and understand our thoughts, feelings, and motions, and are often pained therewith." [^4] In speaking of the nearness of the world of spirits, Parley P. Pratt wrote that "it is here on the very planet where we were born." Continuing, he explained: "The earth and all other planets of a like sphere, have their inward or spiritual spheres, as well as their outward, or temporal. The one is peopled by temporal tabernacles, and the other by spirits. A veil is drawn between the one sphere and the other, whereby all the objects in the spiritual sphere are rendered invisible to those in the temporal." [^5]

Returning to the Presence of God?

The Prophet Alma, recognizing that resurrection-the inseparable union of body and spirit-did not immediately follow death, inquired of the Lord concerning the "state of the soul between death and the resurrection." An angel, a citizen himself of the world of spirits, explained to Alma the nature of the afterworld. Thus Alma testified: "It has been made known unto me by an angel, that the spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body, yea, the spirits of all men, whether they be good or evil, are taken home to that God who gave them life" (Alma 40:11). Alma's language is similar to that of the Preacher in the book of Ecclesiastes: "Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it" (Eccl. 2:7).

Both of these scriptural preachers are speaking in broadest terms, and should not be interpreted to mean that the spirit-at the time of death-goes into the immediate presence of the Lord. President Brigham Young explained that to speak of the spirit returning to the God who gave it means that "when the spirits leave their Bodies they are in the presence of our Father and God" in the sense that they "are prepared then to see, hear and understand spiritual things." [^6] To go into the "presence" of God is not necessarily to be "placed within a few yards or rods, or within a short distance of his person." [^7] President George Q. Cannon explained: "Alma, when he says that 'the spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body .... are taken home to that God who gave them life,' has the idea, doubtless, in his mind that our God is omnipresent-not in His own personality but through His minister, the Holy Spirit. He does not intend to convey the idea that they are immediately ushered into the personal presence of God. He evidently uses that phrase in a qualified sense." [^8] Similarly, Heber C. Kimball taught: "As for my going into the immediate presence of God when I die, I do not expect it, but I expect to go into the world of spirits and associate with my brethren, and preach the Gospel in the spiritual world, and prepare myself in every necessary way to receive my body again, and then enter through the wall into the celestial world. I never shall come into the presence of my Father and God until I have received my resurrected body, neither will any other person." [^9]

One World

The world of spirits is one world, even as the world of mortals is one world. We live and act in a world today wherein we find saints and sinners in one sphere; the degraded and defiled, as well as the pious and the pure go about their business on the very same stage of the mortal drama. So it is in the world hereafter-"the spirits of all men, whether they be good or evil" (Alma 40:11), live and move and have their being in one and the same realm. "Where is the spirit world?" Brigham Young asked. He then answered: "It is right here. Do the good and evil spirits go together? Yes, they do. Do they both inhabit one kingdom? Yes, they do." [^10] And yet, even as the pure maintain a separate existence from the perverse in this stage of action, so also is there a division between spirits beyond the veil of death. On the one hand, death is a great leveler: it breaks all the bands of poverty, infirmity, and worldly caste or station. On the other hand, death is a great separator, an occasion wherein a "partial judgment" of the spirit results in a designated area of residence. That there was a major separation of the righteous and the wicked before the ministry of the disembodied Savior is evident from the scriptures. (See D&C 138; Luke 16:19-31; 1 Ne. 15:26-30.) Regarding the nature of things since the meridian of time, Heber C. Kimball asked: "Can those persons who pursue a course of carelessness, neglect of duty, and disobedience, when they depart from this life, expect that their spirits will associate with the spirits of the righteous in the spirit world? I do not expect it, and when you depart from this state of existence, you will find it out for yourselves." [^11]

A Place of Rest

After teaching his son Corianton concerning the journey of spirits-righteous and wicked-into the spirit world, Alma continued: "And then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness, which is called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow" (Alma 40:12; italics added). We thus see that paradise is the abode of the righteous in the world of spirits, a "state of happiness," a place hereafter where the spirits of the faithful "expand in wisdom, where they have respite from all their troubles, and where care and sorrow do not annoy." [^12]

The Meaning of "Spirit Prison"

One of the marvelous contributions of President Joseph F. Smith's Vision of the Redemption of the Dead is the heightened realization that the whole spirit world-paradise included-is a "spirit prison." The dead, having "looked upon the long absence of their spirits from their bodies as a Bondage," are, in a sense, in prison; they seek redemption and "deliverance" from the "chains of death"; the Master thus came to declare "liberty to the captives who had been faithful." (D&C 138:50, 15, 18.) [^13] "When our spirits leave these bodies, will they be happy?" Orson Pratt asked. "Not perfectly so," he responded. "Why? Because the spirit is absent from the body; it cannot be perfectly happy while a part of the man is lying in the earth .... You will be happy, you will be at ease in paradise; but still you will be looking for a house where your spirit can enter and act as you did in former times." [^14] Brigham Young was most emphatic on this matter: "I know it is a startling idea to say that the Prophet [Joseph Smith] and the persecutor of the Prophet, all go to prison together... but they have not got their bodies yet, consequently they are in prison." [^15] The doctrine that the entire spirit world is a spirit prison is evident in a marvelous vision given to Enoch. Enoch "looked and beheld the Son of Man lifted up on the cross, after the manner of men; and he heard a loud voice; and the heavens were veiled; and all the creations of God mourned; and the earth groaned; and the rocks were rent; and the saints arose, and were crowned at the right hand of the Son of Man, with crowns of glory; and as many of the spirits as were in prison came forth, and stood on the right band of God; and the remainder were reserved in chains of darkness until the judgment of the great day" (Moses 7:55-57; italics added). We note from Enoch's words that the Saints were the ones who came forth from the grave. This was the beginning of the first resurrection, the resurrection of the prophets and those who gave heed to the warnings of the prophets (see Mosiah 15:22). These came forth from prison-in this instance, from paradise, the abode of the righteous. [^16]

Jesus and the Thief on the Cross

One of the most misunderstood biblical passages in Christian history is the account of the Savior's discussion with the thief on the cross during the closing moments of our Lord's mortal existence. Luke records: "And one of the malefactors which were hanged railed on [Jesus], saying, If thou be Christ, save thyself and us. But the other answering rebuked him, saying, Dost not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? And we indeed justly; for we receive the due reward of our deeds: but this man hath done nothing amiss. And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom. And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, To day shalt thou be with me in paradise." (Luke 23:39-43; italics added.) This account has spawned a whole host of incorrect doctrinal perceptions, which in turn have resulted in questionable and perverse practices on the part of Christians over the centuries.

One of the most prevalent misperceptions of the above New Testament dialogue is a belief in a type of "deathbed repentance," a notion that one can postpone his confession of the Lord, an acknowledgment of his divine Sonship, and the outward fruits of one's conversion until the time just before death. Though we must never de-emphasize or denigrate the value of sincere repentance-no matter how late in one's earthly career (see Matt. 20:1-16)-yet the word of the Lord is clear that "he that repents and does the commandments of the Lord shall be forgiven" (D&C 1:32; italics added). "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven," the Master taught in time's meridian, "but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven" (Matt. 7:21). Confession and repentance coerced by the threat of death hardly prepare one's soul for a place with the sanctified.

There is yet a deeper insight to be had in grasping the Savior's intended message to the thief on the cross. In discoursing upon the subject, the Prophet Joseph Smith observed:

I will say something about the spirits in prison. There has been much said by modern divines about the words of Jesus (when on the cross) to the thief, saying, "This day shalt thou be with me in paradise." King James' translators make it [the Greek word hades] out to say paradise. But what is paradise? It is a modern word: it does not answer at all to the original word that Jesus made use of. Find the original of the word paradise. You may as easily find a needle in a haymow. Here is a chance for battle, ye learned men. There is nothing in the original word in Greek from which this was taken that signifies paradise; but it was-This day thou shalt be with me in the world of spirits. [^17]

In confirming these truths, Joseph Smith said: "Hades, the Greek, Sheol, the Hebrew, these two significations mean a world of spirits. Hades, Sheol, spirits in prison, are all one: it is a world of spirits. " R18 Not discounting in any way, therefore, what feelings of contrition may have existed in the heart of the thief on the cross, Parley P. Pratt thus explained that tills man went into the world of spirits "in a state of ignorance, and sin, Being uncultivated, unimproved, and unprepared for salvation. He went there to be taught, and to complete that repentance, which in a dying moment he commenced on the earth." [^18]

A Place of Instruction

Without doubt, the most important work in the world of spirits is the teaching of the gospel. Before the final day of judgment, all must Be extended an opportunity to hear the message of salvation from a legal administrator. It is this work of gospel instruction Beyond the grave which allows all men to "be judged according to men in the flesh, but live in the spirit according to the will of God" (JST 1 Pet. 4:6). Because the primary function of the spirit world is instructional in nature, several of the chapters which follow will focus specifically upon this matter.

A Place of Sorrow and Repentance

Hell

In speaking to Corianton of the second division within the spirit world-that which the scriptures designate as hell or "outer darkness" [^19]-Alma said: "And then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of the wicked, yea, who are evil-for behold, they have no part nor portion of the Spirit of the Lord; for behold, they chose evil works rather than good; therefore the spirit of the devil did enter into them, and take possession of their house-and these shall be cast out into outer darkness; there shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, and this because of their own iniquity, being led captive by the will of the devil" (Alma 40:13). Joseph Smith explained: "The great misery of departed spirits in the world of spirits, where they go after death, is to know that they come short of the glory that others enjoy and that they might have enjoyed themselves, and they are their own accusers." [^20]On another occasion, Joseph taught: "A man is his own tormenter and his own condemner. Hence the saying, They shall go into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone. The torment of disappointment in the mind of man is as exquisite as a lake burning with fire and brimstone. I say, so is the torment of man." [^21]Thus hell is both a place-a part of the world of spirits where suffering and sorrow take place-and a state-a condition of the mind associated with remorseful realization. King Benjamin explained that if a man does not repent, "and remaineth and dieth an enemy to God, the demands of divine justice do awaken his immortal soul to a lively sense of his own guilt, which doth cause him to shrink from the presence of the Lord, and doth fill his breast with guilt, and pain, and anguish, which is like an unquenchable fire, whose flame ascendeth up forever and ever" (Mosiah 2:38; of. Alma 36:12-16).

Nephi foretold the time when people would doubt the reality of the devil as well as the reality of hell. After describing how Satan in the last days would rage in the hearts of some men while pacifying others, he noted: "And behold, others he flattereth away, and telleth them there is no hell; and he saith unto them: I am no devil, for there is none-and thus he whispereth in their ears, until he grasps them with his awful chains, from whence there is no deliverance" (2 Ne. 28:22). [^22]

The Law of Restoration

Death does not change the nature of man. The Book of Mormon affirms the principle that man takes into the next sphere of existence that personality and those attitudes which he has cultivated on earth. Just as we come to earth with tendencies and predispositions developed in the pre-mortal world, so also do we go into the afterworld with the character we have shaped and molded in mortality. Were it not so, there would be little purpose in earth life. If we die with desires for goodness and a yearning for righteousness and are questing for the things of the Spirit, we will continue to do so hereafter among those with like propensities. On the other hand, we need not suppose that a lifetime of evil thinking and malevolent motives will be removed or peeled away by the veil of death. Amulek stressed the need for repentance in this life when he said:

For behold, this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors.

And now, as I said unto you before, as ye have had so many witnesses, therefore, I beseech of you that ye do not procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end; for after this day of life, which is given us to prepare for eternity, behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life, then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed.

Ye cannot say, when ye are brought to that awful crisis, that I will repent, that I will return to my God. Nay, ye cannot say this; for that same spirit [disposition, attitude] which doth possess your bodies at the time that ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have power to possess your [spirit] body in that eternal world.

For behold, if ye have procrastinated the day of your repentance even until death, behold, ye have become subjected to the spirit of the devil, and he doth seal you his; therefore, the Spirit of the Lord hath withdrawn from you, and hath no place in you, and the devil hath all power over you; and this is the final state of the wicked. (Alma 34:32-35; of. 41:3-4, 12-13.)

Elder Melvin J. Ballard declared: "A man may receive the priesthood and all its privileges and blessings, but until he learns to overcome the flesh-his temper, his tongue, his disposition to indulge in the things God has forbidden-he cannot come into the celestial kingdom of God." In further stressing the importance of bringing about changes in our natures in this life, Elder Ballard continued: "He must overcome either in this life or in the life to come. But this life is the time in which men are to repent. Do not let any of us imagine that we can go down to the grave not having overcome the corruptions of the flesh and then lose in the grave all our sins and evil tendencies. They will be with us. They will be with the spirit when separated from the body." Finally: "Then every man and woman who is putting off until the next life the task of correcting and overcoming the weakness of the flesh are sentencing themselves to years of bondage, for no man or woman will come forth in the resurrection until be bas completed his work, until be bas overcome, until he has done as much as he can do." [^23]

A Place of Waiting

The Great Gulf

From the days of Adam until the ministry of the disembodied Savior, there was no link between paradise and hell. Persons who had chosen to follow the ways of the world remained without gospel light for those centuries, and a "great gulf" separated the wicked from the righteous in the world of spirits. "Oh! the weariness, the tardy movement of time!" said Parley P. Pratt, "the lingering ages for a people to dwell in condemnation, darkness, ignorance, and despondency, as a punishment for their sins. For," he noted, "they had been filled with violence while on the earth in the flesh, and had rejected the preachings of... the prophets. [^24]

The parable of the rich man and Lazarus has often Been cited as evidence of such a division in the spirit world. The rich man, finding himself in hell and seeing Lazarus some distance away in the Bosom of Abraham-in paradise-cried out for Abraham to send Lazarus, "that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue; for I am tormented in this flame." Abraham explained that the law of restoration was in full operation-that "thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. And beside all this," Abraham continued, "between us and you there is a great gulf fixed: so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot; neither can they pass to us, that would come from thence." (Luke 16:19-26; italics added.) In commenting specifically upon this parable, Elder Bruce R. McConkie observed that these two men "knew each other in mortality, so they remember their former acquaintanceship. But no longer are they accessible to each other so that one might minister to the needs of the other. Christ [had/ not bridged the gulf between the prison and the palace, and there [was] as yet no communion between the righteous in paradise and the wicked in hell." [^25]

Nephi, six hundred years earlier, in speaking to his brothers of their father's dream, and particularly of the "fountain of filthy waters," said, "It [the fountain] was an awful gulf, which separated the wicked from the tree of life, and also from the saints of God." Nephi further explained that "it was a representation of that awful hell, which the angel said unto me was prepared for the wicked." (1 Ne. 15:28-29; italics added.)

Jesus Christ bridged the gulf between the righteous and the wicked in the spirit world when he visited that realm between the time of his death and resurrection. According to the vision given to Joseph F. Smith, our Lord's ministry to the disembodied was as much organizational as instructional: he preached the gospel to the righteous in paradise and organized them into a force sufficient to carry the message of peace to the wicked, "unto whom he could not go personally, because of their rebellion and transgression" (D&C 138:20-37). After the visit of the Savior to those in this segment of spirit prison, the righteous could deliver the soothing waters of eternal life to those in the desert of darkness. [^26]

The Ministry of Translated Beings

Because the gospel was not taken to those outside paradise until the meridian of time, the Lord chose periodically to utilize the services of the ancients elsewhere. Many of the righteous were translated-prolonged in life, raised to a terrestrial level of existence, and given assignments to continue their labors in behalf of the children of men. In speaking of Enoch and his city, the Prophet Joseph Smith stated, "Their place of habitation is that of the terrestrial order, and a place prepared for such characters He held in reserve to be ministering angels unto many planets." [^27] When the gulf was bridged in the postmortal world, this practice changed. "Occasionally in the overall perspective someone came along who so lived that he was translated, but that's not particularly for our day and generation. When we die our obligation is to go into the spirit world and to continue to preach the gospel there. [^28]

A Place of Reunion

For the righteous, the time of death is also a time of reunion, an occasion wherein a person is welcomed once again to the society of loved ones. "I have a father, brothers, children, and friends who have gone to a world of spirits," Joseph Smith said in 1844. "They are only absent for a moment. They are in the spirit, and we shall soon meet again." [^29] President Joseph F. Smith asked: "What is more desirable than that we should meet with our fathers and our mothers, with our brethren and our sisters, with our wives and our children, with our beloved associates and kindred in the spirit world, knowing each other, identifying each other... by the associations that familiarize each to the other in mortal life? What do you want better than that? What is there for any religion superior to that? I know of nothing." [^30]

Conclusion

The restoration of the gospel through the instrumentality of Joseph Smith has opened the doors of understanding to things both seen and unseen. To those who are willing to enter the realm of knowledge and bask in the living light made available through modern revelation and modern oracles, there is an infinitude of intelligence available concerning the continuation of life after death, of existence beyond this sphere. Truth-glorious truth-proclaims that life did not begin at mortal birth, nor will it end at mortal death. Our development and progress did not begin as we first breathed the breath of life, nor will it cease when we breathe our last. Life goes on-in a world of spirits, beyond the grave.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] An earth had to be created, one to which God's spirit children could come to obtain physical bodies, the physical body being a requisite to godhood. Lectures on Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), 7:9; italics added.
[^2] In its creation, the earth would be paradisiacal, meaning there would be no death or corruption on it. All forms of life were to be placed on the earth but not granted the power of procreation as long as the earth remained in its Edenic state. Those chosen to be our first parents would have to transgress the laws of that paradisiacal state in order to have children. It would then become possible for them and their posterity to be tried and tested to see if they would merit the privilege of returning to the presence of their Divine Father. That transgression, known to us as the fall of Adam, introduced death, corruption, and sin. In this state of corruption, Adam and his posterity could no longer enjoy the presence of the Lord and thus would be known as fallen man. Bruce R. McConkie, "A New Commandment," Ensign, August 1976, p. 9.
[^3] The effects of Adam's fall could only be overcome by an atoning sacrifice made by one free from the effects of sin. The Redeemer must have within his nature both the ability to lay down his life and the power to take it up again. By so doing he could atone for the sins of the world, break the bands of death, and bring to pass a resurrection (the inseparable union of body and spirit). Bruce R. McConkie, "All Are Alike unto God," Annual Religious Educators' Symposium (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1978), p. 4.
[^4] Thus, the one chosen to redeem mankind from the effects of the fall must have God as his father-from whom he could inherit the capacity to live endlessly-and a mortal mother, from whom he could inherit blood or the corruptible element of the body, so that he might die. As the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh, he would then be able to lay down his life in an atoning sacrifice and take it up again, thus breaking the bands of death. From the account of Oliver Cowdery, it appears that the translators had reached the book of 3 Nephi when they determined to inquire of the Lord concerning baptism (Messenger and Advocate, vol. 1 [October, 1834], pp. 14-16).
[^5] As all would be subject to death by Adam's transgression, so all could be freed from its bondage by Christ's atonement. All would be granted the opportunity to accept Christ as their Savior and work out their salvation by complying with the laws and ordinances of the gospel. Those not having the opportunity to do so in mortality were to be granted that opportunity in the world of the spirits prior to the resurrection. Times and Seasons (February 1, 1843), 4:84.
[^6] Thus, all men in all ages of earth's history would be invited to follow the same path, exercise the same faith, comply with the same ordinances, and live the same principles in order to be saved in the kingdom of God. See an interview with William Smith by E. C. Briggs and J. W. Peterson, published in the Deseret News (Salt Lake City), 20 January 1894.
[^7] Lucy Smith, History of Joseph Smith by His Mother (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1958), p. 87.
[^8] Lucy Smith, History of Joseph Smith by His Mother (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1958), p. 89.
[^9] History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., ed. B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1957), 5:126-27.
[^10] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards & Sons, 1855-86), 3:369.
[^11] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards & Sons, 1855-86), 2:150; cf. Parley P. Pratt, Key to the Science of Theology, 9th ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1965), pp. 127-28.
[^12] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977), p. 448.
[^13] See Bruce R. McConkie, "A New Commandment: Save Thyself and Thy Kindred," Ensign, August 1976, p. 11.
[^14] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards & Sons, 1855-86), 1:289-90.
[^15] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards & Sons, 1855-86), 3:95; italics added.
[^16] There are some occasions wherein the word hell is used to refer to the spirit world. As we shall see later, hell is usually the word which describes that portion of the spirit world where sorrow and suffering and repentance are the order of things for the wicked who inhabit it. Note, however, the use of the word hell in Peter's sermon on Christ's soul not being left in hell (Acts 2:27, quoting Ps. 16:10). Appropriately, the Joseph Smith Translation of the verse in Acts renders the word hell as "prison."
[^17] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 309; italics added. Josiah Quincy visited the Prophet Joseph Smith in Nauvoo and wrote later of an occasion wherein Joseph spoke on the necessity of baptism for salvation. A minister in the audience contended as follows with the Prophet: "Minister. Stop! What do you say to the case of the penitent thief? Prophet. What do you mean by that? Minister. You know our Saviour said to the thief, 'This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise,' which shows he could not have been baptized before his admission. Prophet. How do you know he wasn't baptized before he became a thief? At this retort the sort of laugh that is provoked by an unexpected hit ran through the audience; but this demonstration of sympathy was rebuked by a severe look from Smith, who went on to say: 'But that is not the true answer. In the original Greek, as this gentleman [turning to me] will inform you, the word that has been translated paradise means simply a place of departed spirits. To that place the penitent thief was conveyed, and there, doubtless, he received the baptism necessary for his admission to the heavenly kingdom.' "(Figures of the Past [Boston: Roberts Brothers, 1883], pp. 391-92.)
[^18] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 310; italics added. Note also these words from Joseph Smith: "The righteous and the wicked all go to the same world of spirits until the resurrection." (Ibid.)
[^19] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards & Sons, 1855-86), 1:9.
[^20] With but few exceptions, outer darkness refers to hell, the place of suffering and sadness and confrontation in the spirit world. (See Alma 34:33; 40:13; 41:7; D&C 38:5; 138:22, 30, 57; Isa. 49:9.)
[^21] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 310-11.
[^22] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 357.
[^23] For a discussion of how a large segment of modern Christianity has rejected the notions of Satan and hell, see Joseph Fielding McConkie, Gospel Symbolism (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1985), pp. 210-11.
[^24] From "The Three Degrees of Glory," in Melvin J. Ballard-Crusader for Righteousness (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), pp. 212-13; italics added.
[^25] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards & Sons, 1855-86), 1:11.
[^26] Bruce R. McConkie, The Mortal Messiah, 4 books (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979-81), 3:263; italics added.
[^27] See Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), pp. 315-21.
[^28] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 170; see also pp. 171, 191; D&C 7; 3 Ne. 28.
[^29] From Bruce R. McConkie, "Jesus Christ and Him Crucified," 1976 Brigham Young University Devotional Speeches of the Year (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1977), p. 401; see also The Millennial Messiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1982), pp. 284-85. Cf. D&C 138:57.
[^30] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 359.
