Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Life Beyond ( 1986)

3

That All Might Hear

Wherefore the voice of the Lord is unto the ends of the earth, that all that will hear may hear.

-D&C 1:11

What of gospel principles beyond death? What of mercy and justice? What of faith and repentance? of ritual and ordinance? Having served their functions in mortality, are they then, like the body of man, consigned to the dust of the earth? What of those who spurn the saving word in the flesh but thereafter thirst for a drop of living water? And what of those who left mortality having never felt the warmth of gospel light? Or those from whom blessings and promises were withheld because of circumstances beyond their control? What of those who received less than a wholeness here-what is their hope for a fulness hereafter? Is there order in heaven, a divine plan, a plan reaching from eternity to eternity? On matters of such infinite import the revealed word is not silent.

A World of Confusion or a House of Order?

The theologies of the world are a mass of confusion. They evidence the apostasy and attest to the puniness of the mind of man when unaided by the Spirit of God. They lack mercy and are devoid of justice, for they portray a God with power to save but a portion of his creatures, and that too on an inequitable basis. They are founded in uncertainty and some even in ambiguity. They deny revelation and yet in their doctrines freely add to the scriptural canon. Some promise salvation to the wicked and faithless by grace alone; others damn innocent and pure children. But the Latter-day Saint reader ought to be reminded that without a divine dispensation we would be no better informed than our friends from other churches. Were it not for the restoration of the gospel and the advent of living prophets, our understanding would reach no higher than theirs.

The God of heaven is a God of order. He is a God perfect in mercy and flawless in justice, as with all other attributes of godliness. The divine and eternal truths which flow from him, like their author, are without fault. As all men have equal claim upon his attentions and his love, so all men are equally entitled to inherit and possess the blessings that come from obedience to his precepts and commands. A God of justice could not consign one to heaven on the basis of the good fortune of having been born in the presence of legal authorities, those who can perform the ordinances essential to salvation, while consigning another to hell because he was not so well born. A religion that cannot offer salvation to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob because they lived before Christ, or that cannot save the newly born infant that died in perfect innocence, can make no honest profession to represent a God of either mercy or justice. Such theology does not differ in principle from one that would offer salvation to those afforded the opportunity to make a deathbed profession of faith, while damning those to whom no such opportunity came.

The Bible, notwithstanding the many marvelous truths it contains, can be searched in vain for the simple affirmation that our Eternal Father has a plan for the salvation of his children. The misunderstanding and confusion in the world is not without justification. It is an eternal verity that it takes prophets to understand prophets and the spirit of revelation to properly understand those revelations already given. The understanding we as Latter-day Saints have of the "plan of salvation" would not be ours were it not for the Book of Mormon and other revelations of the Restoration. Phrases like "merciful plan of the great Creator" (2 Ne. 9:6), "eternal plan of deliverance" (2 Ne. 11:5), "great plan of redemption" (Jacob 6:8), and "plan of salvation" (Alma 24:14) are common to the Book of Mormon.

Though our modern Bible contains no references to a plan of salvation, anciently it was not so. We are primarily indebted to the writings of Abraham and Moses for our understanding of the pre-earth life and the Grand Council in Heaven, at which our Eternal Father reviewed his plan for the salvation of his children. Scriptural references to the heavenly council are at best brief. The terseness in which they are given, even in the books of Moses and Abraham, is an evidence that they were common knowledge to those to whom they were originally given. Details were not necessary, for the doctrine was well known. Peter's reference to Christ's visit to the spirit world illustrates the point: these verses are not the result of a discourse on the subject; they are simply a succinct illustration used in making some other point.

Abraham's revelation, for instance, first announces that the souls of all men lived in the presence of their Eternal Father prior to their birth into mortality. Further, it tells us that judgments were made among their number as to which were the most noble and faithful, for these were singled out and foreordained to be leaders in the kingdom of God. Abraham was told that he was one of those so chosen. Finally, in this Grand Council the God of heaven asked of the assembled spirits, "Whom shall I send?" meaning: "Whom shall I choose to be the Savior or Redeemer of mankind?" The question implies that those being addressed understood the necessity of a Redeemer in the divine plan. (See Abr. 3:18-28.) The eldest or firstborn of this great family of spirits responded to the question, saying, "Here am I, send me." To Abraham's account Moses adds these words, "Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever" (Moses 4:2). This response assumes significance only if the Son understood the will of the Father and how the Son's obedience to that divine will would bring the Father glory.

We see then that Jesus' role as the Savior of mankind can properly be understood only in the context of the Father's plan for the salvation of his children. It is of considerable significance that our Heavenly Father did not attempt to raise his children without a plan and that the plan required them to assemble as a family council. Of necessity that plan embraced the following elements:

A Gospel for All Peoples

A Gospel for All Mankind

The gospel and its blessings are intended for all mankind. In the meridian of time Peter declared, "God is no respecter of persons: But in every nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted with him" (Acts 10:34-35; italics added). Reflecting this same principle in our dispensation, Joseph Smith wrote, "We believe that through the Atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel" (A of F 1:3; italics added). The salvation which is gained by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel means an inheritance of eternal life or the obtaining of exaltation. As an illustration, we have a revelation that reads, "If thou wilt do good, yea, and hold out faithful to the end, thou shalt be saved in the kingdom of God, which is the greatest of all the gifts of God; for there is no gift greater than the gift of salvation" (D&C 6:13; italics added). Similarly, Joseph Smith taught that "salvation consists in the glory, authority, majesty, power and dominion which Jehovah possesses and in nothing else." [^1]

The Gospel and Its Blessings Are for All Races

The gospel and its blessings are to go to all races, nations, and lineages before the Second Coming. John foresaw that an angelic ministrant would bring again "the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people" (Revelation 14:6; italics added). Of the gospel restored through Joseph Smith the Lord said: "And this gospel shall be preached unto every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people" (D&C 133:37; italics added).

There are numerous revelations commanding us to preach the gospel to "every creature." (D&C 18:28; 58:64; 80:1; 84:62; 112:28; 124:128.) One of these says, "Go ye into all the world, preach the gospel to every creature," and then with reference to those who believe and obey, says, "to you shall be given power to seal them up unto eternal life" (D&C 68:8-12; italics added). To be sealed up unto eternal life includes the receipt of temple ordinances.

John saw in vision that all of this would take place before the Millennium. He saw those who had been "redeemed... of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation," and wrote that they were the ones who would "reign on the earth" with Christ (Rev. 5:9-10; italics added). "They shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years" (Rev. 20:6). Thus, before the Millennium, we must make converts from every kindred and tongue and people and nation, and they must progress in spiritual things until they receive the Melchizedek Priesthood and the ordinances of the house of the Lord.

The Family of Abraham

All those who receive the gospel become members of the family of Abraham and are entitled to all of the blessings of the gospel. Jehovah told Abraham that his seed would take the gospel and the "Priesthood unto all nations, "and that "as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father." These are adopted into the house of Israel. Jehovah also promised Abraham that when his literal seed took the message of salvation to "all nations" then "shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal." (Abraham 2:9-11; italics added.)

The Promise to Abraham's Seed Reaches Beyond the Veil

"Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob-and their seed-have the natural right (such is the promise given them of God) to the priesthood, the gospel, and a fulness of salvation, which is eternal life! And this includes all of 'the literal seed, or the seed of the body,' whether they lived when the gospel was on the earth or not!" [^2]

The vision of the degrees of glory, like the book of Isaiah, begins by saying: "Hear, O ye heavens, and give ear, O earth" (D&C 76:1; Isa. 1:2). Commenting on such verses, Bruce R. McConkie said: "In other words... the Lord was announcing truth to heaven and to earth because those principles of salvation operate on both sides of the veil; and salvation is administered to an extent here to men, and it is administered to another extent in the spirit world. We correlate and combine our activities and do certain things for the salvation of men while we are in mortality, and then certain things are done for the salvation of men while they are in the spirit world awaiting the day of the resurrection." [^3]

A classic illustration of this principle in our modern day is the revelation received in June 1978, which extended the priesthood and the full blessings of the house of the Lord to those of all races. At the present point in time there may well be appreciably greater numbers of people prepared to receive these blessings on the other side of the veil than there are presently in mortality.

No Unearned Blessings

How the Lord Taught Salvation for the Dead to Joseph Smith

To most clearly understand the principles of salvation for the dead we must learn them as the Lord taught them to the Prophet Joseph Smith. We must lay the right foundation and then carefully build the house of our understanding brick by brick. Joseph Smith learned the gospel from the Book of Mormon. In the process of translating the gold plates, Joseph was required to struggle with the message of the book thought by thought, concept by concept, doctrine by doctrine trine. Thus he studiously and prayerfully worked his way through this ancient record, extracting the message from the writings of his fellow prophets, getting it clearly into his own heart and mind, clothing the message in the English language, and seeking the confirmation of the Spirit that his translation was correct. The process was such that the Prophet was tutored or schooled by the voice of these noble souls of ages past.

From Jacob, Joseph learned that God had commanded "all men that they must repent, and be baptized in his name, having perfect faith in the Holy One of Israel, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God. And if they will not repent and believe in his name, and be baptized in his name, and endure to the end, they must be damned; for the Lord God, the Holy One Of Israel, has spoken it." (2 Ne. 9:23-24.) As Joseph and Oliver Cowdery translated such passages, they recognized this as the voice of the Lord to them. This in turn raised in their minds the question of how they could be baptized and by what authority that ordinance could be performed. As the matter worked itself upon their hearts and minds they interrupted the work of translation to go into the woods, find a secluded spot, and implore the heavens for an answer. [^4]

From Amulek, Joseph Smith learned that his religion was to be "a now or never" or "day of this life" religion. In his great discourse to the Zoramites, Amulek forever set to rest the idea of deathbed repentance and the idea that someone could be prayed out of their judgment at death. "Do not procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end," he declared, "for after this day of life, which is given us to prepare for eternity, behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life, then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed." Amulek then explained the reason why the life of spiritual poverty here cannot be one of spiritual wealth hereafter: the spirit is the same. Those who are without faith here will be without faith there; those without the desire or propensity for righteousness here will be without them there. We go into the world of the spirits as the sum of what we have become here, nothing more and nothing less. (Alma 34:33-34.)

Amulek's testimony is echoed throughout the Book of Mormon. Samuel applied the principle to the wicked and rebellious of his day, saying, "Your days of probation are past; ye have procrastinated the day of your salvation until it is everlastingly too late, and your destruction is made sure" (Hel. 13:38). Christ invited the righteous remnants of the Nephite nation to come unto him and be saved, saying, "For verily I say unto you, that except ye shall keep my commandments, which I have commanded you at this time, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven (3 Ne. 12:20; italics added).

We see, then, that it was absolutely imperative that Joseph Smith learn that the opportunities and responsibilities of this life are paramount in the working out of one's salvation. Never has a doctrine come from the heavens that excuses disobedience or spiritual lethargy in any form. The Prophet had to clearly understand this before the Lord would even hint at the possibility of a doctrine of salvation for the dead.

Joseph Smith's Vision of the Celestial Kingdom

It was almost six years after the organization of the Church, 21 January 1836, that Joseph Smith first learned that those who died without the gospel in this life might receive its blessings in the spirit world. The revelation came while Joseph Smith, his father the patriarch, and leaders of the Church from Ohio and Missouri were involved in administering the anointing with oil and the giving of special blessings to each other. In the midst of this, Joseph said: "The heavens were opened upon us, and I beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof, whether in the body or out I cannot tell. I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of that kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire; Also the blazing throne of God, whereon was seated the Father and the Son. I saw the beautiful streets of that kingdom, which had the appearance of being paved with gold. I saw Father Adam and Abraham; and my father and my mother; my brother Alvin, that has long since slept; And marveled how it was that he had obtained an inheritance in that kingdom, seeing that he had departed this life before the Lord had set his hand to gather Israel the second time, and had not been baptized for the remission of sins." (D&C 137:1-6.)

To have the heavens opened was not a new experience to Joseph. No surprise is manifest at such a happening. Nor was the seeing of the Father and the Son a novel experience, for he had had such experiences before (JS-H 1:17; D&C 76:22-24). To see Adam and Abraham merits no special mention by him. The sight of his father and mother in the heavenly vision also seemed to have been most natural to his understanding. On the other hand, the sight of his older brother Alvin caused him to marvel. Why? Because Alvin died before John the Baptist restored the Aaronic Priesthood and the authority to perform legal and binding baptisms.

From Joseph's response to this vision we know that by 21 January 1836 the idea of teaching the gospel in the spirit world and the performance of vicarious ordinances had not occurred to him. It was at this point that the Lord, building on the theological foundation laid in the "day of this life" doctrine of the Book of Mormon, chose to lift the veil and expand our understanding of the justice of God and the marvels of the plan of salvation. "Thus came the voice of the Lord unto me," Joseph said, "All who have died without a knowledge of this gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; Also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom; For I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts" (D&C 137:7-9).

For the first time in revealed word we have announced to us the standards by which one in the world of the spirits can receive the gospel unto exaltation. The promise is not to all, for in the Vision of the Glories we have already been told that the terrestrial kingdom will have among its number those "who received not the testimony of Jesus in the flesh, but afterwards received it" (D&C 76:74). Or, as Joseph Smith stated in his poetic form of that vision, "They received not the truth of the Saviour at first; But did, when they heard it in prison again." [^5] Those who can accept the gospel in the world of spirits and be exalted must: (1) have died without the opportunity to have accepted it in his life; (2) be judged of God as being of that disposition that had the opportunity to accept the message come to them in earth life, they would have done so; and (3) having accepted it, they would have done so "with all their hearts," meaning they would have endured in faith to the end. The revelation complies fully with the statement of Peter, that those in the spirit world are to be "judged according to men in the flesh" (1 Pet. 4:6). It is a perfect expression of the law of justification or the idea that with the Lord there are no unearned blessings.

Alvin Smith the Perfect Prototype

The truths thus revealed must have been the source of great rejoicing in the Smith family. The passing of Alvin had been a matter of considerable sorrow. Their wounded souls had been cut to the core by the unfeeling and intemperate remarks of the Presbyterian minister who had consigned Alvin to hell at his funeral simply because he had not been baptized or involved in that church. [^6]

Despite his relative youth, Alvin was a man of unusual spiritual propensity. Before his death, he called each of his brothers and sisters in turn to his bedside and gave them a parting admonition. To his eighteen-year-old brother Joseph he said: "Be a good boy, and do everything that lies in your power to obtain the Record [having reference to the Book of Mormon]. Be faithful in receiving instruction, and in keeping every commandment that is given you." [^7] Mother Smith stated that "Alvin manifested, if such could be the case, greater zeal and anxiety in regard to the Record that had been shown to Joseph, than any of the rest of the family; in consequence of which we could not bear to hear anything said upon the subject. Whenever Joseph spoke of the Record, it would immediately bring Alvin to our minds, with all his zeal, and with all his kindness; and, when we looked to his place, and realized that he was gone from it, to return no more in this life, we all with one accord wept over our irretrievable loss, and we could 'not be comforted because he was not.' " [^8]

Nearly twenty years later, Joseph Smith recounted his feelings at the time of Alvin's death, saying: "I remember well the pangs of sorrow that swelled my youthful bosom and almost burst my tender heart when he died. He was the oldest and noblest of my father's family .... He lived without spot from the time he was a child.... He was one of the soberest of men, and when he died the angel of the Lord visited him in his last moments." [^9]

Thus we see Joseph Smith's Vision of the Celestial Kingdom as a most perfect teaching device. Each of the characters seen by the Prophet in the vision are singularly representative: Adam, the father of all, the beginning of the great patriarchal chain; Abraham, the father of the faithful, the great patriarch to whom the promise of an endless seed was given; father Smith and his faithful wife, Lucy Mack, representing the immediate family unit to the mind of Joseph; and his beloved brother Alvin, who had died without the opportunity to embrace the fulness of the gospel and comply with its saving ordinances-these were especially chosen by the providence of heaven to represent visually the principles being taught. From the comments of Joseph and his mother we see Alvin as the perfect illustration of the principles announced in the vision. Though Alvin died without the opportunity to accept the gospel, the works and attitudes of his life were such as to attest that had the opportunity come to him he would have embraced it and would have done so with all his heart.

It ought also to be observed that the vision was not of things as they then were in the celestial realms, but rather a depiction of what they could be. Though seen in the vision, Joseph, Sr., and Lucy were still living. Indeed, Joseph's father was present when the vision was received. Joseph Smith, Sr., lived for another four years. He passed away 14 September 1840, while Joseph's mother, Lucy Mack Smith, lived for another nineteen years, passing away 5 May 1855.

The Heresy of Salvation for the Dead

When Amulek spoke of death as the "night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed" (Alma 34:33), he had reference to those who had full opportunity to accept the gospel in the flesh and did not do so. It is a serious doctrinal error to suppose that those who reject that opportunity in this life because they have no desire to conform to gospel standards may correct the matter in the spirit world. The willfully disobedient will not be cleansed from their sins simply because they have the good fortune to have someone labor in their behalf after they are dead. The book of life from which each man will be judged will be the book he has written on his own soul.

No Blessings Denied the Worthy

The law of justification, which holds on the one hand that there are no unearned blessings, that no one is going to slip into the kingdom of heaven using the back door or on someone else's coattail, also extends in the other direction. The promise is that, from one end of eternity to another, every righteous man or woman who did not receive a certain blessing because of circumstances beyond his or her control will have the opportunity to receive those blessings in the world to come. For instance, those who did not have the opportunity to be baptized, to be endowed, to be married in the temple, to have children, or to receive any other blessing, because of circumstances beyond their control, will have those blessings offered to them. Such is the justice of God, and such is the glory of the gospel. Standing alone, the principle is sufficient to testify of the truthfulness of the restored gospel and witness that Joseph Smith was and is a prophet. The world, for all its wisdom, cannot match such principles.

Conclusion

In the great revelation announcing the opening of this, the last gospel dispensation, it is stated that "the voice of the Lord is unto the ends of the earth, that all that well hear may hear" (D&C 1:11; italics added). Further, the Lord said: "That these things might be known among you, O inhabitants of the earth, I have sent forth mine angel flying through the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel, who hath appeared unto some and hath committed it unto man, who shall appear unto many that dwell on the earth. And this gospel shall be preached unto every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people." (D&C 133:36-37.) And then by way of further amplification the Lord said, "And this shall be the sound of his trump, saying to all people, both in heaven and in earth, and that are under the earth [meaning those in the spirit world]-for every ear shall hear it, and every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall confess, while they hear the sound of the trump, saying: Fear God, and give glory to him who sitteth upon the throne, forever and ever; for the hour of his judgment is come" (D&C 88:104; italics added).

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 158.
[^2] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards & Sons, 1855-86), 1:11.
[^3] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977), pp. 471-72.
[^4] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977), pp. 471-72
[^5] Examples of this principle will be given in chapter 6.
[^6] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977), p. 461.
[^7] Melvin J. Ballard-Crusader for Righteousness (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), p. 217.
[^8] Lucy Smith, History of Joseph Smith by His Mother (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1958), p. 89.
[^9] History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., ed. B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1957), 5:126-27.
