Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Life Beyond ( 1986)

4

The Gospel: Here and Hereafter

For for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit.

-1 1 Pet. 4:6

As gospel principles are everlastingly and eternally the same, so is the manner in which they are taught. As faith comes in this life by hearing the word of God through the spirit of revelation, so it comes in the world hereafter. As God calls prophets here, he calls them there; as he clothes his servants with power and authority here, he likewise clothes them there; as he sends forth missionaries to every nation and kindred on earth, so all within the world of spirits will be granted like opportunity. As the gospel is taught to congregation and individual here, so it is taught in that future world. With the restoration of the gospel to earth has come the knowledge that the gospel is taught beyond the bounds of mortality, the knowledge of how it is taught, and the knowledge of the role the faithful will yet play in teaching it.

Opening the Prison to Them That Are Bound

Having established his Church in the meridian of time, Christ then promised that the "gates of hell" would not prevail against it. He promised Peter the "keys of the kingdom," explaining that these keys contained the authority by which those things bound on earth would also be bound in heaven, and those things loosed on earth would be loosed in heaven. (See Matt. 16:18-19.) The meaning of this promise has remained an enigma to the Christian world, one which becomes clear only through the restoration of those same keys and by the same instruction being given to modern prophets that was conferred upon Peter and the meridian Twelve.

The term keys symbolizes power and authority. Specifically, it signifies the authority and responsibility to preside in the kingdom to which Christ referred, the earthly Church. That kingdom either had just been organized or was about to be. When Christ likened "the kingdom of heaven" to one thing or another in the parables given in Matt. 13, he was essentially saying, "The Church of Jesus Christ is likened to this thing or that." Now, in saying to Peter that he was to be given the "keys of the kingdom," Christ was saying: "You will preside over the Church and all ordinances performed in it. They must be done under your direction and by your permission in order to be of 'efficacy, virtue, or force' in and after men are dead. Thus, that which you approve will be binding in the worlds to come and that which you loose or dissolve will be of no effect in the worlds to come." Describing this same authority as it was restored to Joseph Smith, the Lord said, "Whatsoever you seal on earth shall be sealed in heaven; and whatsoever you bind on earth, in my name and by my word, saith the Lord, it shall be eternally bound in the heavens; and whosesoever sins you remit on earth shall be remitted eternally in the heavens; and whosesoever sins you retain on earth shall be retained in heaven" (D&C 132:46).

Peter, then, was given an authority against which the "gates of hell" could not prevail. Gates are used to keep things in a confined area or to keep other things out. A gate has prevailed when it has accomplished that purpose. Hell, in this instance, has reference to the world of the spirits.

The Savior's promise to Peter included: (1) the announcement47 that he would preside over the Church and kingdom of God on earth; (2) the granting of the responsibility to preside over all the ordinances of salvation-that which he approved on earth being approved in heaven, and that which he nullified on earth being null and void in heaven; and (3) the authority to preside over the Church in the world of the spirits, in which he could open and close the gates of salvation to those in the world of spirits to whom the opportunity to accept or reject the gospel had not come in this life.

Each of these promises was for an authority that Peter would yet receive. Obviously he would not preside over the earthly Church while the Savior was still with them, nor would he preside over its counterpart in the world of the spirits until his earthly ministry was finished and his spirit departed from its tabernacle of clay. Nor would we suppose that Peter fully understood the implications of the Savior's promise when it was first given in Caesarea Philippi. Much instruction and explanation was yet needed. For the most part, that instruction would be given Peter and the Twelve after the Savior's resurrection in what we know as the forty-day ministry.

The keys of which Christ had spoken were conferred upon Peter, James, and John-the First Presidency of the Church-the following week on what is known as the Mount of Transfiguration (see Matt. 17:1-13). [^1]Those same keys were conferred upon the others of the Twelve by Christ on the eve of his resurrection while they were assembled in the upper room (see John 20:22-23.) Thus, the Twelve now held those keys containing the authority to prevail or preside even over the "gates of hell." The stage was now set to teach them the nature of missionary work in the spirit world and the necessity of vicarious ordinances being performed on earth for those who accepted the gospel in the world of the spirits.

The Testimony of Bible Prophets

The Bible does not detail the manner in which the gospel is to be preached in the spirit world. This is not a doctrine known to the world. As noted in the second chapter, the idea that there is an intermediate state-a place in which departed spirits await the time of resurrection and the day of judgment-is not a part of traditional Christian theology. Yet scattered throughout the Bible are sufficient references to the nature of these events that the informed reader need have no doubt that they were known to and understood by the ancient prophets.

In a great messianic prophecy, Isaiah announced that Christ would "proclaim liberty to the captives," and that he would open "the prison to them that are bound" (Isa. 61:1). In his mortal ministry, Christ said: "The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live. For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself; And hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man. Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation." (John 5:25-29.) Peter taught that after Christ had been "put to death in the flesh" he would be "quickened by the Spirit" and would preach "unto the spirits in prison," among them those who "were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah." Thus they would be granted the opportunity to hear the word of God preached in the spirit world. (JST 1 Pet. 3:18-20.)

Organizing a Mission in the Spirit World

Without question, the greatest revelation on the nature of missionary work in the spirit world is Joseph F. Smith's Vision of the Redemption of the Dead, now found in D&C 138 of the Doctrine and Covenants. From this revelation we learn that while his body lay in the borrowed tomb of Joseph of Arimathea, Christ, "quickened by the Spirit," joined a great assembly of faithful Saints in the paradise of God. Apparently they were assembled in a conference of the Church, a meeting patterned after the great conference that Adam held with the righteous residue of his posterity in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman. There Adam presided until Christ appeared to instruct and bless them. (See D&C 107: 53-55.)

Among the unnumbered host in this great conference in the spirit world surrounding Adam and his faithful wife, Eve, were Abel, Seth, Noah, Shem, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Elijah, and Malachi from the old world, with Lehi, Nephi, Jacob, and a host of prophets and righteous souls from among the Nephites. All thus assembled had departed mortal life firm in the faith. Each had worshiped the Father in the name of the Son. Each had participated in the offering of sacrifices in similitude of the atoning sacrifice of Christ. Though they had been persecuted for their faith, they esteemed it an honor "to suffer tribulation in their Redeemer's name." The spirit of the meeting was one of rejoicing and gladness as they awaited the arrival of the Savior and anticipated the resurrection and glories that would be theirs.

Thus we read: "While this vast multitude waited and conversed, rejoicing in the hour of their deliverance from the chains of death, the Son of God appeared, declaring liberty to the captives who had been faithful; and there he preached to them the everlasting gospel, the doctrine of the resurrection and the redemption of mankind from the fall, and from individual sins on conditions of repentance. But unto the wicked he did not go, and among the ungodly and the unrepentant who had defiled themselves while in the flesh, his voice was not raised; neither did the rebellious who rejected the testimonies and the warnings of the ancient prophets behold his presence, nor look upon his face. Where these were, darkness reigned, but among the righteous there was peace; and the saints rejoiced in their redemption, and bowed the knee and acknowledged the Son of God as their Redeemer and Deliverer from death and the chains of hell." (D&C 138:18-23.)

Having taught a matchless discourse on gospel essentials, having testified anew to the prophets of old on such matters as the Fall, the Atonement, and the Resurrection, Christ then turned his attention to organizational matters. As noted above, among the wicked and disobedient he would not go in person. It is not the right of such to stand in the presence of the Lord (D&C 138:37). Had the wicked joined the assembly of the righteous, receiving the full benefits therefrom, it could hardly be said of them that they had been judged according to men in the flesh. Rather, our Master and Savior called from among the assembly of the righteous certain of their number to serve as missionaries. These were to take the glorious message of the gospel to those who had died in their sins and those who had died in ignorance of that message. Our key passage states it thus: "But behold, from among the righteous, he organized his forces and appointed messengers, clothed with power and authority, and commissioned them to go forth and carry the light of the gospel to them that were in darkness, even to all the spirits of men; and thus was the gospel preached to the dead" (D&C 138:30; italics added).

The matter is most enlightening. Here assembled are the great and noble from Adam, who was and is Michael the archangel, to John the Baptist, of whom the Savior said there had not been a greater prophet born of woman. Since the councils of heaven, such a body of valiant teachers had not sat together. And yet of their number not a single soul had supposed the right was his to preach the gospel to those in darkness without the commission of the Lord. They did not want for the knowledge of the gospel, nor did they lack the faith to teach it, but to assume the prerogative to teach without the proper commission was something they would not do. As the house of the Lord is one of discipline and order in this life, so it is on the other side of the veil. As none are to go forth to preach the gospel or build up the Church here without authorization (D&C 42:11), so they are not to do so there.

Again, in all that comes from God there is a sense of discipline and order. As to the teaching of the gospel, there is a divine timetable; all are to hear it, but each in order, each in his appointed time. This is why baptism and other temple ordinances were not performed vicariously during Old Testament times. Not until Christ had organized his missionary forces in the world of the spirits do we find references to the Saints practicing the ordinance of baptism for the dead (1 Cor. 15:29).

Joseph Smith Now Presides in the Spirit World

"As in earth, so in the spirit world," said Parley P. Pratt. "No person can enter into the privileges of the Gospel, until the keys are turned, and the Gospel opened by those in authority, for all which there is a time, according to the wise dispensations of justice and mercy." [^2] The Lord taught this principle to Joseph Smith in this language: "Everything that is in the world, whether it be ordained of men, by thrones, or principalities, or powers, or things of name, whatsoever they may be, that are not by me or by my word, saith the Lord, shall be thrown down, and shall not remain after men are dead, neither in nor after the resurrection, saith the Lord your God. For whatsoever things remain are by me; and whatsoever things are not by me shall be shaken and destroyed." (D&C 132:13-14.)

For the gospel to continue in the spirit world the priesthood must continue in the spirit world. For those holding the priesthood to have the right to function in their priesthood the keys of the priesthood must be present also to direct their labors. Our revelations assure us that this is the case. To Joseph Smith the Lord said, "Verily I say unto you, the keys of this kingdom shall never be taken from you, while thou art in the world, neither in the world to come; nevertheless, through you shall the oracles be given to another, yea, even unto the church" (D&C 90:3-4). Thus, Joseph could confer his keys upon the Twelve so that their powers would not be lost to us when he died, and at the same time he would carry those keys with him to preside over a great gospel dispensation in the spirit world.

Recounting his Vision of the Redemption of the Dead, Joseph F. Smith said:

I beheld that the faithful eiders of this dispensation, when they depart from mortal life, continue their labors in the preaching of the gospel of repentance and redemption, through the sacrifice of the Only Begotten Son of God, among those who are in darkness and under the bondage of sin in the great world of the spirits of the dead.

The dead who repent will be redeemed, through obedience to the ordinances of the house of God,

And after they have paid the penalty of their transgressions, and are washed clean, shall receive a reward according to their works, for they are heirs of salvation. (D&C 138: 57-59.)

President Joseph F. Smith also testified that the teaching of the gospel in the spirit world to those of our dispensation has begun under the direction of Joseph Smith. All the faithful prophets and Apostles of our dispensation are sustaining him in that labor. "They are there," he said, "having carried with them from here the holy Priesthood that they received under authority, and which was conferred upon them in the flesh; they are preaching the gospel to the spirits in prison; for Christ, when his body lay in the tomb, went to proclaim liberty to the captives and opened the prison doors to them that were bound." Then President Smith added, "Not only are these engaged in that work but hundreds and thousands of Others," having reference to all the faithful elders of this dispensation. [^3]

Nature of the Gospel Taught to the Spirits

Having established that organization and order are as much a part of the gospel plan in the world of the spirits as they are in mortality, let us now turn our attention to the message that the missionaries in the world of spirits were commissioned to declare to those spirits under the bondage of sin and ignorance. "These were taught," we are told, "faith in God, repentance from sin, vicarious baptism for the remission of sins, the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, And all other principles of the gospel that were necessary for them to know in order to qualify themselves that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit" (D&C 138:33-34). We see, then, that every principle of the gospel has retained its weight and measure in the world of the spirits. All are to be taught as they were on the earth and all principles are to be accepted and lived as they were on the earth. Spirits are to be judged according to men in the flesh, and if the judgment be the same, the principles must of necessity be the same. [^4]

How the Gospel Is Taught in the Spirit World

Legal Administrators

As we have heaven-sent standards by which the gospel is to be preached among men on earth, so those standards apply to the teaching of the gospel in the world of the spirits. As we have seen, the gospel must be taught by legal administrators. Prophets of God would not think to arrogate to themselves the right to teach without a divine sanction. Though knowledge, love, sincerity, and zeal are all to be commended, none of these constitute a divine commission. The priesthood is as necessary for the teaching of the gospel in the spirit world as it is in this life. Further, the priesthood does not function independently. The Lord's house is a house of order and his priesthood is a priesthood of order. That authority which disciplines or directs the priesthood is known as the keys or the keys of the kingdom. All that is to be binding in the world to come must be done by or under the direction of the priesthood, and all that the priesthood does must be done under the direction of those holding the keys or right of presidency.

We Will Teach Our Progenitors

Of necessity the gospel must be both taught and learned by the spirit of revelation, for "if it be by some other way it is not of God" (D&C 50:17-20). The revelations also state that the truth of all things is to be established in the mouth of two or more witnesses (see D&C 6:28), and that missionaries are to go out "two by two" (D&C 42:6). The order of the kingdom in this life is that the primary responsibility for the teaching of the gospel belongs with the family. This complies perfectly with the law of witnesses. Children ought to have the opportunity to hear the gospel taught by a faithful father and the same principles taught again by a faithful mother. They also ought to see the application of those principles in the life of their father and repeated again in the life of their mother. This would be the perfect illustration of the law of witnesses, a mother and father who teach correct principles and a mother and father who set the proper example. These principles do not vary in the world of the spirits. As the primary responsibility for the teaching of the gospel rests with the family here, so it rests with the family there, the difference being that in the world of the spirits there is a greatly extended family. In large measure it will be the responsibility of husband and wife to search out their own progenitors and teach them the gospel. As the primary responsibility for ordinance work rests with the family here, so it will be with the teaching of the gospel there. [^5]

The Sisters Will Teach the Sisters

As the institution of the Church aids the family in the teaching of the gospel here, so it will in the world of spirits. As missions are organized here, so they will be there; as we hold group meetings and conferences here, so they will be held in the world of the spirits. Illustrating this principle, President Joseph F. Smith asked: "Who is going to preach the gospel to the women? Who is going to carry the testimony of Jesus Christ to the hearts of the women who have passed away without a knowledge of the gospel?" In response he said it was a simple and obvious thing: women of faith and testimony here who had developed the ability to teach their fellow sisters would be called upon to do so there. Things here are typical of things there, he taught. [^6]

All Must Accept the Prophets of Their Own Dispensation

To obtain salvation in this life men must accept the prophets the Lord has called and commissioned to declare the gospel to their own generation. There is no salvation for a man living today who rejects the testimony of Joseph Smith while professing loyalty to Peter, James, and John. No one can profess faith in Joseph Smith and reject the living President of the Church or the other officers and leaders the Lord has chosen to represent him. So it is in the world of the spirits. Those who have lived in our day and died without hearing the gospel will not be taught by Peter or Paul or by Moses or Abraham. They too must accept the gospel at the hands of those commissioned to teach it to their age and generation. Melvin J. Ballard stated the principle thus: "This generation shall receive the Gospel at the hands of those who have been honored with the priesthood of this dispensation. Living or dead, they shall not hear it from anyone else." [^7]

Teaching Those of Our Own Nation and Tongue

The heavens have decreed that "every man shall hear the fulness of the gospel in his own tongue, and in his own language, through those who are ordained unto this power" (D&C 90:11). We have every reason to suppose that such decrees transcend the veil of death. Those in that world will also be taught by those of their same nation and tongue. A manifestation given to Oscar W. McConkie while he was serving as president of the California Mission sustains such a conclusion.

A Cochapa Indian by the name of Mark Johnson Vest was baptized in President McConkie's mission, which at that time included parts of Arizona. Mark Vest was a giant of a man with a spirit to match. He stood six feet five inches tall and weighed over three hundred pounds. By birth he would have been the chief of his tribe had his people been following the traditions of their fathers. After he had been in the Church a short time he was called to be the branch president over a small Indian branch. Within six months he had increased the branch to seventy-five members. Brother Vest became ill and in the course of his illness lost over a hundred pounds. Both President McConkie and Elder Harold B. Lee administered to him but without lasting effect. Despite his illness, Mark Vest continued in his work with his people until his death a short time later.

When President McConkie received word that Mark had died he immediately boarded a train for Arizona to attend the funeral. All night long as he traveled, he prayed to know why the Lord had allowed this great missionary to be taken. As he prayed, a vision was opened to him of the spirit world. He saw Mark Johnson Vest standing in front of a large group of Lamanites, which he estimated to be twenty to thirty thousand. As he did so, one of the Indians in the middle of the group stood up and said: "Do not listen to this man! He is not a Lamanite. He is a Nephite!" President McConkie saw Mark Vest rise to the full stature of his height and say: "I am not a Nephite! I am a Lamanite, and when I died I was cremated according to the custom of my people." At this point the vision closed up.

Upon his arrival in Mesa, and as he drove to the chapel where the funeral was to be held, President McConkie was advised of a conflict between Mark Vest's tribe and the tribe from which his wife came. Mark's family wanted him buried in a cemetery while his wife's people wanted to cremate his body according to their traditions. The matter had become so heated that Mark's wife's tribe had threatened to dig up his body and take it if their demands were not met. When they arrived at the chapel President McConkie learned that he was to be the speaker. In his sermon, he was able to resolve the difficulty, explaining the importance of Mark complying even in death with the customs of those among whom he had now been called to labor.

Conclusion

Peter's simple statement that those in the spirit world are to "be judged according to men in the flesh" speaks volumes. If judgment is the same and, as we have learned from the Vision of the Redemption of the Dead, the gospel is the same; and if the source of the gospel is the same, that is, revelation; and if the authority by which it is preached is the same; and if all men are to be taught by the prophets and missionaries of their own dispensation; and if we know that the nature or disposition of men does not change-would we not reason that the degree of ease or difficulty associated with accepting the gospel will be the same also? Surely the justice of God demands it! We could not suppose that those who did not have the opportunity to hear the gospel in this life-who would have accepted it had that chance come to them-will find themselves in a situation that would make it infinitely more difficult in the spirit world. Nor could justice be found in a system demanding of some that they accept the gospel on earth in the most trying of circumstances-being called upon to lay their all upon the altar-while others of their brothers and sisters, having no such challenges in mortality, are granted the gospel in the spirit world in some sort of a blissful paradise where the veil has been lifted and they walk by sight, having no need for faith.

Scripture and reason bring us to the same conclusion-if God is no respecter of persons, then all will be called upon to accept or reject the gospel and work out their salvation in circumstances that the wisdom of heaven holds as equal. None of Adam's family were to be born in the Garden of Eden in a paradisiacal state. All that know accountability were also to know life in the lone and dreary world. All such were to be tried and tested-if not here, then hereafter-all are agents unto themselves and must make a choice for the kingdom of God or against it, and all are to be judged according to men in the flesh-for there is but one gospel, one plan of salvation, one path that leads to eternal life, and one standard of judgment.59

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1973), 3:533.
[^2] Wilford Woodruff, Deseret Weekly News, 53:642-43.
[^3] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards & Sons, 1855-86), 1:10-11.
[^4] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards & Sons, 1855-86), 1:11.
[^5] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards & Sons, 1855-86), 1:12.
[^6] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards & Sons, 1855-86), 1:12
[^7] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards & Sons, 1855-86), 1:14.
