Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Life Beyond ( 1986)

5

Spirits: Their Knowledge and Power

If a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come.

-D&C 130:19

Does death bring a restoration of pre-earth knowledge as many Latter-day Saints have supposed? Is there a need for faith in the spirit world? What are the desires and interests of spirits? Could a spirit apostatize from his station in paradise? Do spirits hear the gospel as soon as they arrive in the world of the spirits or are there great periods of waiting? Would all spirits tell us the same thing were we to communicate with them? What help could spirits give were they allowed to return? Do spirits learn more quickly than mortals or do they learn with greater difficulty? What is it that gives spirits a compelling interest in those of us in mortality? Let us turn to scriptures and prophets in answering such questions.

Death: Reward or Punishment?

Death Is a Judgment

In death the body and spirit are separated for a time; the body is consigned to an earthly grave and returns for a season to the dust from which it was made. The grave lays claim to all that is mortal-every honor, power, glory, or wealth that earth bestows, earth reclaims. Life's blessings and cursings are no more. Disease, bodily pain, poverty, and hunger are but memories. And what of the spirit? What can it take with it in its journey to the world of spirits, in which it will await the resurrection and the great day of judgment? "And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and their works do follow them" (Rev. 14:13). "And it shall come to pass that those that die in me shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them" (D&C 42:46). "And then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness, which is called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow" (Alma 40:12). The spirits of the wicked, however, will reap as they have sown, for "they chose evil works rather than good" (Alma 40:13), and such are the works that will follow them.

It cannot be stated more plainly. It will be the seeds of obedience planted and nurtured in the soil of mortality that produce the delicious fruits upon which one feasts in the paradise of God. "It is not the grace of God standing alone; it is not confessing the Lord Jesus with our lips and stopping there; it is not mere belief; it is not church membership as such; it is not a position of prominence or dignity in the Church; it is not any one or all of the thousand winds of doctrine that blow through the sectarian world. It is plain, simple obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel." [^1]Death, which must come to all men, brings with it an inheritance in paradise or the consignment to hell. It is a judgment. "And unto every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there are certain bounds also and conditions. All beings who abide not in those conditions are not justified [that is, they cannot inherit that kingdom, they cannot enjoy that glory]. For intelligence [which is 'light and truth' (D&C 93:36)] cleaveth unto intelligence; wisdom receiveth wisdom; truth embraceth truth; virtue loveth virtue; light cleaveth unto light; mercy hath compassion on mercy and claimeth her own; justice continueth its course and claimeth its own; judgment goeth before the face of him who sitteth upon the throne and governeth and executeth all things." (D&C 88:38-40.) Yes, death is a judgment, for those who sought light will be united with children of light; those who knew nought but darkness will inherit the same. "Thus did I, the Lord God, appoint unto man the days of his probation -that by his natural death he might be raised in immortality unto eternal life, even as many as would believe; and they that believe not unto eternal damnation; for they cannot be redeemed from their spiritual fall, because they repent not; for they love darkness rather than light, and their deeds are evil, and they receive their wages of whom they list to obey" (D&C 29:43-45). Truly our works follow us.

There Is No Apostasy from Paradise

The time of testing and trial is not without its limits and bounds; the day of probation must end. The pre-earth life was a time of schooling, of trials, and of tests. Its inhabitants had agency, and were required to "choose good or evil." Those choosing good found it necessary to exercise "exceedingly great faith" to survive the challenges of that existence. (Alma 13:3-4.) It was a probationary estate, one in which "a third part of the hosts of heaven" were cast out and became perdition, or hopelessly lost. These will not be born into mortality, will never clothe their spirits in bodies, will never obtain any degree of glory.

Those who kept their first estate will be born into mortality, where trials and tests will continue. Of their number, those who have the privilege of accepting the gospel, and who do so-honoring their covenants and enduring in faith-will at death be escorted into the paradise of God, the day of their probation being complete. None such can fall, none such can lose the sure promises of eternal life which are now theirs, the day of their probation being past. They departed "mortal life, firm in the hope of a glorious resurrection, through the grace of God the Father and his Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ" (D&C 138:14). Abraham taught these principles in this language: "And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon' and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever" (Abr. 3:26).

The Knowledge and Power of Those in Paradise

No Restoration of Pre-earth Knowledge

There are those who suppose that death brings with it a restoration of pre-earth knowledge. The scriptures do not sustain such an idea. Were this the case, those in the spirit world who had not heard the gospel could hardly be judged according to men in the flesh, as revelation ancient and modern asserts (see 1 Pet. 4:6; D&C 138:10). Such faith would be supplanted by knowledge. Yet, without faith it is impossible to please God (see Heb. 11:6). The fruits of the tree of knowledge must be plucked individually; they do not just fall into our baskets. "For behold, thus saith the Lord God: I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; and blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more; and from them that shall say, We have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have" (2 Ne. 28:30).

God does not give us that for which we are not prepared. None have taught the principle more plainly than Alma, who said, "It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God; nevertheless they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him." We have every reason to suppose that this principle is as operative in the spirit world as it is in mortality. "And therefore, he that will harden his heart, the same receiveth the lesser portion of the word; and he that will not harden his heart, to him is given the greater portion of the word, until it is given unto him to know the mysteries of God until he know them in full." Surely that God who would not cast "pearls before swine" in this life will not do so in the world to come. "And they that will harden their hearts," Alma concluded, "to them is given the lesser portion of the word until they know nothing concerning his mysteries; and then they are taken captive by the devil, and led by his will down to destruction. Now this is what is meant by the chains of hell." (Alma 12:9-11; italics added.) By definition, hell is to be without the light of the gospel.

It is the faithful who have been promised that they will receive "line upon line, precept upon precept" until they in "due time" receive a fulness of the Father (D&C 98:12; 93:19). The promise is to none else: they who receive the light, and continue in that light, "receiveth more light: and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day" (D&C 50:24).

Service Brings Salvation

Among the marvelous revelations restored to our dispensation is a fragment of a Gospel apparently written by John the Baptist. From John's writing we learn that Christ did not obtain a fulness of the glory of the Father at first, but did so by advancing from grace to grace. We are then told that this knowledge has been restored to us that we might know what and how to worship. (See D&C 93:11-19.) That is, we worship by imitating or emulating Christ, who was fully obedient to the will of his Father and who refined his soul, advancing from one grace to a greater grace through service to his fellow beings. Nothing is more exalting to the soul than selfless service. The genius of the Lord's kingdom is that all are called upon to serve-and the more faithful the service, the more godlike the servant becomes. Again, such is the system on earth and such is the system in the world of spirits where "just men" are "made perfect."

As to that world, we do not speak of such things as harps, and clouds, and angels with wings. We speak of servants of God, each faithfully laboring according to assignment, each standing in his own office, laboring in his own calling. Though the paradise of God is a place of rest from the cares and sorrows of life, it is not a place of idleness; it is the spirit's Sabbath, a time and season free from the mundane in which full attention can be given to the things of most worth. Wilford Woodruff illustrated that idea thus:

Joseph Smith continued visiting myself and others up to a certain time, and then it stopped. The last time I saw him was in heaven. In the night vision I saw him at the door of the temple in heaven. He came to me and spoke to me. He said he could not stop to talk with me because he was in a hurry. The next man I met was Father Smith; he could not talk with me because he was in a hurry. I met half a dozen brethren who had held high positions on earth, and none of them could stop to talk with me because they were in a hurry. I was much astonished. By and by I saw the Prophet again and I got the privilege of asking him a question.

"Now," said I, "I want to know why you are in a hurry. I have been in a hurry all my life; but I expected my hurry would be over when I got into the kingdom of heaven, if I ever did."

Joseph said: "I will tell you, Brother Woodruff. Every dispensation that has had the priesthood on the earth and has gone into the celestial kingdom has had a certain amount of work to do to prepare to go to the earth with the Savior when he goes to reign on the earth. Each dispensation has had ample time to do this work. We have not. We are the last dispensation, and so much work has to be done, and we need to be in a hurry in order to accomplish it." Of course, that was satisfactory, but it was new doctrine to me. [^2]

How perfect the system! In the spirit world all faithful Saints are called to the full-time service of the Lord, all assume positions of responsibility and leadership, and all receive the blessings attending such service. Our departed dead but serve in another field of labor, one in which their talents and their opportunities to build up the kingdom of God and to establish his righteousness are multiplied a hundredfold.

Where Darkness Reigns

When Spirits Hear the Gospel

Do all the people who die without the gospel have the opportunity to receive it as soon as they arrive in the spirit world? If we reason from what we know of things in this world, the answer to our question is no. God has offered the gospel with its priesthood, powers, and blessings at various times to the peoples of the earth only to have it rejected. The consequence has been that generations of men have lived and died in ignorance of its principles. Surely there have been but few of earth's inhabitants who have actively sought after the saving truths of the gospel. Men, it appears, prefer religions of their own making and governments and laws of their own design.

"I have not the least doubt but there are spirits there who have dwelt there a thousand years," ventured Parley P. Pratt, "who, if we could converse with them face to face, would be found as ignorant of the truths, the ordinances, powers, keys, Priesthood, resurrection, eternal life of the body, in short, as ignorant of the fulness of the Gospel, with its hopes and consolations," as the religious and political leaders of our day. And why such ignorance among departed spirits? "Because a portion of the inhabitants there are found unworthy of the consolations of the Gospel, until the fulness of time, until they have suffered in hell, in the dungeons of darkness, or the prisons of the condemned, amid the buffetings of fiends, and malicious and lying spirits." [^3]

How long must such spirits wait? "You may reckon for yourselves," Elder Pratt said. "The long ages, centuries, thousands of years which intervened between the flood of Noah and the death of Christ. Oh! the weariness, the tardy movement of time, the lingering ages for a people to dwell in condemnation, darkness, ignorance, and despondency, as a punishment for their sins. For they had been filled with violence while on the earth in the flesh, and had rejected the preaching of Noah, and the Prophets which were before him." [^4]

From Noah to Christ, some twenty-four hundred years, those destroyed in the flood were left to linger without hope, without exposure to the gospel message in the spirit world. A similar period has passed from the time of the meridian apostasy to the latter-day restoration, in which the great majority of those in the flesh did not hear the gospel. Thus, on both sides of the veil there have been long nights of darkness, nights without even the hope of a dawn.

Ignorant Spirits Cannot Reveal Truth

You cannot teach what you do not know; it is not for darkness to give instruction to light. Were we to converse with the spirits consigned to hell, spirits who knew not the gospel in this life and are as yet to be taught in the spirit world, the spirits of thieves, adulterers, whoremongers, and liars, they could teach us nothing of saving truths. Indeed, we and our fellow Saints may yet be called to minister among them, and when that day comes we will be sent forth to teach and not to be taught (see D&C 43:15). Even among the more refined of the Citizenry of this place commonly called the spirit prison there will be found no enlightenment for the Saints. Parley P. Pratt aptly describes their situation thus:

Take another class of spirits-pious, well-disposed men; for instance, the honest Quaker, Presbyterian, or other sectarian, who, although honest, and well disposed, had not, while in the flesh, the privilege of the Priesthood and Gospel. They believed in Jesus Christ, but died in ignorance of his ordinances, and had not clear conceptions of his doctrine, and of the resurrection. They expected to go to that place called heaven, as soon as they were dead, and that their doom would then and there Be fixed, without any further alteration or preparation.

Suppose they should come Back, with liberty to tell all they know? How much light could we get from them? They could only tell you about the nature of things in the world in which they live. And even that world you could not comprehend, By their description thereof, any more than you can describe colours to a man Born Blind, or sounds to those who have never heard.

What, then, could you get from them? Why, common chit chat, in which there would be a mixture of truth, and of error anti mistakes, in mingled confusion: all their communications would Betray the same want of clear and logical conceptions, and sound sense and philosophy, as would characterize the same class of spirits in the flesh. [^5]

Who Can Be Ministering Spirits?

Who then among the spirits in the spirit world are able to Be ministering spirits? Who can come to guide and advise, to confer consolation, to administer to the sick, carry messages of joy and gladness, or, as necessary, warn and protect? "All that have been raised from the dead, and clothed with immortality, all that have ascended to yonder heavens, and Been crowned as Kings and Priests, all such are our fellow servants, and of our brethren the Prophets, who have the testimony of Jesus; all such are waiting for the work of God among their posterity on the earth." [^6] Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are the illustrations, for of them we read, "They have entered into their exaltation, according to the promises, and sit upon thrones, and are not angels but are gods" (D&C 132:37). "Yea, and Enoch also, and they who were with him; the prophets who were Before him; and Noah also, and they who were before him; and Moses also, and they who were Before him; and from Moses to Elijah, and from Elijah to John, who were with Christ in his resurrection" (D&C 133:54-55).

Who else can serve as ministering servants? Any who departed this world and went thereafter not to that place of sorrow and darkness, But to the paradise of God, to that place of righteousness, peace, light, and truth. These-persons referred to in scripture as "just men made perfect" (D&C 129:3), as well as translated beings such as John the Revelator, the Three Nephites, or other holy beings of whom we know not (D&C 49:8)-minister to those of us still in the flesh.

The Time Necessary to Learn in the Spirit World

Is it easier or more difficult to learn in the world of the spirits? Again we return to the touchstone given us by Peter -spirits are to be judged according to men in the flesh. If learning were easier and repentance quicker in the spirit world, then there would be little meaning in the declaration of the Lord that "If a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come" (D&C 130:19). Might we not say that those who have trained their eyes to see and their ears to hear will see and hear with far greater facility, while those who have not done so must then learn to do so with painstaking effort?

Why the Dead Have Such Interest in the Living

What is there about mortality that would be of interest to those in the spirit world? When they look upon this life, where are their eyes turned? We answer: to the Latter-day Saints. And why? Because it is among this people and this people alone that the keys, authority, and ordinances are found by which the dead can be redeemed. We ask, are any other people building holy sanctuaries for the conversations and ministrations pertaining to the salvation of the dead? "No, verily. No other people have opened their hearts to conceive ideas so grand. No other people have their sympathies drawn out to such an extent toward the fathers.... It is here that the countless millions of the spirit world would look for the ordinances of redemption, so far as they have been enlightened by the preaching of the Gospel, since the keys of the former dispensations were taken away from the earth." [^7]

Conclusion

Four hundred years Before the Birth of Christ, Malachi, the last of the Old Testament prophets, penned words that would seal the Old Testament with a spirit of faith and hope. His was the promise of the return of Elijah and the sealing powers By which the family chain is linked throughout all the generations of time and throughout all eternity. Truly he promised that the hearts of the fathers, those who have gone on, would turn to their children in the flesh and that there would be a link or Bond Between the two, each laboring to bless the other. We do not walk alone, for we have righteous fathers who Both know and Bless us.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977), pp. 435-37.
[^2] Joseph Fielding McConkie, His Name Shall Be Joseph (Salt Lake City: Hawkes Publishing Co., 1980), p. 213.
[^3] This interpretation of the "keys of the ministering of angels" was given by President Gordon B. Hinckley to the priesthood of the Church, from the Tabernacle on Temple Square, 19 May 1985.
[^4] Charles W. Penrose, Masterpieces of Latter-day Saint Leaders (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1953), pp. 66-67.
[^5] Deseret Weekly News, 53:642-43.
[^6] The Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969), pp. 298-300.
[^7] History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., ed. B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1957), 2:381.
