Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Life Beyond ( 1986)

6

Angels: Our Companions

Have angels ceased to appear unto the children of men? Or has be withheld the power of the Holy Ghost from them? Or will he, so long as time shall last, or the earth shall stand, or there shall be one man upon the face thereof to be saved? Behold I say unto you, Nay; for it is by faith that miracles are wrought; and it is by faith that angels appear and minister unto men; wherefore, if these things have ceased wo be unto the children of men, for it is because of unbelief, and all is vain.

-Moroni 7:36

There never has been a gospel dispensation without the ministering of angels. A people who cannot claim the ministering of angels cannot claim an everlasting gospel. Without the ministering of angels we could make no pretense to priesthood, its keys, power, or authority. Without the ministering of angels we would be without the sealing power by which families and generations are bound together and by which all are bound to the heavens. Without the ministering of angels and other forms of revelation, our theology would be like a body without a spirit.

Messengers of Salvation

"And thus the Gospel began to be preached, from the beginning, being declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost" (Moses 5:58). Such is Moses' summary of the manner in which the gospel of Christ has been taught from the days of Adam. Moses himself having been "ordained by the hand of angels" (JST Gal. 3:19), and having been instructed by them in the law that he gave Israel (see Acts 7:53), knew whereof he spoke. Similarly, Moroni declared, "For behold, God knowing all things, being from everlasting to everlasting, behold, he sent angels to minister unto the children of men, to make manifest concerning the coming of Christ; and in Christ there should come every good thing" (Moro. 7:22).

From earth's beginning, angels had heralded the day of Christ's birth, as did the angelic host on that Christmas eve to chosen shepherds of Bethlehem (see Luke 2:9-14). For the time of his coming was to be "made known unto just and holy men, by the mouth of angels," the world over (Alma 13:26). Nor were these "glad tidings" and this "joyful news" for prophets and righteous men alone. Alma testified: "He imparteth his word by angels unto men, yea, not only men but women also. Now this is not all; little children do have words given unto them many times, which confound the wise and the learned." (Alma 32:23.)

Nowhere do we see the relationship between angels and mortals more perfectly manifest than in the ministry of the Savior. In a beautiful messianic psalm David wrote: "For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone." (Ps. 91:11-12.) Angels were his companions from the preparation for his ministry when they "ministered unto him" (Mark 1:13) to the agony of Gethsemane where the angel strengthened him (see Luke 22:43). Angels tended his empty tomb and testified of his resurrection (see Luke 24:4-5), as legions of men and women came forth from the grave with him and went into the "holy city, and appeared unto many" (Matt. 27:53). In the Americas a similar event took place in fulfillment of the prophecy of Samuel (see Hel. 14:23-25; 3 Ne. 23:9-11). Such was the pattern of Christ's day and such of necessity must be the pattern for our day.

Angels: Who Are They?

Since angels have come from the days of Adam to testify of Christ, teach his gospel, prophesy in his name, and otherwise labor as the Lord's messengers, might we in propriety ask who they are? Are they to be faceless and nameless? Is it a requirement of their ministry that they be strangers to us or is it appropriate that we know them? From whence do they come and what is their nature?

By revelation Joseph Smith learned that "there are no angels who minister to this earth but those who do belong or have belonged to it" (D&C 130:5). Thus, Joseph F. Smith observed that

when messengers are sent to minister to the inhabitants of this earth, they are not strangers, but from the ranks of our kindred, friends, and fellow-beings and fellow-servants. The ancient prophets who died were those who came to visit their fellow creatures upon the earth. They came to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; it was such beings-holy beings if you please-who waited upon the Savior and administered to him on the Mount. The angel that visited John, when an exile, and unfolded to his vision future events in the history of man upon the earth, was one who had been here, who had toiled and suffered in common with the people of God; for you remember that John, after his eyes had beheld the glories of the great future, was about to fall down and worship him, but was peremptorily forbidden to do so. "See thou do it not; for I am thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren the prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this book...."

In like manner our fathers and mothers, brothers, sisters and friends who have passed away from this earth, having been faithful, and worthy to enjoy these rights and privileges, may have a mission given them to visit their relatives and friends upon the earth again, bring from the divine Presence messages of love, of warning, or reproof and instruction, to those whom they had learned to love in the flesh....

Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Jedediah M. Grant, David Patten, Joseph Smith, Sen., and all those noble men who took an active part in the establishment of this work, and who died true and faithful to their trust, have the right and privilege, and possess the keys and power, to minister to the people of God in the flesh who live now, as much so and on the same principle as the ancient servants of God had the right to return to the earth and minister to the Saints of God in their day. [^1]

It seems reasonable to suppose that no previous dispensation will match our dispensation, the dispensation of the fulness of times, in the number or diversity of angelic visitors. First, it is our privilege to have all the keys, powers, and authorities of past dispensations restored to us. Among those who came to the Prophet Joseph Smith for this purpose were Adam or Michael, the archangel; Raphael, who may also be Enoch; Noah, or Gabriel; an Elias from Abraham's dispensation, possibly Melchizedek or maybe Abraham himself; Moses; Elijah; John the Baptist; and Peter, James, and John. Each of these came to bring the powers and authority peculiar to his own office and calling and the dispensation of which he was a part. From among the Book of Mormon peoples we have record that Joseph Smith was visited by Nephi, Mormon, the Three Nephites, and of course on many occasions by Moroni. We are told that many other angels came, and we understand their number to have included such notables as Seth, Jacob, and Paul. [^2]

The appearance of angelic ministrants was so common to this period of the Church's history that the Prophet saw fit to include a revelation in the Doctrine and Covenants giving the manner in which counterfeit angels are detected. The revelation notes that messengers of God might be either resurrected beings or "just men made perfect," that is, messengers from the spirit world who will be numbered among the glorified in the day of their resurrection. Therefore, we are instructed that when a messenger comes saying he has a message from God, we are to offer him our hand and request him to shake hands. If he is a resurrected being he will do so and we will feel his hand. If he is a just man made perfect, he will not shake hands with us but will remain and deliver his message. "If he be the devil as an angel of light, when you ask him to shake hands he will offer you his hand, and you will not feel anything; you may therefore detect him." (D&C 129.)

More frequently, angelic labors will go undetected. Included in this category would be the labors of translated beings-John the Revelator, who labors to gather the tribes of Israel (see D&C 77:14) the three Nephites, who labor with both Jew and Gentile and will not be known by them (see 3 Ne. 28:7, 27-28) along with other "holy men" that we "know not of" (see D&C 49:8; Matt. 16:28; Mark 9:1; Luke 9:27). We will yet speak of the interest of our departed family members and Church leaders as manifest by their attendance at such things as temple dedications, special conferences, and so forth, along with their unseen though often felt presence on special occasions within the family.

By What Authority Angels Come

Order is a hallmark of the kingdom of God here and hereafter. Paradise is not a place of confusion or disarray. It is a kingdom of laws and government, a kingdom in which all of its citizens zealously labor in their own office and in their own calling. Promiscuous or indiscriminate meddling in the affairs of mortals is not a prerogative known to its inhabitants, nor is it one that they would attempt to usurp. The populace of such a kingdom would not respond to the enticements of mediums or spiritualists. Nothing could be more inconsistent than to suppose that prophets of God or other righteous holders of the priesthood would be at the beck and call of these soothsayers. It is inconceivable that men like Isaiah, Jeremiah, Peter, James, John, Paul, Joseph Smith, or Brigham Young, would respond to the call of false prophets or prophetesses.

It will be remembered that Saul, who was rejected of the Lord because of his disobedience, and who could no longer receive revelation from God, improperly sought the aid of the witch of Endor for that purpose. At the king's request she conjured up a spirit purporting to be the prophet Samuel. This evil spirit rightly prophesied Saul's death and that of his sons in the battle of the next day. (See 1 Sam. 28.) From corrections in Joseph Smith's translation of this text we learn that Saul did not actually see Samuel but rather relied upon what the witch said she was seeing. In any event we know that Samuel, who was then in the paradise of God, would not respond to the biddings of this evil woman in death any more than he would have in life.

The manner in which the government of God continues beyond the veil is evident in Joseph Smith's description of the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood. "The messenger who visited us on this occasion and conferred this Priesthood upon us," Joseph wrote, "said that his name was John, the same that is called John the Baptist in the New Testament, and that he acted under the direction of Peter, James, and John, who held the keys of the Priesthood of Melchizedek" (JS-H 1:72). The following facts can be identified from this brief excerpt: (1) John's introduction of himself by name and association with the New Testament; (2) his identification of the authority that he held in mortality and took with him to the spirit world; (3) the announcement that he was going to bestow that authority upon Joseph and Oliver Cowdery; (4) the reference to the position of presidency held by Peter, James, and John, which authority they too had taken with them beyond the veil; (5) and that he acted under the direction of Peter, James, and John, honoring their position of presidency in the realms of glory as he honored that same authority in mortality. Poignantly, John referred to Joseph and Oliver, as his "fellow servants" (JS-H 1:69), thus linking them with himself as a part of the same great brotherhood of priesthood and as chosen servants of the same God.

Our example illustrates that when God has something to reveal by the ministering of angels, it will come in the way, by the means, and through the person or persons whom he has appointed. Nor can it be without significance that among those keys, or that presidency, restored by the Baptist were "the keys of the ministering of angels." Thus, as the foundations of authority are laid in our dispensation, we have given to us the means by which we can call upon the power of those beyond the veil for protection, guidance, comfort, and strength. [^3]

Between us and those in the spirit world a veil has been wisely drawn, yet it is not impenetrable. "As the living are not in their mortal condition, able to see and converse with the dead, so it is rational to believe, the inhabitants of the spiritual domain are, in their normal condition, shut out from intercourse with men in the flesh. By permission of the Lord, persons on either side of the veil may be manifest to those on the other, but this will certainly be by law and according to the order which God has established." [^4]

Some of the Purposes for Which Angels Come

The key requisites for such an experience are obviously worthiness and appropriate purpose. Illustrating this, Wilford Woodruff recalled that a member of the Quorum of the Twelve told him that he had prayed for many years to enjoy the administration of an angel but that his prayers had never been answered. "I said to him that if he were to pray a thousand years to the God of Israel for that gift, it would not be granted, unless the Lord had a motive in sending an angel to him. I told him that the Lord never did nor never will send an angel to anybody merely to gratify the desire of the individual to see an angel. If the Lord sends an angel to anyone, He sends him to perform a work that cannot be performed [except] by the administration of an angel." [^5]

Instruction and Prophecy

As messengers of the Lord, the primary purpose for which angels minister among men is to teach and testify of the saving principles of the gospel. "The office of their ministry," Moroni taught us, "is to call men unto repentance, and to fulfil and to do the work of the covenants of the Father... by declaring the word of Christ unto the chosen vessels of the Lord, that they might bear testimony of him" (Moro. 7:31). Their very purpose constitutes a standard by which delusive spirits can be discerned, for "that which doth not edify is not of God" (D&C 50:23), whereas to edify is to enlighten through teaching and instruction. Thus, the angels of the Lord are primarily gospel teachers, the pattern of their discourses being a perfect example after which we ought to pattern our own.

Illustrations of the manner in which angels have instructed the children of the Lord are legion. Nephi had an angel as his tutor as he saw the vision of the birth of Christ. In that instruction the angel inquired as to Nephi's understanding and then revealed to him marvelous truths that Nephi in turn recorded for us. (See 1 Ne. 11-14.) Similarly, Joseph Smith spoke of "conversing" with Moroni and of his "interviews" in which he received "instructions and intelligence" (JS-H 1:42, 47, 54). John the Revelator's experience in receiving what we know as the book of Revelation appears to have been one and the same with that of Nephi (see Rev. 1, 19). Nephi's younger brother, Jacob, was also taught much about the destiny of Israel and the coming of Christ by an angel (see 2 Ne. 10:3). King Benjamin delivered to his people a great discourse replete with messianic prophecy, which he also had received at the hands of an angel (see Mosiah 3).

The experiences recorded in the scriptures establish the principle. They are not intended to limit the ministering of angels to prophets any more than the recording of the prophets' revelations are intended to limit the receipt of revelation to prophets. To those who have received the Melchizedek Priesthood and honor the covenants thus made, the Lord said, "I have given the heavenly hosts and mine angels charge concerning you" (D&C 84:42). In the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple, Joseph Smith prayed that those there endowed might "go forth from this house armed with thy power," in the name of the Lord, that his "glory be round about them" and his "angels have charge over them" (D&C 109:22).

There are, as we have noted, proper limitations to the ministering of angels, but these bounds are not associated with offices and callings. Illustrating this principle with his missionary experiences, Wilford Woodruff said, "I went out as a priest, and my companion as an elder, and we traveled thousands of miles, and had many things manifested to us. I desire to impress upon you the fact that it does not make any difference whether a man is a priest or an apostle, if he magnifies his calling. A priest holds the key of the ministering of angels. Never in my life, as an apostle, as a seventy, or as an elder, have I ever had more of the protection of the Lord than while holding the office [of] a priest. The Lord revealed to me by visions, by revelations, and by the Holy Spirit, many things that lay before me." [^6]

Warning and Protecting

The scriptures amply attest that armies or legions of angels have been marshaled on the other side of the veil to protect the Saints of God in mortality. One of the early illustrations of this in the scriptures is Joshua's experience after he and the army of Israel had crossed the Jordan. It was near Jericho that Joshua saw a man with his sword drawn, and said to him, "Art thou for us, or for our adversaries? And he said, Nay; but as captain of the host of the Lord am I now come. And Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, and said unto him, What saith my lord unto his servant? And the captain of the Lord's host said unto Joshua, Loose thy shoe from off thy foot; for the place whereon thou standest is holy. And Joshua did so." (Josh. 5:15-15.)

Another classic illustration took place when an army from Syria surrounded the city of Dothan to take Elisha prisoner. Having arisen early, one of Elisha's young disciples discovered the trap that had been laid for the prophet and manifest great fear. Unperturbed, Elisha responded: "Fear not: for they that be with us are more than they that be with them. And Elisha prayed, and said, Lord, I pray thee, open his eyes, that he may see. And the Lord opened the eyes of the young man; and he saw: and, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha. And when they came down to him, Elisha prayed unto the Lord, and said, Smite this people, I pray thee, with blindness. And he smote them with blindness according to the word of Elisha." (2 Kgs. 6:16-18.)

It will also be remembered that Nephi and Sam were spared a beating by Laman and Lemuel through the intervention of an angel of the Lord (see 1 Ne. 3:29) that Daniel had an angel as his companion when he was thrown into the lions' den (see Dan. 6:22) that Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego also enjoyed the company of an angel when they were cast into the fiery furnace (see Dan. 3:25) that Helaman's sons, the prophets Nephi and Lehi, were protected by fire from those who sought to kill them, "and angels came down out of heaven and ministered unto them," before some three hundred witnesses (Hel. 5:21-49).

As to our own dispensation, it will be remembered that a heavenly messenger came to Joseph Smith when he set out to procure wine for a sacrament meeting. Joseph was commanded not to purchase wine from his enemies, the intimation being that it was or at some time might be poisoned. It was in this revelation that we learned that it did not matter what we eat or drink in the ordinances of the sacrament, if it was performed in the proper spirit. (See D&C 27:1-4). On another occasion, Joseph Smith saw Brigham Young in a vision "standing in a strange land, in the far south and west, in a desert place, upon a rock in the midst of about a dozen men of color, who appeared hostile. He was preaching to them in their own tongue, and the angel of God standing above his head, with a drawn sword in his hand, protecting him." Commenting, Joseph said, "But he did not see it." [^7]

Blessing, Sustaining, and Comforting

Wilford Woodruff records the following experience which took place in London in October of 1840. "Having retired to rest in good season, I fell asleep and slept until midnight, when I awoke and meditated upon the things of God until 3 o'clock in the morning; and, while forming a determination to warn the people in London and by the assistance and inspiration of God to overcome the power of darkness, a person appeared to me, whom I consider was the prince of darkness. He made war upon me, and attempted to take my life. As he was about to overcome me I prayed to the Father, in the name of Jesus Christ, for help. I then had power over him and he left me, though I was much wounded. Afterwards three persons dressed in white came to me and prayed with me, and I was healed immediately of all my wounds, and delivered of all my troubles." [^8]

In the April 1973 general conference of the Church, Harold B. Lee shared a somewhat similar experience:

May I impose upon you for a moment to express appreciation for something that happened to me some time ago, years ago. I was suffering from an ulcer condition that was becoming worse and worse. We had been touring a mission; my wife, Joan, and I were impressed the next morning that we should get home as quickly as possible, although we had planned to stay for some other meetings.

On the way across the country, we were sitting in the forward section of the airplane. Some of our Church members were in the next section. As we approached a certain point en route, someone laid his hand upon my head. I looked up; I could see no one. That happened again before we arrived home, again with the same experience. Who it was, by what means or what medium, I may never know, except I knew that I was receiving a blessing that I came a few hours later to know I needed most desperately.

As soon as we arrived home, my wife very anxiously called the doctor. It was now about 11 o'clock at night. He called me to come to the telephone, and he asked me how I was; and I said, "Well, I am very tired. I think I will be all right." But shortly thereafter, there came massive hemorrhages which, had they occurred while we were in flight, I wouldn't be here today talking about it. [^9]

It was also in a conference address that President Joseph F. Smith shared the following impressions about the nature of spirits and their concerns with events on this side of the veil:

I feel sure that the Prophet Joseph Smith and his associates, who, under the guidance and inspiration of the Almighty, and by his power, began this latter-day work, would rejoice and do rejoice-I was going to say if they were permitted to look down upon the scene that I behold in this tabernacle, but I believe they do have the privilege of looking down upon us just as the all-seeing eye of God beholds every part of His handiwork. For I believe that those who have been chosen in this dispensation and in former dispensations, to lay the foundation of God's work in the midst of the children of men, for their salvation and exaltation, will not be deprived in the spirit world from looking down upon the results of their own labors, efforts and mission assigned them by the wisdom and purpose of God, to help to redeem and to reclaim the children of the Father from their sins.

So I feel quite confident that the eye of Joseph, the Prophet, and of the martyrs of this dispensation, and of Brigham and John and Wilford, and those faithful men who were associated with them in their ministry upon the earth, are carefully guarding the interests of the Kingdom of God in which they labored and for which they strove during their mortal lives. I believe they are as deeply interested in our welfare today, if not with greater capacity, with far more interest behind the veil, than they were in the flesh. I believe they know more: I believe their minds have expanded beyond their comprehension in mortal life, and their interests are enlarged and expanded in the work of the Lord to which they gave their lives and their best service.... I stand in the presence not only of the Father and of the Son, but in the presence of those whom God commissioned, raised up and inspired to lay the foundations of the work in which we are engaged. Accompanying that feeling, I am impressed with the thought that I would not this moment say or do one thing that would be taken as unwise or imprudent, or that would give offense to any of my former associates and co-laborers in the work of the Lord.

I would not like to say one thing or express a thought that would grieve the heart of Joseph, or of Brigham, or of John, or of Wilford, or Lorenzo, or any of their faithful associates in the ministry. Sometimes the Lord expands our vision from this point of view and this side of the veil, that we feel and seem to realize that we can look beyond the thin veil which separates us from that other sphere. If we can see by the enlightening influence of the Spirit of God and through the words that have been spoken by the holy prophets of God, beyond the veil that separates us from the spirit world, surely those who have passed beyond, can see more clearly through the veil back here to us than it is possible for us to see to them from our sphere of action. I believe we move and have our being in the presence of heavenly messengers and of heavenly beings. We are not separate from them. We begin to realize more and more fully, as we become acquainted with the principles of the Gospel, as they have been revealed anew in this dispensation, that we are closely related to our kindred, to our ancestors, to our friends and associates and co-laborers who have preceded us into the spirit world. We can not forget them; we do not cease to love them; we always hold them in our hearts, in memory, and thus we are associated and united to them by ties that we cannot break, and we can not dissolve or free ourselves from.

If this is the case with us in our finite condition, surrounded by our mortal weaknesses, short-sightedness, lack of inspiration and wisdom from time to time, how much more certain it is and reasonable and consistent to believe that those who have been faithful who have gone beyond and are still engaged in the work for the salvation of the souls of men, the opening of the prison doors to them that are bound and proclaiming liberty to the captives who can see us better than we can see them; that they know us better than we know them. They have advanced; we are advancing; we are growing as they have grown; we are reaching the goal that they have attained unto; and therefore, I claim that we live in their presence, they see us, they are solicitous for our welfare, they love us now more than ever. For now they see the dangers that beset us; they can comprehend better than ever before, the weaknesses that are liable to mislead us into dark and forbidden paths. They see the temptations and the evils that beset us in life and the proneness of mortal beings to yield to temptation and to wrong doing; hence their solicitude for us and their love for us and their desire for our well being must be greater than that which we feel for ourselves.

I thank God for the feeling that I possess and enjoy and for the realization that I have, that I stand, not only in the presence of Almighty God, my Maker and Father, but in the presence of His Only Begotten Son in the flesh, the Savior of the world; and I stand in the presence of Peter and James, (and perhaps the eyes of John are also upon us and we know it not); and that I stand also in the presence of Joseph and Hyrum and Brigham and John, and those who have been valiant in the testimony of Jesus Christ and faithful to their mission in the world, who have gone before. [^10]

Bringing the Honest in Heart to the Church

Angels often function as missionaries, a classic scriptural illustration being the angel who visited Cornelius. A devout man, Cornelius feared God, gave freely to the poor, and prayed regularly. "Thy prayers and thine alms" the angel said to him, "are come up for a memorial before God" (that is, "Thy good works have opened the windows of heaven to you"). Cornelius was then directed to send for Peter, who would teach him and his household the gospel and baptize them for the remission of their sins. (Acts 10.)

In this same context, Melvin J. Ballard asked the question, "Why is it that sometimes only one of a city or household receives the Gospel?" In response to his question he then shared his revealed insight, "It was made known to me that it is because the righteous dead who have received the Gospel in the spirit world are exercising themselves, and in answer to their prayers elders of the Church are sent to the homes of their posterity so that the Gospel might be taught to them, and that descendant is then privileged to do the work for his dead kindred." He also added, "it is with greater intensity that the hearts of the fathers and mothers in the spirit world are turned to their children now in the flesh than that our hearts are turned to them." [^11]

The Presence of the Unseen

Elder Bruce R. McConkie spoke at the funeral of President Joseph Fielding Smith. Later, in a talk at the Joseph F. Smith family reunion, Elder McConkie told that group that Joseph F. Smith had attended the funeral of his son, doing so to manifest his interest in the family. Such interest and concern is most natural. When a righteous man or a righteous woman die, they do not cease to love their family in the flesh, they do not cease to pray for them, they do not cease to labor in their behalf. As their family was their primary concern in this life, so it will continue to be their primary concern on the other side of the veil. We would demean the nature of their labors in the spirit world to suppose that they had nothing more to do than to conduct a daily watch over those they left behind; yet the love and interest is still there, and on special occasions their presence will be felt and in some instances, as appropriate, they may be granted the privilege to more fully manifest themselves, though these treasures of heaven will not be common.

As the inspiration of heaven most commonly comes while we are on the Lord's errand, such is also the setting in which the intervention of heaven is most common. As a sequel the Vision of the Celestial Kingdom, Joseph Smith said: "I saw the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb, who are now upon the earth, who hold the keys of this last ministry, in foreign lands, standing together in a circle, much fatigued, with their clothes tattered and feet swollen, with their eyes cast downward, and Jesus standing in their midst, and they did not behold Him. The Savior looked upon them and wept." [^12]

In an early revelation to Joseph Smith the Lord said: "Mine eyes are upon you. I am in your midst and ye cannot see me." (D&C 38:7.) Again, to those of our dispensation the Lord said, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, as I said unto my disciples, where two or three are gathered together in my name, as touching one thing, behold, there will I be in the midst of them-even so am I in the midst of you" (D&C 6:32). To some of the early missionaries of our dispensation the Lord said, "I myself will go with them and be in their midst; and I am their advocate with the Father, and nothing shall prevail against them" (D&C 32:3). Such are not idle promises. In a general conference of the Church, Harold B. Lee said: "There has been here an overwhelming spiritual endowment, attesting, no doubt, that in all likelihood we are in the presence of personages, seen and unseen, who are in attendance. Who knows but that even our Lord and Master would be near us on such an occasion as this, for we and the world, must never forget that this is his church, and under his almighty direction we are to serve!" [^13] At the conclusion of the same conference President Lee said: "I can't leave this conference without saying to you that I have a conviction that the Master hasn't been absent from us on these occasions. This is his church. Where else would he rather be than right here at the headquarters of his church? He isn't an absentee master; he is concerned about us. He wants us to follow where he leads. I know that he is a living reality, as is our Heavenly Father. I know it." [^14]

Conclusion

The faithful who have preceded us into the world of spirits have not ceased to love us, to be concerned about us, to pray for us, or to labor in our behalf. For those sealed by the power of the priesthood, death does not dissolve familial ties. Indeed, the increased understanding that comes to one in the paradise of God could but sharpen the desires to continue to minister in behalf of those who have remained on earth. The faithful man or woman whose life was centered in protecting and blessing their family here will find those feelings greatly intensified on the other side of the veil. We are not alone. Surely in the household of faith all have entertained angels unaware. As Moroni testifies, "If these things have ceased [miracles and ministering of angels], then has faith ceased also; and awful is the state of man, for they are as though there had Been no redemption made" (Moro. 7:38).

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] A report by Simon Baker in Journal History, under date of 15 August 1840, LDS Church Archives; cited in Words of Joseph Smith, ed. Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), p. 49.
[^2] See Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith by His Mother, p. 308; "Nauvoo Baptisms for the Dead," Book A, Church Genealogical Society Archives, pp. 145, 149.
[^3] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 179-80; italics added.
[^4] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 356.
[^5] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 193.
[^6] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 158.
[^7] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 308.
[^8] See The Millennial Messiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1982), pp. 103, 268.
[^9] Bruce R. McConkie, Conference Report, April 1983, p. 28.
[^10] The Millennial Messiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1982), p. 264. A more thorough treatment of this subject is Bruce R. McConkie, "The Promises Made to the Fathers," Studies in Scripture, Vol. 3: The Old Testament, Genesis-2 Samuel, ed. Kent P. Jackson and Robert L. Millet (Sandy, Utah: Randall Book Co., 1985), pp. 47-62.
[^11] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 337.
[^12] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 322.
[^13] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 338.
[^14] Why send Elijah? Joseph Smith answered: "Elijah was the last prophet that held the keys of the Priesthood, and who will, before the last dispensation, restore the authority and deliver the keys of the Priesthood, in order that all the ordinances may be attended to in righteousness." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 172; italics added; cf. Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols., comp. Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 2:115-28; Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), p. 683.
