Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Life Beyond ( 1986)

7

Temples: Our Link with Eternity

Verily I say unto you, that your anointings, and your washings, and your baptisms for the dead, and your solemn assemblies...are ordained by the ordinance of my holy house, which my people are always commanded to build unto my holy name.... For I deign to reveal unto my church things which have been kept laid from before the foundation of the world, things that pertain to the dispensation of the fulness of times.

-D&C 124:39, 41

The Lord's people have always been a temple people, the temple being the place of divine encounter, of revelation, and of covenant. Here the ordinances of salvation are per formed for both living and dead. Here the family unit is created-bonded to ancestry and sealed to posterity. In temples, the past, present, and future are fused, the seen and the unseen become one. Temples are the link between the dead and the living, between time and eternity, between man and God.

The Revelation of Vicarious Work

It was the Vision of the Celestial Kingdom (D&C 137) which opened the door to the reality that God judges men by their hearts as well as their works of righteousness. At what point in time Joseph received the specific revelation regarding salvation for the dead is not presently known. Four and one-half years after the Vision of the Celestial Kingdom was received, the Prophet delivered his first public discourse on the subject of baptism for the dead. The date was 15 August 1840, the occasion a funeral address in behalf of Seymour Brunson, a member of the Nauvoo High Council. Simon Baker was in attendance at the funeral and has left us the following account:

I was present at a discourse that the prophet Joseph delivered on baptism for the dead 15 August 1840. He read the greater part of the 15th chapter of Corinthians and remarked that the Gospel of Jesus Christ brought glad tidings of great joy .... He also said the apostle [Paul] was talking to a people who understood baptism for the dead, for it was practiced among them. He went on to say that people could now act for their friends who had departed this life, and that the plan of salvation was calculated to save all who were willing to obey the requirements of the law of God. He went on and made a very beautiful discourse. [^1]

One month later, on 14 September 1840, Joseph Smith, Sr., passed away. Just before his death, Father Smith requested that someone be baptized for and in behalf of his oldest son, Alvin. Hyrum complied with his father's last wish, and was baptized by proxy in behalf of his older brother. [^2]

In a letter to the Twelve dated 19 October 1840, Joseph Smith commented concerning this new doctrine:

I presume the doctrine of "baptism for the dead" has ere this reached your ears, and may have raised some inquiries in your minds respecting the same. I cannot in this letter give you all the information you may desire on the subject; but aside from knowledge independent of the Bible, I would say that it was certainly practiced by the ancient churches [then cites 1 Cor. 15:29]....

I first mentioned the doctrine in public when preaching the funeral sermon of Brother Seymour Brunson: and have since then given general instructions in the Church on the subject. The Saints have the privilege of being baptized for those of their relatives who are dead, [and now note the Prophet's tie of this doctrine to the Vision of the Celestial Kingdom] whom they believe would have embraced the Gospel, if they had been privileged with hearing it, and who have received the Gospel in the spirit, through the instrumentality of those who have been commissioned to preach to them while in prison.

Without enlarging on the subject, you will undoubtedly see its consistency and reasonableness; and it presents the Gospel of Christ in probably a more enlarged scale than some have imagined it. [^3]

In the latter part of his ministry, this doctrine became a major focus of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Two sections of the Doctrine and Covenants (127, 128) are letters to the Saints containing instructions regarding the practice of baptism for the dead. Joseph would point up the eternal significance of this doctrine by making such statements as these: "The greatest responsibility in this world that God has laid upon us is to seek after our dead," [^4] and "This doc trine was the burden of the scriptures. Those Saints who neglect it in behalf of their deceased relatives, do it at the peril of their own salvation." [^5]

As with the doctrinal restoration in general, the doctrine of salvation for the dead came line upon line, precept upon precept. In process of time the Saints came to know that men should officiate in behalf of men, women in behalf of women; that ordinances other than baptism for the dead-washings, anointings, endowments, and temple marriages -could be performed on behalf of the dead; that it was acceptable to officiate by proxy for those who were not immediate kin; that men and women should search their genealogical records as far back in time as possible, and then see to it that all familial ties were sealed together through appropriate temple ordinances; and that through holy and sacred edifices dedicated to the Lord Jehovah, the Almighty would "reveal unto [his] church things which have been kept hid from before the foundation of the world, things that pertain to the dispensation of the fulness of times" (D&C 124:41).

The Keys of the Priesthood Restored

As Jesus spoke with his disciples at Caesarea Philippi, the chief Apostle, in response to a query by his Master, declared, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." Peter was commended for his witness and assured that such a testimony was of divine origin. "And I say also unto thee," the Savior continued, "that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt hind on earth shall he bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." (Matthew 16:13-19; italics added.) Within a week the Lord's promise was fulfilled; Jesus took with him Peter, James, and John-the chief Apostles and First Presidency of the meridian Church-to a high mountain to pray. While in that setting, these four were transfigured-lifted spiritually to a higher plane-and thus prepared for a transcendent experience.

Moses and Elijah appeared and bestowed their keys upon this meridian presidency. [^6] As we have stated before, keys are directing powers, the right of presidency. These rights and powers would allow the Apostles to govern and direct the Church in the absence of Jesus Christ, and to make available to the members all of the blessings of the everlasting gospel. Peter, James, and John had received the Melchizedek Priesthood years earlier and had been given apostolic power and commission at the time of their appointment to the Twelve. As a result of this experience on the Mount of Transfiguration, they were granted the right to bind and seal on earth, with the full confidence that their actions would receive sealing validity in the heavens.

That which took place in the first century of the Christian Church has its parallels in the latter-day Church. The winter and spring of 1836 proved to be an era of both modern pentecost and modern transfiguration. By early April, bearers of the priesthood had been washed and anointed. Sunday, 3 April 1836, one week following the glorious dedicatory services of the temple, the brethren were again assembled in the house of the Lord. In the morning hours, Elder Thomas B. Marsh (then president of the Twelve) and Elder David W. Patten were called upon to speak. In the afternoon the First Presidency and the Apostles participated in a sacramental service, after which Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery knelt in prayer behind drawn curtains adjacent to the large pulpits on the west side of the main floor of the temple. At that moment a wondrous vision burst upon them, one of the most important theophanies of the ages.

The Appearance of the Savior

Just as Jesus and his three ancient Apostles were transfigured in the first century, so also were Joseph and Oliver "apostles, and especial witnesses" of the name of Christ ( D&C 27:12)-transformed and made ready to penetrate the veil and receive divine direction and authority. Appropriately, Jesus the Christ appeared first. In the wanderings of ancient Israel, Jehovah had chosen frequently to make his presence known and manifest his glory through a cloud which rested upon his temple. On this sacred day, Jehovah came again to his temple-the first to be authorized and accepted by him since the long night of apostate darkness. (Cf. Ex. 24:9-10; Rev. 1:14-15.) Our Lord's appearance was but the beginning of the realization of his promise given three years earlier: "And inasmuch as my people build a house unto me in the name of the Lord, and do not suffer any unclean thing to come into it, that it be not defiled, my glory shall rest upon it; yea, and my presence shall be there, for I will come into it, and all the pure in heart that shall come into it shall see God" (D&C 97:15 - 16). Jesus Christ accepted the offering of his Saints-this temple built at great sacrifice-and expanded their vision in regard to the importance of that which they had accomplished: "Yea the hearts of thousands and tens of thousands shall greatly rejoice in consequence of the blessings which shall be poured out, and the endowment with which my servants have been endowed in this house" (D&C 110:9).

Moses and the Keys of Gathering

Joseph Smith recorded, "After this vision [of the Savior] closed, the heavens were again opened unto us; and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north" (D&C 110:11). The keys or directing power restored by the ancient lawgiver enabled the Saints to accomplish the directive delivered in September of 1830, "And ye are called to bring to pass the gathering of mine elect; for mine elect hear my voice and harden not their hearts" (D&C 29:7). To the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints -the man appointed "to preside over the whole church, and to be like unto Moses" (D&C 107:91)-were given keys to gather modern Israel. Even as Moses led ancient Israel out of Egyptian bondage, so the President of the Church was given keys to call and lead modern Israel out of the bondage and throes of modern Egypt. (See D&C 103:16-20.)

People are gathered first spiritually and then temporally. They are gathered first as they accept the true Messiah and are "restored to the true church and fold of God" (2 Ne. 9:2) second they are gathered as they congregate to the places where the Saints of God are. Only through the eventual establishment of stakes throughout the world could the full concept of Zion be realized; only then will the full blessings of the temple be had by all peoples. Joseph Smith taught, "The main object [of gathering] was to build unto the Lord a house whereby He could reveal unto His people the ordinances of His house and the glories of His Kingdom, and teach the people the way of salvation." [^7]

Elias and the Keys of Eternal Marriage

"After this, Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed" (D&C 110:12). The identity of Elias-whether he be Melchizedek, Abraham himself, or a prophet named Elias from the days of Abraham-is not clearly known. [^8] This heavenly messenger restored the keys necessary to establish the ancient patriarchal order, making Joseph Smith and the faithful Saints who receive celestial marriage heirs to the blessings and "promises made to the fathers"-Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. [^9]

Elias thus restored the power by which eternal family units are organized through the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. "As the crowning cause for wonderment," Elder Bruce R. McConkie has explained: "God who is no respecter of persons has given a like promise [to that of Abraham and Joseph Smith] to every [member] in the kingdom who has gone to the holy temple and entered into the blessed order of matrimony there performed. Every person married in the temple for time and for all eternity has sealed upon him, conditioned upon his faithfulness, all of the blessings of the ancient patriarchs, including the crowning promise and assurance of eternal increase, which means, literally, a posterity as numerous as the dust particles of the earth." [^10]

Elijah and the Sealing Power

The Prophet Joseph Smith wrote concerning the final angelic ministrant on this occasion in the Kirtland Temple: "After this vision had closed, another great and glorious vision burst upon us; for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death, stood before us, and said: Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi-testifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come-To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse" (D&C 110:13-15). Precisely on the day that Elijah's appearance took place, Jews throughout the world were engaged in the celebration of the Passover. Since the time of Malachi-from about 400 B.C.-Jews worldwide waited with anxious anticipation for the coming of Elijah. Elijah did come, but not to Jewish homes; he came rather to a synagogue of the Saints, and to his legal administrators on earth. There he bestowed keys of inestimable worth.

When Moroni appeared to Joseph Smith in 1823 he quoted numerous passages from the Old and New Testaments. The Prophet indicated in his official history that Moroni quoted Mal. 4:5-6 but gave a different rendering from that of the King James text. Malachi (from whom this promise came), we learn by revelation, "had his eye fixed on the restoration of the priesthood" (D&C 128:17). The prophecy began: "Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priest hood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord." (JS-H 1:38; D&C 2:1.) Joseph and Oliver had been ordained to the Melchizedek Priesthood and given apostolic power and commission as early as 1829. How was it, then, that Elijah would reveal the priesthood? Simply stated, Elijah was sent to restore the keys of the patriarchal order of priest hood, rights which had not yet been fully operational in this dispensation. Elijah restored the keys whereby families (organized in the patriarchal order through the keys delivered by Elias) could be bound and sealed for eternity.

Three months before his death, Joseph Smith instructed the Latter-day Saints concerning the mission of Elijah: "The spirit, power, and calling of Elijah is, that ye have power to hold the key of the revelations, ordinances, oracles, powers and endowments of the fulness of the Melchizedek Priest hood and of the kingdom of God on the earth." [^11] Elijah restored the keys whereby individuals and families may (through the blessings of the holy temple) develop line upon line to the point where they receive the fulness of the priest hood, and thus become kings and priests, queens and priestesses unto God in the patriarchal order. "Those holding the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood," Joseph had taught earlier, "are kings and priests of the Most High God, holding the keys of power and blessings." [^12] Through the powers delivered by Elias (the order of marriage entered into by the fathers-Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob) eternal family units are created-here and hereafter. Through the powers delivered by Elijah, man and wife may be sealed unto eternal life, inasmuch as "the power of Elijah is sufficient to make our calling and election sure." [^13]

Elijah came to "plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers" whereby the "hearts of the children [should] turn to their fathers" JS-H 1:39; D&C 2:2). The Spirit of the Lord witnesses to faithful Latter-day Saints of the central place of eternal marriage and of the sublime joys associated with the everlasting continuation of the family. Through temples, God's promises to the fathers-the promises pertaining to the gospel, the priesthood, and eternal increase (see Abr. 2:8-11) -are extended to all the faithful Saints of all ages. The hearts of the children turn to the ancient fathers because the children are now participants in and recipients of the blessings of the fathers. Being profoundly grateful for such privileges, members of the Church (motivated by the spirit of Elijah) also find their hearts turning to their more immediate fathers, and do all within their power (through genealogical research and the attendant temple work) to ensure that the blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are enjoyed by ancestry as well as posterity. "If it were not so [that is, if Elijah had not come], the whole earth would be utterly wasted at [Christ's] coming." JS-H 1:39; D&C 2:3.) Why? Because the earth would not have accomplished its foreordained purposes, to establish on its face a family system patterned after the order of heaven. If there were no binding and sealing powers whereby families could be cemented forever, then the earth would never "answer the end of its creation" (D&C 49:16). It would be wasted and cursed, for all men would be forever without root or branch.

Because Elijah came, all other ordinances for the living and the dead (such as baptisms, confirmations, ordinations) have real meaning and are of efficacy, virtue, and force in eternity. [^14] The ordinances associated with the ministry of Elijah (centering in temples) are the "capstone blessings" of the gospel and the consummation of the work of the Church; they provide purpose and perspective for all other gospel principles and ordinances.

Salvation: A Family Affair

Marriage in the Resurrection

Much has been made by critics of Mormonism about our belief that marriage and the family unit were intended by God to be eternal. The standard scriptural text used by way of objection comes from Jesus' confrontation with the Sadducees. These Jews baited him in the temple with a question about a woman and her marriage in the resurrection, one who had been wife to seven brothers, seeking through each union to raise up seed to the first after his death. Christ responded by saying: "Ye do err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God. For in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven." (Matt. 22:23-30.) The text in no way says what our critics would like to have it say. First of all, these same people tell us that the Bible is complete and that there is nothing to be added to it. If the Bible is complete, where in the scriptures can we look to find any thing other than our present text that could be used to suggest that there is no marriage in heaven or that marriages cannot be performed after the resurrection? The plain fact of the matter is that there is no such text in any scriptural record, be it ancient or modern. And what of the present text? We ask, is a doctrine of the kingdom, a doctrine so essential to our understanding of eternal life, to be established from a single text? Do we credit our knowledge of this doctrine to the wickedness and unbelief of the Sadducees, without which we would have no intelligence on the matter? Is this how such vital theological truths are to come?

To properly understand the present scriptural text, one need only ask the standard question in scriptural interpretation: To whom is the text directed? To whom is Christ speaking? The answer to this query in the specific instance is directed to the Sadducees, a religious sect that rejected Christ, his gospel, his priesthood, and even the doctrine of resurrection. In broader terms, the text applies to all others who reject the gospel of Jesus Christ and its sealing powers. None such have any claim upon a sealing bond between marriage partners or in the family unit. The modern equivalent would be for a person who does not believe in the resurrection to ask the President of the Church which of the seven men to whom she has been married will be her husband in the world to come. The answer, obviously, is none of them. Because one unbeliever has been told that she has no claim upon spouse or family in the world to come, certainly is not to say that those in the household of faith have no such promise; nor does it constitute a doctrinal justification for the idea that no resurrected beings can be married, or that other gospel ordinances cannot be per formed for people after they have been resurrected. "And for that matter, there is no revelation, either ancient or modern, which says there is neither marrying nor giving in marriage in heaven itself for righteous people. All that the revelations set forth is that such is denied to the Sadducees and other worldly and ungodly people." [^15]

As Latter-day Saints, we have been blessed with a revelation in which the Savior explained to the Prophet Joseph Smith what he intended in his response to these Sadduceean hecklers.

And everything that is in the world, whether it be ordained of men, by thrones, or principalities, or powers, or things of name, whatsoever they may be, that are not by me or by my word, saith the Lord, shall be thrown down, and shall not remain after men are dead, neither in nor after the resurrection, saith the Lord your God.

For whatsoever things remain are by me; and whatsoever things are not by me shall be shaken and destroyed.

Therefore, if a man marry him a wife in the world, and he marry her not by me nor by my word, and he covenant with her so Long as he is in the world and she with him, their covenant and marriage are not of force when they are dead, and when they are out of the world; therefore, they are not bound by any law .when they are out of the world.

Therefore, when they are out of the world they neither marry nor are given in marriage; but are appointed angels in heaven, which angels are ministering servants, to minister for those who are worthy of a far more, and an exceeding, and an eternal weight of glory.

For these angels did not abide my law; therefore, they cannot be enlarged, but remain separately and singly, without exaltation, in their saved condition, to all eternity; and from henceforth are not gods, but are angels of God forever and ever. (D&C 132:13-17.)

The Family Unit Beyond the Veil

Paul said, "I bow my knees," as do we all, "unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named" (Eph. 3:14-15). In a manifestation to Brigham Young after his death, Joseph Smith told his successor to be sure to instruct the Saints to keep the Spirit of the Lord, promising that if they would do so, "they will find themselves just as they were organized by our Father in Heaven before they came into the world. Our Father in Heaven organized the human family, but they are all disorganized and in great confusion." Brigham also said that Joseph showed him the pattern, "how they were in the beginning." He said that he could not describe it but that there must yet be "a perfect chain from Father Adam to his latest posterity." [^16]

During an illness, Jedediah M. Grant visited the spirit world two nights in succession. lie reported a perfect order and government that existed there, saying that the "righteous gathered together," that there were "no wicked spirits among them," and that they were "organized in family capacities." "To my astonishment," he said, "when I looked at families there was a deficiency in some, there was a lack, for I saw families that would not be permitted to come and dwell together, because they had not honored their calling here." [^17]

Emphasizing that we must honor our callings and keep our covenants in order to preserve the family unit, Joseph F. Smith said:

If we live and turn away from truth we will be separated throughout the countless ages of eternity from the society of those we love. We will have no claim upon them, and they will have no claim upon us. There will be an impassable gulf between us over which we can not pass, one to the other. If we die in the faith, having lived righteous lives, we are Christ's, we have the assurance of eternal reward, being in possession of the principles of eternal truth and shall be clothed with glory, immortality and eternal lives. While we sojourn in the flesh we pass a great portion of our life in sorrow; death separates us for a short time, some of us pass behind the vail, but the time will come when we will meet with those who have gone, and enjoy each others' society forever. The separation is but for a moment as it were. No power can separate us then. God having joined us together, we have a claim upon each other-an undeniable claim-inasmuch as we have been united by the power of the priest hood in the Gospel of Christ. Therefore it is better to be separated in this life for a little season, although we have to pass through deprivation, sorrow, trouble, toil, widowhood, orphanage, and many other vicissitudes, than to be separated for all eternity.

By complying with the principles of the Gospel we become heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ. The anticipation of these great privileges brings happiness to us now, and strengthens our hopes of exaltation and eternal reward in the kingdom of God hereafter. No other power but that of God, through the knowledge of truth, can give such enjoyment, peace of mind, consolation and happiness to the sorrowing hearts of mortals. The Gospel has been revealed for the salvation and exaltation of the children of men, and if they would only receive it, it would bring, finally, unalloyed and perfect happiness to all, even a "fullness of joy" [^18]

Temple and Missionary Work Are One and the Same

"I hope to see us dissolve the artificial boundary line we so often place between missionary work and temple and genealogical work," said President Spencer W, Kimball, "because it is the same great redemptive work." [^19] Some years ago a member of the Presiding Bishopric had a son killed in a tragic train accident. Immediately after his death he attempted to visit his father at his Church office but was unable to interrupt him. President McKay often told this story to illustrate that it is possible for us to become too pre occupied with our own matters. Twice the young man appeared to his mother who had been inconsolable over his death. On the second visit he told her that he had been assigned work in his priesthood quorum and "was very busy working with his grandparents and relatives. He told her not to worry about him anymore, because this was the last time that he would be permitted to come back to see her." [^20] Wilford Woodruff lost a son in a drowning accident. "I asked the Lord," President Woodruff said, "why he was taken from me. The answer to me was, 'You are doing a great deal for the redemption of your dead; but the law of redemption requires some of your own seed in the spirit world to attend to work connected with this.' That was a new principle to me; but it satisfied me why he was taken away." [^21]

Conclusion

As the morning stars sang together for joy at the announcement of the plan of salvation, so the world of the spirits rang forth with refrains of hallelujah with the restoration of knowledge and powers by which the dead are redeemed. A welding link has been established between the fathers and the children, between the heavens and the earth, all that men and earth might answer the ends of their creation. Temples have been erected and men and women are again invited to stand in the divine presence and participate in those sacred ceremonies by which families are forged into eternal units. Thus, the chorus of Latter-day Saints raise their voices in harmony with the words of their Prophet: "Brethren, shall we not go on in so great a cause? Go forward and not backward. Courage, brethren; and on, on to the victory! Let your hearts rejoice, and be exceedingly glad. Let the earth break forth into singing. Let the dead speak forth anthems of eternal praise to the King Immanuel, who hath ordained, before the world was, that which would enable us to redeem them out of their prison; for the prisoners shall go free." (D&C 128:22; italics added.)

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] It is solemn mockery before God to baptize children; to do so is to deny the mercies and atoning power of Christ, as well as the power of the Holy Spirit (vv. 9, 20, 23). S. E. Frost, The Basic Teachings of the Great Philosophers (New York: The New Home Library, 1942), p. 63.
[^2] The leaders of the true church should teach of the necessity of repentance and baptism for those who are accountable and capable of committing sin (v. 10). For a discussion of the fact that Adam and Eve's act was transgression and not sin, see Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols., comp. Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 1:114. An excellent treatment of the Latter-day Saint view of the Fall is in LaMar Garrard, "The Fall of Man," Principles of the Gospel in Practice, Proceedings of the 1985 Sidney B. Sperry Symposium (Sandy, Utah: Randall Book Co., 1985), pp. 39-70.
[^3] The leaders of the Church should teach parents that they must repent and be baptized, and humble themselves as their little children (v. 10). Frost, Basic Teachings of the Great Philosophers, pp. 150-51. See also Martin Luther's debate with Erasmus the humanist on the nature of free will in Martin Luther, The Bondage of the Will, translated by Henry Cole (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Book House, 1976).
[^4] The ordinance of baptism appropriately follows the principle of repentance. Since little children, through Christ, are in no need of repentance, they are in no need of baptism. (vv. 11, 19, 25.) This is a particularly interesting heresy. It may well be that the Apostle Paul had reference to this problem in Heb. 12:24.
[^5] Little children are alive in Christ-free from the sins of the sinful world (vv. 12, 22). James E. Talmage, The Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1975), p. 126.
[^6] Any who suppose that children are in need of baptism are devoid of faith (v. 14). James E. Talmage, The Great Apostasy (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1973), p. 119.
[^7] Because a belief in infant baptism evidences a significant departure from the faith of Jesus Christ, any who continue in this belief shall perish eventually as pertaining to the things of righteousness (v. 16). Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 197.
[^8] Bruce R. McConkie, expressing the sentiments of Joseph Fielding Smith, in "The Salvation of Little Children," Ensign, April 1977, p. 6.
[^9] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 196-97.
[^10] From an address at the funeral of Rebecca Adams, 28 October 1967, typescript, pp. 2-3.
[^11] Bruce R. McConkie, "The Salvation of Little Children," Ensign, April 1977, p. 6; see also Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols., comp. Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 2:55-56.
[^12] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols., comp. Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 2:56-57; italics added; cf. McConkie, "The Salvation of Little Children," Ensign, April 1977, p. 6.
[^13] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 199-200; italics added.
[^14] History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., ed. B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1957), 6:316.
[^15] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977), pp. 452-54; see also an article in the Improvement Era, June 1904. For President Smith's discussion of the misunderstanding of Joseph's original teachings, see a sermon entitled "Status of Children in the Resurrection," remarks at a temple fast meeting held in February of 1918, in Improvement Era, 21:567-74 (May 1918); cited also in Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols., comp. James R. Clark (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 5:91-98.
[^16] See Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols., comp. Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 2:54; Bruce R. McConkie, "The Salvation of Little Children," Ensign, April 1977, p. 5.
[^17] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 296.
[^18] Bruce R. McConkie, "The Salvation of Little Children," Ensign, April 1977, p. 7.
[^19] Ensign, January 1977, p. 3.
[^20] "Bishop John Wells: His Life and Labors," typescript, p. 15, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University.
[^21] Millennial Star, vol. 58, p. 742.
