Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Life Beyond ( 1986)

8

When Children Die

Behold I say unto you that this thing shall ye teach-repentance and baptism unto those who are accountable and capable of committing sin .... But little children are alive in Christ, even from the foundation of t he world.

-Moroni 8:10-12

Little children shall live! What more perfect evidence of an omniscient and all-loving God than the doctrine which pro claims that little children who die are heirs of celestial glory! From these no blessing shall be withheld and from such no opportunities will be denied. The testimony of the Book of Mormon and the latter-day oracles is certain and clear: children who die before the time of accountability shall come forth in the resurrection of the just and go on to enjoy all of the privileges associated with eternal life and the family unit.

As a result of his Vision of the Celestial Kingdom, the Prophet Joseph Smith recorded, "I also beheld that all children who die before they arrive at the years of account ability are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven" (D&C 137:10). This idea was not entirely new to the Prophet, for he had learned from the Book of Mormon and previous revelations of the Lord's disposition in regard to the status of children. An angel explained to King Benjamin that "the infant perisheth not that dieth in his infancy" (Mosiah 3:18). After having described the nature of those who come forth in the first resurrection, Abinadi said simply, "And little children also have eternal life" (Mosiah 15:25). A revelation given in September of 1830 specified that "little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world through mine Only Begotten" (D&C 29:46). In the pages that follow we will turn to the words and counsel of the scriptures and living prophets to provide answers to the most often asked questions associated with this glorious doctrine.

What of Original Sin?

Nephi beheld in vision that because plain and precious truths would be taken away or kept back from the earliest biblical records, "an exceedingly great many" people would stumble and fall, and many thereby would wander in doctrinal darkness, eventually becoming subject to the snares of Satan (1 Ne. 13:20-42). Some of the most critical verities of salvation to be lifted or twisted from their pristine purity are the truths dealing with the Creation, the Fall, and the Atonement. If by no other means, we know that such matters were taught more plainly in the early ages of this world by virtue of the clarity and power in which they are proclaimed and stressed in the Book of Mormon and the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible. A misunderstanding of the nature of the fall of Adam, for example, has led to some of the most serious heresies and perversions in religious history, Without the exalting knowledge of such matters as the Fall as a foreordained act, a God-inspired and predesigned plan for the perpetuation and preservation of the human family-parent to the atonement of Christ-men struggle helplessly to find meaning in the involvement of our first parents in Eden. Others allegorize or spiritualize away the plain meanings of the scriptures regarding the Fall, and thus cloud in mystery the true purposes behind the Atonement. When revelation is wanting, when unillumined man seeks for understanding of heavenly and eternal matters, he is left to his own resources-to the powers of reason and the limitations of the human intellect.

One of the most influential philosopher-theologians in Christian history was St. Augustine (350-430), a man whose writings and teachings have had a marked impact on the formulation of both Catholic and Protestant beliefs. A historian's description of Augustine's thought on the doctrine of "original sin" follows:

... the first man, Adam, set the pattern for all future life of men. Adam, he taught, committed sin and thus handed on to all men the effects of this sin. He corrupted the entire human race, so that all men are condemned to sin for all times. Adam's sin, therefore, is hereditary. But God can reform corrupted man by his grace....

Thus man, a creation of the all-ruling power of the universe, created out of nothing, inherits the weaknesses and sins of the first man. He must pay the price for this sin. But the all-ruling can and does select some men for forgiveness and leaves others to the natural results of Adam's sins. Man is lost forever unless the Creator of the universe chooses to save him. [^1]

Paraphrasing Elder James E. Talmage's description of the creeds of Christendom, it would be difficult to have postulated more error in fewer words. We are left to wonder if, in so writing, Augustine has not indeed committed the original (doctrinal) sin! The false doctrine of original sin is thus based upon the notion that Adam and Eve's disobedience was an act of overt rebellion against the Almighty, an attempt to usurp the knowledge available only to the Gods.

How much more ennobling and soul-satisfying is the true doctrine of the Fall, the assurance that Adam-also known as Michael, the prince and archangel-"fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy" (2 Ne. 2:25). How much more gratifying it is to know that through the atonement of Christ, the act of redemption on the part of the "Lamb slain from the foundation of the world" (Rev. 13:8), "men will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam's transgression" (Articles of Faith 1:2; italics added). [^2]

And [God] called upon our father Adam by his own voice, saying: I am God; I made the world, and men before they were in the flesh.

And he also said unto him: If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, asking all things in his name, and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given you.

And our father Adam spake unto the Lord, and said: Why is it that men must repent and be baptized in water? And the Lord said unto Adam: Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden.

Hence came the saying abroad among the people, that the Son of God hath atoned for original guilt, wherein the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they are whole from the foundation of the world. (Moses 6:51 - 54; italics added.)

An equally vicious falsehood which follows on the heretical heels of original sin is the moral depravity of man and his complete inability to choose good over evil. As an illustration, we again cite the notions of Augustine:

The conception of individual freedom was denied by Saint Augustine. According to him, mankind was free in Adam, but since Adam chose to sin, he lost freedom not only for himself, but for all men and for all time. Now no one is free, but all are bound to sin, are slaves of evil.

But God makes a choice among men of those whom he will save and those whom he will permit to be destroyed because of sin. This choice is not influenced by an act of an individual man, but is determined only by what God wants.

In Augustine we find both fatalism and predestination as far as the individual man is concerned. With Adam there was no fatalism. He was free. But God knew even then how Adam would act, knew he would sin. Thus, from the beginning God made up his mind whom he would save. These were predestined from the first to salvation, and all the rest were pre destined to eternal punishment. [^3]

Reasoning of this sort surely came from reading such passages as Rom. 7 without the clarifying lenses provided by the Prophet Joseph Smith. To read this particular chapter in the New Testament, for example, is to conclude that Paul the Apostle (and thus all men by extension) is a depraved and helpless creature who muddles in sin as a result of carnal nature, an evildoer with little or no hope of deliverance. The Joseph Smith Translation of Rom. 7 presents a significantly different picture of Paul and of all men; it might well be called "Paul: Before and After the Atonement," or "The Power of Christ to Change Men's Souls." The King James Version has Paul introspecting as follows: "I am carnal, sold under sin. For that which I do I allow not: for what I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that do I." Further, "For I know that in me (that is, in my flesh,) dwelleth no good thing: for to will is present with me; but how to perform that which is good I find not." (Rom. 7:14-15, 18.) The JST lays stress where Paul surely intended it: upon the fact that through the atonement of Christ man is made free from the pull and stain of sin. "When I was under the law [of Moses], I was yet carnal, sold under sin. But now I am spiritual; for that which I am commanded to do, I do; and that which I am commanded not to allow, I allow not. For what I know is not right I would not do; for that which is sin, I hate." Finally, "For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good thing; for to will is present with me, but to perform that which is good I find not, only in Christ." (JST Rom. 7:14-16, 19; italics added.) The testimony of Lehi is a con firming witness to this principle of truth: "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy. And the Messiah cometh in the fulness of time, that he may redeem the children of men from the fall. And because that they are redeemed from the fall they have become free for ever, knowing good from evil; to act for themselves and not be acted upon." (2 1 Ne. 2:25-26; italics added; cf. Hel. 14:30.)

What of Infant Baptism?

One who chooses to believe in the depravity of man via transmission of the "original sin" is only a stone's throw removed from a practice which would absolve man from the supposed stain of Eden as early as possible. Infant baptism is thus the result of a major doctrinal misunderstanding, a lack of appreciation for the full impact of Christ's atonement upon mankind. A form of the heretical practice seems to predate the Christian era by many centuries. The Lord Jehovah spoke to his servant Abraham of a number of the theological errors of the day, some of which appear to be tied to ignorance of the true nature and scope of the Atonement.

And it came to pass, that Abram fell on his face, and called upon the name of the Lord.

And God talked with him, saying, My people have gone astray from my precepts, and have not kept mine ordinances, which I gave unto their fathers;

And they have not observed mine anointing, and the burial, or baptism wherewith I commanded them;

But have turned from the commandment, and taken unto themselves the washing of children, and the blood of sprinkling;

And have said that the blood of the righteous Abel was shed for sins; [^4] and have not known wherein they are account able before me. (JST Gen. 17:3-7; italics added.)

This passage clearly demonstrates the inseparable relationship between atonement and accountability. Simply stated, the atonement of Jesus Christ-the greatest act of Jove and intercession in all eternity-defines the bounds and limits of accountability. One of the unconditional benefits of the Atonement is the fact that no man or woman will be held responsible for or denied blessings related to a law whose adoption and application were beyond their power. This is the principle which underlies the doctrine concerning the salvation of little children who die. They are simply not accountable for their deeds and therefore are not required as children to participate in those gospel ordinances prepared for accountable persons.

The question of the innocence of children was also a matter which arose in discussions between the Christians and the Jews in the meridian of time. Paul emphasized that the law of circumcision and "the tradition [should] be done away, which saith that little children are unholy; for it was had among the Jews" (D&C 74:6). Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible is a witness that Jesus had taught concerning the innocent status of children. "Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones," the Master said, "for I say unto you, That in heaven their angels [spirits] do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven. For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost and to call sinners to repentance; but these little ones have no need of repentance, and I will save them." (JST Matt. 18:10-11; italics added; of. 19:13.)

During the period of the Great Apostasy (after the first century of the Christian era) the doctrine of infant baptism again reared its ugly head. Elder James E. Talmage has written, "There is no authentic record of infant baptism having been practised during the first two centuries after Christ, and the custom probably did not become general before the fifth century; from the time last named until the Reformation, however, it was accepted by the dominant church organization." [^5]

Not only was the form of the baptismal rite radically changed [during the time of the apostasy], but the application of the ordinance was perverted. The practice of administering baptism to infants was recognized as orthodox in the third century and was doubtless of earlier origin. In a prolonged disputation as to whether it was safe to postpone the baptism of infants until the eighth day after birth-in deference to the Jewish custom of performing circumcision on that day-it was generally decided that such delay would be dangerous, as jeopardizing the future well-being of the child should it die before attaining the age of eight days, and that baptism ought to be administered as soon after birth as possible. [^6]

It is worth noting that this diabolical doctrine had been introduced in the Americas by approximately the same period. Mormon, in writing to his son Moroni about A.D. 400, delivered a scathing denunciation of the heresy and of those who propound and perpetuate it. The word of the Lord to Mormon was straightforward: "Listen to the words of Christ, your Redeemer, your Lord and your God. Behold, I came into the world not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance; the whole need no physician, but they that arc sick [cf. Mark 2:17] wherefore little children are whole, for they are not capable of committing sin [cf. D&C 29:47; 74:7] wherefore the curse of Adam is taken from them in me, that it hath no power over them; and the law of circumcision is done away in me." (Moro. 8:8.) Expounding upon the Lord's words, Mormon reasoned as follows (from Moro. 8):

Joseph Smith summarized the issue of infant baptism concisely: "The doctrine of baptizing children, or sprinkling them, or they must welter in hell, is a doctrine not true, not supported in Holy Writ, and is not consistent with the character of God." [^7]

Why Do Some Children Die and Others Live?

Lacking a memory of what went before and in some cases having only a general outline of what will come here after, we as Latter-day Saints are not in a position to provide all of the answers to all of the questions that might arise. We rest secure in the knowledge that God is our Father, that he is intimately acquainted with each of us, that he knows the end from the beginning and that he will arrange premortal, mortal, and postmortal conditions for our eternal best interest. We rest secure in the knowledge that God knows what is best for each of us, and that he will bring to pass those conditions which will maximize our growth and further our opportunities for exaltation. "We must assume that the Lord knows and arranges beforehand who shall be taken in infancy and who shall remain on earth to undergo whatever tests are needed in their cases." [^8]

An eye of faith provides us with a heavenly perspective, a divinely discriminating view of things as God sees them. Joseph the Seer asked, "Why is it that infants, innocent children, are taken away from us, especially those that seem to be the most intelligent and interesting?" He reflected upon the waywardness of the world and provided at least a partial answer to this most difficult question: "The strongest reasons that present themselves to my mind are these: This world is a very wicked world; and it is a proverb that the 'world grows weaker and wiser'; if that is the case, the world grows more wicked and corrupt. In the earlier ages of the world a righteous man, and a man of God and of intelligence, had a better chance to do good, to be believed and received than at the present day; but in these days such a man is opposed and persecuted by most of the inhabitants of the earth, and he has much sorrow to pass through here." Then, evidencing the perspective of those who see with the eye of faith, the Prophet added, "The Lord takes many away even in infancy, that they may escape the envy of man, and the sorrows and evils of this present world; they were too pure, too lovely, to live on earth; therefore, if rightly considered, instead of mourning we have reason to rejoice as they are delivered from evil, and we shall soon have them again." Finally, Joseph concluded: "The only difference between the old and young dying is, one lives longer in heaven and eternal light and glory than the other, and is freed a little sooner from this miserable wicked world. Notwithstanding all this glory, we for a moment lose sight of it, and mourn the loss, but we do not mourn as those with out hope" [^9]

In commenting upon the Prophet's remarks, Elder Bruce R. McConkie said: "There are certain spirits who come into this life only to receive bodies; for reasons that we do not know, but which are known in the infinite wisdom of the Eternal Father, they do not need the testing, probationary experiences of mortality. We come here for two great reasons-the first, to get a body; the second, to be tried, examined, schooled, and tested under mortal circumstances, to take a different type of probationary test than we underwent in the pre-mortal life. There are some of the children of our Father, however, who come to earth to get a body-for that reason solely. They do not need the testings of this mortality." [^10]

What of the Mentally Deficient?

What is to become of those who are not capable of distinguishing completely between good and evil, those who never come to comprehend sin and grasp the miracle of forgiveness through the atoning blood of Christ? What is the disposition of the Lord with regard to those who never arrive mentally at the age of accountability, those who are in some way deficient in understanding of these vital matters? The revelations of the Restoration are not silent here. To six elders of the Church in September of 1830 the Lord explained: "Little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world through mine Only Begotten; wherefore, they cannot sin, for power is not given unto Satan to tempt little children, until they begin to Become accountable before me; for it is given unto them even as I will, according to mine own pleasure, that great things may be required at the hand of their fathers." All who have knowledge have been commanded to repent. Of them who have "no understanding" the Lord has said: "And be that bath no understanding, it remaineth in me to do according as it is written." (D&C 29:46-50; italics added; cf. D&C 68:25-28.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written the following concerning the status of the mentally deficient: "It is with them as it is with little children. They never arrive at the years of accountability and are considered as though they were little children. If because of some physical deficiency, or for some other reason unknown to us, they never mature in the spiritual or moral sense, then they never become account able for sins. They need no baptism; they are alive in Christ; and they will receive, inherit, and possess in eternity on the same basis as do all children." [^11]

Will Children Who Die Ever Be Tested?

Let us reason on this matter, leaning heavily upon the wisdom of the prophets for support. We have attempted to demonstrate heretofore that a righteous man or woman cannot take a backward step spiritually after death; in short. the righteous have completed their days of probation in mortality. It was Amulek who informed us that our disposition here will be our disposition hereafter (see Aim; 34:32-35). Such is the case with regard to little children They were pure in this existence, will be pure in the world of spirits, and will come forth in the resurrection of the pure in heart at the appropriate time. At the time of the second coming of Christ, wickedness will be cleansed from the face of the earth. The great Millennium will be ushered in with power, and then Satan and his hosts will be bound by the righteousness of the people. (See 1 Ne. 22:26.) During this glorious era of enlightenment, the earth shall be given to the righteous "for an inheritance; and they shall multiply and wax strong, and their children shall grow up without sin unto salvation" (D&C 45:58; italics added). But will not the devil be loosed at the end of the Millennium, some may ask? Could not those who had left mortality without trial be tested during that "little season"? Certainly not, we answer, for these children will already have come forth from the graves as resurrected and immortal beings. How could such persons-whose salvation is already assured-possibly be tested? To reason otherwise is to place God and all exalted beings in peril of apostasy. In the words of President Joseph Fielding Smith, "Satan will be loosed to gather his forces after the millennium. The people who will he tempted, will be people living on this earth, and they will have every opportunity to accept the gospel or reject it. Satan will have nothing to do whatever with little children, or grown people who have received their resurrection and entered into the celestial kingdom. Satan cannot tempt little children in this life, nor in the spirit world, nor after the resurrection. Little children who die before reaching the years of accountability will not be tempted."R12

At this point it is helpful to consider the tender words of Mormon: "Behold, I speak with boldness, having authority from God; and I fear not what man can do; for perfect love casteth out all fear. And I am filled with charity, which is everlasting love; wherefore, all children are alike unto me; wherefore, I love little children with a perfect love; and they are all alike and partakers of salvation." (Moro. 8:16-17.) We trust that God will eventually reveal more of the particulars of this doctrine to the Church through his appointed servants in days to come. In the meantime, however, we are under obligation to Believe and teach that which we have received from an omniscient and all-loving God.

What Is Children's Status in and After the Resurrection?

It is a marvelous thing to consider that a seer has walked among us, and that seers continue to grace the earth in this final gospel dispensation. We need to feel profoundly grateful to God our Father for sending the Prophet Joseph Smith, one who communed with Jehovah and was schooled in the mysteries of the kingdom of Jehovah. Joseph has brought comfort and consolation and comprehension to man in this day regarding the ever-present phenomenon of death and the little-understood world Beyond the grave. In speaking of the status of children in the resurrection, the Prophet taught in 1842: "As concerning the resurrection, I will merely say that all men will come from the grave as they lie down, whether old or young; there will not be 'added unto their stature one cubit,' neither taken from it; all will be raised by the power of God, having spirit in their bodies, and not blood. Children will be enthroned in the presence of God and the Lamb with bodies of the same stature that they had on earth, having been redeemed by the blood of the Lamb; they will there enjoy the fulness of that light, glory and intelligence, which is prepared in the celestial kingdom."R13 Some two years later, in the Follett discourse, Joseph repeated the same doctrine; he delivered the comforting assurance to grieving parents who had lost little ones that they would again enjoy the companionship of their children; that these tiny ones would not grow in the grave, but they would come forth as they had been laid to rest-as children. [^12]

Some confusion arose over the years after the Prophet Joseph Smith's death concerning his teachings on the status of children in the resurrection. Some erroneously claimed that the Prophet taught that children would be resurrected as children and never grow, but would remain in that state through all eternity. President Joseph F. Smith collected testimonies and affidavits from a number of persons who had heard the King Follett Sermon, and it was his powerful witness that Joseph Smith, Jr., had taught the truth but had been misunderstood by some. President Smith spoke the following in 1895 at the funeral of Daniel W. Grant, the child of Heber J. Grant:

Under these circumstances, our beloved friends who are now deprived of their little one, have great cause for joy and rejoicing, even in the midst of the deep sorrow that they feel at the loss of their little one for a time. They know he is all right; they have the assurance that their little one has passed away without sin. Such children are in the bosom of the Father. They will inherit their glory and their exaltation, and they will not be deprived of the blessings that belong to them; ... all that could have been obtained and enjoyed by them if they had been permitted to live in the flesh will be provided for them hereafter. They will lose nothing by being taken away from us in this way.

This is a consolation to me. Joseph Smith, the Prophet, was the promulgator under God of these principles. He was in touch with the heavens. God revealed himself unto him, and made known unto him the principles that lie before us, and which are comprised in the everlasting gospel. Joseph Smith declared that the mother who laid down her little child, being deprived of the privilege, the joy, and the satisfaction of bringing it up to manhood or womanhood in this world, would after the resurrection, have all the joy, satisfaction and pleasure, and even more than it would have been possible to have had in mortality, in seeing her child grow to the full measure of the stature of its spirit. If this be true, and I believe it, what a consolation it is ... It matters not whether these tabernacles mature in this world, or have to wait and mature in the world to come, according to the word of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the body will develop, either in time or in eternity, to the full stature of the spirit, and when the mother is deprived of the pleasure and joy of rearing her babe to manhood or womanhood in this life, through the hand of death, that privilege will be renewed to her hereafter, and she will enjoy it to a fuller fruition than it would be possible for her to do here. When she does it there, it will be with certain knowledge that the results will be without failure; whereas here, the results are unknown until after we have passed the test. [^13]

Children will come forth from the grave as children, be raised to maturity by worthy parents, and be entitled to receive all of the ordinances of salvation that eventuate in the everlasting continuation of the family unit. [^14]

There are no joys of more transcendent beauty than family joys and no sorrows more poignant than family sorrows. God lives in the family unit and knows family feelings. He has provided a means-through the mediation of his Only Begotten-whereby families may be reunited and affections renewed. "All your losses will be made up to you in the resurrection," the Prophet Joseph Smith declared, "provided you continue faithful. By the vision of the Almighty I have seen it." [^15]

Conclusion

In speaking of the fruits of this everlasting principle-the doctrine that little children shall be saved-a modern Apostle has written:

Truly it is one of the sweetest and most soul-satisfying doctrines of the gospel! It is also one of the greatest evidences of the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith. In his day the fiery evangelists of Christendom were thundering from their pulpits that the road to hell is paved with the skulls of infants not a span long because careless parents had neglected to have their offspring baptized. Joseph Smith's statements, as re corded in the Book of Mormon and latter-day revelation, came as a refreshing breeze of pure truth: little children shall be saved. Thanks be to God for the revelations of his mind where these innocent and pure souls are concerned! [^16]

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., ed. B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1957), 1:245.
[^2] The leaders of the true church should teach of the necessity of repentance and baptism for those who are accountable and capable of committing sin (v. 10). For a discussion of the fact that Adam and Eve's act was transgression and not sin, see Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols., comp. Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 1:114. An excellent treatment of the Latter-day Saint view of the Fall is in LaMar Garrard, "The Fall of Man," Principles of the Gospel in Practice, Proceedings of the 1985 Sidney B. Sperry Symposium (Sandy, Utah: Randall Book Co., 1985), pp. 39-70.
[^3] The leaders of the Church should teach parents that they must repent and be baptized, and humble themselves as their little children (v. 10). Frost, Basic Teachings of the Great Philosophers, pp. 150-51. See also Martin Luther's debate with Erasmus the humanist on the nature of free will in Martin Luther, The Bondage of the Will, translated by Henry Cole (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Book House, 1976).
[^4] The ordinance of baptism appropriately follows the principle of repentance. Since little children, through Christ, are in no need of repentance, they are in no need of baptism. (vv. 11, 19, 25.) This is a particularly interesting heresy. It may well be that the Apostle Paul had reference to this problem in Heb. 12:24.
[^5] Little children are alive in Christ-free from the sins of the sinful world (vv. 12, 22). James E. Talmage, The Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1975), p. 126.
[^6] Any who suppose that children are in need of baptism are devoid of faith (v. 14). James E. Talmage, The Great Apostasy (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1973), p. 119.
[^7] Because a belief in infant baptism evidences a significant departure from the faith of Jesus Christ, any who continue in this belief shall perish eventually as pertaining to the things of righteousness (v. 16). Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 197.
[^8] Bruce R. McConkie, expressing the sentiments of Joseph Fielding Smith, in "The Salvation of Little Children," Ensign, April 1977, p. 6.
[^9] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 196-97.
[^10] From an address at the funeral of Rebecca Adams, 28 October 1967, typescript, pp. 2-3.
[^11] Bruce R. McConkie, "The Salvation of Little Children," Ensign, April 1977, p. 6; see also Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols., comp. Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 2:55-56.
[^12] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols., comp. Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 2:56-57; italics added; cf. McConkie, "The Salvation of Little Children," Ensign, April 1977, p. 6.
[^13] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 199-200; italics added.
[^14] History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., ed. B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1957), 6:316.
[^15] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977), pp. 452-54; see also an article in the Improvement Era, June 1904. For President Smith's discussion of the misunderstanding of Joseph's original teachings, see a sermon entitled "Status of Children in the Resurrection," remarks at a temple fast meeting held in February of 1918, in Improvement Era, 21:567-74 (May 1918); cited also in Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols., comp. James R. Clark (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 5:91-98.
[^16] See Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols., comp. Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 2:54; Bruce R. McConkie, "The Salvation of Little Children," Ensign, April 1977, p. 5.
