Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Life Beyond ( 1986)

9

Many Mansions

In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you.

-John 14:2

Even as all die, so all must rise from the dead, each in his own order, each to his own glory. No righteous deed will go unrewarded and no dark act undetected. The just Paymaster will give to each in full measure, rewarding the small and the great according to their works and the desires of their hearts, even to the granting of all that the Father hath. To the meridian Twelve, as they sat at the Last Supper, Jesus said, "In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you" (John 14:2). That is to say, if judgment were not by works and the rewards of eternity as diverse as the works and desires of men, it would be so completely contrary to everything that I have taught you, and to everything in the revealed word, that I would be obligated to announce this great inconsistency to you.

Surely the rewards that come from God will be worthy of the majesty and power of God. It would be ungodly to grant to man that for which he was unworthy; it would be less than godlike for the divine Father of us all to refuse to share all that he had with those who had laid their all upon his altar. A theology that refuses God the right to make of his children joint heirs, and yet expects the sacrifice of all things by mere mortals, is a theology which demands of men greater magnanimity than of God from whom the very virtue is to have come. The glory of God, which is manifest in all that he does, is nowhere more evident than in the order and nature of the resurrection and the eternal rewards granted to his children.

Resurrection

The Bible can be searched in vain for a definition of resurrection. Once again it is to the revelations of the Restoration that we must turn to part the veil and know of future eternities. And how simple the matter when the Spirit speaks-resurrection is the inseparable union of body and spirit. Amulek stated it thus, "This mortal body is raised to an immortal body, that is from death, even from the first death unto life, that they can die no more; their spirits uniting with their bodies, never to be divided; thus the whole becoming spiritual and immortal, that they can no more see corruption" (Alma 11:45). Or, as Joseph F. Smith declared in his Vision of the Redemption of the Dead, "Their sleeping dust was to be restored unto its perfect frame, bone to his bone, and the sinews and the flesh upon them, the spirit and the body to be united never again to be divided, that they might receive a fulness of joy" (D&C 138:17).

A loving father does not withhold from his children, he does not seek that they be less than he, nor did he choose to father them for the purpose of their becoming his servants. Our God is a corporeal physical being and in the resurrection it is our privilege to become like him. While body and spirit are separated "man cannot receive a fulness of joy" (D&C 93:34); it is in and through the resurrection that such fulness comes. Alma expressed it beautifully: "The soul shall be restored to the body, and the body to the soul; yea, and every limb and joint shall be restored to its body; yea, even a hair of the head shall not be lost; but all things shall be restored to their proper and perfect frame" (Alma 40:23).

The Order of the Resurrections

"For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. But every man in his own order: Christ the firstfruits; afterward they that are Christ's at his coming." (1 Cor. 15:22 - 23; italics added.) Though the resurrection is a free gift to all, men come forth from the grave as they have merited the right-from Jesus Christ, the firstfruits, to those who remain filthy still, or from the most righteous to the least righteous, each man in his appointed time and order.

The First Resurrection or the Morning of the First Resurrection

The scriptural phrases first resurrection or morning of the first resurrection (which is common to patriarchal blessings) are frequently used interchangeably. The phrases are descriptive of those once in paradise, those who bore the title "just men made perfect," those referred to as the just (D&C 76:17), meaning that they are justified, ratified, sealed, or approved of God. These are they to whom the promise has been given that they shall be equal with him in power, might, and dominion (see D&C 76:95). Those coming forth in this resurrection will inherit the celestial kingdom and will enjoy eternal life, which is God's life. Thus the first resurrection is a celestial resurrection.

The Book of Mormon speaks of a first resurrection which included the righteous and faithful from the time of Adam to the time that Christ came forth from the grave. Abinadi described it thus: "And there cometh a resurrection, even a first resurrection; yea, even a resurrection of those that have been, and who are, and who shall be, even until the resurrection of Christ-for so shall he be called. And now, the resurrection of all the prophets, and all those that have believed in their words, or all those that have kept the commandments of God, shall come forth in the first resurrection; therefore, they are the first resurrection." (Mosiah 15:21-22.) This first resurrection is not to be confused with the first resurrection spoken of in the Doctrine and Covenants, which has reference to the coming forth from the grave of the faithful Saints from the time of Christ to the time of his second coming (see D&C 88:96-98). Those living in the Millennium are also spoken of as coming forth in a first resurrection, for they too obtain an exaltation (see D&C 132:19).

The Afternoon of the First Resurrection

"And after this [the morning of the first resurrection or the sounding of the first trump] another angel shall sound, which is the second trump; and then cometh the redemption of those who are Christ's at his coming; who have received their part in that prison which is prepared for them, that they might receive the gospel, and be judged according to men in the flesh" (D&C 88:99). These are heirs of the terrestrial kingdom, those who accepted Christ but not in that faith that would have exalted them. Of the time of Christ's coming we read, "Then shall the heathen nations be re deemed, and they that knew no law shall have part in the first resurrection; and it shall be tolerable for them" (D&C 45:54). That redemption that requires "no law" (meaning that they have not accepted the gospel) and extends a reward that is "tolerable" cannot be confused with the blessings associated with the morning of the first resurrection as previously described.

The Resurrection of the Unjust

"And again, another trump shall sound, which is the third trump; and then come the spirits of men who are to be judged, and are found under condemnation; and these are the rest of the dead; and they live not again until the thousand years are ended, neither again, until the end of the earth. And another trump shall sound, which is the fourth trump, saying: There are found among those who are to remain until that great and last day, even the end, who shall remain filthy still." (D&C 88:100-102.)After the celestial and terrestrial resurrections, after the thousand years, or the millennial era, has ended, comes the resurrection of the unjust-those who will inherit the telestial kingdom and those who have become the children of perdition. Order still prevails; the telestial resurrection precedes that of those whose wickedness places them beyond the power of Christ's redemption. Even hell cannot purge the filth of those who, having had a sure witness and knowledge of heaven's secrets, have denied all and actively sought to crucify Christ afresh.

The Degrees of Glory

The Savior promised that he would teach the gospel to those who were dead. "The hour is coming," Christ said, "in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation" (John 5:28-29). It was while Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon pondered the implications of John's statement that there would be a resurrection of life and a resurrection of damnation, that they received the great vision known to us as the Vision of the Glories. Joseph said: "From sundry revelations which had been received, it was apparent that many important points touching the salvation of man had been taken from the Bible, or lost before it was compiled. It appeared self-evident from what truths were left, that if God rewarded every one according to the deeds done in the body, the term 'Heaven,' as intended for the Saints' eternal home, must include more kingdoms than one." [^1] A series of visions were then opened to the eyes of Joseph and Sidney in which they learned of the division of kingdoms, or the degrees of glory, that will exist in the worlds to come. The highest of these kingdoms was called celestial, and was likened to the glory of the sun; the next was called terrestrial, and was likened to the glory of the moon; and the third, or the lowest of these heavenly glories, was called telestial, and was likened to the glory of the stars. We will briefly describe each.

The Celestial Kingdom

In a subsequent revelation Joseph Smith learned that the earth was a living entity, having both body and spirit; that it, like man, would yet die and be resurrected; and that in the resurrection it would be "sanctified from all unrighteousness" and become the kingdom upon which those who were to be exalted would live. "For after it hath filled the measure of its creation, it shall be crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father; that bodies who are of the celestial kingdom may possess it forever and ever; for, for this intent," the Lord said, "was it made and created, and for this intent are they sanctified." (D&C 88:17-20, 26.) Thus, to obtain the celestial kingdom one must come forth in the morning of the first resurrection and must lay claim in the resurrection to a celestial body. One obtains a celestial body by developing celestial interests, appetites, propensities, desires, attitudes, and inclinations-that is, by living the gospel of Jesus Christ in full. "For he who is not able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom cannot abide a celestial glory" (D&C 88:22).

The celestial kingdom is divided into three heavens or degrees, and in order to obtain the highest, one must be married by the power and authority of the priesthood for time and eternity. Only those who are so married and live true to their marriage covenants continue in the marriage and family relationship in the worlds to come. (D&C 131:1-4.) These become "joint-heirs with Christ" (Rom. 8:17), "into whose hands the Father has given all things-they are they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory" (D&C 76:55-56), and indeed "are gods, even the sons of God" (D&C 76:58), for they are to be equal with him in power, might, and dominion (D&C 76:95). Describing the nature of their society, Joseph Smith stated that the "same sociality which exists among us here will exist among us there, only it will be coupled with eternal glory, which glory we do not now enjoy" (D&C 130:2). Of the other two degrees, or glories, within the celestial kingdom we know only that their inhabitants did not enter into eternal marriage and thus "remain separately and singly, without exaltation, in their saved condition, to all eternity; and from henceforth are not gods, but are angels of God forever and ever" (D&C 132:17).

The Terrestrial Kingdom

The terrestrial or middle kingdom consists of those who come forth in the afternoon of the first resurrection. Four classes of people are given in the Vision of the Glories to represent the nature of souls that will comprise this king dom. First, there are those who died without the gospel law and obviously did not accept it when it was taught to them in the world of the spirits (v. 72). Second, there are those who had the opportunity to accept the gospel in this life and did not do so, but did when the opportunity came to them the second time in the spirit world (vv. 73-74). Such are not celestial because they rejected the gospel in mortality in circumstances in which they were obligated to accept it; nonetheless, they are blessed by their acceptance of it in the spirit world in that they can inherit the terrestrial kingdom. Third, there are "honorable men of the earth, who were blinded by the craftiness of men" (v. 75). As moral and honest people they establish the standard for all that inherit the terrestrial glory and show by way of contrast how much more is expected of those who aspire to be celestial. And fourth, "These are they who are not valiant in the testimony of Jesus; wherefore, they obtain not the crown over the kingdom of our God" (v. 79). To be valiant in testimony is to be courageous, brave, bold, or valorous. By implication, this number will embrace many Latter-day Saints who could stand and bear a powerful testimony but who failed to serve with all their "heart, might, mind and strength," and thus did not "stand blameless" in the day of judgment (D&C 4:2). A testimony of the gospel, independent of faithful service, is not sufficient to save one in the kingdom of God.

The Telestial Kingdom

As baptism is the door through which one enters the earthly kingdom of God and the gate to the heavenly kingdom, so hell is the gate to the telestial world. None will inhabit this kingdom who did not first suffer for their own sins in that part of the spirit prison known to us as hell. Having done so, having "paid the uttermost farthing" (Matt. 5:26), they then come forth clean from sin to the least of the kingdoms of glory, but a kingdom of glory nonetheless. Dramatizing the glory of this, the least of God's kingdoms, the revelation states that it "surpasses all understanding" (v. 89). In so saying, it is not the purpose of the Lord to encourage any to seek after or be satisfied with such a glory, but rather to show again by contrast the marvel of the celestial realm and to indicate the mercies and blessings that the Lord will give even to the wicked. Indeed, all that the God of heaven need do to create a world that surpasses all earthly understanding would be to alleviate death, hunger, pain, and evil. Such a state would surely transcend the imagination of men.

Those inheriting the telestial world constitute two major classes. First, there are those who declare allegiance to false religions, who used their pretended devotion to some principle, cause, or prophet, as an excuse to reject the fulness of the gospel when it was brought to them (vv. 99-101). Had their rejection of the gospel not been the result of their unwillingness to repent of their sins, or because they were honestly deceived, they would have come forth in the terrestrial resurrection. The second class of people comprising the telestial kingdom are "liars, and sorcerers, and adulterers, and whoremongers, and whosoever loves and makes a lie," as well as idolaters and murderers (v. 103; Rev. 21:8; 22:15). These are they of whom Alma said, "They have no part nor portion of the Spirit of the Lord; for behold, they chose evil works rather than good" (Alma 40:13). Of these the revelation declares: "Where God and Christ dwell they cannot come, worlds without end" (v. 112).

Conclusion

The reader is reminded that everything that we have been able to say about the nature and order of the resurrection has latter-day revelation as its source. The same is true of all that we know of the various degrees of glory; our knowledge of this doctrine is also entirely dependent on modern revelation. On these matters the Bible as it has come to us is either ambiguous or silent. This is a rather surprising thing, in view of the importance of these doctrines as a source of faith, understanding, comfort, and encouragement. It is even more surprising when it is remembered that the verity of the Christian belief that Jesus is the Christ is fully dependent on the reality of the resurrection. Christianity rises or falls on the doctrine. If there was no resurrection, Jesus of Nazareth was not the Christ and our bodies will be consigned endlessly to mortal dust and our spirits will be forever divorced from the presence of God (see 1 Cor. 15:12-17).

It is also significant that the testimony of the New Testament disciples of Christ's resurrection, like that of our dispensation, was wholly dependent on revelation. The resurrected Christ manifested himself to "above five hundred brethren" (1 Cor. 15:6) in the hills of Galilee (Matt. 28:16-18), along with numerous other appearances in the Old World. "Him God raised up the third day, and shewed him openly," Peter testified, "not to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen before of God" (Acts 10:40-41). The system of testifying of Christ in the New World was the same. Again Christ showed himself openly to a multitude, "and the multitude did see and hear and bear record; and they know that their record is true for they all of them did see and hear, every man for himself; and they were in number about two thousand and five hundred souls; and they did consist of men, women, and children" (3 Ne. 17:25).

From the early hours of that Sunday morning, when Christ first appeared to Mary Magdalene and then the other women, to the time of his return, when he will be attended by "ten thousands of his saints" (Jude 1:14), those men, women, and children who bear a proper testimony of him must testify also of the principle of current revelation. We can know Christ and the doctrines of the afterlife in no other way. Our testimony must be one of the opening of the heavens, the manifestation of Christ, the calling of prophets, the dispensing of revelation, and the granting of the gift of the Holy Ghost; the knowledge of Christ and the nature of the worlds to come can be had in no other way. Such is our testimony.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Lectures on Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), 7:9.
