Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Life Beyond ( 1986)

10

The Gift of Salvation

If you keep my commandments and endure to the end you shall have eternal life, which gift is the greatest of all the gifts of God.

-D&C 14:7

Salvation is the greatest of all the gifts of God. It is the rightful inheritance of those who have come to think as God thinks, believe as he believes, act as he acts, and thus experience what he experiences. It entitles such individuals to the power and might of the Eternal Father and thus a joint heirship with Christ the Lord. They become equal with their Master in power, might, and dominion. Such are the promises extended to those of whom the scriptures declare: "Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most High" (Ps. 82:6).

Immortality and Eternal Life

Immortality

To possess the gift of immortality is to have the power to live forever, the capacity to endure every obstacle to life. The scriptures speak expressly of immortality as one of the wondrous gifts to man through the atonement of Jesus Christ. And yet we recognize that the spirit of man is already an immortal entity, a conscious personality which cannot cease to exist. Even if there had been no Atonement, the spirit of man would live on everlastingly. But the immortality of which the scriptures almost always speak is that immortality associated with the immortal soul or resurrected body-the inseparable union of body and spirit equipped thereafter for a kingdom of glory. Only through the actions of a God-the redemptive labors of Jesus the Messiah-can such an immortal state be attained. "Now if we be dead with Christ," Paul taught, "we believe that we shall also live with him. Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead dieth no more; death hath no more dominion over him. For in that he died, he died unto sin once; but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God." (Rom. 6:8-10.)

Spiritual and Immortal

In Amulek's description of the resurrected body, he uses the word spiritual synonymously with the word immortal. This usage appears to be common to the teachings of the prophets of all ages, given to denote a state which is not subject to death. (Cf. 1 Cor. 15:44; D&C 88:27; Moses 3:9.) Immortality is a free gift to all men and women who qualified for the second estate, a gift of grace which requires neither righteousness nor rigorous attention to God's laws, "for as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive" (1 Cor. 15:22). We cannot improve upon Amulek's expression: "Now, this restoration [of body and spirit] shall come to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, both the wicked and the righteous" (Alma 11:44; italics added).

Eternal Life

Eternal life is the kind of life enjoyed by our Father in Heaven; it is God's life (see Moses 7:35). It consists primarily of two things: (1) inheriting, receiving, and possessing the fulness of the glory of the Father; and (2) a continuation of the family unit in eternity (see D&C 132:19).

Immortality, as we have indicated, is a free gift to all. Eternal life, on the other hand, is something for which one must qualify through faithful obedience to the statutes and commandments provided through the plan of salvation. Both of these conditions are made available through our Lord's suffering in Gethsemane and on Golgotha, as well as his rise to glorious immortality from the Arimathean's tomb. In a way still incomprehensible to mortal and finite minds, our Savior's conquest of physical death-his bursting the bands and hold of death-passed upon all men: because he rose, so we all will likewise rise, each in his appointed time and order. Immortality, the measure of the quantity of an everlasting life, is thus a reality. Also inexplicable is the manner in which our Deliverer descended below all things and took upon him the weight and effects of the sins of all mankind, making repentance and forgiveness available to the penitent. Eternal life, an expression descriptive of the quality of one's immortality, is thus also a reality and a possibility for those who accept and apply the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Having spoken in a modern revelation of the creation and fall of Adam, the Lord observed: "And thus did I, the Lord God, appoint unto man the days of his probation-that by his natural death he might be raised in immortality unto eternal life, even as many as would believe" (D&C 29:43; italics added). Paul wrote to Timothy of our Master as he "who hath abolished death, and hath brought [eternal] life and immortality to light through the gospel" (2 Tim. 1:10). Succinctly capsulizing the meaning and purpose and labors of godhood, the Lord said to Moses: "For behold, this is my work and my glory-to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39; cf. John 11:25).

Salvation and Exaltation

"Salvation consists in the glory, authority, majesty, power, and dominion which Jehovah possesses and in nothing else; and no being can possess it but himself or one like him." [^1] So taught Joseph Smith to the School of the Prophets in the winter of 1834-35. Both the Prophet of the Restoration and Paul the Apostle taught that Christ had gained salvation because he had put all enemies under his feet, the last enemy being death. It is just so with all men. [^2]

Salvation is eternal life. It is life in the highest heaven, life among the Gods and the angels. The word salvation means exactly the same thing as eternal life, but simply lays stress upon one's saved condition, his state being one of deliverance from death and sin through the atoning sacrifice of Jesus Christ. Exaltation is another word with which we have come to identify the glories of the celestial kingdom; exaltation has the same meaning as eternal life; it has the same meaning as salvation. To be saved is to be exalted, the latter term simply laying stress upon the elevated and ennobled status of one who so qualifies to dwell with and be a part of the Church of the Firstborn, the Church of the Exalted. Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written:

We are ofttimes prone to create artificial distinctions, to say that salvation means one thing and exaltation another, to suppose that salvation means to be resurrected, but that exaltation or eternal life is something in addition thereto. It is true that there are some passages of scripture that use salvation in a special and limited sense in order to give an overall perspective of the plan of salvation that we would not otherwise have. (2 Ne. 9:1 - 27; D&C 76:40 - 49; 132:15-17.) These passages show the difference between general or universal salvation that consists in coming forth from the grave in immortality, and specific or individual salvation that consists of an inheritance in the celestial kingdom....

Since it is the prophetic purpose to lead men to full salvation in the highest heaven of the celestial world, when they speak and write about salvation, almost without exception, they mean eternal life or exaltation. They use the terms salvation, exaltation, and eternal life as synonyms, as words that mean exactly the same thing without any difference, distinction, or variance whatever.R3

Amulek certainly equated the two terms eternal life and salvation. He said concerning the coming of the Messiah, "And he shall come into the world to redeem his people; and he shall take upon him the transgressions of those who believe on his name; and these are they that shall have eternal life, and salvation cometh to none else" (Alma 11:40; italics added). In a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, the Savior said, "If thou wilt do good, yea, and hold out faithful to the end, thou shalt be saved in the kingdom of God, which is the greatest of all the gifts of God; for there is no gift greater than the gift of salvation" (D&C 6:13; italics added). Two months later the Lord spoke to David Whitmer, "And, if you keep my commandments and endure to the end you shall have eternal life, which gift is the greatest of all the gifts of God" ( D&C 14:7; italics added).

Eternal marriage is the gate through which those intent upon eternal life must enter. "In the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees," Joseph Smith explained. "And in order to obtain the highest, a man must enter into this order of the priesthood [meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage]; And if he does not, he cannot obtain it. He may enter into the other, but that is the end of his kingdom; he cannot have an increase." (D&C 131:1 - 4.) The Prophet also taught: "Except a man and his wife enter into an everlasting covenant and Be married for eternity, while in this probation, by the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood, they will cease to increase when they die; that is, they will not have any children after the resurrection. But those who are married by the power and authority of the priesthood in this life, and continue without committing the sin against the Holy Ghost, will continue to increase and have children in the celestial glory." [^3] The scriptures thus speak of one qualifying for the blessing of eternal lives (see D&C 132:22-25). To have eternal lives is to possess eternal life in the highest degree of the celestial kingdom, to be worthy of salvation, and to be a candidate for exaltation. The phrase eternal lives simply lays stress upon the right of a worthy man and woman to enjoy "the continuation of the seeds," the everlasting perpetuation of the family unit. [^4]

Who Then Can Be Saved?

There is no ceiling on the number of saved beings. The design of God's plan is to save all who will be saved. We state as an article of our faith: "We believe that through the Atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel" (A of F 1:3; italics added). No person was promised eternal life in premortality on an unconditional basis, and likewise no soul was condemned as reprobate before the foundations of the earth were laid. [^5] In the words of Lehi to his son Jacob, "salvation is free" (2 Ne. 2:4), meaning that it is freely available to all. Our God does not operate by some "secret agenda," for his plan and his purposes are available and accessible to all. Nephi taught that "the Lord God worketh not in darkness." Further, "He doeth not any thing save it be for the benefit of the world; for he loveth the world, even that he layeth down his own life that he may draw all men unto him. Wherefore, he commandeth none that they shall not partake of his salvation." Emphatically, Nephi declared: "Hath he commanded any that they should not partake of his salvation? Behold I say unto you, Nay; but he hath given it free for all men; and he hath commanded his people that they should persuade all men to repentance." (2 Ne. 26:23-24, 27.)

Innumerable Hosts to Be Saved

The scriptures speak often of a "strait gate" and a "narrow way" which lead unto that life which we have come to know as eternal life. Stress is frequently placed upon the fact that "few" will ultimately get onto that path and navigate that course which will result in a saved condition hereafter. "Strait is the gate, and narrow the way that leadeth unto the exaltation and the continuation of the lives, and few there be that find it, because ye receive me not in the world neither do ye know me." On the other hand, "broad is the gate, and wide the way that leadeth to the deaths; and many there are that go in thereat, because they receive me not, neither do they abide in my law." (D&C 132:22, 25; cf. Matt. 7:13-14.)

These are scriptural passages which must be viewed in proper perspective. In the long run, we must ever keep in mind that our God and Father is a successful parent, one who will save far more of his children than he will lose! If these words seem startling at first, let us reason for a moment. In comparison to the number of wicked souls at any given time, perhaps the numbers of faithful followers seem small. But we must keep in mind how many of our spirit brothers and sisters-almost an infinite number-will be saved. What of the children who died before the age of accountability-billions of little ones from fine days of Adam to the time of the Millennium? What of the billions of those who never had opportunity to hear the gospel message in mortality, but who afterwards received the glad tidings, this because of a disposition which hungered and thirsted after righteousness? And, might we ask, What of the innumerable hosts who qualified for exaltation from Enoch's city, from Melchizedek's Salem, or from the golden era of the Nephites? What of the countless billions of those children to be born during the great millennial era-during a time when disease and death have no sting nor victory over mankind? This is that time of which we have spoken already, a season when "children shall grow up without sin unto salvation" (D&C 45:58). Given the renewed and paradisiacal state of the earth, it may well be that more persons will live on the earth during the thousand years of our Lord's reign-persons who are of at least a terrestrial nature-than the combined total of all who have lived during the previous six thousand years of the earth's temporal continuance. Indeed, who can count the number of saved beings in eternity? Our God, who is triumphant in all battles against the forces of evil, will surely be victorious in the numbers of his children who will be saved.

Salvation: A Process

In regard to the Latter-day Saints, it is vital that we have hope, that we point and align and rivet ourselves on that goal of eternal life, this in spite of our imperfections. Gaining salvation and attaining perfection are processes, lengthy processes which will go on even beyond the time of death. (See D&C 93:19.) In short, there are no instant Christians, no sudden disciples. In speaking to the youth of the Church, Elder Bruce R. McConkie taught the following vital lessons:

We do not work out our salvation in a moment; it doesn't come to us in an instant, suddenly. Gaining salvation is a process. Paul says, "Work out your salvation with fear and trembling" (Philip. 2:12). To some members of the Church who had been baptized and who were on the course leading to eternal life, he said, "Now is our salvation nearer than when we believed" (Rom. 13:11). That is, "We have made some progress along the straight and narrow path. We are going forward, and if we continue in that direction, eternal life will be our everlasting reward...."

We say that a man has to be born again, meaning that he has to die as pertaining to the unrighteous things in the world. Paul said, "Crucify the old man of sin and come forth in a newness of life" (Rom. 6:6). We are born again when we die as pertaining to unrighteousness and when we live as pertaining to the things of the Spirit. But that doesn't happen in an instant, suddenly. That also is a process. Being born again is a gradual thing, except in a few isolated instances that are so miraculous that they get written up in the scriptures. As far as the generality of the members of the Church are concerned, we are born again by degrees, and we are born again to added light and added knowledge and added desires for righteous ness as we keep the commandments....

So it is with the plan of salvation. We have to become perfect to be saved in the celestial kingdom. But nobody becomes perfect in this life. Only the Lord Jesus attained that state, and he had an advantage that none of us has. He was the Son of God, and he came into this life with a spiritual capacity and a talent and an inheritance that exceeded beyond all comprehension what any of the rest of us was born with. Our revelations say that he was like unto God in the premortal life and he was, under the Father, the creator of worlds without number. That Holy Being was the Holy One of Israel anciently and he was the Sinless One in mortality. This shows that we can strive and go forward toward that goal, but no other mortal-not the greatest prophets nor the mightiest apostles nor any of the righteous saints of any of the ages-has ever been perfect, but we must become perfect to gain a celestial inheritance. As it is with being born again. and as it is with sanctifying our souls, so becoming perfect in Christ is a process....

As members of the Church, if we chart a course leading to eternal life; if we begin the processes of spiritual rebirth, and are going in the right direction; if we chart a course of sanctifying our souls, and degree by degree arc going in that direction; and if we chart a course of becoming perfect. and, step by step and phase by phase, are perfecting our souls by overcoming the world, then it is absolutely guaranteed-there is no question whatever about it-we shall gain eternal life. Even though we have spiritual rebirth ahead of us, perfection ahead of us, the full degree of sanctification ahead of us, if we chart a course and follow it to the best of our ability in this life, then when we go out of this life we'll continue in exactly that same course. We'll no longer be subject to the passions and the appetites of the flesh. We will have passed successfully the tests of this mortal probation and in due course we'll get the fulness of our Father's kingdom-and that means eternal life in his everlasting presence.

The Prophet told us that there are many things that people have to do, even after the grave, to work out their salvation. We're not going to be perfect the minute we die. But if we've charted a course, if our desires are right, if our appetites are curtailed and bridled, and if we believe in the Lord and are doing to the very best of our abilities what we ought to do. we'll go on to everlasting salvation, which is the fulness of eternal reward in our Father's kingdom.

Elder McConkie then observed: "I think we ought to have hope; I think we ought to have rejoicing." [^6]

Few of those who have embraced the ways of the world will enter the gate and traverse the strait anti narrow path. Many of our Father's children, however, even "an innumerable company" of the just (see D&C 76:67; 138:12), will come out of the world, get onto the path, and continue faithful until they fall down at the base of that tree whose fruit is the most desirable of all things and the most joyous to the soul.

The Promise of Salvation

The Lord has declared anew in our dispensation that "he who doeth the works of righteousness shall receive his reward, even peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come" (D&C 59:23). Isaiah had written some twenty-six hundred years earlier, "And the work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever" (Isa. 32:17). Those in this life who conduct themselves with fidelity and devotion to God and his laws shall eventually know that peace "which passeth all understanding" (Philip. 4:7), the calming but powerful assurance that one has successfully met the challenges of mortality. These are they who have lived by every word of God and are willing to serve the Lord at all hazards. They have made their callings and elections sure [^7] For them the day of judgment has been advanced, and the blessings associated with the glories of the celestial kingdom are assured. They receive what the Prophet Joseph called "the more sure word of prophecy." "The more sure word of prophecy," he explained, "means a man's knowing that he is sealed up unto eternal life, by revelation and the spirit of prophecy, through the power of the Holy Priest hood. It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance." (D&C 131:5-6.) Though it is true, as President Marion G. Romney observed, that "the fulness of eternal life is not attainable in mortality,... the peace which is its harbinger and which comes as a result of making one's calling and election sure is attainable in this life." [^8]

The Prophet Joseph Smith extended the following challenging invitation to the Saints: "I would exhort you to go on and continue to call upon God until you make your calling and election sure for yourselves, by obtaining this more sure word of prophecy, and wait patiently for the promise until you obtain it." [^9] Latter-day Saints who have received the ordinances of salvation-including the blessings of the temple endowment and eternal marriage-may thus press forward in the work of the Lord and with quiet dignity and patient maturity seek to be worthy of gaining the certain assurance of salvation before the end of their mortal lives. But should one not formally receive the more sure word of prophecy in this life, he has the scriptural promise that faithfully enduring to the end-keeping the covenants and commandments from baptism to the end of his life (see Mosiah 18:8-9)-eventuates in the promise of eternal life, whether that promise be received here or here after. (See D&C 14:7; 53:7; 2 Ne. 31:20; Mosiah 5:15.) "But blessed are they who are faithful and endure, whether in life or in death, for they shall inherit eternal life" (D&C 50:5; italics added). Bruce R. McConkie expressed the following sentiments at the funeral of Elder S. Dilworth Young:

If we die in the faith, that is the same thing as saying that our calling and election has been made sure and that we will go on to eternal reward hereafter. As far as faithful members of the Church are concerned, they have charted a course leading to eternal life. This life is the time that is appointed as a probationary estate for men to prepare to meet God, and as far as faithful people are concerned, if they are in the line of their duty, if they are doing what they ought to do, although they may not have been perfect in this sphere, their probation is ended. Now there will be some probation for some other people hereafter. But for the faithful saints of God, now is the time and the day, and their probation is ended with their death, and they will not thereafter depart from the path. It is true as the Prophet Joseph Smith said, that there are many things that have to be done "even beyond the grave" to work out our salvation, but we'll stay in the course and we will not alter from it, if we have been true and faithful in this life. [^10]

Conclusion

Salvation in the highest heaven is a reality and a possibility, a goal within the reach of all mankind. These precious promises-made available through the atoning blood of Jesus our Lord-give focus and direction to our actions. Salvation, eternal life, eternal lives, exaltation-all expressions connoting the glories of the celestial kingdom and a life which is similar to God's own life-represent the grand ends to our myriad means, the reason we do what we do in the Church and in the home. To those who have developed "like precious faith" with the ancients come the blessings enjoyed by the ancients: the fulness of the glory of the Father and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever. We exult, "How glorious is the voice we hear from heaven, pro claiming in our ears, glory, and salvation, and honor, and immortality, and eternal life; kingdoms, principalities, and powers!" (D&C 128:23.)

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards & Sons, 1855-86), 15:249.
[^2] Boyd K. Packer, Conference Report, October 1983, p. 22.
[^3] From Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, and Anthon H. Lund, "The Origin of Man, "Improvement Era, 13:75-81 (November 1909); also in Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols., comp. James R. Clark (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 4:200-206; italics added.
[^4] Bruce R. McConkie, The Mortal Messiah, 4 books (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979-81), 1:23.
[^5] Harold B. Lee, Conference Report, October 1973, pp. 5-8.
[^6] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 343.
[^7] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 343.
[^8] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 345-46.
[^9] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards & Sons, 1855-86), 11:249.
[^10] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards & Sons, 1855-86), 13:57.
