Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Life Beyond ( 1986)

11

From Everlasting to Everlasting

Then shall they be gods, because they have no end; therefore shall they be from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue; then shall they be above all, because all things are subject unto them. Then shah they be gods, because they have all power, and the angels are subject unto them.

-D&C 132:20

The gospel has been restored, the heavens have been opened, the veil has been rent, and the great God, the Father of us all, has been revealed. The secret of the ages has been made known-God is an exalted man! We are in reality his children and thus of the lineage of the Gods. Our spirits were begotten of heavenly parents, our mortal bodies bear God's image and likeness, and our destiny is to become as he is. Let then the heavens ring with these singular truths: God is our Father! We are his children! We can become as he is. Let none in the household of faith be guilty of reducing these exalted verities to myth or metaphor, and let then our names be numbered in that book of remembrance, commenced by father Adam, in which a "genealogy was kept of the children of God" (Moses 6:8).

Eternity Past

Among the myriad truths revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith as a part of the doctrinal restoration, perhaps none is more glorious and instructive than the simple reality of the premortal existence of man. It is a doctrine which is both logical and soul-expanding, a verity to which the Spirit of God can and will bear a powerful witness. Perhaps Joseph Smith's first encounter with this truth came in his work with the Book of Mormon, as he translated the thirteenth chapter of the book of Alma. It is here that the prophet Alma speaks of those who were "called and prepared from the foundation of the world" to receive the blessings of the priest hood, and of those who demonstrated "exceeding faith and good works" in that pristine existence, thereby qualifying for special opportunities in their second or mortal estate. We have no way of knowing how much light this one chapter shed forth upon the Saints during the early days of the Restoration; in fact, Elder Orson Pratt indicated that had additional and subsequent light and knowledge not been forthcoming in regard to this doctrine, he probably would not have recognized or discerned the mystery in Alma 13. [^1]

It was while the Prophet was engaged in his inspired translation of the Bible that the mind of the latter-day seer was enlightened in regard to the matter of man's pre-earthly existence. While translating the book of Genesis, Joseph came to know of the Grand Council in Heaven, of the occasion wherein the Lord Jehovah was chosen as the chief advocate and proponent of the plan of the Eternal Father, and of the time when Lucifer and his hosts were cast from heaven and denied forever the opportunity for a second estate (see Moses 4:1-4). Additional details of this life before life were forthcoming as Joseph Smith translated the papyrus which came to be known as the book of Abraham. This Abrahamic account spoke of the time wherein the father of the faithful saw in vision the premortal spirits. Abraham's attention was directed to the "noble and great ones," of whom the Lord said, "These I will make my rulers" (Abr. 3:22-23). Through the lenses of modern revelation, Latter-day Saints were able to recognize-in heretofore mysterious biblical passages-allusions to the life before mortal birth. Answers were found to age-old questions, while meaning and purpose began to replace hopelessness and doubt. Elder Boyd K. Packer observed: "There is no way to make sense out of life without a knowledge of the doctrine of premortal life. The idea that mortal birth is the beginning is preposterous. There is no way to explain life if you believe that. The notion that life ends with mortal death is ridiculous. There is no way to face life if you believe that. When we understand the doctrine of premortal life, then things fit together and make sense." [^2]

The revelations of the Restoration make plain the fact that "man was also in the beginning with God" (D&C93:29). An official statement of the First Presidency issued in 1909 affirmed: "The doctrine of the pre-existence-revealed so plainly, particularly in latter days, pours a wonderful flood of light upon the otherwise mysterious problem of man's origin. It shows that man, as a spirit, was begotten and born of heavenly parents, and reared to maturity in the eternal mansions of the Father, prior to coming upon the earth in a temporal body to undergo an experience in mortality." [^3] Further, in speaking of the diverse nature of spirits that always follows as a result of free agency, Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written:

Being subject to law, and having their agency, all the spirits of men, while yet in the Eternal Presence, developed aptitudes, talents, capacities, and abilities of every sort, kind, and degree. During the long expanse of life which then was, an infinite variety of talents and abilities came into being. As the ages rolled, no two spirits remained alike. Mozart became a musician; Einstein centered his interest in mathematics; Michelangelo turned his attention to painting. Cain was a liar, a schemer, a rebel who maintained a close affinity with Lucifer. Abraham and Moses and all of the prophets sought and obtained the talent for spirituality. Mary and Eve were two of the greatest of all the spirit daughters of the father. The whole house of Israel, known and segregated out from their fellows, was inclined toward spiritual things. And so it went through all the hosts of heaven, each individual developing such talents and abilities as his soul desired. [^4]

And thus we see that diversity and difference are not qualities descriptive only of the mortal and postmortal realms; from the period of time prior to mortal birth, man has chosen to distinguish himself (one way or the other) by his actions. President Harold B. Lee taught:

May I ask each of you again the question, "Who are you?" You are all the sons and daughters of God. Your spirits were created and lived as organized intelligences before the world was. You have been blessed to have a physical body because of your obedience to certain commandments in that premortal state. You are now born into a family to which you have come, into the nations through which you have come, as a reward for the kind of lives you lived before you came here and at a tinge in the world's history, as the Apostle Paul taught the men of Athens [Acts 17:24-27] and as the Lord revealed to Moses [Deuteronomy 32:8-9], determined by the faithfulness of each of those who lived before this world was created ....

It would seem very clear, then [having just quoted Paul and Moses], that those born to the lineage of Jacob ... were born into the most illustrious lineage of any of those who came upon the earth as mortal beings.

All these rewards were seemingly promised, or foreordained, before the world was. Surely these matters must have been determined by the kind of lives we had lived in that pro-mortal spirit world. Some may question these assumptions, but at the same time they will accept without any question the belief that each one of us will be judged when we leave this earth according to his deeds during our lives here in mortality. Isn't it just as reasonable to believe that what we have received here in this earth life was given to each of us according to the merits of our conduct before we came here? [^5]

Life-for man and God-is a grand continuum, extending from one aspect of eternity, then into time, then back into eternity.

As God Once Was

"There are but a very few beings in the world," Joseph Smith stated in the King Follett Sermon, "who understand rightly the character of God. The great majority of mankind do not comprehend anything, either that which is past, or that which is to come, as it respects their relationship to God. They do not know, neither do they understand the nature of that relationship; and consequently they know but little above the brute beast, or more than to eat, drink, and sleep. This is all man knows about God or his existence, unless it is given by the inspiration of the Almighty." [^6] The choice seer of the Restoration then tore away the cobwebs of the past, rent the veil of unbelief and ignorance, and shattered the religious traditions of the day regarding the Great God who dwells in heaven. He taught of God's past, which thereby unfolded man's future and potential destiny. Comparing the natures of God and man, the Prophet said: "If men do not comprehend the character of God, they do not comprehend themselves." [^7]

God himself was once as we are now, and is an exalted man, and sits enthroned in yonder heavens! That is the great secret. If the veil were rent today, and the great God who holds this world in its orbit, and who upholds all worlds and all things by his power, was to make himself visible,-I say, if you were to see him today, you would see him like a man in form-like yourselves in all the person, image, and very form as a man; for Adam was created in the very fashion, image and likeness of God, and received instruction from, and walked, talked and conversed with him, as one man talks and communes with another.

In order to understand the subject of the dead, for consolation of those who mourn for the loss of their friends [note how the Prophet here ties an understanding of God's true nature to a deeper peace associated with life after death], it is necessary we should understand the character and Being of God and how he came to be so; for I am going to tell you how God came to be God. We have imagined and supposed that God was God from all eternity. I will refute that idea, and take away the veil, so that you may see.

These are incomprehensible ideas to some, but they are simple. It is the first principle of the Gospel to know for a certainty the Character of God, and to know that we may converse with him as one man converses with another, and that he was once a man like us; yea, that God himself, the Father of us all, dwelt on an earth, the same as Jesus Christ himself did . ... [^8]

Expanding upon that which he had learned from the Prophet Joseph, Brigham Young explained that God the Father "has passed the ordeals we are now passing through; he has received an experience, has suffered and enjoyed, and knows all that we know regarding the toils, sufferings, life and death of this mortality, for he has passed through the whole of it, and has received his crown and exaltation." [^9]

How much more perfect and complete can our worship of the Great God be when we come to know of his true character! How appropriate it is for mortal man to worship and give total devotion and allegiance to an exalted Man, a Man of Holiness. To know that eons ago our God was once a man does not lessen him in our esteem or perspective, but rather opens the divine door to an infinitude of possibilities regarding man. President Brigham Young observed, "Some believe or conceive the idea that to know God would lessen him in our estimation; but I can say that for me to understand any principle or being, on earth or in Heaven, it does not lessen its true value to me, but, on the contrary, it increases it; and the more I can know of God, the dearer and more precious He is to me, and the more exalted are my feelings toward Him." [^10]

As God Now Is

Our Father's development and progression over an infinitely long period of time has brought him to the point at which he now presides as God Almighty, He who is omnipotent, omniscient, and, by means of his Holy Spirit, omnipresent: he has all power, all knowledge, and is, through the Light of Christ, in and through all things. In speaking of the importance of our God possessing all knowledge in order for his children to exercise faith in him, Joseph Smith explained, "Without the knowledge of all things God would not be able to save any portion of his creatures; for it is by reason of the knowledge which he has of all things, from the beginning to the end, that enables him to give that understanding to his creatures by which they are made partakers of eternal life; and if it were not for the idea existing in the minds of men that God had all knowledge it would be impossible for them to exercise faith in him." [^11] Joseph Smith went on to teach those in the School of the Prophets that what was true of God's knowledge was true of every other virtue: the Father of us all possesses all principles and all attributes (for example, faith or power, justice, judgment, mercy, and truth) in perfection. [^12]

In other words, where every attribute and every characteristic are concerned, the Lord is perfect and in him is embodied the totality of what is involved. Can anyone suppose that God does not have all charity, that he falls short in integrity or honesty, or that there is any truth that he does not know? There is a statement in our literature that says that the Prophet and his associates learned, by translating the papyrus received from the catacombs of Egypt, that life had been going on in this system for 2,555,000,000 years. It seems reasonable to me that a God who has been creating, expanding, governing, and regulating worlds for a period that is so infinite that you and I have no way of comprehending its duration has attained a state where he knows all things and nothing is withheld. [^13]

Our God progresses in the sense that his kingdoms expand and his dominions multiply. As his children participate in the new and everlasting covenant of marriage and thereafter prove worthy of the blessings associated with that order of priesthood, then "by this law is the continuation of the works of my Father, wherein he glorifieth himself" (D&C 132:32; italics added; of. v. 63). Joseph Smith, speaking for the Savior in the King Follett Sermon, said: "My Father worked out his kingdom with fear and trembling, and I must do the same; and when I get my kingdom, I shall present it to my Father, so that he may obtain kingdom upon kingdom, and it will exalt him in glory. He will then take a higher exaltation, and I will take his place, and thereby become exalted myself." The Prophet then continued: "So that Jesus treads in the tracks of his Father, and inherits what God did before; and God is thus glorified and exalted in the salvation and exaltation of all his children." [^14]

What Man May Become

As early as February of 1832, in the Vision of the Glories, Joseph Smith learned by revelation of a righteous man's possibilities beyond the grave. In speaking of those who come forth in the resurrection of the just with a celestial body, the revelation stated: "They are they who are the church of the Firstborn. They are they into whose hands the Father has given all things-they arc they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory; and are priests of the Most High, after the order of Melchizedek, which was after the order of Enoch, which was after the order of the Only Begotten Son. Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God." (D&C 76:54-58; italics added.) In the Lectures on Faith Joseph taught further that "all those who keep his [God's] commandments shall grow up from grace to grace, and become heirs of the heavenly kingdom, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ; possessing the same mind, being transformed into the same image or likeness, even the express image of him who fills all in all; being filled with the fullness of his glory, and become one in him, even as the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are one." [^15]

While attending a patriarchal blessing meeting in 1836, young Lorenzo Snow was told by Joseph Smith, Sr., "You will become as great as you can possibly wish-even as great as God, and you cannot wish to be greater." [^16] In the spring of 1840 Elder Lorenzo Snow had a singular spiritual experience. He writes: "The Spirit of the Lord rested mightily upon me-the eyes of my understanding were opened, and I saw as clear as the sun at noonday, with wonder and astonishment, the pathway of God and man. I formed the following couplet which expresses the revelation, as it was shown me, and explains Father Smith's dark saying to me at a blessing meeting in the Kirtland Temple, prior to my baptism." The couplet was recorded as follows: "As man now is, God once was; As God now is, man may be." After the Prophet Joseph Smith's Follett Sermon, Lorenzo felt he could then teach the doctrine publicly. [^17] The couplet is expanded in the following poem penned by Brother Snow in response to the Apostle John's statement in 1 Jn. 3:1-3:

Dear Brother:

Hast thou not been unwisely bold, Man's destiny to thus unfold? To raise, promote such high desire, Such vast ambition thus inspire?

Still, 'tis no phantom that we trace Man's ultimatum in life's race; This royal path has long been trod By righteous men, each now a God:

As Abra'm, Isaac, Jacob, too, First babes, then men-to gods they grew. As man now is, our God once was; As now God is, so man may be- Which doth unfold man's destiny.

For John declares: When Christ we see Like unto him we'll truly be. And he who has this hope within, Will purify himself from sin.

Who keep this object grand in view, To folly, sin, will bid adieu, Nor wallow in the mire anew;

Nor ever seek to carve his name High on the shaft of worldly fame; But here his ultimatum trace: The head of all his spirit race.

Ah, well: that taught by you, dear Paul, 'Though much amazed, we see it all; Our Father God, has ope'ed our eyes, We cannot view it otherwise.

The boy, like to his father grown, Has but attained unto his own; To grow to sire from state of son, Is not 'gainst Nature's course to run.

A son of God, like God to be, Would not be robbing Deity; And he who has this hope within, Will purify himself from sin.

You're right, St. John, supremely right: Whoe'er essays to climb this height, Will cleanse himself from sin entire- Or else 'twere needless to aspire. [^18]

Who is there among mortal men that can fully grasp these transcendent verities? Man may become as God himself! Let those who disagree howl as they may! Such is within the reach of all who will pay the price. This marvelous accomplishment-the ability to be even as our exalted Sire-is the consummation of that process of spiritual development which begins in premortality, continues with an accelerated pace while in the flesh, and moves on to realization in the worlds beyond the grave. Joseph Smith the Prophet thus gave the supreme definition of eternal life: "Here, then, is eternal life-to know the only wise and true God; and you have got to learn how to be Gods yourselves, and to be kings and priests to God, the same as all Gods have done before you, namely, by going from one small degree to another, and from a small capacity to a great one; from grace to grace, from exaltation to exaltation, until you attain to the resurrection of the dead, and are able to dwell in everlasting burnings, and to sit in glory, as do those who sit enthroned in everlasting power." [^19]

Conclusion

By opening the veil and revealing the nature and kind of being God is, Joseph the Prophet thereby made known in concurrent fashion what the nature and kind of being man is. Man is of the same species as God, and as such has the capacity, through extended righteousness and faith, to rise to the station of a god. Our God is not possessive of god-hood, but is an exalted Father who pleads with his posterity with tender regard to follow the path he has already trod, a path which leads not only to the ultimate in joy and happiness, but also to a complete realization of all it was intended for man to become. The cup with its draught of possibilities beyond the grave runneth over, a cup extended to the obedient. The beckoning call of the Lord is, "Drink, then, the heavenly draught, and live!"

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hugh Nibley, When the Lights Went Out (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 35-36.
[^2] J. A. MacCulloch, The Harrowing of Hell (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1930), p. 31.
[^3] J. A. MacCulloch, The Harrowing of Hell (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1930), p. 32.
[^4] J. A. MacCulloch, The Harrowing of Hell (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1930), p. 32.
[^5] 2 Maccabees 12:45.
[^6] Louis Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews, 7 vols. (Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication Society of America, 1968), 6:332.
[^7] Louis Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews, 7 vols. (Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication Society of America, 1968), 3:97.
[^8] J. A. MacCulloch, The Harrowing of Hell (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1930), pp. 48-49.
[^9] J. A. MacCulloch, The Harrowing of Hell (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1930), p. 84-85.
[^10] J. A. MacCulloch, The Harrowing of Hell (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1930), p. 104.
[^11] Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson, ed., Ante-Nicene Fathers, 10 vols. (Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1981), 1:494.
[^12] Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson, ed., Ante-Nicene Fathers, 10 vols. (Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1981), 2:490-91.
[^13] Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson, ed., Ante-Nicene Fathers, 10 vols. (Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1981), p. 491.
[^14] Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson, ed., Ante-Nicene Fathers, 10 vols. (Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1981), p. 491.
[^15] Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson, ed., Ante-Nicene Fathers, 10 vols. (Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1981), p. 492.
[^16] J. A. MacCulloch, The Harrowing of Hell (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1930), pp. 244-47.
[^17] James H. Charlesworth, ed., The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha, 2 vols. (New York: Doubleday & Company, Inc., 1985), 2:750-51.
[^18] James H. Charlesworth, ed., The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha, 2 vols. (New York: Doubleday & Company, Inc., 1985), pp. 754, 757,771.
[^19] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 346-47.
