Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Life Beyond ( 1986)

12

That All May Be Saved

Now the great and grand secret of the whole matter, and the summum bonum of the whole subject that is lying before us, consists in obtaining the powers of the Holy Priesthood. For him to whom these keys are given there is no difficulty in obtaining a knowledge of facts in relation to the salvation of the children of men, both as well for the dead as for the living.

-D&C 128:11

It is for God to ordain that system by which the veil is to be rent and mortals permitted to see and know of future glories. It is for him to call prophets, bequeath priesthood, give keys, and reveal the plan of salvation. This he has done. Let the message be heralded! "Hear, O ye heavens, and give ear, O earth, and rejoice ye inhabitants thereof" (D&C 76:1). "Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people be assembled: who among them can declare this, and shew us former things? let them bring forth their witnesses, that they may be justified: or let them hear, and say, It is truth" (Isa. 43:9).

The Restoration of All Things

All the holy prophets since the world began have heralded a final day in which all things are to be restored, in which all. things are to be gathered in one (see Acts 3:21; Eph. 1:10). Such is the dispensation of which we are a part, the dispensation of the fulness of all past dispensations, "which dispensation is now beginning to usher in, that a whole and complete and perfect union, and welding together of dispensations, and keys, and powers, and glories should take place, and be revealed from the days of Adam even to the present time. And not only this, but those things which never have been revealed from the foundation of the world, but have been kept hid from the wise and prudent, shall be revealed unto babes and sucklings in this, the dispensation of the fulness of times." (D&C 128:18.)

To those who first held the priesthood in this dispensation the Lord said: "Ye are lawful heirs, according to the flesh, and have been hid from the world with Christ in God -therefore your life and the priesthood have remained, and must needs remain through you and your lineage until the restoration of all things spoken by the mouths of all the holy prophets since the world began. Therefore, blessed are ye if ye continue in my goodness, a light unto the Gentiles, and through this priesthood, a savior unto my people Israel." (D&C 86:9-11.) Regarding the restoration of the keys of the priesthood the Lord said, "I have conferred upon you the keys and power of the priesthood, wherein I restore all things, and make known unto you all things in due time" (D&C 132:45). And then, speaking more specifically about the keys, knowledge, and authority necessary to labor for and in behalf of the dead, the Lord said, "For him to whom these keys are given there is no difficulty in obtaining a knowledge of facts in relation to the salvation of the children of men, both as well for the dead as for the living" (D&C 128:11).

Truths Known to the Ancients

Bible References to Vicarious Ordinances

The knowledge that the gospel was to be taught to all, either in this life or the next, and that vicarious ordinances were to be performed for those unable to receive them in earth life, was known to the ancient Saints. There are scriptural, apocryphal, and historical references that evidence that these principles were understood anciently. Yet it is only with the knowledge we have as a result of the restoration of the gospel that these ancient sources take on significant meaning for us; otherwise they would seem as strange to Latter-day Saints as they presently do to the rest of the Christian world. One revelation unfolds another, the present unfolds the past, and the past unfolds the present. Isaiah wrote, "And they shall be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and after many days shall they be visited" (Isa. 24:22). Later he added that Christ would "proclaim liberty to the captives," and open "the prison to them that are bound" (Isa. 61:1). Now note how perfectly the Vision of the Redemption of the Dead explains what Isaiah has written. The vision begins with Joseph F. Smith's description of paradise at the time of Christ's visit among the righteous, saying: "There were gathered together in one place an innumerable company of the spirits of the just, who had been faithful in the testimony of Jesus while they lived in mortality; and who had offered sacrifice in the similitude of the great sacrifice of the Son of God, and had suffered tribulation in their Redeemer's name. All these had departed the mortal life, firm in the hope of a glorious resurrection, through the grace of God the Father and his Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ." Then President Smith said: "I beheld that they were filled with joy and gladness, and were rejoicing together because the day of their deliverance was at hand. They were assembled awaiting the advent of the Son of God into the spirit world, to declare their redemption from the bands of death." (D&C 138:12-16.) All the wisdom and commentary the world can provide cannot match a revelation from heaven.

A second example is found in this prophetic statement by Zechariah: "By the blood of thy covenant [that is, because of the gospel covenant, which is efficacious because of the shedding of the blood of Christ] I have sent forth thy158prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water" (Zechariah 9:11; italics added). The pit is the spirit world, but what waters are necessary to free one from that captivity? Why, the waters of vicarious baptism-a doctrine taught by Paul and restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith. Paul asked, "Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?" (1 Cor. 15:29). And Joseph Smith, in restoring the ordinances in our day, told us the baptismal font must be "in a place underneath where the living are wont to assemble, to show forth the living and the dead, and that all things may have their likeness, and that they may accord one with another-that which is earthly conforming to that which is heavenly" (D&C 128:13). As a third example, what of Malachi's prophecy of the return of Elijah to turn the hearts of the dead to their children in the flesh? Had Elijah not actually returned we would not know that the old prophet had "his eye fixed on the restoration of the priesthood" (D&C 128:17) and its sealing powers.

The world is hard pressed to give any meaningful explanation as to what took place during the forty days that Christ ministered to the Twelve following his resurrection (see Acts 1:3). In fact, their attempts at commentary are embarrassingly poor. [^1] To Latter-day Saints the matter seems most obvious. What would be more natural than to expect his Apostles to ask about his experiences in death and for him to respond? In so doing he would tell of those things described for us in the Vision of the Redemption of the Dead (D&C 138) that is, he would tell of his visit to paradise where he met with the "innumerable company of the spirits of the just" who had faithfully lived the gospel while in the flesh. He would report to the Apostles about having organized a mission in the spirit world and having called various of the prophets and faithful of dispensations past to teach the gospel to those in darkness. That is, he turned the key, or gave his commission for missionary work to commence among those in the bondage of sin and ignorance. Having so explained, it is most natural to suppose that his disciples would ask how the gospel message would differ in the spirit realm. They would be told, as we are in Joseph F. Smith's great vision, that an everlasting gospel does not change (see D&C 138:11-35). Such a response would then raise questions about how gospel ordinances-for instance, the ordinance of baptism-were to be performed among them that were dead. Thus the stage was set for the major purpose of the forty-day ministry-to teach the nature of vicarious ordinances, and to instruct the Apostles in the fulness of the temple ceremony.

Historical References to the Teaching of the Gospel to the Dead

Hosea prophesied that the Messiah would ransom men from "the power of the grave" and that he would "redeem them from death" (Hosea 13:14). Rabbinic commentary on this verse held that those who were bound in Gehinnom would rejoice at the appearance of the Messiah, "saying, He will lead us forth from this darkness." [^2] According to the Zobar, a collection of Jewish mysticism, the righteous, or the patriarchs, descended to hell to rescue sinners from the place of torment. The influence of Talmudic doctrines is also found in the old Islamic theology where it is held that the righteous "who have safely passed the bridge which crosses Hell to Paradise, intercede for their brethren detained upon it. They are sent to Hell to see if any there have faith, and to bring them out. These are washed in the Water of Life and admitted to Paradise." [^3]

"The Talmud teaches that the offerings and prayers made by the living for the dead shorten their stay in Gehenna." [^4] The apocryphal book of 2 Maccabees recounts a story in which Judas, a Maccabean general, took up a collection for Jewish soldiers fallen in battle that was sent to Jerusalem to pay for a sin offering in their behalf. The text reads: "Therefore he made atonement for the dead, that they might be delivered from their sin." [^5] Though we would hold this to be bad doctrine, we are left to wonder at the origin of the idea of ordinances for and in behalf of the dead.

The idea of continuous gospel study beyond the grave was very much a part of Jewish tradition. Frequent reference is made in the Haggadah to the "heavenly academy" in which the pious dead study the Law. [^6] It was also held that the revelations of God were given for the benefit of both the living and the dead. For instance, when Jehovah spoke at Sinai, "the revelation took place in the presence of the living as well as of the dead, yea, even the souls of those who were not yet born were present." [^7]

There is evidence that such knowledge, long lost to the Christian world, was once known to them. Early Christian commentary on the statement in Hebrews that "they without us should not be made perfect" (Heb. 11:40) held that it had reference to the Old Testament Saints who were trapped in Hades awaiting the help of their New Testament counterparts and that Christ held the keys that would "open the doors of the Underworld to the faithful souls there." [^8]

"About the middle of the second century Justin Martyr, in his Dialogue with Trypho (c. 72), cites an apocryphon which he charges the Jews with having deleted from the Book of Jeremiah, though it was still to be found in some synagogue copies: 'And the Lord God of Israel remembered His dead ones, who sleep in the earth of dust, and He descended to preach to them His salvation.' " [^9] "In his commentary on S. Luke, Origen expounds further this conception of the way to the tree of life in Paradise. There is a fiery river through which all must pass, receiving a baptism of fire. It cannot harm the righteous, but all who are baptized with water and the Spirit, receive that fiery baptism and so pass to Paradise. To this Paradise in terra, better than Hades, but not the heavenly Paradise, and guarded by the cherubim with the fiery sword, our Lord transferred those whom He rescued from Hades." [^10]

Irenaeus, bishop of Lyons in France during the latter quarter of the second century, reasoned that it was not merely for those who lived during the time of Tiberius Caesar that Christ came, "nor did the Father exercise His providence for the men only who are now alive, but for all men altogether, who from the beginning, according to their capacity, in their generation have both feared and loved God, and practiced justice and piety towards their neighbors, and have earnestly desired to see Christ, and to hear His voice." All these, Irenaeus argued, were to come forth in an early resurrection and be given place in the kingdom of heaven, Each, he held, would receive "recompense for those things which they accomplished." [^11]

Clement, called "the founder of Christian literature," and contemporary of Irenaeus, wrote with even greater clarity on the matter. The sixth chapter of his work Miscellanies, bears the title, "The Gospel Was Preached To Jews And Gentiles In Hades." In this chapter he not only announces that Christ taught the gospel in the world of spirits but that his Apostles did likewise. "For, it was requisite," he reasoned, "that as here, so also there, the best of the disciples should be imitators of the Master." Clement held that it was necessary to teach the gospel to the departed spirits because they could not be saved in ignorance.

As to the issue of whether Christ taught all that were in the spirit world or only the Jews, Clement reasoned as follows:

If, then, the Lord descended to Hades for no other end but to preach the gospel, as He did descend; it was either to preach the gospel to all or to the Hebrews only. If, accordingly, to all, then all who believe shall be saved, although they may be of the Gentiles, on making their profession there; since God's punishments are saving and disciplinary, leading to conversion, and choosing rather the repentance than the death of a sinner; and especially since souls, although darkened by passions, when released from their bodies, are able to perceive more clearly, because of their being no longer obstructed by the paltry flesh.

If, then, He preached only to the Jews, who wanted the knowledge and faith of the Saviour, it is plain that, since God is no respecter of persons, the apostles also, as here, so there, preached the gospel to those of the heathen who were ready for conversion. [^12]

Clement held that those "who were outside the Law" in mortality but who lived rightly would, "on hearing the voice of the Lord, whether that of His own person or that acting through His apostles," with "all speed" turn to the gospel and believe. "So I think it is demonstrated," he said, "that God being good, and the Lord powerful, they save with a righteousness and equality which extend to all that turn to Him, whether here or elsewhere." [^13]

A dispensation of the gospel on earth required a dispensation of the gospel in the spirit world, according to Clement. He wrote as follows:

Did not the same dispensation obtain in Hades, so that even there, all the souls, on hearing the proclamation, might either exhibit repentance, or confess that their punishment was just, because they believed not? And it were the exercise of no ordinary arbitrariness, for those who had departed before the advent of the Lord (not having the gospel preached to them, and having afforded no ground from themselves, in consequence of believing or not) to obtain either salvation or punishment. For it is not right that these should be condemned without trial, and that those alone who lived after the advent should have the advantage of "Whatever one of you has done in ignorance, without clearly knowing God if, on becoming conscious, he repent, all his sins will be forgiven him." [^14]

Clement reasoned that if Christ "preached the gospel to those in the flesh that they might not be condemned unjustly, how is it conceivable that He did not for the same cause preach the gospel to those who had departed this life before His advent?" [^15] There were three principles that were common to the writings of the Apostolic Fathers as they wrote about Christ's descent to Hades to redeem the dead: first, that as Christ had forerunners to announce his coming on earth so he had forerunners to announce his coming in the world of the spirits. For instance, Hippolytus held that John the Baptist went to prepare the way for the Lord in the spirit realm. Origen agreed but also maintained that Moses and the other Old Testament prophets were already testifying to the spirits that Christ would come. The Fathers also held that the Apostles and faithful from Christ's dispensation would continue their preaching in the spirit world, and finally that baptism was "absolutely necessary" to the salvation of the dead. Little mention is given to the idea of vicarious baptism (see 1 Cor. 15:29) rather it was most generally held that those baptisms were performed in Hades. [^16]

The Descent in Apocryphal Writings

In Christian apocryphal writings the visit of Christ to the spirits in prison held a prominent place. For instance, in the Odes of Solomon, we may have the earliest writings on this subject outside of the New Testament. Ode 17:6-17 reads as follows:

And all who saw me were amazed, and I seemed to them like a stranger.

And he who knew and exalted me is the Most High in all his perfection.

And he glorified me by his kindness, and raised my understanding to the height of truth.

And from there he gave me the way of his paths, and I opened the doors which were closed.

And I shattered the bars of iron, for my own iron(s) had grown hot and melted before me.

And nothing appeared close to me because I was the opening of everything.

And I went toward all my bondsmen in order to loose them; that I might not abandon anyone bound or binding.

And I gave my knowledge generously, and my resurrection through my love.

And I sowed my fruits in hearts, and transformed them through myself.

Then they received my blessing and lived, and they were gathered to me and were saved;

Because they became my members, and I was their head. [^17]

Other Odes speak of Christ being given "authority over chains" so that he might "loose them" (Ode 22:4), of his opening and closing the chasms of the dead (Ode 24:5), and of death ejecting him with many others (Ode 42:11). From Ode 42:14-20 we read the following:

And I made a congregation of living among his dead; and I spoke with them by living lips; in order that my word may not fail.

And those who had died ran toward me; and they cried out and said, "Son of God, have pity on us.

"And deal with us according to your kindness, and bring us out from the chains of darkness.

"And open for us the door by which we may go forth to you, for we perceive that our death does not approach you.

"May we also be saved with you, because you are our Savior."

Then I heard their voice, and placed their faith in my heart.

And I placed my name upon their head, because they are free and they are mine. [^18]

From the Epistle of the Apostles, a work believed to have originated about A.D. 160 in Asia Minor, Christ is quoted as saying: "I descended to the place of Lazarus and preached to the righteous and the prophets, that they might come out of the rest which is below, and go up to that which is above. And I poured out over them with my right hand (the water) of life and forgiveness and deliverance from all evil, as I have done to you and to those who believe in Me." [^19]

Conclusion

Everything that the Lord does and says carries with it the evidence of its own authenticity, and every child of God has been divinely endowed with the ability to recognize and know these truths. We know of no greater evidence that the gospel has been restored in these the latter days than the light that surrounds the revelations of the Restoration. They evidence themselves, and nowhere is this more evident than in those revelations that part the veil and allow us to see beyond the grave. The combined intellect and wisdom of all the world cannot begin to match the majesty and power of such revelations as the Vision of the Glories (D&C 76), the Vision of the Celestial Kingdom (D&C 137), and the Vision of the Redemption of the Dead (D&C 138). Such divine light exalts the souls of men.

The words of these sublime revelations are fashioned in the image and likeness of their maker; in mercy, grace, and justice they resemble the God from whence they came. James told us that "the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be intreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy" (James 3:17). "That which is of God is light" (D&C 50:24), it lifts and ennobles, it brings peace and consolation, it enhances faith and fires the soul, it brings men worthily to God. These revelations constitute what might be called the law of the mourner, by which we "weep for the loss of them that die, and more especially for those that have not hope of a glorious resurrection" (D&C 42:45), while for those of the household of faith our tears are tears of rejoicing, for we know the glories that await us.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hugh Nibley, When the Lights Went Out (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 35-36.
[^2] J. A. MacCulloch, The Harrowing of Hell (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1930), p. 31.
[^3] J. A. MacCulloch, The Harrowing of Hell (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1930), p. 32.
[^4] J. A. MacCulloch, The Harrowing of Hell (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1930), p. 32.
[^5] 2 Maccabees 12:45.
[^6] Louis Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews, 7 vols. (Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication Society of America, 1968), 6:332.
[^7] Louis Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews, 7 vols. (Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication Society of America, 1968), 3:97.
[^8] J. A. MacCulloch, The Harrowing of Hell (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1930), pp. 48-49.
[^9] J. A. MacCulloch, The Harrowing of Hell (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1930), p. 84-85.
[^10] J. A. MacCulloch, The Harrowing of Hell (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1930), p. 104.
[^11] Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson, ed., Ante-Nicene Fathers, 10 vols. (Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1981), 1:494.
[^12] Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson, ed., Ante-Nicene Fathers, 10 vols. (Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1981), 2:490-91.
[^13] Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson, ed., Ante-Nicene Fathers, 10 vols. (Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1981), p. 491.
[^14] Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson, ed., Ante-Nicene Fathers, 10 vols. (Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1981), p. 491.
[^15] Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson, ed., Ante-Nicene Fathers, 10 vols. (Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1981), p. 492.
[^16] J. A. MacCulloch, The Harrowing of Hell (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1930), pp. 244-47.
[^17] James H. Charlesworth, ed., The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha, 2 vols. (New York: Doubleday & Company, Inc., 1985), 2:750-51.
[^18] James H. Charlesworth, ed., The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha, 2 vols. (New York: Doubleday & Company, Inc., 1985), pp. 754, 757,771.
[^19] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 346-47.
