RABBI JESUS

To understand the nature and mission of the life of Christ, one must first understand the lineage, traditions and the religion into which He was born. History has accurately confirmed his birth, childhood, and adult life in a Jewish society. He honored Jewish laws. He taught in Jewish synagogues, and eventually became a Jewish Rabbi. His life's mission was dedicated and foreordained to be a part of the Jewish society, and the events of his life were ultimately fulfilled according to the prophecies of the ancient Jewish prophets.

Unlike any other nation, the tribe of Judah was distinct in its moral and physical laws. The purpose of cleansing or purifying the body and soul was for a dedication and preparation of the "Messiah", who would be born through that sacred lineage. Eating habits were restricted by spiritual laws to purify the blood, and marriage laws were jealously observed by the Jewish community to prevent introduction to contamination by any "gentile" strain of blood. Every Jewish woman lived with the hope and desire of being honored to bear the chosen "Messiah" and Savior of the world.

From the fall of Adam, a Redeemer became a necessity and an expectation. Prophecy depicted the event, the time and the location of his birth, as well as many incidents in the life of this blessed Redeemer. It was the grand patriarch Jacob, who bestowed a patriarchal blessing upon the heads of his twelve sons, and Judah was given the distinction of receiving the promised lineage of this predicted Redeemer. Said Jacob:

The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto Him shall the gathering of

the people be. (Gen. 49:10)

So were the faith and desire of the house of Judah, as they anticipated this cherished event. They concentrated with an amiable protective care on this sacred trust, and the noble examples of heroism and valor were scrawled throughout the pages of ecclesiastical antiquity.

Upon the lips of all Judah was the consolation of the prophetic promise that "His name shall be called Immanuel--God with us;" and for nearly 1700 years that promise continued to be repeated. The expected "Immanuel" became a part of every sacrificial rite, prophecy, prayer, and was even fused into their songs and psalms. The promised coming of their Messiah compelled them to a strict observance of all the laws of God.

When Moses led Israel out of bondage, giving them God's revelations and laws, he pointed ahead to the time when a great "Prophet" would come among them, "Like unto me." (Deut. 18:15) This grand event was to be heralded by heaven itself--the guiding star, the night as day, and messages delivered by angels; thus confirming and fulfilling these ancient prophecies upon the child Jesus.

Among the Jews the twelfth year was the time which separated a boy from his childhood. Then a Hebrew boy was called "Bar Mitzvah", which is a "Son of the Law" or "Child of the Commandment". This is a period in which he was to study and be taught by the wisest teachers in Israel, learning and studying the law and the testament. There were annual gatherings, like conferences, in which many of these wise teachers gave instructions. Three special annual feasts were particularly set apart for the instruction of young men. These feasts were the Passover, the Pentecost, and the Feast of the Tabernacles. The Passover was the most zealously attended, and worshippers came from all parts of the land to commemorate the deliverance of the Israelites from bondage, by the judgments of God upon the Egyptians. (See Exodus 12.)

At the age of twelve, Jesus ventured inside the great Jewish temple and, perhaps, for the first time, He saw the paschal sacrifice of the lamb, (robed men acting in the office of High Priests), while hearing the sacred prayers of his nation and smelling the consecrated temple incense. But more important than this, Jesus came into contact with the learned Rabbis of Israel. It is supposed at this time that Jesus spoke with Rabbi Hillil, whose teachings are recorded with high esteem in the Talmud. However, Jesus was not taught by any Rabbi--it was He who was teaching and answering the questions of the councils, and they "were astonished at His understanding and answers". (Luke 2:47)

Jesus spent three days in the temple conversing with the learned Elders of Zion. After the third day His mother had become aware of His absence and found Him still in the temple speaking to the priests and teachers. She then proceeded to chastise Him for the way He had "dealt" with her. In reply He said, "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" But "they understood not the saying," which indicates that He was about His Heavenly "Father's business." His Father's business was teaching and instructing--not doing carpenter work, as modern tradition teaches. His wisdom and understanding superseded all the learning of the councils; but He could not reveal all that He knew, nor could He expose all of the existing evils within the empire. The Prophet Joseph explained:

Our lives have already become jeopardized by revealing the wicked and bloodthirsty purposes of our enemies; and for the future we

must cease to do so. All we have said about them is truth, but it is not always wise to relate all the truth. Even Jesus, the Son of God, had

to refrain from doing so, and had to restrain His feelings many times for the safety of Himself and His followers, and had to conceal the

r i g h t e o u s p u r p o s e s o f H i s h e a r t i n r e l a t i o n t o m a n y t h i n g s p e r t a i n i n g t o H i s F a t h e r ' s k i n g d o m . W h e n s t i l l a b o y H e h a d a l l t h e

intelligence necessary to enable Him to rule and govern the kingdom of the Jews, and could reason with the wisest and most profound

doctors of law and divinity, and make their theories and practice to appear like folly compared with the wisdom He possessed; but He was

a boy only, and lacked physical strength even to defend His own person; and was subject to cold, to hunger and to death. (T.P.J.S., p. 392)

There was another reason which delayed the full ministry of Jesus. We read that it was not until he "was about thirty years of age" that he began His ministry. This indicated that He was complying with one of the laws required to fulfill the office and calling of Rabbi or priest.

It was not until Jesus was thirty years of age that He was baptized, fasted for forty days, and gathered disciples into the ministry. By this time He had complied with all of the requirements of Jewish laws as a Rabbi. Compliance to the rules and regulations of Jewish law was essential in the work of the ministry, lest the High Priests and Councils use legitimate reason to condemn or reject Him. Jesus knew this, and warned His disciples to obey carefully the requirements of their laws, because "they sit in Moses' seat; all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do;" (Matt. 23:2-3). The chief priests and councils sought with lawyers to trap Jesus for violating even the most minute laws. Jesus, however, could recite the law in His own defense, and by the same law condemn the Pharisees for their disobedience. He could condemn the hierachy of Judah for their hypocrisy by their own law; and also condemn them according to the laws of God.

It should be carefully noted that Jesus was often called "Rabbi" which "is to say, being interpreted, Master." (John 1:38) This was an office, title, or position of "teacher", which was highly honored by the Jews--so much so, that it became a title of prestige and social respect. If a man was a "Rabbi", he was entitled to the choice seats in social gatherings and praises of the multitudes. Jesus warned his disciples to avoid the social prestige, the public honors, and the praiseworthy titles that came with the title of "Rabbi". (See Matt. 23:5-8)

Jesus was often called Rabbi which He did not deny. It was justly applied, both as to office and honor. If Jesus was not a Rabbi according to that Jewish office, He would have immediately renounced the title. His chief Apostle, Peter, often called him "Rabbi" (Mark 9:5, 11:21), but received no word of correction from Jesus, indicating that the title was properly applied. When Jesus was called "Rabbi" by Judas (Matt. 26:25, 49) and by Nathanael (John 1:49), and the other disciples (John 1:38, 4:31, 9:2, 11:8), He acknowledged the title without dispute. Great masses of the people also called Him Rabbi. (John 6:25); and when Nicodemus, a Pharisee and a ruler of the Jews, acknowledged Jesus as Rabbi, it was conclusive evidence that Jesus was indeed a Jewish Rabbi.

The office of Rabbi required a person to be particularly well versed in the scriptures and the Talmud, whereas the office of Priest required certain sacrificial and temple ordinance ceremonies; yet, both were specially commissioned.

To be recognized as a Rabbi, however, a talmudic student has to be ordained. The custom of ordination is very old. Joshua was

ordained by Moses. . . The practice of ordination in its Mosaic form ceased in Palestine in the second half of the 4th century when the

Judaean academies were closed. In the 16th century an attempt was made in Palestine to revive the ancient ordination, as well as the

Sanhedrin, with a l l t h e p o w e r a n d a u t h o r i t y t h a t i t p o s s e s s e d , b u t t h i s a t t e m p t r e s u l t e d i n f a i l u r e . (Encyclopedia Britannica, Vol.

18:978)

With the ordination to this official calling of Rabbi, Jesus could teach the gospel principles wherever He was led to do so. As a Rabbi He taught thousands upon the mountainside, in the synagogues, and even resorted to use of a whip to teach a special lesson to the money changers in the temple. The councils, lawyers, Pharisees and Priests of Judah tried by every means to prove Jesus unfit for the office, but to no avail. Jesus acknowledged the title, office, and position of Rabbi by precept and example. he was destined to be the most honored of rabbis, priests and even kings!

It was his kingly and priestly powers which brought about the envy of both pagan and Jew. His influence was felt in every domain of social, religious and political life, and soon caused the jealousy and fear of those who felt the sting of his rebuke; for Jesus exposed the corruptions of the political tyrants and the religious demigods.

Jesus lived through a constant barrage of attacks against his birth, character, authority, law and doctrine. Yet if He had lived a celibate life, that alone would have given his enemies their greatest advantage to dispute His claims, for it was against the traditional and scriptural law for a Rabbi to remain single. Jesus could only have avoided this pitfall by obeying the Rabbinical law of marriage.
