THE GOSPEL LAW

The definition of "fulfilling" the requirements of the law was used when Jesus came to John to be baptized. Baptism was a law of the gospel, practiced by the Jews before Jesus began His ministry. When John refused to baptize the Savior, Jesus demanded John to "suffer it to be so" because it was necessary that he "fulfill" the requirements of the laws of righteousness. Baptism is one of the eternal laws and commandments to which even the Savior of the world had to comply--or "fulfill". It is not compatible with the laws of heaven that one be exalted without obedience to these eternal laws. Although Jesus was the "Lawgiver", it does not permit Him the distinction of also being a lawbreaker. Obedience was a particular requirement upon the Savior for every law and ordinance of the gospel. This confession came from Jesus Himself when He said, "I came not to destroy the law; but to fulfill." He was the example of perfect obedience to the Gospel laws; and marriage, like baptism, is one of the eternal laws.

One of the Old Testament and Talmudic laws required every Rabbi to be married. It was not until the 20th Century that this law was changed (generally among the Reformed and Conservative Jews) however, there are no unmarried Rabbis today among the Orthodox Jews. Marriage was one of the first commandments; therefore, a Rabbi was called to be an example, and to gain that experience before he could properly counsel and teach others concerning this commandment. A profound scholar writing on this subject says:

Jesus said once that he came to fulfill the Law: the first positive commandment of the Bible according to, rabbinic understanding

(Maimonides, Minyan ha-Mitzvet, 212) is that dealing with the propagation of the human race (Gen. 1:28); thus it has been considered the

duty of every member of the House of Israel to marry at an early age. The late rabbis set eighteen as the age for marriage (Ab. v. 24); and

anyone, they maintained, who remained after twenty without marrying was cursed by God himself (Kid. 29b). Earlier traditions, however,

persistently encouraged children to marry as soon as they reach the age of puberty (Sanh. 76b) and many important Jews are known to

have been married at such an early age. Indeed, so important was marriage regarded in ancient Israel that frequently men who had

passed twenty without marrying, were compelled by the courts to take a wife. (M. Zvi Udley, Th. M., Ph.D.)

Celibacy is by no means a virtue among the Jewish people. Indeed it is for this reason that many Jews cannot accept Christianity. Said Rabbi Hirsch:

Now as the life of Jesus is pictured in the New Testament, there are certain peculiar defects in that life from the Jewish point of view.

His teachings are the ideal teachings of Judaism; they are not new teachings, nor new revelations. They are confirmations of Jewish

thought and life. But his personal life--I am speaking respectfully; I do not think anyone should think I cast any shadow on the beauty

and perfection of that life, but I can take it as it is pictured--you know he was not married and from the Jewish point of view, that is a

defect. The Jewish morality insists that a man who does not assume the social responsibility for the continuation of society, lives a life

that is not complete. (Rabbi Emil Hirsch. "My Religion," New York, 1925, pp. 43-44)

The ancient Jewish prophets depicted the life of their Messiah in minute detail. The time and place of His birth, His teachings, the betrayal, crucifixion, etc., were all accurately predicted. Later Jewish scholars, almost without exception, have interpreted these prophecies to include their Messiah to be married. In the Jewish society, marriage was a commandment strictly observed--almost as a compulsory law.

Every Jewish man should marry at eighteen, and he who marries earlier is more meritorious. (The Shalchan Aruch, Eben Haezer 1:3)

S i n c e t h e M i s h n a h f i x e s t h e e i g h t e e n t h y e a r o f o n e ' s l i f e a s t h e a g e o f m a r r i a g e , a m a n u n m a r r i e d a f t e r t h i s t i m e i s , i n m a n y

communities, regarded as not having conformed with inviolable tradition. (Jewish ceremonies and Customs, William Rosenau, p. 155)

Marriage was firmly implanted in the minds of all Jewish men; however, it was most rigidly observed by those who complied to the laws and offices of Rabbi and Priest. Jewish law required a High Priest to be married on the "Day of Atonement;" and so important was this law that in the case of some unforeseen circumstance, an extra woman was held in readiness for the marriage. This marriage on the Day of Atonement was a prerequisite for entering the Sanctuary. Paul wrote that Jesus was the "Great High Priest" who would make atonement for all men. Since one of the laws of "great high priest office was marriage, then every priest including Jesus had to comply with that ordinance to fulfill the obligation of that office.

Also, Paul wrote in an epistle that "Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are figures of the true: but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us." (Heb. 9:24) Now then, if it were required that the High Priests be married to enter the Holy Places on earth, which are but "figures of the true, then how much more demanding are the requirements to enter into the heavenly sanctuary!

The scriptures render some evidence that Christ did "fulfill" the law of marriage. Apostle Orson Spencer asked this familiar question and then proceeded to answer it.

"Well," say you, "I am partly constrained to feel satisfied that all the New Testament writers fully agree with you, as to the divine

authority and perpetuity of the Patriarchal system of marriage, and increase of their posterity; but l want one more additional proof in

favor of the system, before every relic of doubt can be swept from my mind. I want you to show me distinctly that Christ Jesus was ever

married, or ever had a wife, or that he ever will be married and have a wife. If you can satisfy my curiosity on this one remaining point,

then I will forbear."

Well, this makes me think of a similar question dictated by the Holy Ghost 1800 years ago. The question was this: "Who shall declare

HIS generation?" Now, sir, if you can believe an angel from heaven, and the light of human eyes on this point, you will not need much of

my testimony to confirm it. A certain angel, spoken of in the Revelation of St. John, willing to gratify curiosity upon this same interesting

subject says to one, "Come hither, and I will show the Bride, the Lamb's wife, to the inquisitive person who wanted to know about the wife

of Christ." Again, John the Revelator says, most distinctly, that the Lamb's wife hath made herself ready, and blessed are those who are

called to the marriage supper of the Lamb. Now, if the Lord has in very deed shown unto men in the flesh, the very Bride, and WIFE of

Christ, and also the NUPTIAL celebration, then an honest mind may be at rest upon this subject. The first miracle that Jesus wrought,

was used to grace a nuptial celebration. And sir, God claims to be the Father of the human family, that is, of our spirits: and so far as the

body of Jesus our elder brother is concerned, he is his Father in the flesh. He made a covenant with Jesus Christ, our eldest brother, that

his family, after whom all heaven is named, should increase without end. The same was repeated to Abraham, and all that are Christ's,

down to the last person that shall ever be born. The last child of Christ that is born, whether in the Millennium or final consummation

and end of all things, will claim this "promise" of endless increase. (Orson Spencer's Letters, p. 224-226)

Both modern and ancient historians generally agree that all of the Apostles were married. Clement of Alexandria, born about 150 A.D., occupied a most profound and interesting position in the history of Christianity. He was a philosopher, historian, and Christian whose works are most valuable in formulating much of the early Christian Church. A century and a half later another historian, Eusebius, quoted many portions of Clement's works. Eusebius was a founder of a theological school and is said to have been "one of the most learned men of his age." Said he:

Now Clement, whose words we have just quoted, after what has already been mentioned, with respect to those who reject marriage

gives a list of the Apostles who were known to have been married, (Stromata 3:52) saying: "Or will they disapprove even the Apostles? For

Peter and Philip begot children, and Philip, too, gave his daughters to husbands, and Paul does not hesitate in an Epistle to address his

wife (Phil. 4:3; 1 Cor. 9:5, 13), whom he did not take about with him that he might facilitate his ministry." Since we have mentioned these

matters, there is no harm in my presenting another narrative of the same author, which he wrote down in Book 7 of the Stromata,

relating it in the following way: "They say, indeed, that the blessed Peter, when he beheld his wife being led away to death, rejoiced

because of her calling and return home, and called out to her very encouragingly and comfortingly, addressing her by name, `O thou,

remember the Lord.' Such was the marriage of the blessed and the perfect disposition of those dearest to them." (Stromata 7:63, 64) Let

these matters germane to the subject at hand suffice on my part for the moment at this point. (Ecclesiastical History by Eusebius, Bk. 3,

Chap. 30)

The fact that Paul and the other Apostles were married has been accepted and taught by President Brigham Young and other leaders of the Church. For example, Apostle Orson Hyde said:

The bishop is to be the husband of one wife. And as for old Paul, everybody says he lived and died a bachelor; but he said all things

were lawful for him, and that he had power to lead about a sister, a wife, as well as other Apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord, and

Cephas. Paul did not make known all things, for all things were not lawful to tell. He said himself, he knew a man that was caught up to

the third heavens, and heard things unlawful to utter. If he did not take a wife, and multiply, and replenish the earth, he did not fulfil

the first great fundamental law of nature. (J.D. 2:83-84)

The Lord never forbid any of His disciples from marriage, nor did He ever indicate that He Himself could not marry.

A Presbyterian minister and professor at the Davis and Elkin College in West Virginia recently wrote that Jesus must have been married. His article was immediately picked up and published by other religious newspapers, one of which is shown on the following page.

A May 1969 editorial in the "Showers of Blessings" publication of Denver, Colorado, picked up this same theme and added their comments. Once the ice of superstition has been broken, then others will join in the activity.

Was Jesus Married?

Let us look at the requirement for the priesthood. The Old Testament law required that a man be thirty years of age and married in

order to become a priest. That is why Yahshua the Messiah (Jesus) was not baptized and not anointed and did not begin his ministry in

Palestine until his thirtieth birthday, which was on October 5th, 30 A.D. An Associated Press report from Elkins, West Virginia says:

Quote: "Jesus may have been married and the father of children, according to a Presbyterian minister--professor at Davis and Elkins

College.

"Dr. William Phipps, writing in the current issue of the Journal of Ecumenical Studies said that failure to marry and reproduce was

regarded as a serious sin in Biblical times.

"If Jesus had been a bachelor, Dr. Phipps contends, the Bible would surely contain some record of his being criticized for it.

"Dr. Phipps said that in Greek translation of the Bible there's no difference in the word for `wife' and `woman', and the Bible often

mentions Jesus being with a woman.

"Under Talmudic law, a man couldn't be considered righteous--in fact, couldn't even be considered a complete man--if he didn't marry

and have children," Dr. Phipps writes.

"The Talmud asserts very strongly . . . that it's almost the same as committing murder to not reproduce." End quote. I have quoted similar views in my writings many times; not quoting from the Talmud but from the Old Testament law of Moses and the

meaning of New Testament words such as those used by Martha when she said to Mary, her sister: "The Master is come and calleth for

thee." (John 11:28) "Master" was the title that a wife used when speaking of her husband. The New Testament also required that all

church officers such as bishops, elders, and deacons be married and the fathers of children. (1 Tim. 3:1-4, 12) A man that is not married

or who has never been married meets neither the Old Testament Israel nor the New Testament Church requirements for the priesthood.

The Apostle Peter was married. (Matt. 8:14) Saul of Tarsus, who was better known as Paul, was married, for that was a requirement to be

a member of the Sanhedrin; and Saul (Paul) sat on that council and voted for the death of Stephen. (Acts 7:58-60, Acts 8:1) The truth

makes us free. Jesus (Yahshua) was probably married before and during all the time of his ministry. Many women traveled with him and

ministered to his needs.

A n d i t c a m e t o p a s s a f t e r w a r d , t h a t h e w e n t t h r o u g h o u t e v e r y c i t y a n d v i l l a g e , p r e a c h i n g a n d s h o w i n g t h e g l a d t i d i n g s o f t h e

kingdom of God: and the twelve were with him, And certain women, which had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities, Mary called

Magdalene, out of whom went seven devils, and Joanna the wife of Chuza, Herod's steward, and Susanna, and many others, which

ministered unto him of their substance. (Luke 8:1-3) (page 17)

This announcement by an accepted minister and professor was given public news coverage. Newsweek magazine also gave national publicity to his findings.

Recent manuscripts found in Qumran and other excavations have introduced further information to substantiate Christ's marriage. In The Gospel According to Thomas there are significant references to the marriage of Jesus.

Log 22: "... They (the disciples) said to Him: Shall we then, being children, enter the Kingdom? Jesus said to them: When you make the

two one, (one flesh--or marriage) and when you make the inner as the outer... and when you make the male and the female into a single

one, (married), so that the male will not be male and the female (not) be female, . . . then shall you enter (the Kingdom)."

Log. 114: "Simon Peter said to them: Let Mary go out from among us, because women are not worthy of the Life. Jesus said: See, I shall

lead her, so that I will make her male, (one in marriage) that she too may become a living spirit, resembling you males. For every woman

w h o m a k e s h e r s e l f m a l e w i l l e n t e r t h e K i n g d o m o f H e a v e n . " (The Gospel According to Thomas, p . 5 7 . C o p t i c t e x t e s t a b l i s h e d a n d

translated by A. Guillaumont, etc., 1959)

And in another apocryphal manuscript called Gospel of Philip:

Log 32: "There were three who walked with the Lord at all times, Mary his mother and her (his) sister and Magdalene, whom they

called his consort.* For Mary was (the name of) his sister and his mother and his consort."

* Consort: (1) A husband or wife. (The World Book Encyclopedia Dictionary, 1966)

Log 55: "The Sophia whom they call barren is the mother of the angels. And the consort of (Christ is) Mary Magdalene. (The Lord loved

Mary) more than (all) the disciples, and kissed her on her (mouth) often. The others too ....they said to him, `Why do you love her more

t h a n a l l o f u s ? ' T h e S a v i o u r a n s w e r e d a n d s a i d t o t h e m , ` W h y d o I n o t l o v e y o u l i k e h e r ? ' * " (The Gospel of Philip, p p . 3 5 & 3 9 - 4 0 .

Translated from the coptic text, with an Introduction and Commentary by R. McL. Wilson, B.D., Ph.D., London, 1962)

* In the Commentary of this book, Dr. Wilson quotes Peter as saying, "We know that the Saviour loved you more than other women." (referring to Mary Magdalene) And he quotes Levi as saying later: "He loved her more than us.”

* * *

Celibacy had no recognition within the scriptures. Ancient Jewish law and early Christian law sanctioned and required their disciples to obey the marriage covenant. If the apostles fulfilled the law of marriage, it is only reasonable to assume that they were obeying that law by sanction and direction of the Lawgiver Himself.

And though Jesus gave and instructed his disciples in all of the laws of the gospel, including marriage, it is most unreasonable that He would neglect or refuse to obey that law Himself.

Jesus Christ never omitted the fulfillment of a single law that God had made known for the salvation of the children of men. It would

not have done for him to have come and obeyed one law and neglected or rejected another. He could not do that and then say to mankind,

"Follow me!" (Joseph F. Smith, Mill. Star 62:97)

The first principle, ordinance, and commandment given to man was the marriage law. It would indeed seem very peculiar that the Lord of all mankind would be a perfect example in all things except marriage. Historical records, scriptural evidence, and reason all prove that He was the Good Shepherd in obeying every law of the Gospel.
