AN EVERLASTING COVENANT OF MARRIAGE

When Paul the Apostle reflected upon the history and the future of Christ's Gospel, he was saddened by the realization that there would "come a falling away" (2 Thes. 2:3) from those true teachings. Then while writing to Timothy he said that even "all they which are in Asia be turned away" (2 Tim. 1:15); and he also marvelled that those in Galatia were "so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto another gospel" and that "there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ." (Gal. 1:6-7) However, with consolation he knew that the "times of refreshing shall come" which would be "the times of restitution of all things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all His holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:21) This would be called the dispensation of the fullness of times and "that in the dispensation of the fullness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are on earth." (Eph. 1:10) This restoration of the fullness of the gospel would include every doctrinal law, principle, and ordinance which God had ever revealed to man "by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began."

One of these gospel laws, among the many which had been deleted or diluted, was the practice and principle of plural marriage. It had been taught and practiced by the ancient prophets, patriarchs and the apostles. This law was commonly known and lived from the times of the ancient patriarchs and continued down throughout the Christian Dispensation.

Although the practice of plural marriage was commonly known and believed by many people in the Jewish society, it was never condemned by Jesus. The Savior had surely witnessed plural marriage, heard it taught, and of course had read of the many examples of this law in the scriptures; yet there is no evidence that he opposed or refuted that practice. He spoke of strict moral issues which pertained to every physical or mental sin involving sex, but the word polygamy was never refuted, nor did he utter a word against those prophets and patriarchs who had obeyed this principle of marriage. Because Jesus took no issue against polygamy, it is therefore implied that Jesus must have sanctioned that law. This fact was generally understood and accepted by many scriptorians and reformers.

Our chief reformers, Luther, Melanchthon, Bucer, Zuinglius, etc., after a solemn consultation at Wittenburg, on the question "whether

for a man to have two wives at once, was contrary to the divine law?" answered unanimously "that it was not"--and on this authority,

Philip the Landrave of Hesse actually married a second wife, his first being alive. The language of this council was "The Gospel hath

neither recalled nor forbid what was permitted in the law of Moses with respect to marriage." (Thelyphthora, Vol. 1:212, by Rev. Martin

Madan)

Nearly a hundred years ago a Christian minister by the name of James Campbell, because of an illness, resorted to traveling the world and studying its various religions. One of the religious practices which seemed to interest him most was the principle of polygamy. Through diligent study and research, both in present practices and from practices within the scriptures, he decided to write a book on the subject. Among his conclusions he contended that Jesus and His apostles had sanctioned plural marriage.

The marriage system of polygamy never formed a part of that ceremonial dispensation which was abrogated by the New Testament;

nor has it ever been proved that the New Testament was designed to affect any change in it; but the presumption is that this new

dispensation has also left it, as it found it--abiding still in force. If any change were to be made in an institution of such long standing,

confirmed by positive law, it could obviously be made only by equally positive and explicit ordinances or enactments of the gospel. But

such enactments are wanting. Christ himself was altogether silent in respect to polygamy, not once alluding to it; yet it was practiced at

the time of his advent throughout Judea and Galilee, and in all the other countries of Asia and Africa, and, without doubt, by some of his

own disciples.

The Book of the Acts is equally silent as the four Gospels are. No allusion to it is found in any of the sermons of instructions or

discussions of the apostles and early saints recorded in that book. It was not because Jesus or the Apostles durst not condemn it, had

they considered it sinful, that they did not speak of it, for Jesus hesitated not to denounce the sins of hypocrisy, covetousness, and

adultery, and even alter and amend, apparently, the ancient laws respecting divorce and retaliation; but he never rebuked them for their

polygamy, nor instituted any change in that system. And this uniform silence, so far as it implies anything, implies approval. John the

Baptist was thrown into prison where he was afterwards beheaded for reproving King Herod on account of his adultery, and we cannot

doubt, that, if he would have mentioned it; for Herod's father was, just before that time, living with nine wives, whose names are recorded

by Josephus, in his "Antiquities of the Jews;"--but John only reproved him for marrying Herodias, his brother Philip's wife, while his

brother was living. He administered the same reproof to Herod that Nathan had formerly done to David, and for similar reasons. The

apostles always denounced the sins of fornication and adultery, but never denounced polygamy, nor intimated in any way that it was a

sin. In all the long and painful catalogues of sins enumerated in the first, second and third chapters of Romans, many of which relate to

the unlawful indulgence of the amorous propensities, polygamy is not once named. It is the very place where it is morally certain that it

would have been named if it were sinful; and, that it is not there named, we are fully warranted to believe that it is not sinful. (The

History and Philosophy of Marriage, Rev. James Campbell, pp. 69-71)

Whenever God had commanded men to obey the principle of plural marriage, it became a binding law of the gospel to them. If they should refuse to obey that law or should contend against it, they were then breaking that covenant and would incur the judgment of God upon them. If God requires His people to live plural marriage, they have no other recourse but to accept it and obey His will. Such a law would become a part of their faith and religion--binding upon their conscience--and to disobey would be a sin.

In July of 1841 the Prophet Joseph Smith received a revelation pertaining to "the principle and doctrine of men having many wives" and the Lord said to Joseph:

Prepare thy heart to receive and obey the instructions which I am about to give unto you for all those who have this law revealed unto

them must obey the same. For behold, I reveal unto you a new and an everlasting covenant; and if ye abide not that covenant, then are ye

damned; for no one can reject this covenant and be permitted to enter into my glory. For all who will have a blessing at my hands shall

abide the law which was appointed that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundation of the world.

(D & C 132:3-5)

In this revelation on plural marriage the Lord speaks of it as his "LAW" thirty-one times. This law, when obeyed in righteousness, would bring untold blessings in the future state. It was an "everlasting covenant" to be embraced as a part of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. The Lord said that Joseph Smith was given the appointment to "restore ALL THINGS" (D & C 132:40), and this doctrine and law was a part of that which necessarily had to be restored.

This revelation respecting the law of plural marriage was as valid as any other revelation that Joseph Smith ever received. To doubt or dispute it, as a member of the LDS Church, would jeopardize their salvation. Many men and women have been willing to suffer the ravages of mobs, the fires of persecution, jail, poverty and even death to defend that "law". To every faithful member of the Church it became a part of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

The Savior in the Meridian of Time acknowledged this principle and sustained the prophets who lived it, thereby accepting the doctrine of plural marriage as a part of His gospel. And, these laws were preached and practiced--as the gospel--by the ancient prophets. Said the Prophet Joseph Smith:

But it is said that Abel himself obtained witness that he was righteous. Then certainly God spoke to him; indeed, it is said that God

talked with him; and if He did, would He not, seeing that Abel was righteous, deliver to him the whole plan of the gospel? And is not the

gospel the news of the redemption? How could Abel offer a sacrifice and look forward with faith on the Son of God for a remission of his

sins, and not understand the Gospel?

We all admit that the Gospel has ordinances, and if so, had it not always ordinances, and were not its ordinances always the same? Perhaps our friends will say that the Gospel and its ordinances were not known till the days of John, the son of Zacharias, in the

days of Herod, the king of Judea. But we will here look at this point: For our own part we cannot believe that the ancients in all ages were

so ignorant of the system of heaven as many suppose, since all that were ever saved, were saved through the power of this great plan of

redemption, as much before the coming of Christ as since.

It will be noticed that, according to Paul, (Gal. 3:8) the Gospel was preached to Abraham. We would like to be informed in what name

the Gospel was then preached, whether it was in the name of Christ or some other name. If in any other name, was it the Gospel? And if it

was the Gospel, and that preached in the name of Christ, had it any ordinances? If not, was it the Gospel? And if it had ordinances what

were they? Our friends may say, perhaps, that there were never any ordinances except those of offering sacrifices before the coming of

Christ, and that it could not be possible before the Gospel to have been administered while the law of sacrifice of blood was in force. But

we will recollect that Abraham offered sacrifice, and notwithstanding this, had the Gospel preached to him. * * * So, then, because the

ancients offered sacrifice, it did not hinder their hearing the Gospel; but served, as we said before, to open their eyes, and enable them to

look forward to the time of the coming of the Savior and rejoice in His redemption.

We find also, that when the Israelites came out of Egypt, they had the Gospel preached to them, according to Paul in his letter to the

Hebrews, which says: "For unto us was the Gospel preached, as well as unto them; but the word preached did not profit them, not being

mixed with faith in them that heard it." (Heb. 4:2) It is said again, in Gal. 3:19, that the law (of Moses, or Levitical law) was "added"

because of transgression. What, we ask, was this law added to, if it was not added to the Gospel? It must be plain that it was added to the

Gospel, since we learn that they had the Gospel preached to them. (T.P.J.S., p. 59-60)

If then the Gospel was preached to Abraham and yet Abraham lived plural marriage, it indicates that Abraham was complying with the requirements of the ordinances of the Gospel. We must therefore conclude that Abraham was obeying this principle as a law which was obligatory upon him. He was then justified in doing so. This was revealed to the Prophet Joseph:

Abraham received all things, whatsoever he received, by revelation and commandment, by my word, saith the Lord, and hath entered

into his exaltation and sitteth upon his throne.

Go ye, therefore, and do the works of Abraham; enter ye into my law and ye shall be saved. But if ye enter not into my law ye cannot

receive the promise of my Father, which He made unto Abraham. (D. & C. 132:29, 32, 33)

Orson Pratt justified Abraham's living plural marriage, and came to the conclusion that it was a part of the Gospel of Christ.

If plurality is offensive in the sight of God, why was Abraham, who practiced it, called the friend of God, and the father of the

faithful? Why did the Lord promise that in him, as well as in his seed, all the families of the earth should be blessed? Why require all the

families of the earth, under the Christian dispensation, to be adopted into the family of a polygamist in order to be saved? Why choose a

polygamist to be the father of all saved families? Why require all Christian families in order to be saved, to walk in the steps and do the

works of Abraham? Why did God proclaim Himself to be "The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob," and say that this

shall be "my name and my memorial to all generations?" (See Exodus 3:15.) If polygamy is not to be sanctioned among generations of

Christendom, why did He represent Himself to be the God of Polygamists, and say that all generations should adopt that memorial of

Him? Why choose these polygamists to be examples for Christians, and say, that many should come from the east and the west, from the

north and the south, and sit down with them in the kingdom of God? Will Abraham's wives and concubines, and Jacob's four wives be in

the kingdom of God with their husbands? If so, will it not greatly corrupt the morals of Christians to sit down in the same kingdom with

them? Will not Christians be greatly ashamed to be found sitting in the company of Polygamists? Will not Christians entirely ruin their

characters by being adopted into the family of so noted a Polygamist as Abraham, and be obliged to acknowledge him as father, and be

c a l l e d h i s c h i l d r e n ? T h e s c r i p t u r e f o r e s e e i n g t h a t G o d w o u l d j u s t i f y t h e h e a t h e n t h r o u g h f a i t h , preached before the Gospel unto

Abraham, saying, "In thee shall all nations be blessed." (Gal. 3:8) What kind of Gospel was preached unto Abraham? Was it not the same

Gospel that was preached after Christ, by which the heathen were to be justified, and by which all the families of the earth might be

blessed by becoming the children of Abraham through adoption? Did it not require the same Gospel to save the Polygamist father in the

kingdom of God, as that which saves his adopted children that sit down with him in the same kingdom? Does the Gospel, since Christ

exalt Christians to a more glorious kingdom than the one where Abraham dwells? If not, is it any better than the Gospel preached to

Abraham? Did not Abraham see the day of Christ and rejoice in it, and look forward to his atoning sacrifice, the same as Christians

a f t e r w a r d s l o o k e d b a c k t o t h e s a m e a t o n e m e n t ? I f t h e G o s p e l w h i c h w a s p r e a c h e d t o A b r a h a m r e q u i r e d t h e s a m e f a i t h - - t h e s a m e

repentance--the same, justification--the same sanctification through the Holy Ghost--if it procured for him the same blessings--the same

gifts of prophecy and revelations--the same gifts of seeing visions of conversing with angels--the same miraculous powers and heavenly

promises--if it made him worthy of the title of the friend of God, and exalted him to be the father of the faithful, even the father of all

saved nations--if, moreover, it saved him in the kingdom of God--in the same kingdom where his Christian children are to sit down with

him--then was it not the Gospel of Christianity--the very same Gospel that was preached after Christ? And if the same Gospel, then who

dare deny, that polygamy was not practiced by the very best of men, under a Christian and Gospel dispensation? Who dare say that

Abraham's righteousness was not as great as the righteousness of his children? (Orson Pratt, The Seer, pp. 187-188)

Plural marriage was practiced by a few of the Jews during the Christian dispensation; however, it has nearly always been a doctrine that has aroused the prejudice and wrath of others. We may determine that plural marriage was one of the reasons that caused the persecution and oppression of Jesus; for if plural marriage was a part of the Gospel, then Jesus would have taught it and practiced it Himself.

The Prophet Joseph Smith indicated this:

It always has been when a man was sent of God with the priesthood and he began to preach the fullness of the Gospel, that he was

thrust out by his friends, who are already to butcher him if he teach things which they imagine to be wrong; and Jesus was crucified

upon this principle. (T.P.J.S., p. 310)

Many men will say, "I will never forsake you, but will stand by you at all times." But the moment you teach them some of the mysteries

of the kingdom of God that are retained in the heavens and are to be revealed to the children of men when they are prepared for them

they will be the first to stone you and put you to death. It was this same principle that crucified the Lord Jesus Christ, and will cause the

people to kill the prophets in this generation. (T.P.J.S., p. 309)

I prophecy, in the name of the Lord God of Israel, anguish and wrath and tribulation and the withdrawing of the Spirit of God from

the earth await this generation, until they are visited with utter desolation. This generation is as corrupt as the generation of the Jews

that crucified Christ; and if He were here today, and should preach the same doctrine He did then, they would put Him to death. (T.P.J.S.,

p. 328)

The Prophet Joseph only confirmed what the ancient philosophers and historians had written as true facts of history.

The Apostle Jedediah Grant commented:

The grand reason for the burst of public sentiment in anathemas upon Christ and his disciples, causing his crucifixion, was evidently

based upon polygamy, according to the testimony of the philosophers who rose in that age. A belief in the doctrine of a plurality of wives

caused the persecution of Jesus and his followers. We might almost think they were "Mormons". (Jedediah Grant, J.D. 1:346)

What does old Celsus say, who was a physician in the first century, whose medical works are esteemed very highly at the present

time? His works on theology were burned with fire by the Catholics, they were so shocked at what they called their impiety. Celsus was a

heathen philosopher; and what does he say upon the subject of Christ and his Apostles, and their belief? He says, "The grand reason why

the Gentiles and philosophers of his school persecuted Jesus Christ, was because he had so many wives; there were Elizabeth, and Mary,

and a host of others that followed him."

After Jesus went from the stage of action, the apostles followed the example of their master. For instance, John the Beloved Disciple,

writes in his second epistle, "Unto the elect lady and her children, whom I love in the truth." Again, he says, "Having many things to write

unto you (or communicate), I would not write with paper and ink; but I trust to come unto you, and speak face to face, that our joy may be

full." Again--"The children of thy elect sister greet thee." This ancient philosopher says they were both John's wives. Paul says, "Mine

answer to them that do examine me is this: `Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife, as well as other apostles, and as the

brethren of the Lord, and Cephas.'" He, according to Celsus, had a numerous train of wives. (Jedediah Grant, J.D. 1:345)

It is only logical that Jesus and His Apostles would honor all the laws of marriage in order to set the proper example for their followers. The Church of Christ required its officers, such as elders, bishops and even deacons, to marry. (See I Tim. 3:1-4, 12.) Peter was married (See Matt. 8:14.); Paul, who was a member of the Sanhedrin, had to be married to vote on the decisions of that body (See Acts 7:58-60; Acts 8:1.); all of the Apostles honored Abraham in his marriages.

Modern Christian ministers are embarrassed at the thought of Jesus being married, as though it were some sort of moral sin. However, if marriage has any element of sinfulness, where is it mentioned in the scriptures? Jesus never forbid nor condemned nor failed to sanction any of the principles and laws pertaining to this everlasting covenant of marriage--especially in the lives of Abraham, Jacob, and a host of other prophets who had lived plural marriage. Neither did He criticize any of the laws pertaining to marriage or plural marriage as established by Moses.
