THE ANCIENT PRACTICE OF PLURAL MARRIAGE

Jesus defended and honored His lineage through the grand patriarch Abraham. Is it possible that Jesus would sustain the life of that great prophet, but not the laws and principles that made him great? Throughout the ministry of Jesus and His disciples there is not one word of denunciation against the principle of marriage or plural marriage. Certainly they were aware of such scriptures in the Old Testament as, "If he take him another wife, her food, her raiment, and her duty of marriage, shall he not diminish." (Exodus 21:10) Yet He made no change in these instructions. Rather he advocated men to "do the works of Abraham" to be worthy of being Abraham's seed.

The Catholic and Protestant ministers of today deny the marriage of Jesus and the law of plural marriage. However, in reading the Gospels, there looms the frequent mention of Jesus's association with many women. With all of these women surrounding Jesus, it appears that He was more of a Mormon than Catholic or Protestant.

It is not presumptuous to assume that Jesus had lived plural marriage--it had always been a law among the prophets of Israel. Jesus was to obey those laws--not to destroy them--but to show mankind how to live a fullness of all of the laws of God and the Gospel. His answer to Satan when tempted was "to live by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God;" and the Prophet Joseph Smith could only declare the same to this dispensation:

Thus we have no new commandment to give, but admonish elders and members to live by every word that proceedeth forth from the

mouth of God, lest they come short of the glory that is reserved for the faithful. (T.P.J.S., p. 306)

The Prophet recognized that Jesus was also confined to obey all of the commandments and ordinances which had ever been given to man.

If a man gets a fullness of the priesthood of God, he has to get it in the same way that Jesus Christ obtained it, and that was keeping all the commandments and obeying all the ordinances of the house of the Lord. (T.P.J.S., p. 308)

Several examples of this implication are recorded in the New Testament; and if we can accept this doctrine under the Christian Dispensation, then many incidents in the life of Christ will become clearly evident. Said Orson Pratt:

The Evangelists do not particularly speak of the marriage of Jesus; but this is not to be wondered at, for St. John says: "There are also

many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain

the books that should be written." (John 21:25) One thing is certain, that there were several holy women that greatly loved Jesus--such as

Mary, and Martha her sister, and Mary Magdalene; and Jesus greatly loved them, and associated with them much; and when He arose

from the dead, instead of first showing Himself to His chosen witnesses, the Apostles, He appeared first to these women, or at least to one

of them--namely, Mary Magdalene. Now, it would be very natural for a husband in the resurrection to appear first to his own dear wives,

and afterwards show himself to his other friends. If all the acts of Jesus were written, we no doubt should learn that these beloved

women were his wives. (Orson Pratt, The Seer, p. 159)

Among the dearest friends of Jesus were Lazarus and his two sisters, Martha and Mary. How often Jesus must have visited the home of this happy family. And these casual, perhaps often visits, gave him comfort and solace from the frenzie and turmoil of His daily labors. No doubt these associations with Mary and Martha grew more friendly and devoted because affections and true love will naturally increase; for love begets love. John the disciple, who knew of these circumstances, wrote: "Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister (Mary) and Lazarus." What kind of love was he speaking of? Was not this a different kind of love from that which he generally manifest? Or else why would John mention it? If Mary and Martha were wives and Lazarus a brother-in-law, then Jesus did love them with a deeper and more intimate love which was so noticeable to John.

Now Martha, in her character, was a woman with a particular attention and devotion to her home. In the work of housekeeping and family duties she found much pleasure and satisfaction. As a faithful devoted wife, she exercised her special gift in keeping an orderly and efficient home. Mary, however, was blessed with other types of gifts. She was a contemplative woman and given to spiritual feelings and religious instruction.

These two sisters, devoted as they were to their talents, and to Jesus, were sooner or later, by their nature, destined to clash. On one occasion while Jesus was with them, as the meal was being prepared by Martha, she felt that Mary was neglecting her share of the household duties, thereby leaving these chores to her. Martha could not see the value of Mary's conversations and meditations at the feet of Jesus while she alone managed the chores of the household. In such a circumstance, "Martha was cumbered about much serving and came to Him, and said, Lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? Bid her therefore that she help me." (Luke 10:40)

M A R Y A N D M A R T H A

How much like a wife to offer such a complaint to her husband--for who would suggest such a thing to a casual guest--especially to such a notable person? If Jesus were merely a visitor, what logical reasoning would cause Martha to ask this guest to impose the household obligations upon Mary? Certainly propriety and manners would have constrained such feelings until after the guest had departed. No, these were emotions being expressed regarding household conduct which Martha felt should be corrected by the husband of the house. Jesus knew the feelings of her heart, and being considerate and wise, with loving words said: "Martha, Martha, thou art careful (filled with cares) and troubled about many things"--demonstrating a consolation to her and her troubles. He acknowledges her burdens and with the feeling of an understanding husband calls her name twice as if to show His care and sympathetic feelings. But, with the same wise counsel, he considers Mary and her feelings and gifts, showing to Martha that Mary was performing a duty also. In the same consolation to Martha He said, "But one thing is needful; and Mary hath chosen that good part which shall not be taken away from her." (Luke 10:42) Mary was seeking the principles of the gospel, the words of the Savior, and the understanding of the mission of her husband. Mary also was perhaps learning of her mission on the earth and the duties that she would have to bear when her Lord would be taken away to Calvary.

Six days before the Passover, as the conspiracy of betrayal began to take place, Jesus came again to Bethany. Here once more he came to the home of Martha and Mary. Jesus knew his hours were numbered upon the earth--His heart was torn in the agony of leaving His home, His wives, and His friends. How natural then to come to their home in Bethany to spend a few remaining and precious moments with those whom He loved.

Mary's love and devotion were as pure and as dear as any wife's could be. We read that she was anointing the feet of Jesus with ointment "very costly" and that she "wiped his feet with her hair." Who would be more qualified to anoint the Master than a wife? How much like a wife to weep and rest her head on the bosom of Jesus and anoint his body with costly oil with such profound devotion. Surely she knew of the approaching death of Jesus, and as a faithful wife, she paid this last devotional tribute to her husband--a love story demonstrating an eternal affection, which Jesus said, "shall not be taken away from her."

If He (Jesus) was never married, his intimacy with Mary and Martha and the other Mary also whom Jesus loved, must have been highly

unbecoming and improper to say the best of it. (Orson Hyde, J.D. 4:259)

Joseph Smith spoke upon these passages to show that Mary and Martha manifested much closer relationship than merely a believer.

(Journal of Wilford Woodruff, July 22, 1883)

That relationship had the closeness of a marriage contract. And that love which was so manifest on these occasions was to be perpetual; for a true love which evolves into marriage should become reciprocal--ever increasing with each manifestation of kindness and thoughtfulness. It is meant to form a bond which can never be broken in life or death. However, the empty contracts of marriages performed by the apostate Christian world today are no more binding or everlasting than those administered by the pagan and heathens.

In the marriage ceremony performed by the laws of the land and almost every Christian Church, the ceremonial words direct the couple to love each other "till death do you part." This implies that such love between them will also be dissolved at the time of death by each or both. But can death be the means of destroying love? Are not the feelings and emotions of the human soul to continue as long as the spirit and soul will exist? Of course; and perhaps with much greater purity and intensity in those heavenly realms where the darkness of a depraved world cannot dim nor tarnish that holy emotion.

If love, like a marriage alliance, were to be dissolved at death, a widow would have no tears at the funeral of her husband. But true love, like a true marriage, is not intended by God to be discarded or dissolved. A divine love and divine marriage is eternal in its nature, and as it is honored on earth, it will continue to grow and increase, expanding to newer and higher excellence in the eternities. Such is the revelation of God to the Prophet Joseph Smith concerning this Everlasting Covenant of marriage.

In the restoration of the new and everlasting covenant of marriage the Lord said that "no one can reject this covenant" and then be permitted to "receive a fullness of my glory." Instead they would "remain separately and singly to all eternity." He then justified His servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as also Moses, in having many bound in heaven. The wives of these ancient prophets would then be restored to them in heaven because of their obedience and faithfulness. And, if God's servants are faithful in honoring the commandments and laws of the new and everlasting covenant, they are promised even "a hundred fold." This is no less than the promise that Jesus made to Peter and the Apostles when He said that if they should sacrifice a wife or anything else for the sake of the Gospel, that He would bless them with a hundred more. (Mark 10:29-30)

If then, these faithful prophets and apostles shall come forth in the resurrection with their wives, is it reasonable that Jesus should be left "separately and singly forever and ever?" Was the love and affection which Mary, Martha, and the others had for Jesus meant to be ended at death? Did Jesus honor all of the laws and all of the ordinances with the exception of this new and everlasting covenant? Jesus was not an exception to any of the eternal laws of heaven; and to become a God, He like all others must honor and obey that everlasting covenant of marriage.

Matthew, Mark, and Luke made mention of the many women who attended and ministered to Jesus. The majority of these women were his own wives and they "ministered unto him of their substance" that they might assist Him in fulfilling His life's mission. Again later, at the time of the crucifixion, we find them following Jesus to Calvary and to the sepulchre.

And many women were there beholding afar off, which followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering unto him. (Matt. 27:55)

There were also women looking on afar off; among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the less and of Joses and

Salome; who also, when he was in Galilee, followed him, and ministered unto him; and many other women which came up with him unto

Jerusalem. (Mark 15:40-41)

And there followed him a great company of people and of women, which also bewailed and lamented him. But Jesus turning unto them

said, "Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for yourselves, and for your children." (Luke 23:27-28)

Another incident, recorded by Luke, gives increased insight to these women's identity. The nature of the situation indicates that they were wives.

And the women also, which came with him from Galilee, followed after, and beheld the sepulchre, and how his body was laid. Now

upon the first day of the week very early in the morning, they came unto the sepulchre, bringing the spices which they had prepared, and

certain others with them. And they found the stone rolled away from the sepulchre. And they entered in, and found not the body of the

Lord Jesus. And it came to pass, as they were much perplexed thereabout, behold two men stood by them in shining garments; and as

they were afraid, and bowed down their faces to the earth, they said unto them, Why seek ye the living among the dead? He is not here,

but is risen; remember how he spake unto you when he was yet in Galilee, saying, The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of

sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again. And they remembered his words, and returned from the sepulchre, and told all

these things unto the eleven, and to all the rest. It was Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary the mother of James, and other women

that were with them, which told these things unto the apostles. And their words seemed to them as idle tales, and they believed them not.

(Luke 23:55-56; 24:1-11)

Now then, according to Jewish traditional laws, only members of the immediate family are permitted to attend to the body and enter into the sepulchre of the deceased. All of these women had to be the mother, sisters and wives of Jesus!

By the very nature and intent of God granting wives to the ancient prophets, He would also have to give wives to Jesus. One of the purposes of Jesus' life was to understand the feelings, the sufferings, and the trials of all men. He must know the love, the family ties, and the grief of losing honorable wives in death as the ancient prophets did. How could Jesus know the feelings and emotions of those ancient prophets who had lived plural marriage, with all of their trials and joys, the love and the sorrows connected therewith, unless He in like manner had obeyed the same laws and commandments from God?

It was absolutely necessary that he should pass through this state, and be subject to all the weaknesses of the flesh, that he should

also be subjected to the buffetings of Satan the same as we are, and pass through all the trials incident to humanity, and thereby

comprehend the weakness and the true character of human nature, with all its faults and foibles, that we might have a faithful High

Priest that would know how to deliver those that are tempted. (John Taylor, J.D. 7:198)

Jesus was required to feel all of the paternal anguish and griefs of the human heart. If He was to know the pains of God's faithful prophets who had been torn from their homes and families by mobs, it was necessary that He experience those same trials. The Lord himself attests to this fact by revelation while the Prophet Joseph Smith was experiencing a similar circumstance in the dungeon of Liberty Jail. Said the Lord:

If thou art accused with all manner of false accusations; if thine enemies fall upon thee; if they tear thee from the society of thy father

and mother and brethren and sisters; and if with a drawn sword thine enemies tear thee from the bosom of thy wife: * * * know thou, my

son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. The Son of man hath descended below them all. (D. & C.

122:6, 7, 8)

This is an admission by the Lord that He had known and felt that same anguish--and even worse!

In ancient and modern times the general masses have retaliated against these principles. And, when the leading Pharisees contended against Jesus for these doctrinal views, he exhorted them that "if ye were the seed of Abraham, ye would do the works of Abraham," but they refused! Today the modern Jew and the modern Christian will honor the name and the blood of Father Abraham; but it is his works--his marriages--which are looked upon as a most despicable incident. The cry is often made that this system of marriage is one of the "relics of barbarism," regardless of the honorable men who had lived and taught that doctrine, and in many cases died to sustain it. If then the great prophets and patriarchs who had seen visions, communed with angels, and who saw and talked with God, had lived and sanctioned this principle, then who can declare it to be a "relic of barbarism?" Our modern pagan society has become as distracted from God and His laws as all the other Pharoahs and Pharisees of yesteryear.

There is another class of individuals to whom I will briefly refer. Shall we call them Christians. They were Christians originally. We

cannot be admitted into their social societies, into their places of gathering at certain times and on certain occasions because they are

afraid of polygamy. I will give you their title that you may know whom I am talking about--I refer to the Freemasons.

They have refused our brethren membership in their lodge, because they are polygamists. Who was the founder of Freemasonry? They

c a n g o b a c k a s f a r a s S o l o m o n , a n d t h e r e t h e y s t o p . T h e r e i s t h e k i n g w h o e s t a b l i s h e d t h i s h i g h a n d h o l y o r d e r . N o w w a s h e a

polygamist, or was he not? If he did believe in monogamy, he did not practice it a great deal, for he had seven hundred wives, and that is

m o r e t h a n I h a v e , a n d h e h a d t h r e e h u n d r e d c o n c u b i n e s , o f w h i c h I h a v e n o n e t h a t I k n o w o f . Y e t t h e w h o l e f r a t e r n i t y t h r o u g h o u t

Christendom will cry out against this order. "Oh dear, Oh dear, Oh dear," they all cry out; "I am in pain.... I am suffering at witnessing the

wickedness there is in the land. Here is one of the `relics' of barbarism." Yes, one of the relics of Adam, of Enoch, of Noah, of Abraham, of

Isaac, of Jacob, of Moses, David, Solomon, the Prophets, and Jesus and His Apostles. (Brigham Young, Feb. 10, 1867, Deseret News)

There is little doubt that a few of the Pharisees accepted a belief in that doctrine, but would not advocate or obey that principle. And when Jesus exhorted his disciples to "do the works of Abraham", he contended that the chief priests were guilty of this deliberate neglect, for he said, "they say and do not." Since these leading Elders of Israel would "say and do not," it would follow in short sequence that apostasy would overtake them. Leading historians admit that this had happened. One of the most profound scholars of early Church history, Eusebius, wrote a work entitled "History of the Christian Church" which became the--

...most important ecclesiastical history of ancient times, and is written in the belief that the old order of things was passing away and

with the apologetic purpose of exhibiting the history of Christianity as a proof of its divine origin and efficacy. (Encyclopedia Britannica)

And, in his 15-volume work, entitled Contra Hieroclem, Eusebius devoted it entirely to the Christians for justification and acceptance of all the sacred writings and teachings of the Hebrews.

Through the corruptions and apostasy of early Christianity, the "plain and precious" truths were soon smothered and buried in the pages of the past--although a few marks of the original doctrines remain within the scriptures and old traditions. For example, the calling of nuns to be the "brides of Christ," and also in the scriptures that tell of the bridegroom coming to meet the ten virgins--both advocate the basic principle of plural marriage, regardless of the interpretations. But the most astounding factor in this plural marriage parable is that Jesus makes himself to be the bridegroom! He was speaking symbolically of an actuality!

Indeed, the Psalmist, David, prophesies in particular concerning the wives of the Son of God. We quote from the English version of the

Bible, translated about three hundred and fifty years ago: "All thy garments smell of myrrh, and aloes, and cassia; when thou comest out

of the ivory palaces, where they have made thee glad, King's daughters were among thine honorable WIVES; upon thy right hand did

stand the Queen in a vesture of gold Ophir? (Psalm 45:8, 9) That this passage has express reference to the Son of God and His wives, will

be seen by reading the sixth and seventh verses which are as follows: "Thy throne, O God, is forever and ever; the sceptre of thy kingdom

is a right sceptre. Thou lovest righteousness, and hatest wickedness; therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness

above thy fellows." This Being, whom the Psalmist here calls God, is represented in the next verses as having "honorable wives". If any

should still doubt whether this prophecy has reference to the Son of God, they may satisfy themselves by reading Paul's application of

these passages in the eighth and ninth verses of the first chapter of his epistle to the Hebrews; "But unto the Son He saith. Thy throne, O

God, is forever and ever; a sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of thy kingdom. Thou hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity;

therefore God, even thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows." Paul applies the words of the Prophet David

to the Son of God, to the anointed Messiah, who is called God, and whose "throne is forever and ever." Let it be remembered then, that the

Son of God is expressly represented as having "honorable wives". King James' translators were not willing that this passage should have

a literal translation, according to the former English rendering, lest it should give countenance to polygamy; therefore, they altered the

translation to honorable women instead of wives; but any person acquainted with the original can see that the first translators have

given the true rendering of that passage. Indeed, the very next sentence most clearly demonstrates this; for the Son of God is represented

a s h a v i n g a "queen" standing upon His right hand, clothed "in a vesture of gold." This Queen is exhorted in the following endearing

language: "Hearken, O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear; forget also thine own people, and thy father's house; so shall the

King greatly desire thy beauty, for he is thy Lord; and worship thou Him." (verses 10, 11)

Notwithstanding the Queen is numbered among the "honorable wives" of the Son of God, yet she is called upon to worship Him as her

Lord. If her husband were a mere man, she would not be exhorted to worship him; this therefore, is another evidence that He was truly, as

Paul says, the Son of God. (Orson Pratt, The Seer, pp. 159-160)

The historian, Farrar, said that Herod "issued his fell mandate to slay all the male children of Bethlehem and its neighborhood from two years old and under." (Farrar's Life of Christ, p. 30) Also an earlier historian named Macrobius, who lived in the third century, stated that "among the boys under two years of age whom Herod ordered to be slain in Syria, his own son also had been slain." (Ibid.)

The massacre of so many male children created a surplus of women, who were the same age as Jesus. It is quite certain that Christ and the Apostles would have accepted some of them as wives, offering them an opportunity to have families.

Some of the early Bibles are quoted here showing the original translations:

Psalms 45 from

The Geneva Bible,

London edition, 1599 AD

King James' translators were not willing that this passage should have a literal translation, according to the former English rendering, lest it should give countenance to polygamy; therefore, they altered the translation to honorable women instead of wives; but any person acquainted with the original can see that the first translators have given the true rendering of that passage. (Orson Pratt, The Seer, p. 160)

The Book of Psalms from a

Church of England Bible,

published in London in 1636

The Apostle Orson Pratt continues to elaborate and substantiate these passages of scripture with references to the Messiah who was to have a plurality of wives:

Inasmuch as the Messiah was to have a "plurality of wives", will they not all be Queens? Yes; but there will be an order among them.

One seems to be chosen to stand at his right hand; perhaps she may have merited that high station by her righteous acts, or by the

position she had previously occupied. It seems that she was one of the daughters of a king; for in the same Psalm it says, "The king's

daughter is all glorious within; her clothing is of wrought gold. She shall be brought unto the King in raimant of needle work; the virgins

her companions that follow her shall be brought unto Thee. With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought; they shall enter into the

King's palace." (verses 13-15) It must be recollected that "kings' daughters were among Thine honorable Wives." The kings here spoken of

were no doubt those who through obedience to the gospel became kings and priests forever; for we cannot suppose that Christ would

marry the daughters of the kings of this world who only reign under the pretended name of kings for this short life; such are not worthy

to be called kings. Some of the daughters of those kings who are to reign on the earth forever and ever, and who are in reality kings, will

be among His "honorable wives," one being chosen to stand as Queen at His right hand and worship Him, unto whom is made the following

promise: "Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children, whom thou mayest make Princes in all the earth. I will make thy name to be

remembered in all generations; therefore, shall the people praise thee forever." (verses 16, 17)

We are not informed at what time Jesus was to be married to this king's daughter or to any of the rest of His wives. But from what

John the Baptist says, He may have been married to some of them previous to that prophet's martyrdom. The passage is as follows: "He

that hath the Bride is the Bridegroom; but the friend of the Bridegroom, which standeth and heareth Him, rejoiceth greatly because of

the Bridegroom's voice; this my joy therefore is fulfilled. He must increase, but I must decrease." (John 3:29, 30) And again, "Jesus said

unto them, Can the children of the bridechamber mourn, as long as the Bridegroom is with them? But the days will come, when the

Bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast." (Matt. 9:15) John represents Jesus as already in the possession of the

B r i d e ; w h i l e t h e S a v i o u r c o n f i r m s w h a t J o h n s a y s , b y c a l l i n g H i m s e l f "the Bridegroom," a n d t h e d i s c i p l e s "the children of the

Bridechamber," but who the Bride was neither of them informs us. Whether Jesus had married any of His wives at that time or not, it is

very evident that there will be a marriage of the Son of God at the time of His second coming; for Jesus said, "The kingdom of heaven is

like unto a certain king, which made a marriage for his son, and sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding;

and they would not come. Again, he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden, Behold I have prepared my dinner; my

oxen and fatlings are killed, and all things are ready;: come unto the marriage. But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his

farm, another to his merchandise; and the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully and slew them. But when the king

heard thereof, he was wroth; and he sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city. Then saith he to his

servants, the wedding is ready, but they which were bidden were not worthy. Go ye therefore into the highways, and as many as ye shall

find bid them to the marriage. So those servants went out into the highways, and gathered together all as many as they found, both bad

and good; and the wedding was furnished with guests. And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man which had not on

a wedding garment; and he saith unto him, Friend how camest thou in hither not having a wedding garment? And he was speechless.

Then said the king to his servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take him away and cast him into outer darkness; there shall be weeping

and gnashing of teeth. For many are called, but few are chosen." (Matthew 22:1-14) All will admit that the king's son, here spoken of, is

Jesus Christ, and that the last servants who are sent forth have a commission to gather together from the highways and hedges both bad

and good; and that by this gathering, "the wedding was furnished with guests." The Bridegroom, the servants, and the guests are all

m e n t i o n e d , b u t t h e p a r a b l e d o e s n o t i n f o r m u s w h o t h e B r i d e i s . J o h n t h e R e v e l a t o r d e s c r i b e s t h e g r e a t n e s s , t h e g l o r y , a n d t h e

magnificence of this marriage celebration. He says, "And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters,

and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia; for the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth. Let us be glad, and rejoice and give honor

to him: for the Marriage of the Lamb is come, and His Wife hath made herself ready. And to her was granted that she should be arrayed

in fine linen, clean and white; for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints, And he saith unto me, Write, Blessed are they which are

called unto the marriage supper of the Lamb." (Rev. 19:6-9) That the wife was to be a very good and holy woman, is very clearly indicated

by her being clothed with "the righteousness of the saints," compared to fine linen, clean and white. Her raiment is more fully described in

the Psalm already quoted, being composed of fine needle work of wrought gold, while many virgins were to be her attendants.

That the Bride will continue to be the Wife of the Son of God in Eternity as well as time, is most clearly revealed in the twenty-first
