t h e L a m b ' s W i f e ; " a n d h e w a s c a r r i e d i n t h e s p i r i t t o a g r e a t a n d h i g h m o u n t a i n , a n d s a w a g r e a t c i t y c a l l e d t h e h o l y J e r u s a l e m ,

descending from the heavens upon the New Earth. This city contained the throne of God and the Lamb, and was inhabited by a great

n a t i o n o f k i n g s w h o w e r e t o "reign forever and ever," being Gods, as is evident from the name of God being written on each of their

foreheads. The inscription upon their foreheads was not intended as a mere sham or mockery, but was in reality the name given to each,

that all the inhabitants of eternity, when they saw GOD conspicuously inscribed upon all their foreheads, might know most assuredly

that each one was a God, as the written title or name expressly declared. The grandeur and glory of this city are still further described;

the city and the streets thereof were of pure gold, clear as glass, while the walls and the gates were of the most precious stones; and the

glory of God enlightened the city, so that they had no need of the light of the sun or moon. This light was so great that all the nations

that were saved that dwelt upon all the face of the New Earth, walked in the light of it. There was no night there, but the whole Earth

was clothed in one eternal day. It was in the midst of this city that the King of kings and Lord of lords sat upon His throne, while upon

His "right hand did stand the Queen," arrayed in the most costly apparel. ln order that John might see the glory of God, the glory of His

kingdom, and the glory of His Bride, it was necessary to show him, the Palace, the place of the Throne, and the city in which the Bride

resided. It is expressly said, concerning this Queen, that her name should be remembered in all generations, and that the people should

praise her forever and ever. (Psalm 45:17) As John saw in vision the Bride, the Lamb's Wife more than a thousand years after her

marriage--after she and all the rest of the inhabitants of the earth had been raised from the dead and become immortal--it is quite certain

that she was in reality a Wife after the resurrection as well as before, and that she will be the Lamb's Wife forever and ever; and in that

capacity she will, as the Psalmist has said, be respected and praised by all the people forever and ever.

That the marriage will be celebrated at the second coming of the Messiah, is also clearly expressed in the parable of the ten virgins;

f o r J e s u s s a i d , " T h e n s h a l l t h e k i n g d o m o f h e a v e n b e l i k e n e d u n t o t e n v i r g i n s , w h i c h t o o k t h e i r l a m p s , a n d w e n t f o r t h t o m e e t t h e

Bridegroom. And five of them were wise, and five were foolish. They that were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with them; but the

wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps. While the Bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept. And at midnight there was a

cry made, Behold the Bridegroom cometh, go ye out to meet him. Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps. And the foolish

said unto the wise, Give us of your oil; for our lamps are gone out. But the wise answered, saying, Not so; lest there be not enough for us

and you; but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves. And while they went to buy, the Bridegroom came; and they that were

ready went in with Him to the marriage; and the door was shut. Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. But

He answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not. Watch therefore, for you know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son

of Man cometh." (Matt. 25:1-13) This parable, like that of the marriage of the King's son which we have already quoted, plainly shows

that there will be a gathering out from among the nations--a going forth to meet the Bridegroom; but among those who gather, there will

be some without a wedding garment--without oil in their lamps. But the five wise virgins who are ready will go in with the Bridegroom to

the marriage, and the door will be shut. And here let us ask the following questions: Are these five wise virgins to be married unto the

Bridegroom, or are they only the invited guests? And if they are guests, who constitutes the Bride? In the parable of the marriage of the

King's son, it is said, "And the wedding was furnished with guests;" the guests being those who received the invitation of the servants and

gathered together. If the five wise virgins constitute the guests, then the Bride must be some wise holy virgin, chosen to be the royal

consort or Queen. On the other hand, if the five wise virgins represent all the saints, both male and female, and if they all constitute the

Bride, then where will the guests come from, or who will they be? Again, if the five virgins are actually virgins or females who are to be

married to the Bridegroom, then all the rest of the saints would constitute the guests. Are not these five wise virgins the "honorable

Wives" which the Psalmist represents the Son of God as having taken from among king's daughters? (Orson Pratt, The Seer, pp. 169-172)

The faith, power, and gifts of the early Christian Church disappeared with its original doctrines. Through persecution from without and the semi-apostates who aspired from within, the Church of Christ reverted to the institutions of paganism from which it had emerged. It was a desperate and futile struggle for the faithful few that contended for the gospel as revealed from the heavens. When sacredotal overseers themselves perpetuated heresies and deceptions, disguised as the word and will of God, Christianity waned and slipped into apostasy. After being persecuted for adhering to truth, the priests turned their efforts to persecuting those who believed in those very same truths.

Freedom, sought so desperately by the Christians and which should be incorporated as part of their religion, soon became one of the most deficient articles of their faith. The martyrs' pyre and the bloody guillotine soon became one of the most active programs of the Church. Although spiritual disciples bore testimony to the truths of the scriptures, the Church found it necessary to hide and subterfuge the truth from the lay member. The Church, through the word of mortal man began to supplant, as well as suppress, the words of God.

Spiritual darkness and the forces of evil from without had half collapsed the Church through lion's dens, the crosses, and the rivers of blood. Then the balance of doctrinal purity became smothered by cunning artifice from within. The Church had sacrificed its doctrinal truths for the purchase of worldly honor and esteem. The result became a half-truth, socialized Christianity which has now become horrified at the original laws and principles which were taught and lived by prophets, apostles and the Lord Jesus Christ.

There is another and more important question that should engage the attention of the churches of today. The Apostle Paul declares

that "all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." (2 Tim. 3:12) Why is it, then, that persecution seems in a great

degree to slumber? The only reason is that the church has conformed to the world's standard, and therefore awakens no opposition. T h e

religion which is current in our day is not of the pure and holy character that marked the Christian faith in the days of Christ and His

apostles. It is only because of the spirit of compromise with sin, because the great truths of the word of God are so indifferently regarded,

because there is so little vital godliness in the church, that Christianity is apparently so popular with the world. Let there be a revival of

the faith and power (and doctrines) of the early church, and the spirit of persecution will be revived, and the fires of persecution will be

rekindled. (Ellen G. White, The Great Controversy, p. 53)

The Latter-day Saints still acknowledge the doctrine of plural marriage as an everlasting covenant. It was never meant as a temporal commandment or a practical incident in Church history. This doctrine has always been declared to be an eternal principle of the fullness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

A key: Every principle proceeding from God is eternal and any principle which is not eternal is of the devil. (T.P.J.S., p. 181)

Eternal principles are given to man for him to obtain eternal blessings. To refuse or oppose them would cause man to lose not only eternal rewards but perhaps the priesthood of God.

Now, briefly, the reason that the Lord, through the Prophet Joseph, introduced the doctrine of plural marriage, and the reason that

the Church . . . has never and will never relinquish the doctrine of plural marriage, is simply this: the major purpose of the Church is to

help man attain the great eternal destiny suggested in that couplet . . . plural marriage is the patriarchal order of marriage lived by God

and others who reign in the Celestial Kingdom. As well might the Church relinquish its claim to the Priesthood as the doctrine of plural

marriage. (Brigham Young and His Wives, by J. J. Stewart, p. 41)

Throughout the centuries men have raised mobs or laws against those who have sustained the laws of God. The Saints of former-days and latter-days have found a common faith that brought them into jails or death. The Apostle Parley P. Pratt had faced them both and declared:

Sir, I have yet to learn by what constitutional or moral right a local state sovereignty makes a crime of that which, rightly conducted,

never has been recognized as a crime by God, or angels, prophets or apostles, or even by the Saviour of the world. (Autobiography of

Parley P. Pratt, p. 420)

Then his brother, Orson Pratt, who had been very familiar with the laws and attitudes of the modern Christian, also portrayed a vivid picture of the fate of those who persist in such prejudices.

Jesus says "there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets in

the kingdom of God, and you yourselves thrust out." (Luke 13:28) There are many in this generation so pious that they would consider

themselves greatly disgraced to be obliged to associate with a man having a plurality of wives; would it not be well for such to desire a

place separate from the kingdom of God, that they may not be contaminated with the society of these old polygamists? And then it would

be so shocking to the modesty of the very pious ladies of Christendom to see Abraham and his wives, Jacob and his wives, Jesus and his

honorable wives, all eating occasionally at the same table, and visiting one another, and conversing about their numerous children and

their kingdoms. Oh, ye delicate ladies of Christendom, how can you endure such a scene as this? Oh, what will you do, when you behold

on the very gates of the holy Jerusalem the names of the Twelve sons of the four wives of the Polygamist Jacob? If you do not want your

morals corrupted, and your delicate ears shocked, and your pious modesty put to the blush by the society of polygamists and their wives,

do not venture near the holy Jerusalem, nor come near the New Earth; for polygamists will be honored there, and will be among the chief

rulers in that Kingdom. (Orson Pratt, The Seer, p. 172)

Men must sooner or later, in this life or the next, learn the eternal truths of the new and everlasting covenant. And, if men have been given opportunities and privileges of gaining a knowledge and testimony of these principles in this life, but should forsake them through cowardice, compromise, or social honors while trusting in the arm of flesh, they shall barter an everlasting inheritance for a mess of pottage.

Popular traditions, customs and prejudices have always a profound effect upon the minds of men. These popular customs have almost always run counter to the laws of God; but God's laws are everlasting and unchangeable. Men, however, must learn the truths of God by testimony and then be willing to sacrifice popularity and social prestige for the eternal honors of heaven. But, there are many who fail in the cause of God, for Lehi saw many souls who had partaken of the gospel fruit but "after they had tasted of the fruit they were ashamed, because of those that were scoffing at them; and they fell away into forbidden paths and were lost." (1 Nephi 8:28) The Latter-day Saints of today have reason to be proud rather than ashamed of the heritage bestowed by their pioneer fore-fathers who sacrificed their wealth, their names and their lives to sustain the Everlasting Covenant of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. They dare not repudiate or condemn the principle of plural marriage without jeopardizing their salvation; and they should, with the valiancy of Paul the apostle, say that they "are not ashamed of the gospel of Christ for it is the power of God unto salvation."
