JESUS AND HIS POSTERITY

The true Messiah spoken of by all the ancient prophets was the personification and representation of all that is true and noble. One of man's most honorable estates is that of marriage and his family. The very thought of singleness and barrenness is generally repulsive and certainly not according to God's law which commands mankind to "be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth." (Gen. 1:28) Living things are designed to grow and be productive.

One of the most popular misconceptions about Jesus was His manliness. The common Christian has been taught about a Jesus with a femininity which is embarrassing if not revolting to anyone who understands His true character. The real Messiah labored and toiled with a genuine manly dignity. He walked many miles; He climbed and preached upon the mountainsides; He ate the most common food--and that among the poorest publicans and the worst of sinners. He wielded a whip across the backs of temple thieves and overturned their tables. Then with a dignity, majesty, and inner self-control that demanded the utmost strength, He silently and patiently withstood the beatings, the spitting and the sordid insults of a depraved humanity. Finally, He carried a burdensome cross through sweat and blood on the road to Calvary and suffered a tortuous death between two thieves.

This is not the character personified in the stained glass of the cathedrals--robed in costly garments, and glorious with a delicate and effeminate appearance. The Christ we adore and revere was a real man--strong in character, body and mind. He was a man among men, a King of kings, and a Lord of lords. Yet He understood by experience every feeling, every weakness and strength, of each mortal man. He lived like a man, He understood and spoke as a man, but He possessed the dignity and wisdom of a God. This was the real Jesus--the true Messiah--the perfect example!

Among man's greatest honors and blessings is his home. For the security, the love, and the possessions of a family, man will make every sacrifice, toil to unending endurance, or fight upon any battlefield. The family is man's most valuable treasure--and the dearest to his heart. The basis of dignity and glory is for a man to have a continuation of seed--children that will revere his life and continue his name. No blessing could have been more precious to Abraham than the promise that his seed would become as numerous as "the stars and the sands of the sea." If Abraham was so honored because of his righteousness, then it is only reasonable that Jesus should also be granted a similar blessing. If mortal men may be blessed with such a numerous posterity, then how much more deserving should be the Christ!

Did Jesus have children? Paul said that Jesus took upon Him the seed of Abraham (Heb. 2:16), which means simply that He continued the lineage and posterity of Abraham.

If these things have power to disturb the pure mind, we apprehend that even greater troubles than these may arise before mankind

learn all the particulars of Christ's incarnation--how and by whom he was begotten; the character of the relationships formed by that

act; the number of wives and children he had, and all other circumstances with which he was connected, and by which he was tried and

tempted in all things like unto man. Whatever may prove to be the facts in the case, it certainly would exhibit a great degree of weakness

on the part of anyone to indulge in fears and anxieties about that which he has no power to control. Facts still remain facts, whether

kept or revealed. If there is a way pointed out by which all beings who come into this world can lay the foundation for rule, and a never-

ending increase of kingdoms and dominions, by which they can become Gods, we are as willing the Lord Jesus Christ should enjoy them

all as any other being, and we believe the descendants of such a sire would glory in ascribing honour and power to him as their God. The

Apostle informs us that those who are redeemed shall be like Jesus; not to say, however, that they shall be wifeless and childless, and

without eternal affections. (Samuel W. Richards, Mill. Star, 15:825)

There is a law of procreation just as binding, just as eternal, and just as consistent in its demands and blessings as the law of baptism. The purpose and scope of marriage is to bear children. To say that Jesus did not need to comply with the law of marriage, and the propagation of children is as foolish as to say that He did not need to comply with the demands of any other law of the Gospel.

Jesus Christ never omitted the fulfilling of a single law that God has made known for the salvation of the children of men. It would not

have done for him to have come and obeyed one law and neglected or rejected another. He could not consistently do that and then say to

mankind, "Follow me." (Joseph F. Smith, Mill. Star, 62:97)

Jesus honored and obeyed every law of the gospel, including marriage and raising a posterity. Indeed, it is through obedience to this divine law that gives the greatest honor to man, for this was the first law and commandment given to men. Jesus said that He came to "fulfill the law," and the first positive commandment of the Bible according to Rabbinical law (Maimonides, Minyan ha-Mitznet, p. 212) is the propagation of the human race.

The Jewish morality insists that a man who does not assume the social responsibility for the continuation of society, lives a life that

is not complete. (Rabbi Hirsch, My Religion, p. 44)

Jewish tradition and rabbinical law declare the promised Messiah is to be a married High Priest with children. To better understand human nature with its weaknesses, problems, and trials, a High Priest was required to be married and raise a family. In such a position he could, from his own experience, be better prepared to give counsel and advice in assisting others who may have similar problems. With the experience of marriage, and the raising of a large family, coupled with the inspiration of heaven, he then was qualified to act in that holy calling for his fellow men.

Although through many centuries, priests and popes disregarded the law of marriage and substituted the doctrine of celibacy, the supposed first pope, the Apostle Peter, was a married man. (Matt. 8:14; Mk. 1:30; Lk. 4:38) Indeed, he may well have been a polygamist, rather than a celibate, for he had two homes--one in Bethsaida, (John 1:44) and another home in Capernaum (Mark 1:29). Now, if there be a perversion in the original history of the lives of the Apostles, how much more had it been tampered in the life of the true Messiah?

For years before Christ's coming, the Jews believed in a Messiah who would have children:

The Messiah will die, and his son will become king in his stead, and there will be no immortality, but the people will live much

longer.... (The Messiah Idea in Jewish History, Greenstone, p. 147)

After nearly two thousand years of historical juggling, true facts will sound like fairy tales. American history, in an enlightened age with only a couple hundred years to draw from, is being constantly re-exposed to the amazement of her citizens. How delicately we must expose the truth from many, many centuries.

In 1853 the Apostle Orson Hyde dared to deliver a lecture revealing incidents in the life of Christ which affirmed His marriage and children. This news scattered like wildfire throughout the country and editors made literary war upon the apostle. Said Orson Hyde a few months later:

I discover that some of the Eastern papers represent me as a great blasphemer, because I said, in my lecture on marriage, at our last

conference that Jesus Christ was married at Cana of Galilee, that Mary, Martha, and others were his wives, and that he begat children.

All that I have to say in reply to that charge is this--they worship a Savior that is too pure and holy to fulfill the commands of his

Father. I worship one that is just pure and holy enough "to fulfill all righteousness;" not only the righteous law of baptism, but the still

more righteous and important law "to multiply and replenish the earth." Startle not at this, for even the Father himself honored that

law by coming down to Mary, without a natural body, and begetting a son; and if Jesus begat children he only "did that which he had

seen his Father do." (Apostle Orson Hyde, J.D. 2:210)

The ancient prophet Isaiah had written more on the life and the expected Messiah than any other prophet. In one of these prophecies he said the great Redeemer would see his children.

When thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, He shall see His seed. (Isaiah 53:10)

This scripture indicates that when Jesus would be making "his soul an offering for sin" that he would see his children. No doubt this event did occur--which would make His offering more heart-rending and the trial more severe. Perhaps Luke recorded this very event--for at the time that Jesus was being taken to the cross at Calvary, Luke said:

There followed him a great company of people, and of women which also bewailed and lamented him. But Jesus turning unto them

said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for yourselves, and for your children. (Luke 23:27-29)

These women were wives and mothers who "bewailed and lamented" because Jesus was going to the cross. But, Jesus knew that his mortal mission was nearly over--it was the end of the suffering for him, but it was not the end of the trials for those mothers and their children. And, Jesus continued to explain their situation by adding, "If they do these things in the green tree, what shall they do in the dry?" Jesus knew the sorrows that would continue for those women and children because the persecutors would not stop at the death of Jesus. They would continue to destroy his children, his relatives and his disciples. Then said Jesus, "the days are coming, in the which they shall say, blessed are the barren and the wombs that never bare" because the destroyers would, like Herod, seek their destruction. Persecution became so severe that every apostle (with the exception of John) and most of the disciples were killed.

Man's honor and glory is obtained by woman. Alone and single, man fades into insignificance, but through women and children, his glory is extended and perpetuated. For this reason Paul said that "the woman is the glory of the man." (I Cor. 11:7) Jesus was not the exception to this principle. Before He died he said to the Father:

Father, the hour has come; glorify thy Son that thy Son may also glorify thee; * * * I have glorified thee on the earth; I have finished

the work which thou gavest me to do. (John 17:1, 4)

The Lord continued to reveal further light on this subject in a revelation to the Prophet:

For they are given unto him to multiply and replenish the earth, according to my commandment, and to fulfill the promise which was

given by my Father before the foundation of the world, and for their exaltation in the eternal worlds, that they might bear the souls of

men; for herein is the work of my Father continued, that He might be glorified.

This promise is yours also, because ye are of Abraham, and the promise was made unto Abraham; and by this law is the continuation

of the works of my Father, wherein he glorifieth himself. Go ye, therefore, and do the works of Abraham; enter into my law and ye shall be

saved. (D. & C. 132:63, 31, 32)

Hence, God is "glorified" by the commandment to "multiply and replenish the earth." It is evident Jesus had a posterity by His admission that He "glorified" the Father on earth.

The grand blessing of honor which was given to Abraham was his family and his posterity. This was the glory of Abraham.

But to continue with the scripture of Isaiah:

What did the old Prophet mean when he said (speaking of Christ) "He shall see his seed, prolong his days, etc.?" Did Jesus consider it

necessary to fulfill every righteous command or requirement of His Father? He most certainly did. This he witnessed by submitting to

baptism under the hands of John. "Thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness," said he. Was it God's commandment to man, in the

beginning, to "multiply and replenish the earth?" None can deny this, neither that it was a righteous command; for upon an obedience to

this, depended the perpetuity of our race. Did Christ come to destroy the law or the prophets, or to fulfill them? He came to fulfill. Did he

multiply, and did he see his seed? Did he honour his Father's law by complying with it, or did he not? Others may do as they like, but I

will not charge our Saviour with neglect or transgression in this or any other duty. (Orson Hyde, J.D. 4:260)

When Christ came in the Meridian of time, He came to fulfill all of the gospel laws; He further fulfilled all of the ancient prophecies concerning the life of the promised Messiah. Isaiah the prophet saw the Messiah seated upon the throne of the temple:

In the year that King Uzziah died I saw also the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up. and his train filled the temple. (Isa.

6:1)

In this instance the "train" was not a robe--for it "filled the temple". This "train" implies more than just disciples; the term referred to relations or family members; and this was the interpretation taken by President Brigham Young.

The scripture says that He, the Lord, came walking in the temple, with His train; I do not know who they were unless His wives and

children.... (B. Young, J.D. 13:309)

That he did take upon himself the responsibilities of a family is also inferred by the Apostle Paul who said that he "took not on him the nature of angels; but he took on him the seed of Abraham." Orson Pratt refers to this scripture as follows:

From the passage in the forty-fifth Psalm, it will be seen that the great Messiah who was the founder of the Christian religion, was a

polygamist, as well as the Patriarch Jacob and the prophet David from whom He descended according to the flesh. Paul says concerning

Jesus, "Verily he took not on him the nature of angels; but he took on him the seed of Abraham." (Heb. 2:16) Abraham the polygamist,

being a friend of God, the Messiah chose to take upon himself his seed; and by marrying many honorable wives himself, show to all future

generations that he approbated the plurality of wives under the Christian dispensation, as well as under the dispensations in which His

polygamist ancestors lived.

We have now clearly shown that God the Father had a plurality of wives, one or more being in eternity, by whom He begat our spirits

as well as the spirit of Jesus His First Born, and another being upon the earth by whom He begat the tabernacle of Jesus, as His Only

B e g o t t e n i n t h i s w o r l d . W e h a v e a l s o p r o v e d m o s t c l e a r l y t h a t t h e S o n f o l l o w e d t h e e x a m p l e o f h i s F a t h e r a n d b e c a m e t h e g r e a t

Bridegroom to whom kings' daughters and many honorable wives were to be married. We have also proved that both God the Father and

our Lord Jesus Christ inherit their wives in eternity as well as in time; and that God the Father has already begotten many thousand

millions of sons and daughters and sent them into this world to take tabernacles; and that God the Son has the promise that "of the

increase of his government there shall be no end;" it being expressly declared that the children of one of His Queens should be made

Princes in all the earth. (See Psalm 45:16) (Orson Pratt, The Seer, p. 172)

As Jesus entered the Garden of Gethsemane, He knew of the conspiracy of death that loomed upon the near horizon. Diabolical men and demons were allying their means and powers to destroy the prospects of the Son of God; and with this premonition, Jesus sank to His knees and cried. No mortal man, no human heart ever felt the anguish, the sorrow, and the despair that came from that little garden that lonely night. And why? Because He prayed and felt as a mortal man--as a husband and a father. He loved His home as dear as any man ever loved a home. He knew the warmth of a family's love beside a fireplace, the smiles and laughter of His children, the tender embrace of a loving wife. Was there ever a blessing or a joy in a human heart that He should be deprived of? And conversely, was there ever a sorrow, a pain, or an anguish that other men had suffered that He too must not share?

With the seeds of mortality coursing through the veins of Jesus, He had experienced the emotions and feelings of every other mortal--yet with a nature that was divine He neither sinned nor erred. No mortal was ever more entitled to a home and family than he. No man had greater reason to remain alive than did Jesus--and for these He prayed. Death could deprive Him of all these deserving blessings. In a gushing of tears and sweat He was pleading to His Father for a continuation of His life. He loved His wives, His children and His disciples; and in the despair of leaving them, He said, "My soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death." In the darkness of the night and the blackness of his future, He attempted to arouse His apostles three times to assist Him in this petition for His life; and He cried, "Father, all things are possible unto Thee; take away this cup from Me; nevertheless, not what I will but what Thou wilt." (Mark 14:36)

His soul was torn between the affectionate ties on the earth and the will of His Father in heaven. But, like many of God's prophets who had been robbed of their homes and families to perish in the prime of life, so too Jesus must suffer through this same trial and temptation; "for we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin." (Heb. 4:15)

Attention must again be drawn to the revelation of March 1839 to the Prophet Joseph Smith during his incarceration in the Liberty Jail. The Lord indicates this trial of Joseph's was for his good and would give him experience--then indicates that He too had undergone the same heartfelt sorrow of being separated from his offspring--and also much worse.

If thou art accused with all manner of false accusations; if thine enemies fall upon thee; if they tear thee from the society of thy father

and mother and brethren and sisters; and if with a drawn sword thine enemies tear thee from the bosom of thy wife, and of thine

offspring, and thine elder son, although but six years of age, shall cling to thy garments, and shall say, "My father, my father, why can't

you stay with us? O, nay father, what are the men going to do with you?" And if then he shall be thrust from thee by the sword, and thou

be dragged to prison, and thine enemies prowl around thee like wolves for the blood of the lamb; . . . know thou my son, that all these

things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than He? (D.

& C. 122:6, 7, 8)

Understanding the feelings of the heart can only be obtained by experience. As the taste of salt and sugar cannot be known but by the taste of the tongue, so also must the joys and sorrows of the heart be known by experience. Jesus knew happiness, sorrow, disappointment, and every other emotion and feeling of a husband, a father, and a man. He experienced them all that he might understand our feelings and lead us to eternal life.

ln the light of new revelation and new archaeological findings these little known facts are finding their way to discovery. In 1875 an archaeologist by the name of Ganneau discovered these facts in ancient records. The written commentary of the learned M. Zvi Udley are most revealing:

Did Jesus have children? There seems to be evidence that such was the case; in 1873 M. Clermont Ganneau discovered near Bethany on

the Mount of Offense certain sarcephagi of extremely ancient times. On these were small crosses, but none of the usual symbols of Jewish

burials, "which leaves no doubt of the religion of the persons whose remains were preserved in them." M. Clermont Ganneau, writing of

these discoveries in the Palestine Exploration Fund Quarterly, 1874, pp. 7-10, notes the following to have been buried there: Salome, wife

of Judah; Judah, son of Eleazar (Lazarus), Eleazar, the son of Nathan, Martha, daughter of Pesach; Simeon, son of Jesus; Salomzion,

daughter of Simeon. Other sarcephagi had been destroyed earlier. Concerning them writes Clermont Ganneau: "By singular coincidence,

which from the first struck me very forcibly, these inscriptions, found close to the Bethany road, and very near the site of the village,

contain nearly all the names of the personages in the Gospel scene which belonged to the place; Eleazar (Lazarus), Simon, Martha . . . a

host of other coincidences occur at the site of all these evangelical names...."

The "Simeon, son of Jesus" was called in one of the inscriptions "the Priest" (H-Kohan) and M. Clermont Ganneau concluded: ". . .this

Simeon might very well be the second Bishop of Jerusalem. But then would arise . . . the grave question of the marriage of Christian

priests, since Simeon has a daughter named Salomzion." M. Clermont Ganneau's French name suggests him to be Catholic, and bound to

the doctrines of celibacy; however, the first 15 Bishops of Jerusalem were circumcised Jews, and the earlier ones, at least, certainly

obeyed the marriage commandments! It seems the only reason Clermont Ganneau did not candidly state his beliefs was the question of a

married clergy, for throughout his article he suggests this Simeon to have been the Bishop of Jerusalem. He promised to write a complete

paper on the subject when he had more carefully examined all the find. It was an important find from the standpoint of archaeology, for

it was the first actual discovery of the name "Martha" which "would alone be sufficient to make this collection important from an exegetic

point of view;" yet, his promised paper was never published. Why? Was it because a full study of the find disclosed that this "Simeon the

Son of Jesus" was the Bishop of Jerusalem? I fully believe this to be the case. Orthodox Christians have purposely destroyed valuable

historical evidences which would prove embarrassing to them; that such was probably the case here is suggested by the fact that several

ancient writers imply that Simeon the Bishop of Jerusalem, and President of the Church, (died c. 106 A.D.), was of the family of Jesus. It

would be only natural for Jesus' son, when he was old enough to succeed James, the brother of the Lord, on his death, to the Presidency of

the Church. In all probability Simeon was a son of Jesus and Martha, and was that child who appeared at the crucifixion. (M. Zvi Udley,

Ph.D.)

Other ancient manuscripts may have been found which would contribute additional evidence concerning the marriage and family of Jesus. However, our present attitudes forbid validity and disclosure of such evidence because they tear asunder all of our home-spun traditional teachings. Historical sources may yet some day bring further light and information on this subject.

From an ecclesiastical point of view we know that Jesus came to honor, teach and obey the laws of the priesthood. And when Jesus became "an high priest forever after the order of Melchizedek" (Heb. 6:20), He obeyed every law and ordinance pertaining to that order and priesthood. Not only did He sustain those laws, but He became the perfect example for others to follow in like manner. One of the primary laws of this priesthood order was for the priests to bear children. It was essential for men who bore the priesthood to have a continuation of seed by bearing children under that covenant. A high priest who had no children was considered accursed, while those who had a numerous posterity were called blessed.

The children who were born under the covenant of the priesthood were blessed with a fatherly or patriarchal blessing. Prophecies were uttered upon their heads for their future and the future of their posterity, for many generations. Isaiah prophecied concerning the posterity of Jesse (father of David) and that from his loins should come someone known as the "stem"; another as the "rod" and one as the "branch". The identity of these persons was sought for by the Prophet Joseph Smith who inquired of the Lord. The disclosure concerning the "stem" was made known in the following revelation:

"Who is the Stem of Jesse spoken of in the lst, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th verses of the 11th chapter of Isaiah?" "Verily thus saith the

Lord; it is Christ." (D. & C. 113:1-2)

Since Christ was identified as the "Stem", it is interesting to note that the "Stem" was to have posterity; according to Isaiah--

. . . there shall come forth a Rod out of the Stem of Jesse and a Branch shall grow out of his roots. (Isa. 11:1)

This is evidence that the "Stem" or the Christ would have children because these great servants known as the "Rod" and the "Branch" were to come forth through His lineage!

The "Rod" has been identified as the Prophet Joseph Smith. Prophecy designates the "Rod" as one who would hold "the keys of the kingdom, for an ensign, and for the gathering of my people in the last days." (D. & C. 113:6) And Isaiah said that he should be the means of establishing an "ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek." (Isa. 11:10)

Since Joseph Smith did hold the keys of the kingdom in the last days, (D. & C. 64:5, 65:2, 115:19) and was the "Rod" from the loins of the Stem of Jesse, he would have the blood of Abraham, Jesse, and the Savior, according to the testimony of scripture and revelation. lt would be evident that Joseph Smith should also know these facts. The Prophet did understand them--and more--but he was reluctant to tell them because of the traditions and ideologies of modern Christianity. Once he hinted:

Would to God, brethren, I could tell you who I am! Would to God I could tell you what I know! But you would call it blasphemy, and

want to take my life! (Joseph Smith, Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 333)

But the royal blood lineage of the prophets and the Savior was not confined to the few select individuals described by Isaiah. Other notable leaders, such as those chosen to assist in the restoration of the Gospel in these last days, were also instilled with the blood and the spirit of their Lord, and these valiant souls were commissioned to establish this "ensign" for the work of the "gathering of my people in the last days."

Among the notable and valiant leaders of this last dispensation was President Heber C. Kimball. Here was a noble man, a prophet, and a true apostle of Jesus Christ who possessed all of the powers and gifts of the ancient apostles. The story of his life, his character, and his labors was patterned after the similitude of the Savior. The spiritual gifts and endowments which God had blessed him with became so abundantly manifest that thousands flocked to hear and see this latter-day prophet. On one occasion in England, crowds of people greeted him with flowers, songs, and offerings of kindness. The Apostle Orson F. Whitney commented on this occasion by making a parallel in the life of the Savior:

A rare scene, indeed, and a suggestive one, for the parallel of which the mind must leap backward nigh two thousand years:

"On the next day much people that were come to the feast, when they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, took branches of

palm trees, and went forth to meet Him, and cried, Hosanna; Blessed is the King of Israel that cometh in the name of the Lord.

"The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing? Behold, the world is gone after him."

So was it with this servant of Christ, this brother of Jesus in the British Isles. The hireling, the pharisees of Christendom, prevailed

nothing. The "word went after him" whole villages at a sweep, singing praises, and shouting in tones of rapture; "Blessed is he that

cometh in the name of the Lord."

There was divine harmony in all this. In Heber, his character, manner and methods--we say it reverently--there was much of the

Christ; the might of the lion, with the meekness of the lamb. His, also, was the Savior's lineage; in his heart a kindred spirit, in his veins

the self-same blood. Where causes are similar, should there not spring similar results? (Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 185)

Heber C. Kimball understood the paternal nature of this ancient blood royalty. At a conference in 1857 he was impressed to publically reveal information concerning this sacred lineage and perhaps he knew the time had arrived when these things should be made known for the light and understanding of the Saints. If they could comprehend and treasure this information it would inspire them to live a more Saintly life.

Are you ever going to be prepared to see God, Jesus Christ, His angels, or comprehend His servants, unless you take a faithful and

prayerful course? Did you actually know Joseph Smith? No. Do you know Brother Brigham? No. Do you know Brother Heber? No, you do

not. Do you know the Twelve? You do not; if you did, you would begin to know God, and learn that those men who are chosen to direct and

counsel you are near kindred to God and Jesus Christ, for the keys, power, and authority of the kingdom of God are in that lineage.

(Heber C. Kimball, J.D. 4:248)

The Prophet Joseph Smith had previously and privately revealed some of these things to a few select individuals. It was in the early 1840's that Joseph made a similar disclosure.

While visiting with Zina, she related a conversation that occurred between her and a Sister Repshire upon events in Nauvoo, where

the Prophet Joseph Smith sealed her, Sister Repshire, to a Judge Adams of Springfield, Illinois.

The Prophet stated to her (Repshire) that Judge Adams was a literal descendant of Jesus Christ. The judge died in Nauvoo and Sister

Repshire, his wife, who had been married before to Repshire, died at Hill Creek, Utah. (Oliver B. Huntington Journal, p. 259)

In a solemn assembly held in the Salt Lake Temple, July 2, 1899, more information pertaining to the descendants of Christ was devulged. The Apostle George Q. Cannon made the disclosure after which the President of the Church, Lorenzo Snow, confirmed his statement:

President George Q. Cannon also spoke on the law of tithing. Among the other things, he said, "There are those in this audience who

are descendants of the old Twelve Apostles--and shall I say it, yes, descendants of the Savior Himself. His seed is represented in this body

of men.

Following Pres. Cannon, President Snow arose and said that what Bro. Cannon had stated respecting the literal descendants among

this company of the old apostles and the Savior himself is true--the Savior's seed is represented in this body of men. (Journal of Pres.

Rudger Clawson, pp. 374-375)

But Kimball, Young, Adams and other apostles were not the only exceptions in possessing the literal blood of Christ. Other members of the Church and congregation were also descendants of this grand royalty.

There are men in this congregation who are descendants of the ancient Twelve Apostles and shall I say it, of the Son of God Himself,

for He had seed, and in the right time they shall be known. (Anthony W. Ivins Journal, p. 21)

What became of the descendants and the children of Jesus? Would they not, as Abraham's seed be a blessing to all the nations of the earth? According to prophecy, the choicest seed of the earth will be gathered in the last days to prepare for the second coming of the Savior.

The Apostle Orson Hyde comments on this blood lineage:

We say it was Jesus Christ who was married, to be brought into the relation whereby he could see his seed, before He was crucified.

"Has he indeed passed by the nature of angels, and taken upon himself the seed of Abraham, to die without leaving a seed to bear his

name on the earth?" No. But when the secret is fully out, the seed of the blessed shall be gathered in, in the last days; and he who has not

the blood of Abraham flowing in his veins, who has not one particle of the Savior's in him, I am afraid is a stereotyped Gentile, who will be

left out and not be gathered in the last days; for I tell you it is the chosen of God, the seed of the blessed, that shall be gathered. I do not

despise to be called a son of Abraham, if he had a dozen wives; or to be called a brother, a son, a child of the Savior, if he had Mary, and

Martha, and several others, as wives; and though he did cast seven devils out of one of them, it is all the same to me.

Well, then, he shall see his seed, and who shall declare his generation, for he was cut off from the earth? I shall say here, that before

the Savior died, he looked upon his own natural children, as we look upon ours; he saw his seed, and immediately afterwards he was cut

off from the earth; but who shall declare his generation? They had no father to hold them in honorable remembrance; they passed into

the shades of obscurity, never to be exposed to mortal eye as the seed of the blessed one. For no doubt had they been exposed to the eye of

the world, those infants might have shared the same fate as the children in Jerusalem in the days of Herod, when all the children were

ordered to be slain under such an age, with the hopes of slaying the infant Savior.

History is replete with circumstances of neck-or-nothing politicians dyeing their hands in the blood of those who stood in their way to the throne or to power.

That seed has had its influence upon the chosen of God in the last days. The same spirit inspires them that inspires their father, who

bled and died upon the cross after the manner of the flesh. (Orson Hyde, J.D. 2:82-83)

Two years later this learned Apostle again continued to expound on the blessings of this chosen seed:

Abraham was chosen of God for the purpose of raising up a chosen seed, and a peculiar people unto his name. Jesus Christ was sent

into the world for a similar purpose, but upon a more extended scale. Christ was the seed of Abraham, so reckoned. To these, great

promises were made; one of which was, that in Abraham, and his seed, which was Christ, all the families of the earth should be blessed.

When? When the ungodly or those not of their seed should be cut off from the earth, and no family remaining on earth except their own

seed. Then in Abraham and in Christ, all the families and kindreds of the earth will be blessed--Satan bound, and the millennium fully

come. Then the meek will inherit the earth, and God's elect reign undisturbed, at least, for one thousand years.

Is there no way provided for those to come into this covenant relation who may not possess in their veins, any of the blood of Abraham

o r o f C h r i s t ? Y e s ! B y d o i n g t h e w o r k s o f A b r a h a m a n d o f C h r i s t i n t h e f a i t h o f A b r a h a m a n d o f C h r i s t ; n o t i n u n b e l i e f a n d

unrighteousness, like the wicked world who have damned themselves in their own corruption and unbelief. (Orson Hyde, J.D. 4:260)

What would today's ministers of Christianity say about Jesus if He came into our society traveling with a large group of women? What would they say if they saw Him eating and staying overnight in the home of a couple of young women? Our modern ministers think that Mary Magdalene was a prostitute and consider Christ's association with her in that relationship as more acceptable than if she were his wife. It takes a special bending of the mind to reach some of the conclusions of our counterfeit Christian ministry. It is certainly more respectful to Christ to consider his association with Mary as a wife rather than a prostitute; and scriptural evidence leans more toward that conclusion.

It is strange indeed to think that Jesus should be able to understand and obey, or "fulfill", every law and commandment of God, yet be exempt from obeying that law which commands man to multiply and replenish the earth.
