CONCLUSION

Neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man in the Lord. (I Cor. 11:11)

When Jesus was alive, general public opinion was in error about His divine mission. Today it is in error concerning His marital status. The concept of His celibacy was promoted by celibates and became popular through the mother church of Catholicism. Celibate priests believed that unmarried men were more righteous than those who were married.

But Jesus advocated the laws of Judaism, not the alien apostate doctrines that were influencing the early Christian church. The Apostle Paul warned the Church against these influences, but their ultimate victory over true Christian doctrines is evident.

To any reader of the Bible it is obvious that God's first law to man was to be fruitful and multiply, and the first marriage of record was solemnized by God Himself. Never has He, from that day to this, promoted or advocated the laws of celibacy nor barrenness for righteous men and women. Believing that Jesus was married, according to divine law, is logical and reasonable.

Propagation of species is a law of nature. It is a divine principle ordained for all living things. Can it be sanctioned in the lives of animals, plants, fowls and fish, and not for mankind? Yet it is considered by some to be too base, carnal and sinful for Christ and His disciples.

Perhaps our modern, immoral, and sinful world is too filled with wickedness to make a proper judgment. They may be too carnal-minded to understand anything virtuous. But then they have only the basis of an apostate form of Christianity upon which to make their judgment.

There is a divine law of marriage ordained and commanded by God, and Jesus came to fulfill that "law". He could not teach men to be fruitful and multiply, and then become celibate Himself. Could He reach one thing and live another? He was the Good Shepherd advocating all men to follow him, for He said, "I came not to destroy the law, but to fulfill." His life, including obedience to the marriage covenant, was the only "perfect" example set for all mankind to follow.

If Protestant and Catholic ministers believe that Jesus was a celibate priest, then they, too, should follow that life style. If they think that celibacy is a law so honored by Christ, then they are hypocrites for being married; neither should they perform marriage ceremonies for others.

A great many important and solemn truths have been buried and forgotten throughout the centuries of the past. These truths would remain forever dead if we were to depend solely upon the philosophy of men to restore them. Man-handled teachings which pass through the generations of time seldom if ever bring forth any new disclosures. It is only through the revelations of God, or the discovery of ancient documents that such knowledge can be restored. For this reason new revelation has always aroused the wrath and resentment of the tradition-bound populace. That Jesus was married is just such an antagonizing doctrine.

At this doctrine the long-faced hypocrite and the sanctimonious bigot will probably cry, blasphemy! Horrid perversion of God's word!

W i c k e d w r e t c h ! H e i s n o t f i t t o l i v e ! e t c . , e t c . B u t t h e w i s e a n d r e f l e c t i n g w i l l c o n s i d e r , r e a d , a n d p r a y . I f G o d b e n o t o u r F a t h e r ,

grandfather, or great grandfather, or some kind of a father in reality, in deed and in truth, why are we taught to say, "Our Father who

art in heaven?" How much soever of holy horror this doctrine may excite in persons not impregnated with the blood of Christ, and whose

minds are consequently dark and benighted, it may excite still more when they are told that if none of the natural blood of Christ flows in

their veins, they are not the chosen or elect of God. Object not, therefore, too strongly against the marriage of Christ, but remember that

in the last days, secret and hidden things must come to light, and that your life also (which is in the blood) is hid with Christ in God.

(Orson Hyde, J.D. 4:260)

Without the evidence of ancient papyrus, the conclusiveness of the scriptures, or the light of new revelation, reason alone should convince the mind that Jesus was married. Believing in a Christ who lived a life without the personal feelings of a father toward his children or a husband for his wife, is nearly unimaginable. It requires a perverted Christianity to believe in a god without body, parts, or passions, and it also requires a similar superstition to believe in a lonely, secluded, celibate Christ.

Jesus often prayed and taught about "Our Father in Heaven," which signified a family relationship. And, if there is a Father and children, it is positive evidence that there is a husband and wife! The family framework is the building element for adding glory to man and the Gods! A family union, just as the principle of love, can become an everlasting blessing to man.

The tender ties of the heart and the sacred ordinances of the gospel are meant to blend into a perpetual unity for all eternity. Why should a man's feelings of love for his family be subjected to the short duration of mortality? Who dares to imagine that a mother's love for her child, or a husband's love for his wife will instantly vanish at the grave? Is there the least possibility that these divine passions are meant to be cut asunder at death, leaving a family doomed separation and singleness forever? The very thought is repulsive!

When God created man, He made the decree that "it is not good that man should be alone" and so He created woman. "And God said, Let US make man in OUR image, after OUR LIKENESS," and "so God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him male and female created he them." The mold of man and woman was patterned after the image and likeness of the Gods!

Such a creation of man and woman had a divine purpose. It is the charm and loveliness of a wife that is among the purest and most heavenly influences to touch the heart of man. The delight and attractiveness of a good woman will motivate and inspire man to a love of all that is good. Every attribute and characteristic of man and woman was created for a continuation in eternity. Every qualification which will render them happy in mortality will be increased and perfected into a majesty, glory, and excellence that will lead them to greater dominions, principalities and powers forever and ever.

Surely, if man was created to inherit such an honorable destiny, it is only logical to assume that Jesus will inherit as much. Both reason and evidence compel us to admit that Jesus was married!
