The Help That Came Too Late

It should be clear to anyone, by now, that there is a real relationship between the Book of Abraham and the Apocalypse and Testament of Abraham. The Old Slavonic Apocalypse of Abraham was first published in 1863 and the (Greek) Testament in 1895. Here there can be no question of convenient rabbis popping out of the woodwork with timely hints and proddings to help the Book of Abraham along. The definitive study on that subject was made by Professor L. C. Zucker of the University of Utah, from whom we learn that Joseph Smith's first Hebrew teacher, Professor Joshua Seixas, arrived in Kirtland on January 26, 1836, and spent only two months there. (360:44.) During those months, however, he was quite close to the Prophet, who had a good chance for some really first-class tutoring. But Seixas not only arrived too late to supply the first chapters of Abraham, but would have been the last man in the world to do so. For he was strictly a conservative Jew and his sessions with Joseph and the brethren were closely confined to the translation of the Bible, and not to flights of apocalyptic fancy. Zucker notes that Joseph Smith had to that time no need of conventional scholarship in making translations: "Until 1835, Joseph had been content to translate by transcendental intuition. ... The 'New Translation' of the New Testament was finished in 1833, and five months later, the Old Testament also. Joseph never laid claim to have in those years a knowledge of Hebrew or Greek." What? Translate the whole Bible without knowing the languages? It was a special kind of translation, as we have been at pains to insist all along, which, as Professor Zucker puts it, "purported to be no other than a 'revision' "; and he quotes B. H. Roberts: "What he did was to revise the English Bible under the inspiration of God." (360:43.)

Then, at the end of 1835 we find "the Mormon high elders ... determined to study Hebrew." This puzzles Zucker. "Why Hebrew and not Greek," he asks, since "Mormonism is, above all, a Christ-centered religion?" (360:43.) The answer is partly that they had gotten just Egyptian papyri, and the Egyptian connection is all with the Old Testament. Immediately they started looking around for a teacher, and early in 1836 Seixas arrived on the scene just in time: the Hebrew words used in explaining things to Abraham's descendants appear in the Book of Abraham in the Shephardic accent of Professor Seixas, a Jew of Portuguese extraction. This would indicate that parts of the translation were completed while he was still there, in early 1836. With a real savant on hand, the brethren were now in business as scholars: it was then that they decided to undertake the Alphabet and Grammar. But Joseph Smith's study with "the precise scholarly" Seixas, though it may have been adequate to give him a good start in reading the Bible, "did not," as Zucker observes, "confirm Joseph Smith in the ways of scholarship." (360:48.) How fortunate! This is the whole issue with the critics today, but the ways of scholarship would have got nowhere with Egyptian; moreover they had been quite expendable in the Prophet's many earlier translations—how long would it take the ways of scholarship to produce a Book of Mormon? But for all that, the ways of scholarship do have an irresistible appeal to the curiosity and vanity of the race, and, as we have seen, the brethren were duly impressed and fell to with a will. The sudden abandonment of their ambitious projects is matched by the equally sudden and complete "silence about the Seixas family, and silence about Hebrew"; after March 27, 1836, the former simply disappeared from sight, and Hebrew "was never taught again to the Mormons in Kirtland." (360:47.)

If Joseph Smith definitely did not get the Apocalyptic material in the Book of Abraham from Seixas, Professor Zucker thinks he can explain it as part of the Prophet's Christian heritage: "In theology, Mormonism, like Christianity, derives in part from the Jewish Apocalyptic literature, but apocalypse is a fitful, minor force in normative Judaism," and we can be sure that Seixas viewed it as adversely as Professor Zucker himself. (360:48.) But what our informant overlooks is that Christianity absorbed its Jewish Apocalyptic elements anciently, as part of the original message, as an abundance of recent manuscript discoveries makes disturbingly clear both to conventional Christianity and normative Judaism, equally upset and offended by Jewish Apocalyptic. The books of Revelations and Daniel are authentic Jewish Apocalyptic, to be sure, and never more fervidly studied than in Joseph Smith's day; but they are not the substance of the Book of Abraham: for that one must go to far more recondite sources than any known to conventional Jewish or Christian scholarship.

One can illustrate this by some of Professor Zucker's own observations on the vagaries of Joseph Smith's name-giving. Thus he notes that Mahujah and Mahijah of the Joseph Smith Book of Enoch are "off-biblical names," which at best "resemble 'Mehujael' in Gen. 4:18." (360:48.) But now the name of Mahujah turns up in the oldest version of the Book of Enoch, that found in Qumran Cave No. 1, and first published in 1976, in which Mahujah is the central figure of a strange little story that is found nowhere else in the now large and growing ancient Enoch literature except in the Joseph Smith Enoch history contained in the Book of Moses, where the man Mahijah goes to the place Mahujah as the hero of the same little story. (236:156-61.) Again, Zucker notes that of course Adam does not mean "many," as Joseph Smith says it does, in Moses 1:34 (Joseph would hardly need Seixas to tell him that!); but now a number of recent studies have shown that archaic Atum-Adamu means "many" in a very special and impressive sense, as the one who contains in himself the being of all who have gone before and the seed of all who are to follow after. (235:133f.) Finally, Zucker would explain the name Baurak Ale as a clumsy attempt to derive a proper name from the Hebrew word for blessing, barak (360:49), apparently completely oblivious to the amply documented fact that Baraq-El, "God's Lightning," was an important epithet for Enoch, which is just how Joseph Smith uses it. (Cf. 236:159.) If the learned Professor Zucker did not recognize that ancient title, who could have given it to Joseph Smith? Even the most cooperative rabbi in Joseph's day could have been of little help in putting him on to the Apocalypse of Abraham, for example, a text discovered in 1863 and written not in Hebrew but in Old Slavonic. We are reminded of the Sarah episode in the Genesis Apocryphon: place it beside the Book of Abraham account and it fairly screams plagiarism. Here is something the critics could really crow about if it were not for that one disturbing little detail: the Genesis Apocryphon was not discovered until 1950—more obfuscation! (233: Apr. 1970, 79ff.)

Summary of Study Since 1967

At this point before proceeding on our journey it may be well to take a brief glance backward at some of the terrain we have already covered in a swarm of articles appearing between 1967 and 1970. Our first step was to show that the men of 1912 in their haughty and perfunctory replies to Bishop Spalding's leading questions never gave Joseph Smith or the Book of Abraham a hearing. They considered both beneath them, agreed in calling the whole thing a fraud (though they agreed in little else), and asked to be excused. (153: Jan. and Feb. 1968.) In reply to their repeated charges that the three Facsimiles in the Book of Abraham are perfectly ordinary Egyptian funerary motifs "depicted innumerable times" (153: Mar. 1968), it can be readily shown by comparing large numbers of such documents that the Joseph Smith papyri differ in significant points from all the others, so much so that Egyptologists have often complained that the Mormons have deliberately redrawn them—an accusation that the discovery of some of the originals disproved. (153: Sept. 1968, 68ff.) Heretofore most of our attention has gone to Facsimile No. 1, of which the Church now possesses the original. It is full of quite unique features such as the crocodile, the "pillars of heaven," the hieroglyphic cryptogram framing it, peculiar aspects of the human figures, the lotus stand, etc. (153: Sept. and Oct. 1968), all of which imply (without necessarily proving) the presentation of a special dramatic situation; peculiarities of the drawing supply further evidence that the artist was trying to tell a particular story. (233: Oct. 1968, 73ff.; Nov. 1968, 40ff.) From first to last, the whole thing represents ritual, a sacrificial scene (233: Nov. 1968, 32f.): it was time to bring Abraham into the picture. The past hundred years have seen the publication of a wealth of nonbiblical but very ancient stories about Abraham, most of them fairly recent discoveries, the rest long despised by normative Judaism and ignored by scholars but at last receiving serious attention in some quarters. (233: Jan. 1969, 26ff.) The dominant theme of these stories is the jealousy of a great king, who fears for his priesthood and kingship, both threatened by Abraham, from the time the hero's birth is foretold by his wise men to the time he finally recognizes the true God, after an unsuccessful attempt to put Abraham to death on an altar, (233: May 1969, 87ff.) Being placed on the altar at the urging of the King's courtesans, Abraham prays for deliverance, an angel of the Lord appears, and at the last moment the altar is overthrown and the erstwhile sacrificing priest becomes the victim. (233: Feb. 1969, 64ff.) The Book of Abraham thus has the support of the legends; but where does Pharaoh come in? Abraham's royal rival, usually designated as Nimrod, in the oldest versions of the story is definitely identified with Pharaoh. (233: Feb. 1969, 66f.)

Among hundreds of Egyptian "lion couch" scenes resembling Facsimile No. 1 are some found in the tombs of great kings that have become the object of special study; they are only incidentally funerary in nature, and depict the dramatic climax of the Sed festival of Egypt, the moment at which the King, overcome by the evil power of Seth, lies helpless on the couch, which is simultaneously deathbed, embalming table, and bed of deliverance and rejuvenation. (233: May 1969, 87ff.; June 1969, 126ff.; July 1969, 87ff.) In actual practice the person on the couch was a substitute for the King and was really sacrificed; according to the legends, Abraham was chosen to be such a substitute, and after his miraculous delivery (the priest being killed in his place with the overthrow of the altar), he also took the king's place in sitting upon this throne. (153: May 1969, 87f.) In the Sed rites the royal person is resurrected from the lion-couch to mount the throne as the King for a new period of years. (233: June 1969: 126ff.) Abraham goes through all of this as a substitute, according to the Abraham traditions and the Book of Abraham, the whole thing being at the same time in strict conformity with the Egyptian Sed rites as well as the well-established practice in other lands (we have called it "the Procrustes Cycle" [233: Nov. 1969, 116ff.]). The substitute motif in the Abraham traditions has quite recently come in for serious study by scholars who see in the sacrifice of Isaac a royal substitute rite of the Canaanites as well as of Israel. (233: Mar. 1970, 86f., 90f.) As in the case of Abraham, the sacrifice is arrested by an act of sudden divine intervention supplying yet another substitute—the ram in the thicket. We have shown that the sacrifice of Sarah follows the same pattern, as confirmed by the newly discovered and very old Genesis Apocryphon of the Dead Sea Scrolls: Sarah must go to Pharaoh's bed—a lion-couch, where she prays fervidly for deliverance (though it is Abraham's prayer that receives the most attention ), which happens when at the last moment an angel arrives and Pharaoh is smitten and helpless—he ends up confessing the superiority of Abraham's God and loading the Patriarch, especially Sarah, with royal honors. (233: Apr. 1970, 79ff.)

This is enough to indicate that the story of Abraham told in the Book of Abraham has the support of very ancient tradition, and that both have peculiar ritual ties with Egypt, confirmed by recent studies of actual Egyptian practice. Facsimile No. 1 is a symbolic representation of the little-known but well-attested sacrifice of Abraham—not Isaac, but Abraham. All of which bids us take the Book of Abraham seriously, even while it raises many interesting questions.

Stirred by Professor Zucker's study, the student may well ask, Who put Joseph Smith's Abraham so completely into the ancient picture? The recent investigations into nonbiblical Abraham material by G. Vermes (1961), R. Martin-Achard (1969), G.W.E. Nickelsburg, and others (a symposium of scholars in 1972-1976) quite overlook the sources we cited in our Improvement Era series of 1968-1970. Having no access to their studies, how could Joseph have known about the forgotten sources even they ignore?

In 1968 a Jewish Rabbi wrote A Critical Analysis of the Book of Abraham in the Light of Extra-canonical Jewish Writing, a Ph.D. dissertation, in which for the Life of Abraham, he draws upon the Talmud, Josephus, Jubilees, and S. Yetzirah, but overlooks all the other sources. (347.) And you expect Joseph Smith to use them? Even R.C.Webb, in chapter 8 of his Joseph Smith as a Translator, is impressed only by the contrast between the Book of Abraham and the noncanonical sources available to him—he too knows nothing of that large but neglected body of Abraham literature that is now coming to light.(342:106-17.)

The first important collection of Abraham texts was begun by Adolf Jellinek in his Bait ha-Midrasch, starting in 1856, a work so rare in the west that we had never seen a copy of it until its reprinting in Israel in 1967. In 1859 B. Beer's Leben Abraham's made available sources hitherto completely unknown to scholars, and extensive and important Arabic sources were first published by H. Schutzinger in 1961. (233: Jan. 1969, 31.)

Going through a list of Abraham sources with their dates of publication is one way of showing how recent most of the stuff is and how highly improbable it is that Joseph Smith could have made use of any of it: Genesis Apocryphon (1956); Apocalypse of Abraham (1863); various Ma'aseh Abraham (162:V, 40f., 1879, Arabic text discovered by Tischendorff, follows ben Asher's Commentary on the Pentateuch); Ka'b al-Akbar, Qissash Ibrahim Abinu (1920); Sepher ha-Yashar (1923); Pseudo-Philo's Biblical Antiquities (1898); Book of Jubilees (1859); Cave of Treasures (1883); Testament of Abraham (1892); Bar Hebraeus, Chronography (1923). References in the Talmud, Mishnah, Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer, etc., are few and scattered, while exotic Arabic sources all published late, e.g., the Brethren of Basra, 'Antar, Tha'labi, etc., are out of the question. The Midrash (Bereshith Rabba 38:19) recalls the sacrifice of Abraham, but in a form that no one without a clue would recognize, as we have shown elsewhere. (233: Nov. 1969, 120.) Classical writers known in Joseph Smith's day contain brief references to Abraham, consulting which the reader may judge for himself whether he made any use of them: Eusebius, Praeparatio VII, vi-viii; IX, xviff. (212:XXI, 516, 524ff.; 540:705ff.); St. Augustine, C.D. xvi, 15 (165:I, 1, 7); Clementine Recognitions 1:32f. (1854); Philo, De Abrahamo (very disappointing).

Absurd as it seems to labor a point as obvious as Joseph Smith's ignorance of a literature that has always been recondite and is still largely unknown even to experts on Abraham, it has been nonetheless necessary because of the growing practice of assuming offhand that Joseph must after all have had access to this and that apocryphal source whenever such a source strongly confirms some statement of his—a phenomenon that occurs with disturbing frequency. And so we find his learned critics swinging perilously between two extremes, issuing withering comments on his gross and disgusting ignorance on one page only to accuse him of deep and recondite researches on the next. The desperate device of summoning uniquely erudite and cooperative rabbis to appear whenever he needs them requires us first to discover any such prodigals of learning in the America of his day—or any other. The most eminent Abraham authorities of the present-day have assured the author that Joseph Smith's story of the sacrifice of Abraham simply reveals his ignorance of the Bible, in which, according to them, he has got the sacrifice of Isaac all mixed up.

Ebla Changes Things

Everything must wait upon Ebla today. At that ancient site in northern Syria in the last week of digging in 1975 a library of over fifteen thousand cuneiform tablets was discovered. More tablets—sixteen hundred of them—were added in the following year, and who knows what is yet to turn up, for fully ten years before the great discovery the searchers were digging "within one yard of the library room, but were not alerted by a single tablet." (28:41f.) So much for the argument of silence. For all these years nobody had any idea of where Ebla was—it was just another city mentioned in the Babylonian archives far to the south. And suddenly it emerges as the capital of a mighty empire. Nor has any ancient record beside the Bible ever mentioned Abraham's five "cities of the plain"; such silence put the whole Abraham story in doubt: "In its heyday the older criticism became quite skeptical about this material, writing it off as a legend of no historical worth." (12:10.) Those were the same critics who dismissed the Book of Abraham with a contemptous glance and flick of the hand. But now in the Ebla records the mysterious Cities of the Plain emerge in an everyday business document, waiting for the traveler, as large as life on the very route that Abraham was supposed to have followed. (104:143ff.) And along with them there is another city specifically called "Ur in Harran." "An especially intriguing notice," write the editors of the Biblical Archaeology Review, "is a reference to 'Ur in Haran.' Does this mean that the Ur from which Abraham originally came was near Haran rather than a thousand miles further away in southern Mesopotamia where 'Ur of the Chaldees,' is supposedly located?" (28:41f.) We have noted elsewhere how the Abraham legends and traditions strongly favor that northern as against the southern Ur, a theme to which we shall return presently. (233: Apr. 1969, 66ff.) The name of Jerusalem also appears in the tablets, which abound with biblical matter. Thus the discoverer of the tablets, the Roman archaeologist G. Pettinato, calls the place "Canaanite Ebla," and notes that this big city of over a quarter of a million had a king called Eber and referred to its god as both Ya and El. In fact, in one tablet a man changes his name from Mika-il to Mika-ya, thus adding a new dimension to the long controversy over which was Israel's special God—Yahweh or El. (249:48.) The kings at Ebla were "anointed,"and "their governors were called 'judges,' " and their prophets were nabi'utum. (28:42.) All of which reminds us of Israel. Long ago when "the Egyptian and Mesopotamian texts thrust Israel into a real world," the picture of Abraham as the simple wandering shepherd should have been erased, though artists and Sunday School teachers still cling to it. (278:6.)

Was Abraham Real? New Theories

To this day "scholarship has largely ignored exegetical analysis of these narratives," writes T.L. Thompson of the patriarchal stories, with Abraham's at their head. (323:77.) Exclusively preoccupied with "theological and sociological trends," according to another specialist, they have avoided the "historical-descriptive task" of treating the patriarchs as real people, as a result of which "the current situation in Old Testament theology has been described as 'in crisis'." (315:279.) The trouble is that "archaeology has now thrust the world of the Old Testament into the historic past, and there can be no retreat from the study of parallels." (278:8.) We have been accused of preoccupation with historic parallels where Abraham is concerned, but with Ebla nobody can escape it.

For along with a sudden resurgence of interest in the Old Testament in the 1970s comes an unparalleled concern for Abraham. (239:15f., 18.) In the new studies, the whole problem of discovering Abraham is one of fitting things together. Given a body of data contained in an ancient document, what period of history, what geographical or cultural setting, what literary conventions fit it best? Students of the most advanced physical theory today confess that they cannot hope to describe or even imagine what the waves and particles they deal with really are; what keeps them going and reassures their faith in the reality of those mysterious entities is the principle of consistency. A hypothetical structure is worth working on if it is consistent within itself and agrees with whatever limited data are available; as long as the known data agree with each other and experimental predictions, we are on the right track. So it has always been with the study of the past. We never shall know what really happened or exactly what it was like back then, but consistency of sources keeps the game going. For example, we have seen that the Book of Abraham agrees remarkably well with the Apocalypse of Abraham. But will anyone maintain for a moment that the Apocalypse of Abraham is actually the original version of his history? Of course not, but it in turn agrees remarkably well with other writings about Abraham that reach back into various times and regions. In our series in the Improvement Era we showed how the Abraham legends turn up in Egyptian, Babylonian, and even Greek traditions of great antiquity with a richness of detail that can hardly be accidental. "The Egyptian and Mesopotamian texts," writes S. Rummel, "thrust Israel into a real world. Specific parallels, grounded on historical and cultural connections, replaced abstract speculation" of Wellhausen's day—"there can be no retreat from the study of parallels." (278:6-8.)

But even before we consider the parallels, we have firm ground under our feet in the mere fact that the text of the Abraham story of 1835 has been placed in our hands. That someone has produced what purports to be an ancient document must in itself, as Frd. Blass points out, command our respect and oblige us to give the benefit of the doubt to its claims until proven spurious. (32:293f.) The Book of Abraham must have come from somewhere. It is a document rich and clear in specific statements, inviting and never avoiding the closest attention of the critic. It is agreed by all that it could not have come from that papyrus called the Book of Breathings, nor can it possibly be the product of the clumsy and quickly abandoned gropings of the so-called Alphabet and Grammar. The Kirtland Papers show us where it did not come from, and that is all. The existence of a very concrete text invites and deserves just the kind of looking into to which at the present moment both the Abraham literature and important Egyptian stories are being exposed. If it is a fraud, that should become quickly apparent without any back-door approaches seeking by a pointless preoccupation with method and intrigue to avoid a head-on confrontation with the text.

Abraham's emergence as a real person has been comparatively recent, following the fashionable trends of scholarship. For example, only "in the last few decades" has "the basic historicity of the Sumerian epics ... tacitly been taken for granted by most scholars who have dealt with them." (10:49.) Before that it was, like Abraham, all myth, folklore, superstition, and poetic invention until a sudden "bouleversement radical," as A. Parrot called it, changed everything. (245:11-13.) The weight of the evidence itself has been enough to bring this about, for the experts have come around reluctantly; indeed, "the general line in much modern scholarship," Alster observes, is "one that sets itself a task to deprive the ancient literary sources of actual reality whenever possible, instead of asking what the texts intend to say." A serious research into any ancient texts, as he notes, requires examining "similar texts from elsewhere." (10:50f.) "It has become commonplace," writes the Bible scholar P.R. Ackroyd, "to acknowledge that the understanding of the Old Testament is deficient without a proper appreciation of its ancient context," meaning "how it fits into a giant jigsaw along with Egyptian, Mesopotamian, Hittite, Ugaritic, and North Semitic sources." (1:103.) Granted that "the fundamental truths of the Bible cannot be demonstrated by archaeology," an eminent Jesuit scholar notes, "still it becomes clearer and clearer that the Bible has its roots in the history of the Near East," so that "a new much deeper study is necessary" before we can get to the "true source of the faith of Israel." In particular the sensational discoveries at Ebla are forcing the world to consider more seriously than ever before the historical reality of the Patriarchs, with Abraham at their head. (302:398.)

Christian theologians who have hitherto disdained to debase their faith by digging for historical evidence now assure us that we cannot overlook what M. Wiles calls "the raw material in the light of which our faith judgments have to be made." (351:13.) In the New Testament field, "to the extent that Christians tend to overlook or forget the historical Jesus, they tend to structure Christian life more and more as a religion in the pejorative sense .... access to the Christ of faith comes through our following of the historical Jesus." (303:460.) A few years ago such statements as these by leaders of Christian thought would have been unthinkable. On all sides the discovery of new documents is forcing open the doors that have heretofore safely contained the ancient patriarchs, prophets, and saints in a vague and distant quarantine.

Recent Abraham studies insist that something very significant was going on back there, which only increases our frustration at being unable to find out just what it was. The field of speculation is more wide open than ever; H. Werner reminds us that the Abraham question requires "investigations, experiments, and new approaches (Angebote)" as never before. (346:25.) The big problem for him is how the stories got down to us: were they preserved out of a wealth of tales because they were peculiarly relevant as articles of faith, declarations of principle, and sermons? Granted they are edifying stories and would have been preserved for that if for no other reason, does it follow that they are fables? If they are, why do they lay such insistence on a particular time, a particular place, and particular historical conditions? (346:27ff.) Werner confesses himself at a loss to explain why three different versions of intrigue between Abraham and a king involving his wife are given, and how they are related, and finds preposterous the supposed confrontations between those "mighty potentates and virtually disfranchised aliens." (346:73-79.) The reactions of the kings when they discover they have been duped are simply "astonishing," and make no sense at all. Along with such perplexing oddities, he notes certain overriding motifs that cannot be overlooked: the strange theme of the tribal mother (Stammutter) in danger, the recurrent motif of famine and the need for sacrifice to relieve it, and especially the dominance of drought in the picture. Werner's astonishing conclusion is that Abraham is really fleeing from "the absurdity of the world," after he has become convinced that Yahweh has let him down in Canaan, and moves to Egypt seeking a more rational existence. Actually, Werner decides, it is Abraham and not Pharaoh who should have been smitten in the palace. (346:87-95.)

The Dutch scholar G. Hamming is led to equal though different extremes. He begins with the declaration that Abraham was before all else a writer of history who wrote down the story of the Creation, as we have it in Genesis 2:4-12:4, under strong Egyptian influence. (143:7, 13, 34ff.) Whereas Werner insists that the Patriarchal narratives are full of such things as dreams and private conversations that no historian could have possibly known, Hamming corrects the proposition: Abraham himself could have known those things, making him alone the author of them: "Abraham himself is necessarily the author of whatever is true in his history." He reasons that "Abraham wrote a number of short accounts," setting forth "his view of history, his philosophy of culture and a number of personal reminiscences. Some of these accounts have been lost and some partly preserved." (143:7.) Hamming lays emphasis on the technological sophistication of Abraham's world, rapidly moving toward economic and social collapse, in which only Egypt retained any virtue and integrity. Like Werner, Hamming cannot understand why the Egyptians took an outsider and an outcast like Abraham so seriously. Also, Abraham's concern with the priesthood makes him wonder. (143: ch. VI, 60ff.)

The New Dating Game

Discussions of Abraham today almost all center on problems of dating, with every scholar convinced that he can match conditions set forth in Abraham stories with a real historic setting so exactly that there can no longer be any doubt as to the time of Abraham.

At present the center of attention is John Van Seters' book Abraham in History and Tradition, which places the Patriarch squarely in the middle of the first millennium B.C. (328.) This came out just before the discovery of the Ebla tablets, which have pushed the possibility of Abraham back to the middle of the third millennium B.C. So now we have a range of two thousand years in which the experts are seeking to find an exact date for Abraham!

We begin at one end with a theoretically possible date of 2400 or even 2500 B.C. suggested by the Ebla tablets, but too recent and surprising to have any serious champions yet. (28:42.) Coming down half a millennium or more, with the greatest confidence A. Parrot could announce that "all truly objective specialists are agreed: the way of life described in the accounts in Genesis ... fits perfectly with what we know today, from other sources, of the beginning of the second millennium, but imperfectly with a more recent time." (245:11.) How early in the second millennium? J.L. Kelso puts his finger on the century between 2000 and 1900 B.C. and announces, "Here and only here in all of the Near East can Abraham be dated; but here in Middle Bronze I, he is as much at home as Abraham Lincoln in the Civil War period of the U.S.A." (183:4f.) More specifically, G.Hamming would have Abraham born very near to the year 1985 B.C. (143:7.) On the other hand, we are assured that that time, "the Larsa period (2000-1800 B.C.) ... most scholars believe to be slightly earlier than Abraham," although conditions would have been much the same "until well after Abraham's time." (67:22.) W.H. Stiebing now moves the date down from the Middle Bronze I favored by N. Glueck, W.F. Albright, and others, to Middle Bronze II (1900 down to 1550 B.C.). (311:18.) Still descending the scale, "Recently there has been a tendency to bring the patriarchs down into the Late Bronze Age (1600-1200 B.C.) or even to the Assyrian period nearly a thousand years later." (12:10.) It was the ancient texts discovered at Mari and Nuzi that brought things down to the Middle Bronze II dating and led Parrot to his dogmatic certitude; but now it is claimed that "the contracts of 15th century Nuzi are neither unique to their time and place, nor related to Genesis." (323:77.) In fact, we are assured that those documents describe a world not so different from the Nimrod texts of the sixth century B.C., the time favored by Van Seters. Some have noted how the Patriarchal narratives with their romantic and heroic allure suggest most strongly the traditions of the Amarna, Minoan, and Mycenaean worlds which flourished in the Eastern Mediterranean c. 1400-1100 B.C. (233:Nov. 1969, 116ff.) Indeed, the present writer finds abundant and striking parallels between the Abraham traditions and the myths and legends harking back to the bad old days of Greek and Levantine prehistory. The presence of Philistines in Abraham's history favors such dating, but of course is lightly dismissed by those supporting other dates as an obvious anachronism. But as N. Weeks notes, "as long as the historian can dismiss inconvenient evidence as anachronistic it is hard to control his thesis." (343:80.) Abraham's camels, long a subject of controversy, have been treated in the same high-handed manner. Albright insisted that the camel was not domesticated until about 1000 B.C., so naturally the camels of Isaac and Jacob had to go. J.L. Kelso now brings them back by explaining that "the camel of Abraham's day was simply a luxury riding animal for the rich," which Abraham would not use in his caravans. Why not? The beast could cross the desert then as well as it does today. (183:9, 11, 21.) To Van Seter's surprising and much-discussed dating of Abraham to the mid-sixth century B.C. (which, of course, puts him back into his old nineteenth century category of a mythical being: only the Abraham story could be so late—no real Abraham could have been walking around long after Moses and the prophets!), telling objections are raised. Such as, that the Patriarchal narratives are fully of accepted customs that would be an abomination to the Exilic Jews—they certainly would never have invented the Abraham story, and twenty-seven of the thirty-eight names of Patriarchal family members never turn up again in the Bible—they are unique to a much earlier time. (202:58f.) In taking things back to the mythical Abraham of nineteenth century scholarship, Van Seters uses the favorite argument of that school by conjuring up the all-sufficient Sitz im Leben of the Exile: the story of Abraham would naturally appeal to people suffering the afflictions of the Captivity, who accordingly must have invented it to give themselves comfort and encouragement. But as Martin-Achard points out, following G. Rad, "every generation found itself faced anew with the same task of understanding itself as Israel." (202:58.) The sufferings of Abraham are relevant whenever Israel finds itself in straits.

The greatest windfall of nineteenth century scholarship was the license to break down any ancient text into as many separate constituent parts as one chose; thanks to that, any scholar could spot the origin of any item of Patriarchal tradition in the vagaries of scribes, the imaginations of storytellers by the campfire, the fervor of preachers, the Tendenzschriften of sectaries—in almost anything, in fact, but real history. In particular, oral tradition was the way out of any tight place: "Indeed the whole predominance of oral transmission in modern Biblical studies is a curious phenomenon," write N. Weeks. " ... is the very lack of historical control ... the basis of its popularity?" (343:79.)

So where do we stand? Ever since Albright's dating of Abraham "collapsed precipitately," according to T.L. Thompson, there has been a lack of any real consensus, so that today one can only conclude that the Patriarchal narratives "appear to have taken shape in some still unsatisfactorily explained manner, over a period of time as yet undetermined." "Possibilities are infinite," he concludes, "and scholarly preferences are irrelevant. Alternative dates [i.e., to his own—favoring a late date, "but this is only a guess"] have not and cannot be excluded." (323:76f.)
