Richard Bauckham is Professor of New Testament Studies at the University of St. Andrews. His more detailed treatments on thistheme (for which, see notes) include Jude and the Relatives of Jesus in the Early Church (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1990).

[p.18]

Careful readers of the NT know that one of Jesus' relatives, his brother James, played a prominent part in the early history of the church. Not so well known is the fact that other members of the family were also important figures and continued to exerciseleadership in Palestinian Jewish Christianity down to at least the early second century.[1]

The family tree shows those members of the family whose names and relationship to Jesus are definitely known. The four brothers of Jesus are named in the Gospels (Mt. 13:55; Mk. 6:3). We can be sure that James was the eldest of the four, and Joses the nextin age, but since Matthew and Mark differ in the order in which they list Simon and Judas, we cannot be sure which was theyoungest. The name Joses, which Mark gives to the second brother, was a common abbreviated form of Joseph (the form Matthewuses). No doubt Joses was commonly known by this short form in order to distinguish him from his father Joseph. In English usageJesus' brother Judas has been conventionally known as Jude, and this form of the name is usually used for the NT letter attributed tothis brother of Jesus. All four names are among the most common Jewish male names of the period. From the same passages ofthe Gospels which name four brothers we learn also that Jesus had sisters. Although Matthew refers to 'all his sisters', we cannot tellwhether there were more than two, since Greek can use 'all' for only two. Later Christian literature[2] gives the names Mary andSalome to sisters of Jesus These names were extremely common Jewish women's names within Palestine, but Salome seems notto have been used in the Jewish diaspora. There is therefore some probability that the tradition of these two names goes back to Palestinian Jewish Christian tradition, and so it may be a reliable tradition.

The brothers of Jesus were evidently known as 'the brothers of the Lord' in early Christian circles (Gal. 1:19; 1 Cor. 9:5), but since the term 'brother' by no means necessarily refers to a full blood-brother, the question of their precise relationship to Jesus, along with that of Jesus' sisters, arises. Since at least the fourth century this issue has been much debated, mainly because ofitsimplications for the traditional doctrine of the perpetual virginity of Mary. The three major views have come to be known by the names of their fourth-century proponents: Helvidius, Epiphanius and Jerome. The Helvidian view, which probably most modern exegetes, even including some Roman Catholic scholars, hold, is that the brothers were sons of Joseph and Mary, born afterJesus.[3] The Epiphanian view, which is the traditional view in the Eastern Orthodox churches, is that they were sons of Joseph by a marriage prior to his marriage to Mary,

[p.19]

and so were older than Jesus. The Hieronymian view, which through Jerome's influence became the traditional western Catholicview, is that they were first cousins of Jesus.

We cannot here enter this debate in any detail. Although the Hieronymian view still has its advocates, it must be said to be the least probable. The Greek word for 'brother' can be used for relationships more distant than the modern English 'brother'. However, thebrothers of Jesus are invariably called his brothers in early Christian literature (both within and outside the NT). If they were actuallycousins, we should expect that this relationship would be specified more exactly on at least some occasions. In fact, the second-century writer Hegesippus,[4] who calls James and Jude 'brothers of the Lord', calls Simeon the son of Clopas the 'cousin of theLord', evidently distinguishing the two relationships. But if the Hieronymian view is improbable, it is not easy to decide between theother two views. On the Epiphanian view, the brothers of Jesus would have been his adoptive brothers (assuming the virginal conception of Jesus as historical fact). In that case, we should not expect them to be called anything except 'brothers'. No NT text offers any further real evidence on this point, but the idea that the brothers and sisters of Jesus were children of Joseph by a previous marriage is found in three second-century Christian works (the Protevangelium of James, the Infancy Gospel of Thomasand theGospelofPeter),[5]which probably all derive from Syria. It looks as though this was an early second-century Syrian Christian tradition. Reliable tradition about prominent early Christian leaders like the Lord's brothers could still have been available at this time and place. It is true that the Protevangelium of James implies the perpetual virginity of Mary, and so it is possible that reflection on the idea of the virginity of Mary led to the conclusion that Jesus' brothers and sisters could not be her children. On the
