other hand, it is also possible that the notion of the perpetual virginity arose only because Mary was already known not to have beenthe mother of Jesus' brothers and sisters. The historical evidence is not sufficient for a firm decision between the Helvidian and Epiphanian views (and so my version of the family tree leaves this open). In any case, we can be sure that the brothers and sisters of Jesus belonged, with him, to the family household of Joseph and Mary in Nazareth. The Gospel traditions regularly refer to Jesus'brothers in company with his mother.[6]

For help with identifying other relatives, we must turn to Hegesippus, who lived in Palestine in the mid-second century and recordedsome local Jewish Christian traditions about relatives of Jesus. His work survives only in fragments, mostly quotations by the churchhistorian Eusebius, but Eusebius probably extracted most of what he said about relatives of Jesus. The traditions in Hegesippus tend to be legendary, but the legends are attached to historical figures who were revered as Christian leaders and martyrs in the memory of the Jewish Christian communities of Palestine. That these persons existed and were related to Jesus in thewayHegesippus claims we can be sure.

According to Hegesippus,[7] Jesus' putative father Joseph had a brother named Clopas. The name is extremely rare: only two othercertain occurrences of it are known. One of these is in John 19:25.[8] We can therefore be sure that the man to whom this verse ofthe Fourth Gospel refers is the same Clopas, Joseph's brother. He is mentioned in a list of women who stood by the cross whenJesus was dying: '[Jesus'] mother and his mother's sister, Mary of Clopas and Mary Magdalene.' Although this could be read as a list of four women, most likely there are only three. If 'Mary of Clopas' was Clopas's wife, then she was in fact Jesus' mother'shusband's brother's wife - a relationship which, not surprisingly, the evangelist has preferred to state less precisely as: 'his mother'ssister'. So it seems that an aunt of Jesus, as well as his mother, was among those Galilean women who accompanied him on hislast journey to Jerusalem and were present at the cross.

Probably Clopas himself was also in Jerusalem at this time. Luke names one of the two disciples in his story of the walk to Emmausas Cleopas (Lk. 24:18). This Greek name is not the same as the Semitic name Clopas, but it was common for Palestinian Jews at this period to be known by both a Semitic name and a Greek name which sounded similar. Thus, for example, the Greek nameSimon was very commonly used as the equivalent of the Hebrew Simeon, and either name could be used for the same individual. Itis very plausible to suppose that Joseph's brother Clopas also used the Greek name Cleopas. Luke names him because he was a sufficiently significant person in the early church for some of Luke's readers to have heard of him. Perhaps his companion on the road to Emmaus was his wife Mary. In any case, John 19:25 and Luke 24:18 are an interesting case of two quite distinct Gospeltraditions which corroborate each other. This uncle and this aunt of Jesus were among his loyal followers at the end of his ministry.

Perhaps Jesus' brothers, whom the Gospels indicate were less than enthusiastic about Jesus' activity at earlier points in hisministry,[9] had also come round by the time of his death. Certainly they soon became prominent leaders in the early Christianmovement. We know most about James, but since his role as leader of the Jerusalem church is quite well known, we will pass over him rather rapidly here.[10] Already an important figure when Paul visited Jerusalem three years after his conversion (Gal. 1:19), heseems to have risen to a position of unique pre-eminence in the Jerusalem church after the Twelve were depleted and dispersed, so that they no longer formed the Christian leadership in Jerusalem, and especially after Peter ceased to be permanently residentin the city (see Acts 12:1-17). Later writers called him 'bishop' of Jerusalem, and although the term may be anachronistic, he seemsto have been more like a later monarchical bishop than anyone else in the period of the first Christian generation. But his role wasby no means confined to Jerusalem. Since the Jerusalem church was the mother church of all the churches, and was naturallyaccorded the same kind of central authority over the whole Christian movement that Jerusalem and the temple had long had for theJewish people, James now occupied a position of unrivalled importance in the whole early Christian movement. A minor indicationof this is the fact that, although the name James was common, this James could be identified simply as 'James', with no need forfurther explanation (1 Cor. 15:7; Gal. 2:12; Acts 12:17; 15:13; 21:18; Jas. 1:1; Jude 1). He also has the distinction of being the onlyChristian mentioned by name in a first-century source not written by a Christian. The Jewish historian Josephus records his martyrdom, in 62 CE.[11] The high priest Ananus II (son of Arenas and brother-in-law to Caiaphas) had him executed by stoning, probably under the law which prescribed this penalty for someone who entices the people to apostasy (Dt. 13:6-11). The morelegendary account in Hegesippus[12] agrees that he suffered death by stoning.

While James assumed pre-eminent leadership at the centre of the Christian movement, the other brothers of Jesus worked astravelling missionaries. We know this from an incidental, but revealing, reference to them by Paul. In 1 Corinthians 9 Paul maintainsthat, although he has waived his right as an apostle to be supported by his converts at Corinth, he has this right, just as much as theother apostles do. It was an accepted principle in the early Christian movement that travelling missionaries had a right to food andhospitality from the Christian communities among whom they worked. Evidently, wives who accompanied their husbands onmissionary travels also had this right. Paul attributes both the right to support and the right to be accompanied by a wife to 'the otherapostles and the brothers of the Lord and Cephas' (1 Cor. 9:5). In instancing, among the apostles, the brothers of the Lord and Cephas (Peter), Paul intends to associate himself with people whose claim to apostleship and its rights was unquestioned andunquestionable. The Lord's brothers must have been so well known as travelling missionaries that they, along with Peter, were the obvious examples for Paul to choose, even when speaking to the Christians in Corinth. And since it is unlikely that James was well-known for missionary travels, Paul must be thinking primarily of the other brothers: Joses, Simon and Jude.

Such a reference to people Paul assumes to be very well known, but of whose role in the early church we know hardly anything, makes us aware how very fragmentary our knowledge of the early Christian mission is. We might compare it with Paul's tantalizingreference to Andronicus and Junia, 'prominent among the apostles' (Rom. 16:7), who must also have been members of the earliest Palestinian Jewish Christian movement and played an important missionary role, of which we know nothing. But in the case of thebrothers of Jesus, Paul's information that they were famous as travelling missionaries correlates with one other piece of informationabout relatives of Jesus. This comes from Julius Africanus, who lived at Emmaus

[p.20]

in the early third century and reports, as coming from the relatives of Jesus, information which he probably took from a written source of Palestinian Jewish Christian origin. He says that the relatives of Jesus were known as the desposynoi, a term whichmeans 'those who belong to the Master [or Sovereign: despotes]'. He explains how they were one of those Jewish families who hadpreserved their genealogy when Herod burned the public genealogical records. He then reports:

From the Jewish villages of Nazareth and Kokhaba they travelled around the rest of the land and interpreted the genealogy they had [from the family traditions] and from the Book of Days [i.e. Chronicles] as far as they could trace it.[13]
