The meaning is probably that members of the family of Jesus, travelling around the land of Israel and preaching the gospel to their fellow-Jews, used a family genealogy, like that in Luke 3:23-38, as a way of explaining the Christian claim that Jesus was the messianic Son of David.[14] Kokhaba is most likely the Galilean village of that name (modern Kaukab), about ten miles north ofNazareth. It may have been, like Nazareth, a traditional home of members of the family. But the significance of the two villages, as the centres from which the mission of the desposynoi operated, may also lie in their names. They may have been given special messianic significance because each can be related to one of the most popular texts of Davidic messianism. Nazareth could beconnected with the messianic Branch (neser) from the roots of Jesse (Is. 11:1), while Kokhaba, meaning 'star', recalls the prophecyof the messianic Star from Jacob (Nu. 24:17).

This information from Julius Africanus is of great interest. It gives us a very rare glimpse of Christianity in Galilee, showing us that not only Jerusalem, where James was leader, but also Nazareth and Kokhaba, where other members of the family were based,were significant centres of early Christianity in Jewish Palestine. Moreover, it preserves the term desposynoi, not found in any othersource. Julius Africanus has to explain what it means, and clearly it is not a term he would himself have used had he not found it inhis source. It must be the term by which members of the family of Jesus were known in those Palestinian Jewish Christian circles in which they were revered leaders. It demonstrates that not only 'the brothers of the Lord', but also a wider circle of relatives - 'the Master's people' - played a prominent leadership role.

We already know who some of these other relatives were. Jesus' aunt and uncle, Mary and Clopas, may well have been a husband-and-wife team of travelling missionaries, as Andronicus and Junia (Rom. 16:7) evidently were, and as Paul implies theLord'sbrothers and their wives were (1 Cor. 9:5). If, as we suggested, the names of sisters of Jesus - Mary and Salome - were correctlypreserved in tradition, this would imply that they were also known figures in the early church. Probably there were other relativesactive in Christian leadership of whom we know nothing.

Julius Africanus speaks only of travels of the desposynoi within Palestine, but it is worth asking whether their mission may not alsohave extended to parts of the Jewish diaspora. In particular, there is some reason to think of the eastern diaspora. From the NT we know almost exclusively about Christianity's spread westwards from Palestine, but it must have spread eastwards just as quickly. For Palestinian Jews, the eastern diaspora - in Mesopotamia and areas further east (see Acts 2:9) - was just as important as thewestern diaspora, and links with it just as close. Pilgrims returning home from Jerusalem, where they had heard the Jerusalemchurch's preaching about Jesus the Messiah, would have carried belief in Jesus to the Jewish communities in the east, just as theyprobably did to Rome and elsewhere in the west. But east was also an obvious direction for Jewish Christian missionaries from Palestine to go. Already by the time of Paul's conversion there was a Christian church in Damascus, easily reached from Galilee,and first stop on the routes north to Edessa and Nisibis, in northern Mesopotamia, and east to Babylonia.

We have one remarkable piece of evidence for James's connection with the mission to the eastern diaspora. The Gospel ofThomas, which reflectstheGospel traditionsofChristianityin thenorth Mesopotamian area, containsthis dialogue (logion 12):

The disciples said to Jesus, 'We know that you will depart from us. Who is to be great over us?' Jesus said to them, 'Wherever you shall have come, you are to go to James the Righteous, for whose sake heaven and earth came into being.'

The remarkable hyperbole of the last clause is a thoroughly Jewish form of expression, which shows that this is a tradition from theJewish Christian origins of north Mesopotamian Christianity. Jesus' alleged saying presupposes the mission of the apostles and gives James the position of central authority to which they are to look from wherever their missionary travels take them. Thoughthere is no probability that the saying is an authentic saying of Jesus, it most likely goes back to James's lifetime, in which it makes sense as an expression of the role attributed to James, as leader of the mother church which claimed central authority over the mission to the diaspora. Whereas in the Pauline mission field James's authority was played down, in the mission to the eastern diaspora it was highly respected.

Evidence that some of the desposynoi actually travelled east may be preserved in a list, given in medieval chronicles, of the early bishops of Ctesiphon-Seleucia on the Tigris, in central Mesopotamia. The three names following Mari, the late first century founderof the church, are Abris, Abraham and Ya'qub (James). Abris is said to have been 'of the family and race of Joseph' the husband ofMary, while Abraham was 'of the kin of James called the brother of the Lord' and Ya'qub was Abraham's son. While it may seem hazardous to trust such late sources, the medieval chronicles had access to good older sources. The claim to descent from thefamily of Jesus should not be regarded as a mark of legend, since claims to descent from the family of Jesus are extremely rare in Christian literature and the very few other such alleged descendants who are to be found in the literature (all mentioned below) areentirely credible. Later Christian writers were not in the least prone to invent legendary descendants of this family or to ascribe suchdescent to historical persons without warrant. In favour of the historicity of these three relatives of Jesus is the implication that Christian leadership in Seleucia passed down among members of this family. As we shall see, the same thing happened in Palestine. At least it seems a reasonable possibility that some members of the desposynoi travelled as missionaries to the easterndiaspora, where their descendants were important Christian leaders in the early second century.

This excursionto theeasthastakenusbeyondthelifetimeofJesus' brothers,and it istimetoreturntoPalestinetotracedevelopments there after the death of James. The second 'bishop' of Jerusalem, after James, was Simeon or Simon (both the Hebrew and the Greek versions of his name are found), the son of Clopas.[15] Probably this was not a matter of strict dynasticsuccession, as though he was considered next in line to succeed. After all, James could never have been considered 'successor' tohis brother Jesus. But a kind of dynastic feeling, which was natural for people of the time, who were used to associating authority with a family rather than a mere individual, must have had some weight in the appointment of Simeon. The model which perhapsbest explains the role of Jesus' relatives in the leadership of the Palestinian church is not that of dynastic succession, but that of theassociation of a ruler's family with him in government. Just as it was normal practice in the ancient Near East for members of theroyal family to hold high offices in government, so Palestinian Jewish Christians felt it appropriate that Jesus' brothers, cousins andother relatives should hold positions of authority in his church. Indeed, the term desposynoi ('those who belong to the Sovereign')could well have the sense, more or less, of 'members of the royal family'.

Simeon the son of Clopas was leader of the Jerusalem church - and doubtless the most important figure in Jewish Christianity - forat least 40 years, until his martyrdom in the reign of Trajan (either between 99.and 103 CE or between 108 and 117 CE). When Luke's first readers read of Cleopas (Lk. 24:18) and John's first readers of Mary of Clopas (Jn. 19:25), many of them would no doubt easily have recognized the parents of their famous contemporary. That we know so little about so significant a figure is another salutary reminder of the great gaps in our evidence for early Christianity. But the great reverence with which he was remembered in Jewish Christian tradition can be seen in Hegesippus's hagiographical account of his death.[16] The historically

reliable information in the account is that Simeon was arrested on a charge of political subversion, because he was of a Davidic family and supported the alleged Davidic king Jesus, and was put to death by crucifixion. This fits well into the period between thetwo great Jewish revolts, when

[p.21]

the Roman authorities in Palestine were highly sensitive to the dangers of Jewish political nationalism. More hagiographical is thestatement that 'he bore witness through tortures of many days' duration, so that all, including the governor, marvelled exceedinglyhow an old man of a hundred and twenty years could thus endure'. A hundred and twenty years is the biblical limit on human life (Gn.6:3), which no-one after Moses (Dt. 34:7) may exceed, but which someone as righteous as Moses might equal. No doubt Simeonwas very old, but if Clopas was a younger brother of Joseph, he could easily have been a much more plausible age at his death. Butthe age Hegesippus attributes to him tells how Palestinian Jewish Christians regarded him in the years immediately after his death.

Evidently also important leaders in Palestinian Jewish Christianity in the late first century were two grandsons of the Lord's brother Jude, called Zoker and James.[17] According to Hegesippus,[18] they too came under suspicion, since they were descendants ofDavid, and were brought before the emperor Domitian himself. When asked about their possessions,

they said that between the two of them they had only nine thousand denarii, half belonging to each of them; and this they asserted they had not as money, but only in thirty-nine plethra of land, so valued, from which by their own labour they both paid the taxes and supported themselves.

To prove that they were hard-working peasant farmers, they showed their tough bodies and the hardened skin of their hands. They also explained that the kingdom of Christ was not earthly (and so, Hegesippus implies, not a kingdom whose supporters would rebel against the empire) but coming at the end of history. Convinced they were harmless and despising them as mere peasants,Domitian released them, and ordered the persecution against Christians to cease.

Several features of Hegesippus's account, such as the trial before Domitian himself, are historically improbable, and the story has astrong apologetic thrust. It is concerned to show that Jewish Christianity was not a politically dangerous movement by representingthe emperor Domitian as himself recognizing this. It is hard to tell what kernel of historical truth may lie behind the legend. But it iscertainly a legend about real historical persons.

Apart from the information that members of the third generation of the family of Jesus were still active in Christian leadership, themost interesting aspect of the story is what it tells us about the farm which the two brothers held in partnership. The size and valuegivenaresospecificandprecise thatit islikely that they restonaccurate tradition.Thesizeof the farm would have been remembered, not because an accurate report of what Zoker and James said to Domitian was preserved, but because the size of the family's smallholding in Nazareth was well-known in Palestinian Jewish Christian circles at this time. The farm was not dividedbetween the brothers, but owned jointly, no doubt because this family continued the old Jewish tradition of keeping a smallholding undivided as the joint property of the 'father's house', rather than dividing it between heirs. So, two generations back, this farm would have belonged to Joseph and his brother Clopas. Unfortunately, because there are two possible sizes of the plethron, it seems impossible to be sure of the size of the farm: it may be either about 24 acres or about 12 acres. In either case, this is not much landto support two families, and Joseph had at least seven children to feed. So it is not surprising that he (and Jesus) supplemented thefamily income by working as a carpenter. As in the case of many village artisans, Joseph's trade was not an alternative to workingthe land, but a way of surviving when the family smallholding could no longer fully support the family. It did not necessarily put Jesus'family any higher on the social ladder than most of the peasant farmers of Nazareth.

After Zoker, James and Simeon the son of Clopas the family of Jesus disappears into the obscurity that envelops the subsequent history of Jewish Christianity in Palestine. Only one more member of the family may be identifiable. During the persecution ofChristiansin250-251CE,undertheemperor Decius,acertain Conon,agardeneron theimperial estate,was martyred atMagydos in Pamphylia in Asia Minor. According to the acts of his martyrdom, when questioned in court as to his place of origin and his ancestry,he replied: 'I am of the city of Nazareth in Galilee, I am of the family of Christ, whose worship I have inherited from my ancestors.'[19] Perhaps this is a metaphorical reference to his spiritual origins as a Christian, but it seems more plausible to read itas a literal claim to natural family relationship with Jesus. If so, there may be an indirect link with archaeological evidence fromNazareth. At the entrance to one of the caves below the church of the Annunciation, a fourth-century mosaic bears the inscription: 'Gift of Conon deacon of Jerusalem'. Perhaps, as the Franciscan excavators thought, the cave was dedicated to the cult of Conon the martyr from Nazareth, and the later Gentile Christian from Jerusalem dedicated the mosaic out of reverence for his famousnamesake who was commemorated there.
