Richard O. Cowan, Church in the Twentieth Century ( 1985)

Preface

The twentieth century has been one of the most significant eras in the history of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Surely it would have been wonderful to live in the days of Joseph Smith and to associate with him personally. Likewise, to accompany the pioneers in their westward trek would have been an unforgettable experience. Yet the challenges and opportunities of the twentieth century hold a unique excitement. To the casual observer the primary theme of recent Latter-day Saint history is worldwide growth. This work will show that there have also been many other significant developments in Church organization, programs, and activities. Even though the Lord has worked through fallible human beings and institutions, I am convinced that his hand can be seen, not only in specific incidents where inspired guidance was obvious, but also in the overall progress of his kingdom during the present century. Thus we do not need to look only to past ages for examples of divine direction or assistance.

I have encountered a number of interesting challenges while researching and writing this book. Even though I have written from the perspective of faith, I have also wanted to follow high standards of historical scholarship. I do not believe that one necessarily excludes the other. In addition, writing contemporary history has its advantages and disadvantages: There may be an abundance of public sources such as newspapers, but more reflective personal sources such as journals or correspondence are less likely to be available to the historian. In some cases the researcher himself may have been intimately involved in the events he must describe, but at the same time he lacks the perspective necessary to assess their long-term importance. Furthermore, writing about individuals who are still living requires particularly sensitive judgment. Despite these challenges, I have found the preparation of this book to be an especially rewarding work.

My interest in this topic is of long standing. After finishing my Ph.D. in American history at Stanford University in 1961, I joined the religion faculty at Brigham Young University, where I was asked to specialize in researching and teaching LDS history from 1900 onward. This book is an outgrowth of that assignment.

I am indebted to many persons who have provided assistance without which this work could not have been completed. Larry C. Porter, who at the time was chairman of the Department of Church History and Doctrine at BYU, directed me to write a text on twentieth-century Church history; afterward he encouraged me to submit my manuscript for publication. Research assistants, particularly David F. Boone and Frank Alan Bruno, have made a major contribution. Personnel at the Historical Department of the Church have also been cooperative and helpful. Many typists and editors have played a key role in moving this project forward. Most recently, I have appreciated the valuable help from Bookcraft's editorial department: George Bickerstaff has insightfully and graciously pointed out ways the manuscript could be polished, while Andy Allison has assisted in the selection of illustrations and in other ways has helped move the manuscript toward publication. To all these individuals I express my deep gratitude.

It is my hope that this history of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the twentieth century will be a source of information, interest, and especially inspiration to all who read it.
