Richard O. Cowan, Church in the Twentieth Century ( 1985)

Chapter 1

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCThe Turn of the Century: Lorenzo Snow

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCAs the twentieth century dawned, Lorenzo Snow was sustained as Prophet, Seer, and Revelator, and President of the Church of just over 250,000 Latter-day Saints-only a small fraction of what the Church's membership would be during the later twentieth century. Many of these early Saints had personally experienced the hardships of pioneering in the deserts and had suffered through the persecutions that had been so common in the nineteenth century. Some forty-three stakes and nineteen missions were functioning. Missionaries were teaching the restored gospel in the United States, Canada, western Europe, and the islands of the Pacific. Because about five out of every six Latter-day Saints lived in the predominantly Mormon Intermountain area of the western United States, however, the Church's influence elsewhere was limited. The Church's four temples were all located in Utah. The twentieth century would see The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints expand far beyond these modest dimensions.

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCOn Tuesday, January 1, 1901, the opening day of the new century, President Snow addressed a special New Year's Day audience in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. Having played a key role

<_HEADING __="">Missions and Stakes of the Church-U.S. and Canada, 1900

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCin the progress of the Church almost since its beginning, he now eagerly anticipated the future:

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCI hope and look for grand events to occur in the twentieth century. At its auspicious dawn, I lift my hands and invoke the blessings of heaven upon the inhabitants of the earth. May the sunshine from above smile upon you. May the treasures of the ground and the fruits of the soil be brought forth freely for your good. May the light of truth chase darkness from your souls. May righteousness increase and iniquity diminish as the years of the century roll on. May justice triumph and corruption be stamped out. And may virtue and chastity and honor prevail, until evil shall be overcome and the earth shall be cleansed from wickedness. Let these sentiments, as the voice of the "Mormons" in the mountains of Utah, go forth to the whole world, and let all people know that our wish and our mission are for the blessing and salvation of the entire human race. May the Twentieth Century prove the happiest as it will be the grandest of all the ages of time. [^1]

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCAlthough President Snow's hopes have not been fully realized even yet, he did see the Church take substantial strides toward achieving the strength needed to fulfill its worldwide mission.

Lorenzo Snow's Earlier Life

Lorenzo Snow was eighty-four years of age when he assumed the leadership of the Church. No other President had reached such an advanced age at the time of entering this office. President Snow's long life had been filled with experiences that prepared him for his prophetic call.

Although opportunities for formal schooling were quite limited in frontier Ohio, Lorenzo Snow loved to read and yearned for an education. After completing one term in high school, he attended Oberlin College, a nearby Presbyterian institution. Lorenzo Snow would be the first President of the Church to have had any college education. He taught school for a season in Ohio and would later organize the Polysophical Society to promote cultural refinement and learning among the early pioneers in Utah. This society was a forerunner of the Mutual Improvement Associations.

1814April 3: Born in Mantua, Ohio1831Heard Joseph Smith preach (age 17)1835Entered Oberlin College (21)1836Attended Hebrew school in Kirtland; baptized (22)1837-40Mission in Kentucky and Ohio; taught school1840Received revelation on nature of God and man (26)1840-43Mission to Great Britain, during which he gave copy of the Book of Mormon to Queen Victoria (26-29)1846-48Leading role in pioneers' crossing of the plains1849Called to the Twelve and on mission to Italy (35)1852Organized Polysophical Society (38)1853Called to preside over Saints in Brigham City (39)1864Restored to life after drowning in Hawaii (50)1872-82Served as president of Utah Territorial Legislative Council (58-68)1873Participated in rededication of Holy Land (58)1873-77One of seven counselors to President Brigham Young (59-63)1885Arrested on charge of polygamous cohabitation (71)1888Participated in Manti Temple dedication (74)1893Became president of Salt Lake Temple (79)1898Met the Savior in Salt Lake Temple; sustained as President of the Church (84)1899Inspired to reemphasize tithe paying (85)1901Sent Elder Heber J. Grant to open Japanese Mission; died October 10 in Salt Lake City, Utah (87)

Lorenzo's first contact with the restored gospel came at the age of seventeen when he went to hear Joseph Smith preach in Hiram, Ohio, just four miles from his home. Four years later Lorenzo was receptive when his sister Eliza, who had joined the Church a few months earlier, wrote from Kirtland and invited him to visit her and attend the Hebrew school that was Being opened there by the Mormons. This gave him the opportunity to become acquainted with Joseph Smith and other Church leaders, and in June 1836 he was baptized.

Deep personal spirituality would characterize Lorenzo Snow throughout his life, and this trait was manifested early. He later recalled:

Some two or three weeks after I was baptized, one day while engaged in my studies, I began to reflect upon the fact that I had not obtained a knowledge of the truth of the work-that I had not realized the fulfillment of the promise "he that doeth my will shall know of the doctrine," and I began to feel very uneasy. I laid aside my books, left the house, and wandered around through the fields under the oppressive influence of a gloomy, disconsolate spirit, while an indescribable cloud of darkness seemed to envelop me. I had been accustomed, at the close of the day, to retire for secret prayer, to a grove a short distance from my lodgings, but at this time I felt no inclination to do so. The spirit of prayer had departed and the heavens seemed like brass over my head. At length, realizing that the usual time had come for secret prayer, I concluded I would not forego my evening service, and, as a matter of formality, knelt as I was in the habit of doing, and in my accustomed retired place, but not feeling as I was wont to feel.

I had no sooner opened my lips in an effort to pray, than I heard a sound, just above my head, like the rustling of silken robes, and immediately the Spirit of God descended upon me, completely enveloping my whole person, filling me, from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet, and O, the joy and happiness I felt! No language can describe the almost instantaneous transition from a dense cloud of mental and spiritual darkness into a refulgence of light and knowledge, as it was at that time imparted to my understanding. I then received a perfect knowledge that God lives, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and of the restoration of the holy Priesthood, and the fulness of the Gospel. It was a complete baptism-a tangible immersion in the heavenly principle or element, the Holy Ghost; and even more real and physical in its effects upon every part of my system than the immersion by water; dispelling forever, so long as reason and memory last, all possibility of doubt or fear. [^2]

It was in Nauvoo that Lorenzo received by personal revelation a knowledge of man's potential destiny:

The Spirit of the Lord rested mightily upon me-the eyes of my understanding were opened, and I saw as clear as the sun at noonday, with wonder and astonishment, the pathway of God and man. I formed the following couplet which expresses the revelation, as it was shown to me,... "As man now is, God once was: As God now is, man may be." [^3]

Lorenzo Snow played a key role in the westward migration of the Mormon pioneers. Then, in 1849, he was called to the Quorum of the Twelve and appointed to open a mission in Italy. After only two weeks' preparation, he left his wives and families and traveled east with the first group of missionaries sent from the Rocky Mountain area.

Elder Snow and his companions arrived in Italy in 1850. Despite initial discouragement, he prayed fervently for the Italian people and for his own success. This success did not come easily, however. Only after Elder Snow had exerted his great faith in healing a young boy were the missionaries able to open the door, albeit just a crack, to missionary work in Italy.

In 1853 he was called to preside over the settlements in Box Elder County of northern Utah, where he named the principal settlement Brigham City in honor of President Young. He lived in this region for over forty years, although he did accept frequent assignments to travel elsewhere. Under his leadership, the Saints developed a series of cooperative enterprises that brought prosperity to the area. Here he gained valuable economic experience that would give him needed perspective when, as President of the Church, he would confront the challenge of an overwhelming debt.

Elder Snow accepted several assignments to travel overseas. This broadened his appreciation of the Church's worldwide mission. While filling a special assignment in Hawaii in 1864, he drowned when the small boat in which he was riding capsized. After fifteen or twenty minutes his lifeless body was finally found and taken from the water. His companions administered to him and continued praying as they worked over him. Finally they felt impressed to apply mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, a life-saving technique not commonly known at that time, and his life was restored.

In 1872-73 he toured Europe and the Near East with a group of General Authorities and others. President Brigham Young had instructed the group:

The Presidents of the Church

Name<_HEADING __="">Presided as ApostleServed as President<_HEADING __="">Age when called<_HEADING __="">Age when died1. Joseph Smith1830-1844/14 yrs24382. Brigham Young3.5 yrs1847-1877/30 yrs46763. John Taylor3 yrs1880-1887/7 yrs71784. Wilford Woodruff1.7 yrs1889-1898/9 yrs82915. Lorenzo Snow11 days1898-1901/3 yrs84876. Joseph F. Smith7 days1901-1918/17 yrs62807. Heber J. Grant4 days1918-1945/26.5 yrs62888. George Albert Smith7 days1945-1951/6 yrs75819. David O. McKay5 days1951-1970/19 yrs779610. Joseph Fielding Smith5 days1970-1972/2.5 yrs939511. Harold B. Lee5 days1972-1973/1.5 yrs737412. Spencer W. Kimball4 days1973-78

... We desire that you observe closely what openings now exist, or where they may be effected, for the introduction of the Gospel into the various countries you shall visit. When you get to the land of Palestine, we wish you to dedicate and consecrate that land, that it may be blessed with fruitfulness, preparatory to the return of the Jews, in fulfillment of prophecy and the accomplishment of the purposes of our Heavenly Father.

On March 2, 1873, Elder Snow and the others ascended the Mount of Olives and, in compliance with President Young's instructions, offered a solemn prayer blessing the Holy Land. Elder Snow's son later asserted that "few experiences in the long and eventful life of Father were of greater interest and brought more joy to his soul than this trip." [^4]

Spiritual experiences continued to characterize Elder Lorenzo Snow's ministry. On March 9, 1891, through his great faith in the power of the priesthood, he raised a young woman from the dead. Ella Jensen of Brigham City had been dead for two hours when he commanded her to "come back and live," declaring, "your mission is not ended." She lived to become the mother of eight children.

Upon the dedication of the Salt Lake Temple in 1893, Lorenzo Snow was named to be its first president. He had earlier worked on the construction of the Nauvoo Temple and officiated in sacred ordinances there, and had participated at the cornerstone's laying and the public dedication of the Manti Temple. His great spirituality and love of people well qualified him for this new calling. He enjoyed his service in the temple until he was released upon becoming President of the Church in 1898.

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCSelection as President of the Church

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCTwo important principles relative to succession in the Presidency of the Church were clarified as Lorenzo Snow assumed that office and during his administration. One of these points dealt with how soon the new President should take office, and the other defined how that person should be selected.

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCImmediate Reorganization of the First Presidency

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCFollowing the deaths of the first three Presidents of the Church, the Council of the Twelve Apostles had presided for prolonged periods of times before the new President took office. As early as 1892, however, President Wilford Woodruff instructed that there should not be another of these lengthy "apostolic presidencies" following his death. Elder Lorenzo Snow, President Woodruff's successor, recorded his instructions as follows:

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCHe said, and spoke with much feeling and energy, "I have an important request to make of you which I want you to fulfill. A few months ago while on a visit to St. George I carne near dying. I have no lease of my life, and know not how soon I may be called away, and when I go I want you, Brother Snow, not to delay, but organize the First Presidency. Take George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith for your counselors; they are good, wise men of experience."

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCOf course I was much surprised, and said, "President Woodruff, am I to receive this as a revelation?" I do not call to mind the words of his answer, but they were such as gave me the impression that he wanted me to regard it as such. Without thought or thinking of the impropriety of such questions, I continued: "President Woodruff, is this the place I am to occupy?" He hesitated a moment, then replied, "It is according to the order..." [^5]

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCThe authority of these instructions was later confirmed through a sacred experience Elder Snow had in the Salt Lake Temple. In 1898, as President Wilford Woodruff became critically ill, Lorenzo Snow grew extremely worried. The Church was unable to pay even the interest on its heavy debt. Elder Snow's son recorded:

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCMy father went to his room in the Salt Lake Temple... knelt at the sacred altar in the Holy of Holies in the House of the Lord and there pled to the Lord to spare President Woodruff's life, that President Woodruff might outlive him and that the great responsibility of Church leadership would not fall upon his shoulders. Yet he promised the Lord that he would devotedly perform any duty required at his hands. At this time he was in his eighty-fifth year. [^6]

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCElder Snow was in Brigham City when he received notice of President Woodruff's death on September 2, 1898. The Apostle immediately returned to Salt Lake City and went to his room in the temple.

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCPresident Snow... repaired again to the same sacred altar and poured out his heart to the Lord. He reminded the Lord how he pied for President Woodruff's life to be spared, that President Woodruff's days would be lengthened beyond his own; that he might never be called upon to bear the heavy burdens and responsibilities of the Church. "Nevertheless," he said, "Thy will be done. I have not sought this responsibility but if it be Thy will, I now present myself before Thee for Thy guidance and instruction. I ask that Thou show me what Thou wouldst have me do."

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCAfter finishing his prayer he expected a reply, some special manifestation from the Lord. So he waited,-and waited-and waited. There was no reply, no voice, no visitation, no manifestation.<_P> [^7]

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCDisappointed, he left the sacred room, and walked through the celestial room out into the large corridor. Here he received a glorious manifestation, which he later described to his granddaughter. She wrote:

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCOne evening while I was visiting grandpa Snow in his room in the Salt Lake Temple, I remained until the door keepers had gone and the night-watchmen had not yet come in, so grandpa said he would take me to the main front entrance and let me out that way. He got his bunch of keys from his dresser. After we left his room and while we were still in the large corridor leading into the celestial room, I was walking several steps ahead of grandpa when he stopped me and said: "Wait a moment, Allie, I want to tell you something. It was right here that the Lord Jesus Christ appeared to me at the time of the death of President Woodruff. He instructed me to go right ahead and reorganize the First Presidency of the Church at once and not wait as had been done after the death of the previous presidents, and that I was to succeed President Woodruff."

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCThen grandpa came a step nearer and held out his left hand and said: "He stood right here, about three feet above the floor. It looked as though He stood on a plate of solid gold."

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCGrandpa told me what a glorious personage the Savior is and described His hands, feet, countenance and beautiful white robes, all of which were of such a glory of whiteness and brightness that he could hardly gaze upon Him.

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCThen he came another step nearer and put his right hand on my head and said: "Now, granddaughter, I want you to remember that this is the testimony of your grandfather, that he told you with his own lips that he actually saw the Savior, here in the Temple, and talked with Him face to face." [^8]

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCOn September 13, the Apostles met to discuss Church finances in the wake of President Woodruff's death. Elder Francis M. Lyman referred to "President Woodruff's feelings, as expressed on different occasions during his administration, to the effect that whenever he died, the First Presidency of the Church should be organized without delay." Elder Lyman then declared, "And if the Lord should manifest to you, President Snow, that it was the proper thing to do now, I am prepared to not only vote for the Trustee-in-trust, but for the President of the Church." The others present concurred, and Lorenzo Snow was unanimously sustained as the new President of the Church.

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCPresident Snow then arose and acknowledged that "there was no use in his making excuses as to [his] inability, etc., to assume the vast responsibilities involved in the position to which he had been elected [called]. He felt that it was for him to do the very best he could and depend upon the Lord· He knew the action taken by the Council was according to the mind and will of the Lord who had shown and revealed to him several days ago that the First Presidency should be organized before the next conference." Before calling for a formal vote, President Snow explained: "I have not mentioned this matter to any person, either man or woman. I wanted to see what the feelings of the brethren were. I wanted to see if the same spirit which the Lord manifested to me was in you. I had confidence in you that the Lord would indicate to you that this was proper and according to his mind and will." [^9]

Seniority Among the Twelve

As early as 1887 Elder Wilford Woodruff had given his reasons for believing that the president of the Twelve would always become the new President of the Church:

... when the President of the Church dies, who then is the Presiding Authority of the Church? It is the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles (ordained and organized by the revelations of God and none else). Then while these Twelve Apostles preside over the Church, who is the President of the[Church[?] It is the President of the Twelve Apostles. And he is virtually as much the President of the Church while presiding over Twelve men as he is when organized into the President of the Church, and presiding over two men. [^10]

Elder John A. Widtsoe has explained:

This is a wise procedure. It places at the head of the Church the Apostle who has been longest in service. He is known well to the people and trusted by them. He himself knows the procedure of Church affairs. He is no novice to be trained for the position. He can call to his assistance, in addition to his counselors, any helpers from among the priesthood of the Church. It eliminates the shadow of politics from the operations of the Council.

Should there be any deviation from the practices of the past, it would come by revelation to the President of the Twelve, who by virtue of his presidency, holds the keys of authority committed to this quorum of the priesthood. However, President Woodruff declared that in his opinion, the President of the council would never be set aside for someone else in appointing a president of the Church. [^11]

More recently, Elder Spencer W. Kimball testified:

Even when a powerful leader dies, not for a single instant is the Church without leadership, thanks to the kind Providence who gave his kingdom continuity and perpetuity ....

The moment life passes from a President of the Church, a body of men become the composite leader-these men already seasoned with experience and training. The appointments have long been made, the authority given, the keys delivered. For [a few] days, the kingdom moves forward under this already authorized council. No "running" for position, no electioneering, no stump speeches. What a divine plan! How wise our Lord, to organize so perfectly beyond the weakness of frail, grasping humans ....

People talk about precedent. If it is precedent, it has become such by the repetition of the revealed order since the beginning. [^12]

President Harold B. Lee further testified that the President of the Church, like all other officers, must (in the words of the fifth article of faith) "be called of God by prophecy and by the laying on of hands by those who are in authority .... " One's call as President of the Church actually begins when he is ordained and set apart as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.

Each apostle so ordained under the hands of the President of the Church, who holds the keys of the kingdom of God in concert with all other ordained apostles, has given to him the priesthood authority necessary to hold every position in the Church, even to a position of presidency over the Church ....

Immediately following the death of a President, the next ranking body, the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, becomes the presiding authority, with the President of the Twelve automatically becoming the acting President of the Church until a President of the Church is officially ordained and sustained in his office.

Early in this dispensation, because of certain conditions, the Council of Twelve continued to preside as a body for as long as three years before the reorganization was effected. As conditions in the Church became more stabilized, the reorganization was effected promptly following the passing of the President of the Church. [^13]

The foregoing statements clearly indicate that upon the death of a President of the Church, the senior Apostle succeeds him in that office. During Lorenzo Snow's administration, Church leaders had the opportunity to clarify how seniority among the Twelve should be determined.

Brigham Young, Jr., had been ordained an Apostle in 1864, and Joseph F. Smith received a similar ordination two years later. Because there were no vacancies in the Twelve at the time, however, these two men were not immediately sustained as members of the Quorum. In 1867 Joseph F. Smith was called to fill a vacancy in the Twelve, and a year later Brigham Young, Jr., filled another vacancy in that same quorum. Thus when the President of the Twelve died in 1899, the question arose as to which of these two men was the senior Apostle.

On April 5, 1900, at a meeting held in the Salt Lake Temple, the First Presidency and the Twelve unanimously decided that "the acceptance of a member into the Council or Quorum of the Twelve fixed his rank or position in the Apostleship," that "the Apostles took precedency from that date they entered the quorum," and that "ordination to the Apostleship under the hands of any Apostle other than to fill a vacancy in the quorum, and authorized by the General Authorities of the Church, did not count in precedence." Hence Joseph F. Smith ranked ahead of Brigham Young, Jr., among the members of the Twelve. Finally, it was decided that "if the First Presidency were dissolved by the death of the President, his counselors having been ordained Apostles in the Quorum of the Twelve would resume their places in the quorum,

<_HEADING __="">The First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles about 1899: (top row, from left) Anthon H. Lund, John W. Taylor, John Henry Smith, Heber J. Grant, Francis M. Lyman, George Teasdale, Marriner W. Merrill; (middle row, from left) Brigham Young, Jr., George Q. Cannon, Lorenzo Snow, Joseph F. Smith, Franklin D. Richards; (bottom row from left) Matthias Cowley, Abraham O. Woodruff. (Church Archives)

according to the seniority of their ordinations into that quorum." [^14]

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCOvercoming Church Debt

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCA major challenge that faced the Church as Lorenzo Snow assumed the presidency in 1898 was a debt that exceeded $1.25 million. Historian Leonard Arrington has explained the circumstances that led to this predicament: The Church initially went $300,000 into debt as a direct result of the 1887 Edmunds-Tucker Anti-Bigamy Act, which provided for the confiscation of Church property. Furthermore, the Church established a defense fund to help with legal fees and court costs of those being prosecuted for living in plural marriage, and it assumed the responsibility of caring for the families of men who were imprisoned. At the same time, members became reluctant to make financial contributions to the Church, fearing that these funds would be seized by the government. Thus, annual tithing income fell from an average of $500,000 during the 1880s to a little more than $300,000 in 1890. "Consequently," Arrington concluded, "the long-run effect of the Edmunds-Tucker Law was to throw the Church, which had previously enjoyed a creditor status, into a debt of at least half a million dollars."

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCOther commitments during the 1890s swelled the debt even further. President Woodruff was anxious to complete the construction of the Salt Lake Temple, so a million dollars was spent on this project between 1890 and 1893. Church leaders had also encouraged local units to establish academies to meet the educational needs of the Saints. These schools continued to receive a substantial portion of Church appropriations. Expenditures for welfare also increased during the depression of the mid-1890s. The Church invested funds to develop essential Intermountain industries, but during the business slump they returned no profit. These difficult times led to yet another drop in the Church's tithing income. Thus the Church had to borrow in order to meet its obligations.

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCWhen Lorenzo Snow became President of the Church he faced a debt in excess of $1.25 million, most of it owed to "gentile" (or non-Latter-day Saint) creditors. [^15]<_P/>He therefore decided to sell bonds in order to meet the Church's debt. This move had at least three advantages: (1) It gained badly needed time during which a permanent solution could be sought. (2) Interest on the bonds was at a lower and hence more favorable rate than the existing debt. (3) The bonds were sold to the Church's own members. President Snow preferred to borrow "among ourselves". rather than "go into the world." Three issues of a half million dollars each were planned. The first two series were issued in January 1899. Significant new developments, however, would make the third series unnecessary.

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCPresident Snow's Revelation on Tithing

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCDuring the spring of 1899 President Lorenzo Snow was impressed to go to St. George in southern Utah and to take with him as many of the General Authorities as could be spared at Church headquarters. There he would receive by revelation the key to solving the Church's immediate financial difficulties, providing the solid foundation for the growth that was to occur during the twentieth century. This vital revelation, however, did not come immediately. Upon arrival in St. George, President Snow paced the floor having "the most painful and anxious expression on his face that I had ever seen," his son, LeRoi, later recalled. "Why have I come to St. George?..." the President worried aloud. "Why have I come here?"

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCLeRoi C. Snow described what happened at the special conference on Wednesday, May 17, 1899, in the St. George Tabernacle:

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCI was sitting at a table on the stand, reporting the proceedings, when all at once father paused in his discourse. Complete stillness filled the room. I shall never forget the thrill as long as I live. When he commenced to speak again his voice strengthened and the inspiration of God seemed to come over him, as well as over the entire assembly. His eyes seemed to brighten and his countenance to shine. He was filled with unusual power. Then he revealed to the Latter-day Saints the vision that was before him.

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCGod manifested to him there and then not only the purpose of the call to visit the Saints in the South, but also Lorenzo Snow's special mission, the great work for which God had prepared and preserved him, and he unveiled the vision to the people. He told them that he could see, as he had never realized before, how the law of tithing had been neglected by the people.

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCThe President stressed that faithful compliance with the law would become the means of releasing the Church as well as individual members from the burden of debt. "The word of the Lord is: The time has now come for every Latter-day Saint, who calculates to be prepared for the future and to hold his feet strong upon a proper foundation, to do the will of the Lord and to pay his tithing in full. That is the word of the Lord to you, and it will be the word of the Lord to every settlement throughout the land of Zion."

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCReferring to the prolonged drought in southern Utah, President Snow assured his listeners that if they would pay an honest tithing they could with faith plant their crops for the coming season. "He promised them, in the name of the Lord," his son reported, "that the clouds would gather, the rains from heaven descend, their lands would be drenched, and the rivers and ditches filled, and they would reap a bounteous harvest that very season."

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCLater that evening President Snow reflected: "Now I know why I came to St. George. The Lord sent me here, and he has a great work for me to perform. There is no mistake about it. I can see the great future for the Church and I can hardly wait to get back to Salt Lake City to commence the great work .... " [^16]

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCOn his way back home, President Snow visited various communities, where he repeated his exhortations for the Saints to honor the law of tithing. Upon arriving in Salt Lake City he found the annual conference of the Young Men's and Young Women's Mutual Improvement associations in session. President Snow recognized this gathering as the means of getting the principle of tithing before the youth of the entire Church. At a meeting of the Young Men's officers on May 30, President Snow gave an impressive discourse on tithing that those who were present accepted by formal resolution as "the word of the Lord to them, which they promised to accept and obey themselves, and would do all in their power to get the whole membership of the Church to do likewise." President Snow was visibly affected. He arose and said: "Brethren, the God of our fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob bless you. Every man who is here, who has made this promise, will be saved in the Celestial kingdom. God bless you. Amen."

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCA solemn assembly of priesthood leaders convened in the Salt Lake Temple on July 2. "The call for this assembly did not Originate in his own mind," President Snow's son testified, "but as a command from the Lord who revealed it in vision." All the General Authorities were present, and all forty stakes were represented. During the session, which lasted from 10:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M., each of the eighteen speakers referred to the renewed tithing revelation, which was again accepted as "the word and will of the Lord through President Snow to the Church." [^17]

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCAs a whole, the Saints in southern Utah faithfully accepted President Snow's challenge and gave much more than one-tenth of their income to the Lord's work. After some anxious weeks the rains came and the crops were saved. Similarly, as the Saints all over the Church faithfully complied with the law of tithing, the promised blessings were realized. The burden of debt was overcome. By 1907 Joseph F. Smith, who had succeeded Lorenzo Snow as President of the Church, announced that the increased tithes had enabled the Church to pay all its obligations. Since that time the Church has been able to remain free from debt, and tithing has continued to be the largest source of financial support for many and varied religious programs worldwide.

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCWorldwide Mission of the Church

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCAt the dawning of the twentieth century, President Lorenzo Snow was impressed with the necessity of taking the gospel message to all the world. To this end, in 1901 he appointed Elder Heber J. Grant of the Quorum of the Twelve to open a new mission in Japan. Elder Grant selected three others to accompany him on this mission. Because of formidable cultural and language barriers, however, the fruits of the Eiders' labors were meager. Only after eighteen long months of tedious language study did the first pair of missionaries venture out among the Japanese people. Speaking in general conference upon his return in 1903, Elder Grant admitted, "To be perfectly frank with you, I acknowledge I have accomplished very little indeed." Only three converts had been baptized. "At the same time," he continued, "I have assurance in my heart there will yet be a great and important labor accomplished in that land." [^18]<_P/>These early missionaries had laid a foundation upon which future growth would be built, although the flourishing of the work in that land would not come until after World War II.

<_HEADING __="">Elder Heber J. Grant dedicates the land of Japan for the preaching of the gospel on Sunday, September 1, 1901. Accompanying Elder Grant on this wooded hillside just south of Yokohama are (from left) Horace S. Ensign, Alma O. Taylor, and (far right) Louis B. Kelsch. (Utah State Historical Society)

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCPresident Snow regarded opening the mission in Japan as only a beginning. He also had in mind carrying the gospel to Russia and Austria, as well as to the republics of Latin America. These desires, however, would not be fulfilled during his lifetime.

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCRole of the Twelve and the Seventy

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCPresident Lorenzo Snow believed that two particular groups of the General Authorities had a special responsibility to take the lead in accomplishing the Church's worldwide mission. In 1901 he declared:

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCI want to say, here are the Apostles and the Seventies, their business is to warn the nations of the earth and prepare the world for the coming of the Savior. They have been engaged in this more or less. Now we find ourselves in a compact, gathered condition It looks to me that our minds ought to extend somewhat, and we get out of the beaten track, and a little change be made. For instance, we have started in this direction by sending Brother Grant over to Japan, but this is only a start. Things seem to be going favorable with him; but whether he will accomplish much or not matters not in one sense; it is for the Apostles to show to the Lord that they are his witnesses to all the nations, and that they are doing the best they can. [^19]

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCDuring the nineteenth century's era of colonization, Church leaders, particularly the Twelve, had become intimately involved in the administration of local Church affairs. But President Lorenzo Snow now became quite concerned at the amount of time the Twelve Apostles and also the Seventy were spending with auxiliary organizations such as the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association. In his last public discourse he gave emphasis to this theme:

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHC. . . It is not for the apostles to look after [local bishops]. The apostles have a work that is in another direction altogether. I want the presidents of stakes hereafter to realize that it is their business, not the business of the Apostles; it is the business of the high priests, the elders, the bishops, priests, teachers, and deacons, to look after these things. Do not lay this duty upon the shoulders of the Apostles. It is not in their line, at least only occasionally....

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCThe apostles and the seventies-it is their business, by the appointment of the Almighty, to look after the interests of the world. The seventies and twelve apostles are special witnesses unto the nations of the earth .... [^20]

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCThis responsibility to carry the gospel to the world was shared by the Church's corps of proselyting missionaries. While at first most missionaries were married men who left home to preach for relatively short periods of time, by the 1890s young unmarried elders were much more common among the missionaries' ranks. In 1898 "lady missionaries" were called for the first time (although wives had sometimes been called to accompany their husbands into the mission field during earlier years). Many of these new missionaries had the benefit of special missionary-preparation courses at the Church's academies. Their work was further strengthened by a new series of tracts, "Rays of Living Light," authored by Elder Charles W. Penrose. These tracts formed the basis of "cottage meeting" discussions on basic gospel topics.

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCWhile responsibility for local Church ward activity was being shifted more squarely onto the shoulders of stake presidents and bishops, steps were also being taken to make these units more efficient. Before the turn of the century, some stakes had been very large, having as many as twenty thousand members. The entire Salt Lake Valley, for example, was covered by one single stake. By 1904 this area had been divided into six stakes. Churchwide, the average stake soon had only about five thousand members, a figure which would remain fairly constant throughout the twentieth century.

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCA New Emphasis on the "Gathering"

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCConsistent with President Snow's worldwide vision was a new understanding of the Saints' responsibility to "gather." During the nineteenth century, Mormon migration patterns had been dominated by a geographical gathering of converts from the nations of the earth to the centers of Latter-day Saint colonization in America. Early revelations proclaimed the importance of gathering: "Ye are called to bring to pass the gathering of mine elect... Wherefore the decree hath gone forth from the Father that they shall be gathered in unto one place... and be prepared in all things against the day when tribulation and desolation are sent forth upon the wicked." (D&C 29:7-8.) Another revelation commanded: "Wherefore, prepare ye, prepare ye, O my people; sanctify yourselves; gather ye together, O ye people of my church, upon the land of Zion .... Go ye out of Babylon; gather ye out from among the nations..." (D&C 133:4, 7.) Such injunctions held a great appeal for the Saints in the Old World. Many of them lived in grimy industrial cities, while others struggled to earn their living as landless tenant farmers. Most belonged to small, persecuted Mormon branches whose meeting places were often dirty and grossly inadequate rented halls. Thus, during the nineteenth century, thousands of converts left their homes in the Old World, and many more would do so in the new century. While most were leaving unsatisfactory economic conditions behind, many appear to have been motivated primarily by the vision of helping to establish Zion in the promised land.

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHC Revelations given through Joseph Smith also anticipated a second phase of the "gathering" that became more typical of the twentieth century. The time would come when there would no longer be just one gathering place, but "other places" or "stakes" would be appointed for the "strength of Zion." (See D&C 101:20-22.) This phase would be more spiritual than geographical. (See D&C 133:14.) Though remaining in their homelands, Saints would "gather" out of the wicked world and become identified with the Saints.

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCChurch leaders decided to suspend the geographical gathering, at least temporarily, during the 1890s, a decade of particularly severe economic depression. Furthermore, as historian Frederick Jackson Turner noted, 1890 had marked the end of the frontier and of readily available free land in America. Most immigrants congregated in the cities; many failed to find work, became discouraged, and wanted to return home. It was just such conditions the Church wanted to avoid. [^21]At about the turn of the century, the General Authorities began emphasizing that the need to gather into one place had passed, and that now the important task was to build up the "other places" around the world. [^22]

This advice Would be reiterated in a 1921 editorial in the Millennial Star, the Church's British magazine:

The Counsel of The General Authorities to the yet ungathered Saints is not to flock Zionward under existing conditions; but to remain in the countries where they now dwell. . . . Such as have home and employment especially, should stay and help build up the Lord's work in the various missions and conferences and branches, strengthening the hands of the elders and other missionaries labouring among them. [^23]

The Church's counsel would be reinforced by restrictive immigration laws adopted by the United States during the 1920s; although most Latter-day Saint immigrants were from northern Europe, even they found it increasingly difficult to fit within the newly imposed American quotas.

This same counsel has continued to be given during the twentieth century. At the Mexico City area conference in 1972, Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained:

The gathering of Israel consists of joining the true Church, of coming to a knowledge of the true God and of his saving truths, and of worshiping him in the congregations of the Saints in all nations and among all peoples. Any person, therefore, who has accepted the restored gospel, and who now seeks to worship the Lord, in his own tongue, and among his own people, and with the Saints of his own nation has complied with the law of gathering and is entitled to all the blessings promised the Saints in these last days.

As Elder McConkie therefore declared:

The place of gathering for the Mexican Saints is in Mexico; the place of gathering for the Guatemalan Saints is in Guatemala; the place of gathering for the Brazilian Saints is in Brazil; and so it goes throughout the length and breadth of the whole earth. Japan is for the Japanese; Korea is for the Koreans; Australia is for the Australians; every nation is the gathering place for its own people. [^24]

Administration of Lorenzo SnowHCLorenzo Snow presided over the Church for only three years. Nevertheless, his brief administration witnessed developments whose impact would be far-reaching. Not only did his Presidency straddle the turn of the century, but it can be regarded as an era of transition for several other reasons: He was the last President to come from the same generation as the Church's founding prophet, Joseph Smith. He helped define the inspired principles which would continue to guide succession in the Presidency of the Church. Through him, the Lord called for a rededication to tithe paying. President Snow proclaimed the Church's worldwide mission, and took steps to achieve it.

Nevertheless, the transition was not yet complete. Many key developments were to take place during the administration of President Joseph F. Smith, who would see the progress and prosperity that would follow the Church's overcoming its debt through the Saints' faithful payment of tithing. He would see a further reform of priesthood and auxiliary activities. However, he would also witness the resurgence of earlier anti-Mormon agitation. These attacks were at least in part an outgrowth of the "Progressive Era" in American politics that had its roots in the years covered by Lorenzo Snow's administration and would flourish during the opening years of his successor's. These developments are the subject of the following chapters.

Notes

Chapter 1 The Turn of the Century: Lorenzo Snow

---
Notas:
[^1] B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1930), 6:334.
[^2] B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1930), pp. 134-37.
[^3] Russell R. Rich, Ensign to the Nations (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Publications, 1972), pp. 472-73.
[^4] Francis T. Plimpton at Amherst College, quoted in Reader's Digest. June 1958, p. 142.
[^5] James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 4:84-85.
[^6] Quoted in Joseph Fielding Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1938), pp. 378-80.
[^7] B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1930), 6:407-8.
[^8] Alfred Henry Lewis, "The Viper on the Hearth" Cosmopolitan, March 1911, pp. 439-50.
[^9] Conference Report, October 1907, pp. 5-6.
[^10] George F. Richards, "Why Are Mormon Missionaries Expelled from Germany," Improvement Era 13 (September 1910): 1004; as cited in Gilbert Scharffs, Mormonism in Germany (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), p. 70.
[^11] James B. Allen and Glen M. Leonard, The Story of the Latter-daySaints (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 473-74.
[^12] B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1930), 6:435-41.
[^13] B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1930), l:v, vi, x.
[^14] "Mr. Roosevelt to the Mormons," Collier's, April 15, 1911, p. 28; reprinted in Improvement Era 14 (June 1911): 715-18.
[^15] B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1930), 6:477-78.
[^16] 16. LeRoi C. Snow, "The Lord's Way Out of Bondage," Improvement Era 41 (July 1938): 401, 439-41.
[^17] 17. B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints: Century I, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1930); 6:359-60.
[^18] 18. Conference Report, October 1903, p. 7.
[^19] 19. B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1930), 6:377.
[^20] 20. B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1930), p. 379.
[^21] 21. See, for example, Journal History of the Church, January 19, 1899 pp. 2-5; Frederick Jackson Turner, The Frontier in American History (New York: Holt and Co., 1920).
[^22] 22. "First Presidency to Netherlands Mission," December 14, 1907- in James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency 6 Vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 4:165.
[^23] 23. Millennial Star, September 15, 1921, p. 585.
[^24] 24. Report of Mexico City Area Conference, 1972, p. 45.
