Richard O. Cowan, Church in the Twentieth Century ( 1985)

Chapter 2

Smoot CaseHCThe Church in the Progressive Era

Smoot CaseHCThe opening years of the twentieth century are known in United States history as the Progressive Era. Under the leadership of United States President Theodore Roosevelt, reform legislation sought to remedy such problems as unregulated monopolies, the wasting of natural resources, and unclean conditions in food-packing plants. The press's sensational exposes of slums and a variety of other social evils earned the nicknames "yellow journalism" or "muckraking." This reform era had its roots just before the turn of the century, so it overlapped the administrations of Church Presidents Lorenzo Snow and Joseph F. Smith. It was in this setting that the elections of two General Authorities, Elders B. H. Roberts and Reed Smoot, to the United States Congress sparked a revival of earlier agitation against the Mormons. Nevertheless, the Church took steps to improve its popular image, thus laying the foundation for the public relations efforts that would become increasingly important as the century progressed.

Smoot CaseHCThe Saints' Interest in Politics

Smoot CaseHCThe events of this period cannot be fully appreciated without an understanding of the background of earlier developments. As part of the "Compromise of 1850," Utah had become a territory rather than a state. This meant that its key officials were appointed by the president of the United States rather than being elected by the people. Then, in 1852, the Church made the first public announcement of plural marriage. This practice quickly became the focal point of attacks directed against the Latter-day Saints. The federally appointed officials allied themselves with the small non-Mormon or "gentile" minority in Utah to form the Liberal party and to effectively dominate the political scene. In response, the Mormon majority formed the People's party to preserve whatever vestige of local self-government they could. With political issues drawn along these lines during the later nineteenth century, the Church inevitably found itself involved in politics.

1887Edmunds-Tucker Law provided for confiscation of Church property and barred polygamists from voting or holding office1890President Woodruff's Manifesto announced end of plural marriages1896Utah admitted as a state of the Union1898Lorenzo Snow became President of the Church1900Church resumed control of the Deseret News; B. H. Roberts excluded from U.S. House of Representatives1901Joseph F. Smith became President of the Church1902Bureau of Information opened on Temple Square1904U.S. Senate committee opened hearing on Elder Reed Smoot's election as a senator; President Joseph F. Smith issued "Second Manifesto" banning all new plural marriages1905Thomas Kearns attacked the Church in the Senate and affiliated with the American party in Utah; Elders John W. Taylor and Matthias Cowley resigned from the Quorum because of disagreement with Church leaders over plural marriage1907Smoot allowed to retain seat in the Senate; Church issued "Address to the World" to correct misunderstandings1910Wave of bitter anti-Mormon articles in national magazines1917Saints' support of war effort improved public attitude

Smoot CaseHCA series of antibigamy laws culminated in the Edmunds-Tucker Act of 1887. This harsh law not only punished those convicted of polygamous living but also restricted the Saints' participation in elections, disincorporated the Church as an institution, and provided for the seizure of its assets. In 1889 the United States Supreme Court upheld this law as constitutional. This posed a dilemma for the Latter-day Saints who believed that the practice of plural marriage had been divinely revealed (see D&C Section 132), but who had been instructed to obey "that law of the land which is constitutional" (see D&C 98:5). While praying for guidance, President Wilford Woodruff was shown that the work of the Church would be disrupted by its enemies if the practice of plural marriage continued. Hence in 1890 he issued his inspired Official Declaration or Manifesto declaring: "Inasmuch as laws have been enacted by Congress forbidding plural marriages, which laws have been pronounced constitutional by the court of last resort, I hereby declare my intention to submit to those laws, and... publicly declare that my advice to the Latter-day Saints is to refrain from contracting any marriage forbidden by the law of the land." (Read Official Declaration 1 and accompanying statements in the 1981 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants.)

Smoot CaseHCA brief era of good will toward the Mormons followed the termination of plural marriages, and the long-sought-for goal of Utah's statehood now appeared attainable. The People's party was disbanded, and Church leaders urged the Saints to identify themselves with one or another of the national political parties. Utah was finally admitted to the Union as a state in January 1896. Almost from the beginning, the Latter-day Saints had been taught to seek and uphold wise and good men (see D&C 98:10), and with the obtaining of statehood, they looked for ward more than ever before to getting involved in the political process. Because the Mormons dominated the population of the new state, there were concerns that the Church would continue to dominate politics. To dispel these fears, and to encourage leading Church officers not to become so involved in political matters that they would neglect their ecclesiastical responsibilities, the General Authorities issued the following "political manifesto" in April of that year:

Smoot CaseHCWe unanimously agree to, and promulgate as a rude, that should always be observed in the church and by every leading official thereof, that before accepting any position, political or otherwise, which would interfere with the proper and complete discharge of his ecclesiastical duties, and before accepting a nomination or entering into engagements to perform new duties, said official should apply to the proper authorities and learn from them whether he can, consistently with the obligations already entered into with the church upon assuming his office, take upon himself the added duties and labors and responsibilities of the new position. [^1]

Smoot CaseHCThe Roberts Case

Smoot CaseHCIt was in this setting that Utah Democrats urged Elder Brigham H. Roberts, a member of the First Council of the Seventy, to run for Congress. Although Utah's constitution provided that new plural marriages should forever be prohibited, there was a general unwritten understanding that men who had already entered into plural marriage prior to the 1890 Manifesto would not be subject to prosecution and would not be required to abandon their plural families as long as they did not marry any additional wives. Elder Roberts had married all three of his wives before 1890, so party leaders were confident that there would be no problem. His nomination in 1898, however, brought the charge of a "reversion to polygamy." Protestant ministers led the attack, accusing the Church of a breach of faith by again attempting to control politics and by renewing the approval of polygamy. Church leaders emphatically denied these charges, and Roberts won the election easily.

Smoot CaseHCHis opponents, however, promoted a nationwide campaign against him. When he arrived in Washington, his right to take his seat in Congress was challenged. A "monster" petition claiming over seven million signatures was presented, and the nation's newspapers and magazines were full of articles attacking Roberts and the Mormons. By a ratio of about five to one the House of Representatives voted to exclude Roberts, an action that has been taken extremely rarely in American history. It was evident that the Latter-day Saints had not yet been fully accepted and were still under the necessity of convincing the nation of their good faith.

Smoot CaseHCAs Elder Roberts reflected on the nature and motivation of the opposition, he concluded that "the real cause of this anti-Mormon crusade was a fight for the political control of Utah on the part of the crusaders." Although they professed to be interested in "preserving the purity of the American home," Roberts charged that a majority of them were "not exemplars of that chastity [which] they in this struggle affected .... Their concern about the alleged evils of polygamy was mere pretense." [^2]

Smoot CaseHCThe Smoot Case

Smoot CaseHCElder Reed Smoot was elected to the United States Senate by Utah's Republican legislature in January 1903. Formerly a businessman in Provo and Salt Lake City, he had become a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles three years earlier. Even though he had obtained a "leave of absence" from his ecclesiastical duties, his election immediately revived the old charges of a violation of the proper separation of church and state. As they had done in the case of Elder Roberts four years earlier, Salt Lake City ministers, editors, and others mounted a nationwide campaign, and protests against Reed Smoot poured into the Senate from all parts of the country. However, Elder Smoot was sworn in as a senator and allowed to take his seat. Nevertheless, the Committee on Privileges and Elections was authorized to conduct a thorough investigation of the whole affair and to determine whether or not Smoot was qualified to remain in the Senate.

Smoot CaseHCThe committee's chairman was Senator Julius C. Burrows of Michigan. His grandfather had been a member of the Church during the days of the Prophet Joseph Smith and had marched with Zion's Camp in 1834, but was subsequently excommunicated. This family background may have added to Senator Burrows's prejudice against the Latter-day Saints. [^3]

Smoot CaseHCThe Smoot hearings did not get under way until January 1904. A variety of charges were presented against the Mormon senator. The accusation of polygamy was easily dismissed, as Elder Smoot was a monogamist. Others alleged that Smoot was a member of a "self-perpetuating body of fifteen men" (the First Presidency and the Twelve) who controlled Utah's economy and politics and secretly encouraged the continued practice of plural marriage. He was also accused of having taken a secret oath of disloyalty to the United States. Senator Smoot responded by emphasizing the legality of his election. Numerous and varied witnesses were called by both sides. Even President Joseph F. Smith was required to testify. For three days he frankly admitted that he was still living with his plural wives and answered other prying questions about his personal life and sacred aspects of his religion. He stressed that Latter-day Saints have their agency, that binding doctrines are found in the standard works, and that Church members are not obligated to accept as doctrine the political opinions of those occupying prominent offices. President Smith believed that when his testimony began all the senators except one were unfriendly, but that he had won the respect of several others before he was through.

Smoot CaseHCThe committee's hearings dragged on for two and a half years; a report of the proceedings filled more than thirty-four hundred pages in four large volumes. Here again, the press widely reported the hearings, but unfortunately it emphasized only the more sensational aspects of the testimony, and generally that which was less favorable to the Church. Finally, in June 1906, the committee concluded that Reed Smoot was not entitled to serve as the senator from Utah; eight, including Burrows, voted for this majority report. A minority of five other committee members, however, believed that no just grounds had been found to disqualify or expel Smoot.

<_HEADING __="">President William Howard Taft (left) and Senator Reed Smoot share the same car in a parade in Salt Lake City, Utah (Utah State Historical Society)

Smoot CaseHCSix months passed before the Senate chose to consider the committee's report. From December 13, 1906, to February 20, 1907, Reed Smoot's fate was debated in the Senate. Boles Penrose, a leader in the Senate, is reported to have quipped: "I don't see why we can't get along just as well with a polygamist who doesn't polyg as we do with a lot of monogamists who don't monog." [^4]A two-thirds vote was required to approve the committee's recommendation to oust Smoot. When the vote was taken, twenty-eight, or only 40 percent, voted in favor of the report, forty-two voted against, and twenty abstained. Thus Elder Smoot had received the support of nearly two-thirds of those voting. He went on to a distinguished thirty-year career in the Senate, and earned the respect of his colleagues with his personal integrity and hard work. He played a particularly influential role as chairman of the Senate Finance Committee.

Some Lingering Challenges

Even though Elder Reed Smoot had been allowed to retain his seat in the Senate, the prolonged hearings demonstrated that certain questions continued to trouble many people: Had the Mormons really given up their practice of polygamy? Was the Church attempting to control politics? These concerns sparked the revival of an anti-Mormon political party in Utah and of widespread attacks in the nation's newspapers and magazines.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThe Question of continuing Polygamy

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCIt was only natural that the practice of plural marriage would not be easy to give up. Since it had become so much at part of the belief and personal lives of individual members of the Church, it was not to be expected that everyone involved would suddenly change his feelings, even though the change of practice had been required by the President of the Church.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHC Mormon polygamy had been a prominent topic in the Smoot hearings, but Church witnesses there emphasized that the practice had been suspended. A Church census revealed only 897 polygamous families in 1902, in contrast to the 2,451 that had existed when the 1890 Manifesto was issued. The Senate committee's investigation, however, disclosed that new polygamous marriages actually had been performed by certain leaders of the Church since the Manifesto. Specifically involved were two Apostles, John W. Taylor and Matthias F. Cowley. Both men believed that the Manifesto applied only to members of the Church living within the United States.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCAs a result, just a few weeks after his appearance before the Senate committee in Washington, President Smith issued an official statement at the 1904 April conference. Sometimes called the Second Manifesto, the statement reiterated:

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCInasmuch as there are numerous reports in circulation that plural marriages have been entered into contrary to the official declaration of President Woodruff, of September 26, 1890 . . . which forbade any marriages violative of the law of the land; I Joseph F. Smith, president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, do hereby affirm and declare that no such marriages have been so solemnized with the sanction, consent, or knowledge of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; and I hereby announce that all such marriages are prohibited, and if any officer or member of the Church shall assume to solemnize or enter into any such marriages he will be deemed in transgression against the Church and will be liable to be dealt with, according to the rules and regulations thereof, and excommunicated therefrom. [^5]

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThis new statement clearly stressed that the ban on plural marriage applied worldwide and that no new plural marriages would be authorized anywhere, even in the Mormon colonies of Mexico and Canada. President Smith also directed that the 1890 Manifesto be included in the Doctrine and Covenants; this answered critics who had pointed out that the Doctrine and Covenants included the revelation authorizing plural marriages but did not include the declaration suspending them. The problem remained, however, as some members, including Elders Cowley and Taylor, still refused to accept the new position as binding. In October 1905 the First Presidency took the very unusual step of asking for their resignation. Elder Taylor acknowledged that he was out of harmony with the General Authorities' interpretation of the 1890 Manifesto:

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCI have always believed that the government of the United States had jurisdiction only within its own boundaries, and that the term, "Laws of the land" in the manifesto meant merely the laws of the United States. I find now that this opinion is different to that expressed by the Church authorities, who have declared that the prohibition against plural marriage extended to every place and to every part of the Church. It is doubtless true that this view of the matter has been given by President Woodruff and others, but I have never taken that as binding upon me or the Church, because it was never presented for adoption by "common consent," as was the manifesto itself, and I have disputed its authority as a law or a rule of the Church. [^6]

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCSeveral groups continued to insist that plural marriage is an essential doctrine and to perform such marriages. On several subsequent occasions during the twentieth century the First Presidency has denounced these so-called fundamentalists, and the Church's policy has been to excommunicate anyone practicing plural marriage.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCRevival of Anti-Mormon Agitation

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCAs has been seen, the elections of Elders Roberts and Smoot to Congress provided the occasion for a revival of attacks directed against the Church and its members. In the spirit of the Progressive Era, "muckraking" journalists dwelled on what they called "the twin relics of Mormonism-polygamy and hierarchy." Polygamy of course referred to the alleged continuation of plural marriages, and hierarchy to the undue influence Church leaders were accused of exerting over secular affairs, including political and economic concerns. The phrase "twin relics" was borrowed from a plank in the 1856 Republican party platform that promised to eradicate "the twin relics of barbarism-slavery and polygamy."

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCA leading source of anti-Mormon agitation was Thomas Kearns, a non-Mormon who, along with Reed Smoot, served as a senator from Utah. In 1905, near the close of his term, Kearns delivered a bitter attack in the Senate condemning Mormon leaders as a monarchy that dominated the political, business, and social life in Utah and secretly permitted their favorites to continue taking plural wives. The reason for Kearns's bitterness, the historian B. H. Roberts believed, was President Joseph F. Smith's refusal to help reelect the senator. [^7]<_P/>Ironically, Kearns was now attacking the very political influence that he himself had unsuccessfully attempted to gain from the Church.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCAnother source of attack was the American party, which had been organized in Utah in 1904. This was actually a revival of the old anti-Mormon Liberal party. Reasons for organizing the new party came from charges in the Reed Smoot hearings of continued polygamy and Church interference in politics. One of the party's chief financial backers was Senator Kearns, who had also purchased the Salt Lake Tribune. He named as editor Frank J. Cannon, who had been an influential Mormon but was now an embittered enemy of the Church. Under their leadership, the Tribune defamed the Church and specifically President Joseph F. Smith on almost a daily basis. Some commented that the infamous Nauvoo Expositor was "holy writ" when compared to the Tribune.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCSalt Lake City's Deseret News was a key medium through which the Church answered these attacks and proclaimed its message. While President Lorenzo Snow had generally desired to sell businesses in which the Church had invested during earlier times, he saw the value of maintaining an active interest in this newspaper. The Church had leased the News to a private company in 1892, but resumed direct control January 1, 1899, in the midst of the discussions surrounding Elder Roberts's election to the House of Representatives. Charles W. Penrose, an experienced and capable journalist, was reinstated as the paper's editor. The Deseret News came to be recognized as the Church's official newspaper voice, and Penrose (who became a member of the Quorum of the Twelve in 1904) made a substantial contribution in defending the Church.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCMany of the charges published in the Salt Lake Tribune were picked up by the nation's periodical press. The years 1910 and 1911 brought a revival of anti-Mormon writing in the American press. Four popular magazines particularly involved were Pearson's, Everybody's Magazine, McClure's, and Cosmopolitan. These sensationalized denunciations of the Church and its leaders displayed little understanding of the spirit and objectives of Mormon society. The depth to which criticism could sink was seen in a particularly negative series of articles in Cosmopolitan during 1911. The first article in the series, entitled "The Viper on the Hearth," was headed with an illustration of a huge snake coiled around a defenseless family. The writer asserted that the viper was the Mormon Church preparing for the time when it could inflict a fatal strike on the family structure of America and take over the nation both politically and economically. Another cartoon in the series depicted President Joseph F. Smith as the head of a huge octopus whose tentacles were reaching out to grasp education, industry, the government, and so on.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCBeing published in nationally circulated magazines, such articles did much to hurt the Church's image. They were often filled with obvious distortions of the facts. For example, the Cosmopolitan writer, who claimed to have spent several months among the Mormons researching his articles, asserted that the Saints believed that Thummim and Urim were two "stenographic angels" who aided Joseph Smith with his translation of the Book of Mormon. [^8]

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCPresident Smith chose not to respond to such charges but rather declared: "I bear no malice toward any of the children of my Father. But there are enemies of the work of the Lord as there were enemies to the Son of God. There are those who speak only evil of the Latter-day Saints. There are those-and they abound largely in our midst-who will shut their eyes to every virtue and to every good thing connected with this latter-day work, and will pour out floods of falsehood and misrepresentation against the people of God. I forgive them for this. I leave them in the hands of the just judge." [^9]

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCOpposition Overseas

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCNot only in the United States but also in Europe the Church lacked general public acceptance. Negative stories circulated by the clergy and printed in newspapers created suspicion and ill will. Missionaries frequently reported being criticized, driven out of town, and even having stones thrown at them. In 1906, the German government decreed that Mormon teachings were "subversive of morality" and ordered the Church to withdraw from the country. This forced the eight thousand German Saints to conduct the Church activities in Germany themselves. By 1910, however, a few missionaries had returned to various parts of Germany.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCA special conference directed by the Apostle Rudger Clawson convened in Berlin on July 21, 1910. "The hall was crowded with Saints and friends, but the occasion was greatly marred by the entrance of several police who unceremoniously and defiant to politeness interrupted President Clawson's speech and closed the meeting." The German members were permitted to leave, but the missionaries, the mission president, and the following day even Elder Clawson were imprisoned and then banished from Prussia. [^10]

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCIn Europe as in America, a popular theme in attacks against the Church was the supposed continuation of plural marriages. Reports from the American "muckraking" magazine crusade reached Great Britain at a time when conservatives were speaking out against the erosion of traditional Victorian virtues. British Latter-day Saints shared conservatives' concerns over growing immorality, abortion, and divorce. Ironically, however, certain crusaders made the Mormons the symbol of immoral living, and the evils of polygamy became a central theme of their lectures and rallies. Some novels and movies even followed the plot of an innocent young heroine being rescued from a crafty American missionary. In a few isolated areas emotions ran so high that anti-Mormon rallies turned to violence. Mud and rocks were hurled at chapels in Birkenhead and Nuneaton, a branch president was tarred and feathered, and missionaries were harassed out of town. In the face of such agitation, the level of convert baptisms dropped during the second decade of the twentieth century. Nevertheless, there were some sympathetic newspapers willing to publish the Church's response to such attacks. The London Evening Times, for example, carried a statement by the First Presidency explaining the Church's basic teachings and its stand on emigration and plural marriage. [^11]

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCEfforts to Create More Favorable Attitudes

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThe magazine crusade, together with earlier sensational publicity during the Roberts and Smoot elections, tended to reinforce the negative public attitudes about Mormons and Mormonism that had lingered from the nineteenth century. That had been an era of ignorance and persecution. There had been almost no contact between the main body of the Latter-day Saints and the public as a whole. In such a setting, misrepresentations were accepted as fact because most people had no personal experience with Mormons to suggest otherwise. During the opening years of the twentieth century, however, the Church took steps to remedy the problem, and some improvement resulted.

Bureau of Information/Temple SquareHCThe First Bureau of Information

Bureau of Information/Temple SquareHCAt the turn of the century, even those who came to Salt Lake City were not guaranteed to hear the truth about the Latter-day Saints. Hotel operators would send employees with carriages to meet incoming trains and vie for guests. These hack drivers made quite a business of filling visitors with wild tales about the Mormons. Both community and Church leaders were concerned about the negative image this practice was creating. Discussions among members of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association general board and the First Council of the Seventy resulted in the specific recommendation that a "bureau of information" be established on Temple Square to provide correct information to those visiting the city. In 1902 the First Presidency approved this project and assigned the Seventy to take charge of it. The first building was an octagonal structure measuring twenty feet across and costing six hundred dollars. About two dozen volunteers staffed the bureau; during its first year of operation they distributed Articles of Faith cards and other literature to 150,000 visitors. At last visitors to Salt Lake City were learning about the Mormons from the Mormons themselves.

<_HEADING __="">Temple Square in Salt Lake City soon after the Bureau of Information opened in 1902. (Church Archives)

Bureau of Information/Temple SquareHCPopularity of the guided tours of Temple Square continued to grow, and in 1906 free organ recitals were added. A new nine-thousand-dollar building was erected in 1904, and as the number of visitors continued to increase, ever more commodious facilities were provided. In later years of the twentieth century, annual visitors to the square would number in the millions.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThe "Address to the World"

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCIn April 1907, just a few weeks after the Senate had finally voted to allow Elder Reed Smoot to retain his seat, the Church took another step to present its case. The First Presidency's sixteen-page "Address to the World" was adopted by unanimous vote in general conference. This powerful yet conciliatory statement emphatically denied the charges made against the Church, and clearly set forth its major doctrines, ideals, and aspirations. It upheld the facts that Mormonism respected the sanctity of marriage, that it opposed tyranny, that its tithes were not used for the benefit of the leaders, that the Church believed in and upheld the government of the United States, and that the Church had long since abandoned plural marriage. A group of Utah ministers published a review criticizing the Church's address, but their efforts received little attention and so had minimal effect. [^12]

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCSome Positive Signs

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCIn 1911, at the peak of the "magazine crusade," the Mormon Tabernacle Choir accepted an invitation to sing at the American Land and Irrigation exposition in New York City. During their tour, the choir presented more than four dozen concerts in twenty-five cities, spending ten days at Madison Square Garden in New York City and making an appearance at the White House in Washington, D.C. The choir was well received, and favorable comments by music critics helped contribute to an improving image of the Latter-day Saints.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCAn important opportunity to present correct information about the Church came when the editors of Americana magazine invited Elder B. H. Roberts to respond to some false information published earlier. They were so pleased with his writing that they invited him to prepare a more thorough explanation of the Church's origins and history. When Elder Roberts discussed the scope of the proposed project with the editors, they agreed to expand their magazine from bimonthly publication to a monthly format and to devote most of its space to the Mormon articles. Roberts's history appeared serially from 1909 to 1915 and was later published in book form in connection with the Church's 1930 centennial. [^13]

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThe former president of the United States, Theodore Roosevelt, gave a helping hand to the Church when, on April 15, 1911, he allowed Collier's magazine to publish a letter he had written refuting many of the charges made against the Church and its leaders. In the letter he denied allegations that he had made political deals with the Mormons and strongly proclaimed the virtues and high standards of the Mormon people. [^14]<_P/>In Great Britain, an investigation initiated by Home Secretary Winston Churchill had the effect of putting to rest false reports about the Mormons that had been circulating in that land. The interest of such influential individuals as Roosevelt and Churchill augured well for a growing spirit of fairness in dealing with the Church and its members.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCAnother reflection of the changing situation was the statement made in 1916 by Charles C. Goodwin. Goodwin, who in earlier years as editor of the Salt Lake Tribune had been an outspoken enemy of the Church, said: "A more kindly and benevolent man has seldom held an exalted ecclesiastical position in these latter days than President Joseph F. Smith .... To his people he is a great spiritual leader. To men at large he is a man of wide sympathies, great business acumen, and a born leader of the great institution of which he is the head.<_P>" [^15]

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThus the opening years of the twentieth century saw the Church of Jesus Christ overcome many problems that had persisted for years. The Church's debt was paid by 1906. The last really bitter attacks in the national press appeared in 1911. That same year marked the end of the anti-Mormon American party's control of Salt Lake City politics. The Church was making headway in answering charges that had been raised by "muckraking" journalists and politicians of the Progressive Era.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCBut there was much more going on in the Church during these years. Under the leadership of President Joseph F. Smith, the Church expanded its programs, reached out to meet the needs of Saints in other lands, and helped to clarify the members' understanding of key gospel doctrines. In this way foundations were being laid for future progress.

Notes

Chapter 2. The Church in the Progressive Era

---
Notas:
[^1] Quoted in Preston Nibley, Presidents of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1959), pp. 232-33.
[^2] Joseph Fielding Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1938), pp. 160-63.
[^3] Joseph Fielding Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1938), pp. 170, 173.
[^4] Joseph Fielding Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1938), pp. 288-91.
[^5] Conference Report, April 1907, pp. 5-6.
[^6] B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1930), 6:426-30.
[^7] Joseph Fielding Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1938), pp. 425-27; Conference Report, October 1911, pp. 129-30.
[^8] Joseph Fielding Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1938), pp. 427-28.
[^9] Joseph Fielding Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1938), p. 397.
[^10] Rey L. Pratt, "History of the Mexican Mission," Improvement Era 15 (April 1912): 493,498.
[^11] Der Stern, August 1, 1906, p. 332; see also Serge F. Ballif, Conference Report, October 1920, p. 90.
[^12] Conference Report, October 1915, p. 8.
[^13] N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1947), p. 173.
[^14] Conference Report, October 1920, pp. 136-37.
[^15] James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 4:199-206.
