Richard O. Cowan, Church in the Twentieth Century ( 1985)

Chapter 3

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCJoseph F. Smith: An Era of Transition

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCPresident Joseph F. Smith led the Church during most of the first two decades of the twentieth century. His administration as well as his personal life represented important links with the past as well as with the future.

Joseph F. Smith's Earlier Life

Joseph F. Smith was born in Far West, Missouri, on November 13, 1838, in the midst of one of the most bitter periods of anti-Mormon persecution. His parents were Hyrum and Mary Fielding Smith. Within his first year, the Saints had been driven from Missouri and had commenced to build the city of Nauvoo in Illinois. He was only five years old when his father and his uncle, the Prophet Joseph Smith, were martyred in the Carthage Jail. The impression of this personal tragedy would remain with him throughout his life.

In 1848 he helped his widowed mother drive an ox team across the plains to Utah, performing most of the duties of a man. On one occasion their oxen were lost and could not be found despite a diligent search. Suddenly his mother arose and began walking toward a nearby river, even though she had been told that her oxen had been seen earlier in the opposite direction. She found them in a deep gulch by the river bank, perfectly concealed from view. "This circumstance," Joseph later reflected, "was one of the first practical and positive demonstrations of the efficacy of prayer I had ever witnessed. It made an indelible impression upon my mind and has been a source of comfort, assurance and guidance to me throughout my life." [^1]

1838November 13: Born in Far West, Missouri1844Father and uncle, Hyrum and Joseph Smith, martyred at Carthage Jail (age 5)1852Became orphan when mother died (13)1854-57Mission to Hawaii (15-18)1859Called to Salt Lake Stake high council (20) 1860-63 Mission to Great Britain1864Special assignment to Hawaii1865-74Member of territorial house of representatives 1866 Ordained as Apostle (27)1874-77Two terms as president of European Mission1878Mission to eastern U.S. to gather Church history information1880Became Second Counselor in First Presidency (41)1884-91Voluntary exile due to plural marriage persecution1901Sustained as President of the Church (63)1903Carthage Jail became first of several Church history sites purchased1904Testified at Smoot hearings; issued "Second Manifesto"1905LDS Hospital opened in Salt Lake City; monument dedicated at Joseph Smith's birthplace in Vermont1906Became first to visit Europe as Church President1909First Presidency issued statement on "The Origin of Man"1913Site dedicated for Alberta Temple1915Site dedicated for temple in Hawaii; Jesus the Christ by James E. Talmage published1916Issued doctrinal exposition on "The Father and the Son"1917New Church Administration Building occupied1918October 3: Received a vision of the redemption of the dead1918November 19: Died in Salt Lake City (80)

The family settled on a farm just southeast of Salt Lake City. The heavy responsibilities carried by Widow Smith weakened her physically, and she died in 1852, leaving her thirteen-year-old son an orphan.

At the April general conference in 1854, Joseph was one of those whose names were read in a call to fulfill missions to the Hawaiian Islands. As Elder Parley P. Pratt set the fifteen-year-old boy apart, he promised him that he would learn the Hawaiian language "by the gift of God as well as by study." [^2]In fulfillment of this blessing, Joseph was able to learn the language in only three months. "My desire to speak was very strong," he later recorded; "it was present with me night and day, and I never permitted an opportunity of talking with the natives to pass without improving it. I also tried to exercise faith before the Lord to obtain the gift of talking and understanding the language." He declared that he could teach the gospel and perform ordinances "with greater ease" in Hawaiian than he could in English. [^3]<_P/>During his three years in Hawaii he had to overcome fatigue, severe and prolonged illness, and material loss by flood and fire. The young missionary healed the sick, cast out devils, and had the opportunity of presiding over several branches of the Church. These trying as well as rewarding experiences helped him to develop an even stronger faith in his Heavenly Father and a lasting love for the Hawaiian people.

By the time Joseph F. Smith was twenty-seven years old, he had served two missions to Hawaii and another to Great Britain. He had married, had gone to work in the Church historian's office, and had been elected to the territorial legislature.

In 1866, at the age of only twenty-seven, Joseph F. Smith was ordained an Apostle by President Brigham Young, and served briefly as one of his special additional counselors. When a vacancy occurred in the Twelve the following year, Elder Smith was sustained as a member of that quorum.

During the next decade and a half, Elder Joseph F. Smith was called to preside over settlements in Utah and Davis counties respectively, to serve twice as president of the European Mission, and to direct the work in the Endowment House. One of his most interesting assignments came in 1878. He was appointed to go east with Elder Orson Pratt "to gather up records and data relative to the early history of the Church." They first went to Missouri, where they visited the temple site in Independence and had several valuable conversations with David Whitmer, one of the Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon, in nearby Richmond. They visited Elder Smith's birthplace in Far West and stopped at other places in Illinois before going on to Kirtland, Palmyra, the Hill Cumorah, and New York City. On their way back west, they contacted Elder Smith's cousin, Joseph Smith III, the president of the Reorganized Church. This trip heightened Joseph F. Smith's interest in Church history sites, many of which he was later instrumental in purchasing.

When the First Presidency was reorganized in 1880, three years following the death of Brigham Young, George Q. Cannon became the First Counselor and Joseph F. Smith the Second Counselor to President John Taylor. These same two men later served as counselors to Presidents Wilford Woodruff and Lorenzo Snow.

Unfortunately, however, Joseph F. Smith's service in the Presidency was seriously hampered by the persecution of the Saints over their practice of plural marriage. He had married six wives and eventually became the father of forty-three children, plus five more who were adopted. He therefore had to go into "exile" or "retirement" from 1884 to 1891. During this trying period he visited outlying settlements and otherwise served the Church as best he could. In 1888, for example, he was sent to Washington, D.C., to represent the Church there. He was accompanied by Charles W. Penrose, who was the editor of the Deseret News. Because of the intense prejudice against the Mormons, the two men had to travel under assumed names-President Smith being known as Jason Mack (the name of his great-uncle) and Brother Penrose as Charles Williams. During an interview, the president of the United States counseled them that if the Mormons would do away with the doctrines of prophets and revelation and abandon the practice of plural marriage, and become like everybody else, all difficulties would disappear. The brethren agreed that the predicted result would follow if they did what the president said, "but to follow such counsel was to destroy the Church and bring to naught the work which the Lord planted in the earth never again to be taken away or destroyed. [^4]

Joseph F. Smith did not come out of hiding until the proclamation of amnesty in 1891. At the October general conference the complete First Presidency was seated together on the stand for the first time in seven and a half years. The changing attitude toward the Saints during the 1890s was reflected in the fact that Joseph F. Smith, who had so recently had to spend seven years in exile, was now invited to participate in the convention called to draw up a constitution for the new state of Utah. As has been seen, this decade was only a brief lull in the storm of anti-Mormon persecution that would become one of the challenges facing Joseph F. Smith during his years as President of the Church.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCPresident Lorenzo Snow died on October 10, 1901. Just one week later the Apostles met and sustained Joseph F. Smith as the sixth President of the Church. He and his counselors were sustained at a special conference that convened in the Tabernacle on November 10. His administration would move the Church in a positive direction to reach out and bless the lives of Church members worldwide.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCAn Era of Prosperity

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCBeing the father of a large family had taught Joseph F. Smith prudent financial practices. This, plus his experience as counselor to three former Church Presidents, helped prepare him to direct the financial affairs of the Church.

<_HEADING __="">Carthage Jail in Illinois, where the Prophet Joseph Smith was martyred. The Church purchased the jail in 1904, the year after this photograph was taken. (Church Archives)

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCPresident Smith continued his predecessor's emphasis on tithe paying, and the Saints' faithful response enabled the Church to pay off all its debt by the end of 1906. It was with justifiable pride that President Smith could announce at the April general conference in 1907: "Today The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints owes not a dollar that it cannot pay at once. At last we are in a position that we can pay as we go. We do not have to borrow any more, and we won't have to if the Latter-day Saints continue to live their religion and observe the law of tithing. It is the law of revenue of the Church." [^5]This ushered in a period of prosperity that enabled the Church to undertake activities not possible when the Saints were saddled with the burden of debt.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCHistoric Sites Purchased

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCJoseph F. Smith's personal background undoubtedly heightened his interest in Church history. During his administration the Church for the first time had the funds to begin purchasing sites important in its history. These purchases would help new generations of Latter-day Saints to more fully appreciate their religious heritage and spiritual roots.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThe first of these sites to be purchased was the Carthage Jail in Illinois where President Smith's father, Hyrum, and his uncle, the Prophet Joseph Smith, had been martyred. Under his direction two acres were purchased on November 5, 1903, at a cost of four thousand dollars.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThe Church also purchased the one hundred acres which constituted the Smith homestead in Manchester township near Palmyra, New York. This property included the Sacred Grove, where the Prophet received the First Vision in 1820. The Smiths' newer home stood near the site of the earlier log structure in which Joseph met the Angel Moroni in 1823.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThrough four separate transactions Between 1905 and 1907 the Church purchased the homestead of the Mack family (Joseph Smith's maternal ancestors) and some adjoining property, totaling 283 acres. This included the site of the Prophet's birth in 1805. A "memorial cottage" or small visitors' center was constructed on the site. Nearby, an imposing monument of polished Vermont granite was erected to honor the Prophet Joseph Smith. It was dedicated by President Joseph F. Smith on December 23, 1905, the one-hundredth anniversary of the Prophet's birth. The monument stood thirty-eight and one-half feet tall, one foot for each year of the Prophet's life.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCAnother significant acquisition was in Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, the place identified by revelations as the future site of the latter-day city of Zion. A tract of twenty-five acres was acquired on April 14, 1904. It was part of the original 63 acres purchased for the Saints in 1831, anti it lies adjacent to the site which Joseph Smith dedicated for the temple in that year. A chapel and a mission home for the Central States Mission were subsequently erected on this property. The Church also established Zion's Printing and Publishing Company here. From this publishing house countless tracts, pamphlets, books, and other religious literature were furnished to the Latter-day Saint missions of North America. This operation continued until the 1940s, when it was consolidated with the Deseret News Press in Salt Lake City.

<_HEADING __="">President Joseph F. Smith (third from right in back row) and other Church leaders dedicate monument near Sharon, Vermont, in 1905 on centennial anniversary of Joseph Smith's birth. (Church Archives)

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCA final purchase of property during the first decade of the twentieth century was made at Far West in northern Missouri. Here, under unusually trying circumstances, the Twelve had dedicated a temple site in 1839 in compliance with a revealed command of the Lord. [^6]

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThese sites not only attracted Latter-day Saint visitors, but they also provided opportunities for the Church to share its message with the world. At several of them "bureaus of information" or visitors' centers, patterned after the successful program on Temple Square, were constructed to facilitate sharing the restored gospel.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCPresident Joseph F. Smith also encouraged the work of the Church historian's office. For example, Elder B. H. Roberts, one of the assistant Church historians, was assigned to edit Joseph Smith's history of the Church for publication in multi-volume form.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCImportant Building Projects

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThe Church's building program particularly benefited from the new era of prosperity. New buildings included many local meetinghouses as well as several key structures at or near Church headquarters. In 1905 the Latter-day Saints Hospital opened in Salt Lake City. Construction was financed primarily by general Church funds, to which was added a substantial donation from the estate of Dr. William S. Groves, after whom the hospital was officially named. This facility was the first in what would become a system of Church-operated hospitals during the twentieth century.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCTo finance such charitable enterprises as the LDS Hospital, as well as the Church's religious programs, President Joseph F. Smith followed the policy of making selected investments. For example, the Church maintained or acquired control of the Deseret News, Zion's Savings Bank and Trust Company, Utah-Idaho Sugar, and Beneficial Life Insurance Company. It also purchased about 25 percent of the ZCMI stock. In 1919 the Deseret Sunday School Union Book Store and the Deseret News Book Store combined to form the Church-con-trolled Deseret Book Company.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCOne of the Church's largest investments during this period was in the erection of the new Hotel Utah, which opened across the street from Temple Square in 1911. Perhaps no Church building project drew more criticism than did this one. Speaking in general conference, President Smith defended the Church's interest in this venture. He quoted from Doctrine and Covenants section 124, verse 60 and pointed out that the Hotel Utah should fill a function similar to that which the Lord had specified for the Nauvoo House-it should be a place where "the weary traveler" might find a resting place and "contemplate the glory of Zion." Responding to criticism that liquor was sold in the hotel, President Smith explained that the hotel was operated by an independent corporation, and took the occasion to urge that the Saints themselves continue to observe the Word of Wisdom faithfully. [^7]

<_HEADING __="">Church Administration Building in Salt Lake City. Completion of this structure in 1917 represented the Church's strength and stability. (Utah State Historical Society)

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCIn 1910 the Church opened the Deseret Gymnasium on the block just east of Temple Square. This new facility not only served the needs of the Latter-day Saints University located on the block, but provided for the recreational needs of the Saints in general.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCOne of the most critical needs was for adequate office space. For many years the work of the General Authorities, auxiliaries, and other Church organizations had been conducted from offices scattered around downtown Salt Lake City. The new Bishop's Building, dedicated in 1910 and located directly across the street from the Salt Lake Temple, provided accommodations for the Presiding Bishopric and most of the auxiliary organizations. Seven years later the Church Administration Building was opened at 47 East South Temple Street. This handsome five-story granite structure featured fine marble and woodwork interiors. Although some people also criticized this building as too extravagant, it provided dignified accommodations for the General Authorities and symbolized the Church's strength and stability. It also provided badly needed space for the Church historian's office and the Genealogical Society. [^8]

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThe Saints in Other Lands

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCPresident Joseph F. Smith shared President Lorenzo Snow's understanding of the Church's worldwide mission. As he continued to encourage the Saints to remain and build up the Church in their homelands, Latter-day Saint missions and branches expanded abroad. This expansion was reflected in Joseph F. Smith's becoming the first Church President to visit Europe while serving in that office.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCDuring a period of about two months in 1906, he visited the missions in the Netherlands, Germany, Switzerland, France, and England. President Smith's personal visit did much to promote the growth of Church strength in these lands. Inspirational events confirmed and strengthened the Saints' faith. In Rotterdam, Holland, he was the instrument in restoring full sight to a faithful eleven-year-old boy who had declared that he believed "the prophet has the most power of any missionary on earth" and that if "he will look into my eyes, I believe they will be healed." [^9]

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCPresident Smith returned to Europe in 1910. He also traveled to the Hawaiian Islands (four times), Canada, Mexico, and to various stakes in the western United States. Many of these travels were occasioned by the need to deal with special problems faced by the Saints in different areas, or by the happier business of preparing for the erection of new temples.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCDifficulties in Mexico

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCPresident Joseph F. Smith's administration witnessed events that would have a far-reaching impact on the future of the Church in Mexico and in adjoining sections of the United States. During the last quarter of the nineteenth century Latter-day Saints had established colonies in northern Mexico as they sought a haven from the persecution then raging north of the border. Furthermore, a mission had been established in Mexico City where a few small branches were organized. Nevertheless, because of clerical opposition in Mexico and the Saints' problems at home, the mission had been closed in 1891.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCBy the turn of the century, conditions seemed right for reopening the mission in Mexico. The Latter-day Saint colonies had become well established and were prospering; their young people, who by this time could speak Spanish fluently and were well acquainted with the Mexican culture, were now available for proselyting duties. In 1901, with the approval of the First Presidency and under the immediate supervision of the Juarez Stake, the mission in Mexico City was reopened.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCDuring the next ten years, the work prospered. The missionary force increased to twenty. President Anthony W. Ivins of the Juarez Stake made frequent visits to the mission, as did a total of six members of the Twelve from Salt Lake City. Local men and women were called and trained as leaders. They received great strength from Rey L. Pratt, who became mission president in 1907 and would preside for nearly a quarter century.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCMany new converts were added, so that by 1911, the mission's membership exceeded a thousand. In that year, President Pratt observed that "prospects were never brighter for the spreading of the gospel in this land ...." [^10]But the whirlwind of revolution had again been unleashed, and within a very short time it would disrupt the Church's progress in Mexico.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCAs revolutions and counterrevolutions swept the country, missionary work became increasingly difficult. These conditions were complicated by a growing nationalistic, anti-American sentiment. By August 1913 it was necessary to evacuate the missionaries once again.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThe Mexican Saints were left alone to take care of themselves. In San Marcos, about fifty miles northwest of Mexico City, for example, Rafael Monroy, a comparatively recent convert, was given the responsibility of serving as branch president. Just two years after the departure of the missionaries, however, the brutal forces of revolutionary conflict and religious prejudice resulted in the murders of President Monroy and his cousin, Vincente Morales, because they were accused of being members of a rival revolutionary group and because they would not deny their testimony of the gospel.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHC Mormon colonists flee their homes in northern Mexico as contending revolutionary armies maraud the area in 1912. (Church Archives)

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCIn 1912 the same forces that had disrupted missionary work also brought trouble to the colonists in northern Mexico. When rebels confiscated the Saints' arms, Mormon leaders ordered an evacuation of women and children by special train to El Paso on July 26. The men followed a few days later, coming out in a mile-long wagon caravan. By February 1913 some began returning to Mexico while others remained permanently in the United States. The revolution raged for several more years, and on repeated occasions the Mormon colonists felt they were protected by divine power.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCDuring later years the colonists' superior education programs and advanced agricultural methods would attract favorable attention for the Church. Furthermore, when the Mexican government began enforcing laws prohibiting foreign clergy from functioning, most of the missionaries in Mexico and almost all of the mission presidents, as well as the leaders in the Church's growing school system, would come from these colonists who had become Mexican citizens. In this way, the Mormon colonies provided the strength that would enable the Church in later years to grow throughout Mexico and elsewhere in Latin America.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThe difficulties in Mexico had a positive by-product even beyond the borders of that nation: They led to Church expansion in the southwestern United States. Many exiled families provided new vitality and leadership to Latter-day Saint congregations in Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas. Furthermore, in 1915 the First Presidency assigned Rey L. Pratt to take charge of proselyting among the Spanish-speaking peoples in the United States. This would become an important missionary field in later years.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCTemple Sites

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCDuring his first visit to Europe, President Joseph F. Smith made an important prophetic statement. At a conference in Bern, Switzerland in 1906, he stretched out his hands and declared: "The time will come when this land [Europe] will be dotted with temples, where you can go and redeem your dead." He also explained that "temples would be built in diverse countries of the world.<_P>" [^11]Interestingly, the first Latter-day Saint temple in Europe would be dedicated nearly a half century later in the very city where President Smith made his prophecy.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCAlthough President Joseph F. Smith did not live to see temples built in Europe, he did inaugurate the construction of the first two of these sacred edifices away from the traditional centers of Mormon colonization in Utah. He recognized the need for temples to bless Church members living in foreign lands: "They need the same privileges as we do, and that we enjoy, but these are out of their power. They are poor and they can't get the means to come up here and be endowed, and sealed for time and eternity for their living and their dead." [^12]

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCOne of these new temples was located in Cardston, Alberta, Canada. In 1888, when Elder John W. Taylor had dedicated Cardston as a location for Latter-day Saint colonization, he had declared, "I now speak by the power of prophecy and say that upon this very spot shall be erected a Temple to the name of Israel's God, and nations shall come from far and near and praise His high and holy name." Later, President Joseph F. Smith sent Presiding Bishop Charles W. Nibley to Canada to recommend the best possible sites for a temple. He brought back photographs of four locations. President Smith thoughtfully studied the pictures and, pointing to one of them, said, "I feel strongly impressed that this is the one." He had selected the same site Elder Taylor had dedicated years earlier. [^13]<_P/>President Joseph F. Smith dedicated this site in 1913 and construction commenced on the temple.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCHe also dedicated a site for a temple in Hawaii, where he had served as a missionary many years before. Following a meeting in honor of President Smith in Laie, June 1, 1915, he invited Elder Reed Smoot and Bishop Charles W. Nibley to join him for an evening walk into the nearby tropical grounds. "I never saw a more beautiful night in all my life," Elder Smoot later recalled. While they were strolling, President Smith unexpectedly confided, "I feel impressed to dedicate this ground for the erection of a Temple to God, for a place where the peoples of the Pacific Isles can come and do their temple work. ... I think now is the time to dedicate the ground." Elder Smoot continued, "I have heard President Smith pray hundreds of times... but never in all my life did I hear such a prayer. The very ground seemed to be sacred, and he seemed as if he were talking face to face with the Father. I cannot and never will forget it if I live a thousand years." Elder Smoot was convinced that nobody could love a person "more than did the natives of the islands love President Joseph F. Smith.<_P>" [^14]President Smith's action was approved by the general conference the following October. Construction on both temples was well under way at the time he died in 1918.

The First Presidency from 1901 to 1910: (from left) Joseph F. Smith, Anthon H. Lund, and John R. Winder. (Utah State Historical Society)

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCUnderstanding of Gospel Doctrines Clarified

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThe early twentieth century was a period of heated debate between religious fundamentalists and liberals or modernists. Many asked where the Mormons stood on the various theological controversies of the time. The Latter-day Saints were fortunate to have the leadership of President Joseph F. Smith, an unusually able and inspired exponent of gospel principles. A compilation of his sermons and writings is found in the volume entitled Gospel Doctrine, and Church members still look to his teachings for helpful definitions of basic gospel concepts. President Smith and his counselors in the First Presidency issued several "doctrinal expositions" clarifying the Church's stand on the issues of the day.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCPerhaps the most heated and prolonged discussions centered on the creation of the earth and the theory of organic evolution. In their 1909 statement on "The Origin of Man" the First Presidency affirmed:

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHC"God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them." In these plain and pointed words the inspired author of the book of Genesis made known to the world the truth concerning the origin of the human family ....

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCAll men and women are in the similitude of the universal Father and Mother, and are literally the sons and daughters of Deity.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHC. . . The doctrine of the pre-existence, revealed so plainly, particularly in latter-days, pours a wonderful flood of light upon the otherwise mysterious problem of man's origin. It shows that man, as a spirit, was begotten and born of heavenly parents, and reared to maturity in the eternal mansions of the Father, prior to coming upon the earth in a temporal body to undergo an experience in mortality ....

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCIt is held by some that Adam was not the first man upon this earth, and that the original human being was a development from lower orders of the animal creation. These, however, are the theories of men. The word of the Lord declares that Adam was "the first man of all men" (Moses 1:34), and we are therefore in duty bound to regard him as the primal parent of our race ....

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCMan is the child of God, formed in the divine image and endowed with divine attributes, and even as the infant son of an earthly father and mother is capable in due time of becoming a man, so the undeveloped offspring of celestial parentage is capable, by experience through ages and aeons, of evolving into a God. [^15]

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCOther discussions questioned the traditional concept that the Trinity or Godhead consisted of three persons in one. Some Latter-day Saints also wondered about the relative roles of Elohim (God the Father), Jehovah (or Jesus Christ), and Michael (or Adam). The First Presidency's 1916 exposition, "The Father and the Son," explained that "the term 'Father' as applied to Deity occurs in sacred writ with plainly different meanings" and should be carefully segregated. (1) God is "Father" as the "literal parent" of our spirits. (2)Jesus Christ is the "Father" or creator of this earth. (3) The Savior may also be regarded as the "Father" of those who receive spiritual rebirth through abiding in his gospel. And, (4) Jesus may be called "Father" as he represents Elohim by "divine investiture of authority" here on earth. Concerning the Savior's status as the "Son," the First Presidency explained:

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThere is no impropriety... in speaking of Jesus Christ as the Elder Brother of the rest of human kind .... Let it not be forgotten, however, that He is essentially greater than any and all others, by reason (1) of His seniority as the oldest or first-born; (2) of His unique status in the flesh as the offspring of a mortal mother and of an immortal, or resurrected and glorified Father; (3) of His selection and foreordination as the one and only Redeemer and Savior of the race; and (4) of His transcendent sinlessness. Jesus Christ is not the Father of the spirits who have taken or yet shall take bodies upon the earth, for He is one of them. [^16]

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCPresident Smith also shed light on a related question. Although the terms Holy Ghost and Light or Spirit of Christ are often used interchangeably, he explained that "the Holy Ghost is a personage in the Godhead," while the Light of Christ "is the Spirit of God which proceeds through Christ to the world, that lightens every man that comes into the world, and strives with the children of men, and will continue to strive with them, until it brings them to a knowledge of the truth and the possession of the greater light and testimony of the Holy Ghost." [^17]

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCDuring these years, a further contribution to gospel understanding was made by a group of particularly capable Latter-day Saint scholars. One of these was James E. Talmage, who as a young man had taught science at Brigham Young Academy and later had also served for several years as president of the University of Utah. In 1899 he delivered a very popular series of lectures on the Articles of Faith, and his material was published in book form by direction of the First Presidency. This work has gone through more than fifty editions in English, has been translated into more than a dozen other languages, and continues to be accepted by Church members as an essential exposition of Latter-day Saint theology. Two other important works followed Elder Talmage's call to the Twelve in 1911: The House of the Lord, 1912, and Jesus the Christ, 1915. Beginning in 1907, a more intense interest in gospel study was being kindled by the Seventies Course in Theology by Elder B. H. Roberts. This work contributed to the establishment of regular weekly priesthood meetings (as will be seen in the next chapter). John A. Widtsoe, an immigrant convert from Norway, drew from his training as a scientist as well as from his personal gospel study in writing A Rational Theology, 1915; he became a member of the Twelve six years later. These and other scholarly works of the period have continued to be recognized as key volumes in any Latter-day Saint's library.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCA fitting climax to these contributions to gospel understanding resulted from a marvelous experience of President Joseph F. Smith only a few weeks before his death. On October 3, 1918, while President Smith was pondering the atonement of Jesus Christ, he opened his Bible and read in 1 Pet. 3:18-20 and 4:6 about the Savior's preaching to the spirits in prison. While he was meditating on these passages, the Spirit of the Lord rested upon him and he saw in vision the "hosts of the dead" who were gathered in the spirit world. He saw the Savior appear among them and preach the gospel to the righteous. He was shown that the Lord commissioned others to continue this work of preaching, and that faithful eiders in the present dispensation would also preach to the dead after leaving mortality. In this way, all the dead may be redeemed. This "Vision of the Redemption of the Dead" was presented by President Smith to the First Presidency and the Twelve, who accepted it unanimously. In 1976 this revelation was officially added to the standard works and soon afterwards designated as D&C 138 in the Doctrine and Covenants.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThe Saints and World War I

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCWorld War I broke out in Europe in 1914. The United States did not become actively involved until three years later, after Germany had sunk several American vessels in an undeclared submarine war. The United States officially entered the conflict on April 6, 1917.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCMembers of the Church in America believed the war was being fought for noble purposes. President Wilson had declared that it was a war for the purpose of preserving democracy, liberty, and peace. Since this agreed with long-expressed feelings of the Church, members found no religious conflict in responding quickly to the call to arms.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCSince Utah was still the home of most Latter-day Saints, the response of the people of that state was a good reflection of the attitude of the Saints in general to the war. A total of 24,382 enlisted, far exceeding the quota assigned to Utah. Six of President Joseph F. Smith's own sons served in the uniform of their country. The Red Cross asked for $350,000-and received $520,000. When the government began to sell Liberty bonds, Utahns were requested to raise $6,500,000; they purchased $9,400,000 worth.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCIt was the custom for each state to raise a volunteer military unit. Utah provided the 145th Field Artillery Regiment. An overwhelming majority of its approximately fifteen hundred officers and men were members of the Church. The unit's chaplain was Elder B. H. Roberts of the First Council of the Seventy. Six hundred of this modern "Mormon Battalion" saw duty overseas.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThe Church, as an institution, participated officially in the war by purchasing $850,000 in Liberty Bonds. In addition, auxiliary organizations purchased bonds with their own funds, amounting to nearly $600,000, and women of the Relief Society actively participated with the Red Cross.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was uniquely prepared to help provide food for the starving peoples of war-torn Europe. For years the Relief Society had been storing wheat in preparation for just such an emergency, so it was able to sell over two hundred thousand bushels to the United States government. The sisters put this money into a special wheat fund for future charitable purposes.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThe prompt response of the Church and its members to the war emergency was effective evidence of the Saints' loyalty and patriotism. The American press praised their actions, fairly well canceling any negative impressions that may have lingered from the anti-Mormon magazine crusade of earlier years.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCOverseas Saints also responded patriotically to the calls of their own countries. In England, the Pudsey News reported:

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCPatriotic Latter-day Saints at Pudsey.-The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Pudsey branch, has (writes a correspondent) a record of patriotism which will be hard to beat, as every man of military age, with the exception of those engaged in government and munitions work, has enlisted. Whatever we may say about the so-called "Mormons," we must admit that they are certainly "very patriotic at Pudsey.<_P>" [^18]

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCEven in Germany, Latter-clay Saints fought for their fatherland; about seventy-five gave their lives in the conflict.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThe Church's April general conference was in session when the United States officially entered the war in 1917. The attitude of the Church toward war was well expressed in President Joseph F. Smith's opening address. He reminded the Saints that even in the face of conflict, the spirit of the gospel must be maintained. He declared that even in war the people should maintain the spirit of humanity, of love, and of peace-making. He instructed prospective soldiers to remember that they were "ministers of life and not of death," and that they should "go forth in the spirit of defending liberties of mankind rather than for the purpose of destroying the enemy." [^19]

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCLinks with the Future

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCPresident Joseph F. Smith died on November 19, 1918, just one week after the armistice was signed ending World War I. While President Smith's personal life represented important links with the past, inspired developments during his presidency formed key links with the future. An improved popular attitude toward the Latter-day Saints, financial stability, key Church buildings, and clarification of doctrinal understanding were only some of the lasting contributions of President Smith's administration.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThe opening decades of the twentieth century had seen a new generation of Church leaders assuming responsibility. While Lorenzo Snow had been a personal associate of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Joseph F. Smith was the son of the Prophet's brother and hence represented a younger generation. Furthermore, President Smith was instrumental in calling to the Quorum of the Twelve a group of men whose contributions would have a major impact during the new century. Elders Charles W. Penrose, Orson F. Whitney, James E.

General Authorities in April 1918: (standing, from left) Orrin P. Miller, Anthony W. Ivins, Charles Hart, Orson F. Whitney, David O. McKay, Rulon S. Wells, Joseph Fielding Smith, J. Golden Kimball, James E. Talmage, Stephen L. Richards, Joseph E. McMurrin, Hyrum G. Smith, Richard R. Lyman, Levi Edgar Young, David A. Smith; (seated from left) Rudger Clawson, Heber J. Grant, Anthon H. Lund, Joseph F. Smith, Charles W. Penrose, George Albert Smith, Charles W. Nibley. (Church Archives)

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCTalmage, and Joseph Fielding Smith all made substantial additions to the body of Latter-day Saint doctrinal and historical literature. A group of relatively young appointees would carry important leadership responsibilities in coming years: George Albert Smith, George F. Richards, David O. McKay, Joseph Fielding Smith (a son of President Smith), and Stephen L Richards. Three of these would later serve as Presidents of the Church.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCYet other contributions of President Joseph F. Smith's administration would bless the Saints directly. Under his leadership, the Church made significant refinements in its priesthood and auxiliary programs, and launched several important publications. These inspired developments are the subject of the following chapter.

Notes

Chapter 3. Joseph F. Smith: An Era of Transition

---
Notas:
[^1] Deseret News Weekly, April 17, 1852, p. 2.
[^2] Deseret Evening News, April 9, 1894.
[^3] James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 3:282.
[^4] Conference Report, April 1906, p. 3.
[^5] Conference Report, April 1906, p. 19.
[^6] Conference Report, April 1907, p. 5; B. N. Roberts, "Seventies Council Table," Improvement Era 11 (November 1907): 63, 65.
[^7] James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75),4:195.
[^8] "The Publications of the Church," an address given to seminary and institute teachers at BYU, July 8, 1958, p. 1.
[^9] Society for the Aid of the Sightless, Minutes, pp. 1-2, Church Archives, Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^10] Carol Anne Schuster, "LDS Church Services to the Blind Through the Society for the Aid of the Sightless: The Talmage Era" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972), pp. 21-50.
[^11] Der Stern, August 1, 1906, p. 332; see also Serge F. Ballif, Conference Report, October 1920, p. 90.
[^12] Conference Report, October 1915, p. 8.
[^13] N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1947), p. 173.
[^14] Conference Report, October 1920, pp. 136-37.
[^15] James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 4:199-206.
[^16] "The Father and the Son: A Doctrinal Exposition by the First Presidency and the Twelve," June 30, 1916; James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75),5:26-34.
[^17] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1966), pp. 67-68.
[^18] Quoted in Improvement Era 19 (February 1916): 369.
[^19] Conference Report, April 1917, p. 3.
