Richard O. Cowan, Church in the Twentieth Century ( 1985)

Chapter 4

Priesthood and Auxiliary Expansion

President Joseph F. Smith's administration witnessed a major expansion and "reform" in both priesthood and auxiliary programs. During these years the Church also standardized the schedule of basic local meetings which would be followed for most of the twentieth century.

The Church of Jesus Christ with its varied programs had been established with the goal of helping to perfect the Saints (see Eph. 4:11-13). Some have supposed that the full Church organization was restored on April 6, 1830. This, however, was not the case. Of the nine priesthood offices, duties for only four-elders, priests, teachers, and deacons-were explained in Doctrine and Covenants section 20, the revelation that directed the original organization of the Church. Other offices-bishops, high priests, patriarchs, Apostles, and seven-ties-were added during the next five years. In 1835 Doctrine and Covenants section 107 outlined the structure and functions of quorums related to these priesthood offices. The first stake was established at Kirtland, Ohio, in 1834, but the first wards were not created until five years later in Nauvoo, Illinois.

The auxiliary organizations came even later. Most developed during the time when Brigham Young presided over the Church. The first Relief Society had been organized at Nauvoo in 1842 with the object of caring for the needy and strengthening community morals. Latter-day Saint Sunday Schools had also met irregularly in both Kirtland and Nauvoo. Richard Ballantyne organized the first Sunday School in the Rocky Mountains in 1849. Neither the Relief Society nor the Sunday School, however, was formally established Church-wide until the 1860s. At that time President Brigham Young directed Eliza R. Snow to promote the establishment of Relief Societies in every branch of the Church, and Elder George Q. Cannon headed the first union organization of the formerly independent local Sunday Schools. President Young personally organized the forerunner of the Young Woman's Mutual Improvement Association in 1869 and a similar association for the Young Men in 1875. These programs helped the young people to live the gospel more fully and provided them with intellectual and cultural development. Finally, Aurelia Spencer Rogers started the first Primary in 1878, the year following Brigham Young's death. This organization provided weekday religious training for Latter-day Saint boys and girls.

In 1890, when a Utah territorial law prohibited all religious instruction in public schools, Church leaders recognized the continuing necessity of more thorough practical training of the children of the Latter-day Saints in the requirements of the gospel and therefore established Religion Classes throughout the Church. Like the Primary, the new classes met in a Church building after school hours, generally one afternoon each week. The Religion Classes emphasized religious instruction, while the Primary featured religious activities. These two organizations would function side by side until finally being merged in 1929.

Even though priesthood quorums and auxiliary associations were established during the nineteenth century, the programs sponsored by these organizations underwent substantial development and expansion during the years immediately preceding and following the beginning of the twentieth century. A person who had been active in the Church prior to 1890 might scarcely be able to recognize the programs that developed during the following two or three decades. These changes not only affected the work of the priesthood and the auxiliaries but had an impact on the Saints' basic meeting pattern as well.

1842Relief Society organized in Nauvoo1849First Sunday School in the Rocky Mountains1866Juvenile Instructor published by George Q. Cannon1869Cooperative Retrenchment Association, forerunner of YWMIA1875Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association founded1878Primary Association started1890Religion Classes organized1894Communitywide sacrament meetings discontinued1896Fast day shifted from Thursday to Sunday1897Conference Reports and Improvement Era inaugurated1901Juvenile Instructor became official organ of the Sunday School1902New edition of the Pearl of Great Price approved; Children's Friend published by the Primary; Mothers' Classes added to the Relief Society1904Society for the Aid of the Sightless organized1906Sunday School conducted first class for adults; President Joseph F. Smith anticipated emphasis on priesthood1907Committee on Adjustments recommended consolidations1908General Priesthood Committee called1909Weekly ward priesthood meetings commenced1910Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine inaugurated1911YMMIA adopted Boy Scouts program1915Relief Society Magazine instituted1920-21Improved editions of standard works published1929Improvement Era and Young Woman's Journal amalgamated1931Weekly Church Section launched by Salt Lake's Deseret News

Developments in Basic Meetings

Significant modifications in the pattern of sacrament and fast meetings occurred during the 1890s. Changes in two other important Sunday meetings-Sunday School and priesthood meetings-followed during the next decade and will be considered in later sections of this chapter.

Sacrament Meetings

The scriptures have directed that members of the Church meet together often to instruct and strengthen one another and to partake of the sacrament (see D&C 20:45, 75; 43:8). Although the basic objectives have remained constant, the pattern of these meetings has changed over the years to meet varying needs and conditions.

The schedule the early pioneers were to follow was outlined at the April general conference in 1852:

President Young then gave notice that from henceforth we should hold meetings regularly each Sabbath at 10 A.M., and 2 P.M., and in the evening, the several quorums of the priesthood would assemble to receive instructions. On Thursdays the brethren and sisters would come together at 2 P.M. for prayer and supplication; and on the first Thursday in each month, at 10 A.M., for the purpose of fasting and prayer, calling on the saints to observe that day. [^1]

In some of the larger centers, such as Salt Lake City and Provo, it became customary to hold just one worship service at a central location on Sunday afternoons, and the sacrament was administered in these meetings rather than in the separate wards. In 1894, however, Church leaders directed that the administration of the sacrament should be moved to the regular Sunday evening services held in each ward. [^2]<_P/>Thus, the ward sacrament meeting became a Churchwide practice.

Sacrament meeting Attendance

Fast Day

The familiar pattern for fast meetings developed in very early times. By 1896, however, new patterns of life made a shift in the fast day advisable. In an official statement, the First Presidency explained the reasons for the change:

Shortly after the arrival of the people in the valley of the Great Salt Lake, the first Thursday in each month was set apart as a day of fasting and prayer. The members of the Church were enjoined to bring on that day their contributions for the relief and sustenance of the poor, and hand them to the Bishop of the ward.

At the time of the adoption of this regulation it was very convenient for the people generally to meet together in their places of worship on that day. The conditions were such that they, being of one faith, employers and employed, could leave their labor and devote a few hours to the Lord ....

As the years rolled by, conditions changed, and it became more difficult for the people generally, and especially those in steady employment, to attend these meetings, until at the present time they have dwindled to such an extent that comparatively few have the opportunity of attending them. Thursday as a day of fasting and prayer in the Church no longer serves the object for which it was intended.

Our attention has been called to this subject, and after mature deliberation, it has been decided to change the day that has heretofore been devoted to this purpose. Instead of the customary assemblages in the various wards throughout Zion on the first Thursday in each month, we have concluded to set apart the first Sunday in every month as the day for the regular fast meetings.

Hereafter, therefore, we desire the Latter-day Saints, under the direction of the Presidents of Stakes and the Bishops, to meet in their several places of worship on the afternoon of the first Sunday in each month, whenever it can be done conveniently, and devote the meeting to the administration of the Sacrament, to the bearing of testimony by the members of the Church, to the blessing of children and the confirming of members in the Church, and to such other services as have usually been attended to at such meetings. [^3]

Auxiliary Expansion

The Church's auxiliary organizations were most greatly affected by the developments during the opening years of the twentieth century. Although specific changes varied from one organization to another, they generally involved an improvement in teaching methods and materials directed to specific age groups, a greater emphasis on the scriptures rather than on secular materials, and a greater role for each organization's general leaders.

Opportunities for Learning

During the nineteenth century the Latter-day Saints had been in the forefront of educational development. The School of the Prophets in the 1830s, for example, had been one of the nation's first adult education programs. At the dawning of the twentieth century the Saints were again in the lead as several of the Church's organization's commenced new instructional programs especially for adults.

During the nineteenth century the Relief Society had stressed "compassionate service" and had emphasized sewing or other projects directly related to assisting the needy. In 1902, however, the Society inaugurated a greater emphasis on education. Special eight-month nursing courses taught care for the sick. Mothers' Classes, launched Churchwide that same year, became the forerunners of a much broader uniform curriculum that would be introduced a few years later. At first local Relief Societies provided their own study materials, but in 1914 the general board began providing uniform lessons for these weekly classes. The pattern soon developed to feature theology the first week, and then studies of homemaking, literature, and social science, respectively, during the other weeks of the month.

Relief Society general board in 1916, at a time when this organization was unfolding its education programs and launching its own magazine. (Utah State Historical Society)

Even after the turn of the century the Sunday School still remained an organization only for children. The first class for adults, the Parents' Class, was not inaugurated Churchwide until 1906, just four years after the Relief Society had instituted its Mothers' Class. At this time, David O. McKay had a profound impact on Sunday School development. As a young returned missionary at the turn of the century, he was called to be a member of the Weber Stake Sunday School superintendency and to give particular attention to instruction. He introduced refinements in teaching methods, such as defining lesson goals, outlining materials, using teaching aids, anti making practical application of lessons to daily life. Students were "graded" according to age, and a specific course was developed for each age group, to be used throughout the stake. In 1906 Elder McKay was called to the Council of the Twelve and also became a member of the Sunday School general superintendency; in this position he was able to promote these improvements throughout the Church. During the following years a thorough departmentalization of Sunday School work was accompanied by an improvement of published lesson materials.

Priesthood quorums also commenced regular lesson work, as will be seen below. Furthermore, the opening years of the twentieth century saw the addition of college-level classes to several of the Church's schools and the inauguration of seminaries for high school students.

Improved Activities

During the nineteenth century the Young Men's and Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Associations had followed similar but separate patterns of development. Originally the two MIAs met separately, consistent with the wishes of Brig-ham Young, who did not want the sessions to degenerate into "courting meetings." Following the turn of the century, the move to unite the two associations gained impetus, and by 1914 joint meetings had become a rule. At first, MIA meetings had consisted of lectures on theology, science, history, and literature-the four designated areas of emphasis. Formal class-work was introduced about 1890, but until after the turn of the century just one large class was held for all ages. Several local groups, however, felt the need to separate the younger and older members.

Relief Society Activity

(Beginning in September 1971, all Latter-day Saint women were automatically enrolled in Relief Society.)

By 1903 the practice of conducting separate junior and senior groups had been implemented Churchwide. In 1911 the Young Men's organization adopted the growing Boy Scout program, and the Church eventually became one of the largest sponsors of this international movement. In 1913 the Young Ladies adopted the Campfire Girls summer program, but they replaced it the following year with the Church's own year-round Beehive Girls program. Later years saw the formation of still other age-group programs to better serve the needs of the youth. As the Sunday Schools, and especially the priesthood quorums, expanded their theological study, this was dropped from MIA activity. As more and more Latter-clay Saints moved into the cities, Church leaders became concerned that the new environment and increased leisure would erode traditional virtues and family life. They therefore placed increasing emphasis on modesty, chastity, and marriage within the Church. Leaders encouraged the youth to avoid pool halls, card games, non-LDS dances, and Sunday sports. The wards, which were at the center of Mormon community life, sponsored more picnics, excursions, and other well-supervised recreational activities. The MIAs also expanded their music, dance, speech, drama, and sports activities.

Similarly, the Primary Association enhanced its educational and activity programs for children. Special class names and emblems were introduced to increase interest: boys became known as "Trail Builders" and girls as "Home Builders." The Primary even opened its own children's hospital in 1922. A few years earlier, Louie B. Felt, president of the Primary, and May Anderson, one of her counselors, had seen a crippled child and felt impressed that their organization should do something for such children. They studied the latest methods used in children's hospitals in the eastern United States before going ahead with this project.

Following the lead of the Sunday School, the other auxiliary organizations began "grading" their classes for specific age groups. They increasingly adopted centrally prepared uniform lessons. The opening years of the twentieth century also brought a greater emphasis on regional conventions and general auxiliary conferences for the training and motivation of local workers. All these developments tended to strengthen the role of the auxiliaries' general boards.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThe Priesthood Reform Movement

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCAt the height of this rapid auxiliary expansion, President Joseph F. Smith looked forward to a time when the priesthood would again occupy a position of preeminence. At the April general conference in 1906 he declared:

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCWe expect to see the day, if we live long enough (and if some of us do not live long enough to see it, there are others who will), when every council of the Priesthood in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will understand its duty; will assume its own responsibility, will magnify its calling, and fill its place in the Church, to the uttermost, according to the intelligence and ability possessed by it. When that day shall come, there will not be so much necessity for work that is now being done by the auxiliary organizations, because it will be done by the regular quorums of the Priesthood. The Lord designed and comprehended it from the beginning, and he has made provision in the Church whereby every need may be met and satisfied through the regular organizations of the Priesthood. It has truly been said that the Church is perfectly organized. The only trouble is that these organizations are not fully alive to the obligations that rest upon them. When they become thoroughly awakened to the requirements made of them, they will fulfill their duties more faithfully, and the work of the Lord will be all the stronger and more powerful and influential in the world. [^4]

Speaking at the same conference, Elder J. Golden Kimball of the First Council of the Seventy assessed even more bluntly the need for a revival of priesthood activity:

The auxiliaries have been urged forward with great enthusiasm... [and] these organizations are to the front. The priesthood quorums are apparently weary in well doing .... They have become lax in their work and let loose their hold. While the auxiliary organizations have taken the right of way, the priesthood quorums stand by looking on awe-struck .... So the auxiliary organizations are going way up the hill and we, the priesthood quorums, stand down in the valley and look on. [^5]

Records indicate that during the later nineteenth century, priesthood meetings were held at varying intervals. Most quorums met only monthly. Customarily these gatherings were held on various week nights rather than on Sunday, and all the quorums within a given ward did not usually meet at the same time. With such infrequent and often irregular meetings, the priesthood quorums' effectiveness declined. By the beginning of the twentieth century, Church leaders lamented that less than half of Latter-day Saint men were active in their priesthood quorums. The leaders suspected that one problem was the growing popularity of fraternal lodges. They believed that all needs-spiritual and temporal-should be met by the Church, and that the priesthood quorums themselves should provide true brotherhood.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThe revival of priesthood activity appears to have started among the seventies. In 1907 President Joseph F. Smith reminded them of their responsibility to be prepared for missionary service. They should not depend on the auxiliaries or Church schools for their knowledge of the gospel, but, he exhorted, make their own quorums "schools of learning and instruction wherein they may qualify themselves for every labor that may be required at their hands." In November of that same year, Elder B. H. Roberts of the First Council of the Seventy announced the "New Movement" among the seventies. It would include study of The Seventies Course in Theology each Sunday morning. "To become a seventy," he declared, "means mental activity, intellectual development, and the attainment of spiritual power." The Improvement Era became the official vehicle through which monthly instructions were received by these priesthood quorums. [^6]The success of these efforts among the seventies attracted admiration and led to a broadening of the reform movement.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCWeekly Ward Priesthood Meetings

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCIn 1908, to give direction to the revitalization of the priesthood and specifically to provide lesson materials for Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthood quorums, the First Presidency appointed a General Priesthood Committee. David O. McKay became committee chairman, and other General Authorities served as members. One of the committee's most far-reaching recommendations was for the inauguration of weekly ward priesthood meetings.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCIn 1909 the First Presidency explained the advantages of implementing this new plan:

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCSpecial attention is called to the weekly meetings of the priesthood quorums in all wards. We believe this movement will not only increase the proficiency of the priesthood by reason of its educative features, but by bringing all the brethren together once a week they will acquire the habit of regular activity as servants of the Lord. It has the additional advantage of putting the bishop in communication with every home once a week. We like the idea of these weekly reunions of the fathers of the ward with their sons and associates. [^7]

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCMelchizedek Priesthood Activity

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCAt first these ward priesthood meetings were scheduled for Monday evenings. This time, however, interfered with evening chores, especially in farming areas, so Sunday morning gradually became the preferred time.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThe General Priesthood Committee increased the effectiveness of these ward meetings by providing uniform courses of study to be used throughout the Church. This committee continued preparing these lessons for the quorums until it was released in 1923. After that time, responsibility for the Melchizedek Priesthood was assigned directly to the Council of the Twelve, and for the Aaronic Priesthood to the Presiding Bishopric.

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCAaronic Priesthood Age Groupings

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCAnother important accomplishment of the priesthood reform movement was systematizing ordinations to offices in the Aaronic Priesthood at specified ages. As early as 1877, the First Presidency had endorsed the practice of ordaining young men to the lesser priesthood to give them needed experience before they received the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood. Although it became typical to ordain boys to the office of deacon at age twelve, no ages were fixed for ordination to subsequent offices. In 1908 the General Priesthood Committee recommended that deacons be ordained at twelve, teachers at fifteen, priests at eighteen, and elders at twenty-one, thus giving young men three years' experience in each Aaronic Priesthood office. Standardizing the ages of ordination enabled the committee to more effectively plan the program for each priesthood group. The concept of set ages for ordination has continued even though some of the ages have been modified.

Key Developments in Church Publications

From the time that Joseph Smith read in the Bible James's exhortation "to ask of God," the printed word has played a key role in the unfolding of the Lord's work on earth. As Elder Mark E. Petersen declared: "I feel that our publications and communication system are positively essential, vital, and basic to the life blood of the Church." [^8]The early years of the twentieth century brought a variety of important developments in Church literature. With the rapid expansion of priesthood and auxiliary programs, new lesson outlines and other instructions were published. Church organizations either inaugurated magazines or made greater use of existing ones to help promote their programs. These years brought important improvements even to the published editions of scriptural works.

Developments in Periodicals

While the Latter-day Saints had been active in publishing newspapers and magazines since as early as 1831, most of the publications that became best known during the twentieth century date from the years immediately preceding or following the turn of the century. Many of the nineteenth-century publications had been sponsored by private individuals or groups. Those dating from the early twentieth century, on the other hand, were all published under the auspices of individual Church organizations, particularly the auxiliaries.

When the Juvenile Instructor was inaugurated in 1866, it had been a personal project of Elder George Q. Cannon, who saw the magazine as a means of teaching the gospel to the youth of the Church. This semimonthly publication is credited as being the first magazine for children published between the Mississippi River and the Pacific Coast. Following Elder Cannon's death in 1901, the Deseret Sunday School Union purchased the magazine from the Cannon family and made it the Sunday School's official organ. In 1908 it became a monthly publication, and during the first decades of the twentieth century it carried Sunday School lesson materials. Just as the Sunday School added adult classes, so also was the field of the magazine enlarged. The periodical's broadened scope was reflected in 1930 when the word Juvenile was dropped from the title.

In 1897 the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association replaced its Contributor with a new periodical entitled The Improvement Era. Joseph F. Smith of the First Presidency and B. H. Roberts of the First Council of the Seventy were editors, and Elder Heber J. Grant of the Twelve was the business manager. In 1929 this magazine was merged with the Young Woman's Journal, which had been published since 1889 by the Young Ladies' MIA. Gradually the enlarged Improvement Era came to be recognized as the basic Church magazine for adults.

Beginning in 1872, a group of women, some of whom were members of the Relief Society general board, began publishing the Woman's Exponent. When the Relief Society began supplying lesson materials to be taught in its weekly meetings Churchwide, this provided the basis for launching its own official magazine in 1915.

Two other organizations launched periodicals during the first decade of the twentieth century. These were the Children's Friend, started by the Primary Association in 1902, and the Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, a quarterly published by the Genealogical Society beginning in 1910.

Development of Church Magazines

Albert Talmage published a braille magazine and directed the Church's programs for the blind during the opening decades of the twentieth century. Here, aided by his sister, he prints an issue of the monthly Messenger to the Sightless. (Improvement Era photo)

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCLiterature for the Blind

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCSince the beginning of the twentieth century, the Church has provided religious literature to a special group of members. In 1904 the Society for the Aid of the Sightless was created under the direction of President Joseph F. Smith. It was charged with the responsibility of publishing literature for the blind, "aiding in their education, endeavoring to improve their condition, becoming interested in all that pertains to their welfare," and cooperating with others as opportunity came to work for these ends through education and legislation. [^9]

Administration of Joseph F. SmithHCThe lack of such literature as braille scriptures, hymns, or lesson materials was a substantial obstacle to blind Latter-day Saints' becoming fully involved in the mainstream of Church activity. Largely through the efforts of Albert M. Talmage (a blind brother of the Apostle) and his wife, Sarah, the society worked to fill this void. Beginning in 1912, a monthly braille periodical, The Messenger to the Sightless, published materials of religious and general interest.

Publishing the Book of Mormon in braille was an important project for Albert and Sarah Talmage. They had to prepare the metal printing plates by hand. The special braille paper had to be moistened thoroughly before the dots could be embossed by means of a hand-powered press. Completed pages were then hung up to dry on clotheslines that had been strung all around the Talmages' home. As the embossed braille pages became available, they were distributed piecemeal to eagerly waiting readers. By the early 1930s, however, only the first half of the book had been brailled. At this point the Church decided to have the entire book embossed by a national braille publisher and in 1936 the book appeared in seven large braille volumes. Copies were made available to individuals and were also sent to Latter-day Saint missions around the world. [^10]<_P/>Since then the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price, and a few other Church books have also been released in braille.

During the second half of the twentieth century the programs launched by Albert and Sarah Talmage would undergo substantial expansion. In 1953 the braille magazine was expanded greatly and renamed The New Messenger. Five years later a significant step was taken, in the inauguration of a magazine in recorded form. Lesson manuals for adults, as well as several other Church works, have also been released on "talking book" records. All these materials were made available free of charge to libraries and to blind individuals free or at a nominal cost.

The Standard Works

Latter-day Saints accept four volumes as the standard works, or canonized scriptures, of the Church. Faith in the Bible is shared with other Christians, but the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price are unique to the restored gospel. The original publication of all three of these volumes of scripture took place during the nineteenth century.

Translation of the Book of Mormon was completed in June 1829, and the first edition was published in March 1830, just prior to the organization of the Church. In 1831 a special conference directed that a compilation of revelations given through Joseph Smith be published. This became known as the Doctrine and Covenants. The Pearl of Great Price, "a selection from the revelations, translations, and narrations of Joseph Smith," as compiled by Elder Franklin D. Richards of the Council of the Twelve and president of the British Mission, was first published in England in 1851.

The present verse divisions, together with improved historical notes and cross-references prepared by Elder Orson Pratt, were features of new editions of the Doctrine and Covenants in 1876 and of the Book of Mormon in 1879. A similar new edition of the Pearl of Great Price was prepared under the supervision of Elder James E. Talmage in 1902.

The general conference assembled on October 10, 1880, voted to accept the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price as revelations of God to the Church and to the world.

A new edition of the Book of Mormon appeared in 1920, and new editions of the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price in 1921. Improvements in these new editions included printing the text in two columns to make reading easier, adding headings or superscriptions to introduce and summarize the contents of each chapter or section, amplifying footnotes, and adding an index to each of these three scriptural works. The new edition of the Book of Mormon also included an account of its origin, an analysis of the various sets of plates from which it was translated, a chronology, and a new pronouncing vocabulary. Useful additions to the Doctrine and Covenants included a brief history of its beginnings, together with a chronological summary of its contents. The 1921 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants also omitted the "Lectures on Faith," which formerly had been published along with the revelations; these lectures never had been accepted formally by the Church as anything more than theological lessons.

Future Developments Anticipated

While the opening years of the twentieth century witnessed many substantial developments in priesthood and auxiliary activity, still others were considered but would not be achieved until later. In 1906 President Joseph F. Smith anticipated a time when the priesthood quorums would more fully assume their proper role in Church government and activity. Many Church leaders have referred to the unfolding of "priesthood correlation" during the 1960s as a fulfillment of President Smith's prophecy. Then in 1907 a Committee on Adjustments and Correlation recommended that the Primary and the similar Religion Class programs be merged; this was achieved in 1929. The committee also suggested that all of the Church's magazines for adults be consolidated. Important steps in this direction were taken when the Improvement Era absorbed the formerly separate Young Woman's Journal in 1929, the Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine in 1940, and the Liahona-Elder's Journal in 1945. The goal was fully realized when in 1971 the Ensign replaced all other LDS magazines in English for adults. The 1907 committee also proposed that focus be placed on the home as the prime place for teaching the gospel. This recommendation was echoed in President Smith's 1915 call for regular home evenings Churchwide. The formal family home evening program was instituted fifty years later. All of these developments will be treated in later chapters.

Notes

Chapter 4. Priesthood and Auxiliary Expansion

---
Notas:
[^1] Francis M. Gibbons, Heber J. Grant: Man of Steel Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979), p. 13.
[^2] Heber J. Grant, Gospel Standards, comp. G. Homer Durham (Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1941), pp. 11-12.
[^3] Heber J. Grant, Gospel Standards, comp. G. Homer Durham (Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1941), pp. 342-43.
[^4] Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1951), pp. 40-42; Heber J. Grant, "Work, and Keep Your Promises," Improvement Era 3 (January 1900): 196-97; "Learning to Sing," Improvement Era 3 (October 1900): 886-90.
[^5] Heber J. Grant, Diary, Dec. 20, 1931, MS, Church Archives, Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^6] Heber J. Grant in Conference Report, October 1922, pp. 2-3; Ronald W. Walker, "Young Heber J. Grant and His Call to the Apostleship" Brigham Young University Studies 18 (Fall 1977): 121-26.
[^7] James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 2:348.
[^8] Heber J. Grant to Mrs. Parley Fenn, Feb. 13, 1931, MS, Church Archives.
[^9] Preston Nibley, The Presidents of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1959), p. 305.
[^10] Joseph Anderson, Prophets I Have Known (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1973), p. 25.
