Richard O. Cowan, Church in the Twentieth Century ( 1985)

Chapter 5

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCHeber J. Grant Begins His Administration

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe year 1918 marked a major milestone or turning point in the course of world and Church events. In the world, it brought the end of hostilities and a turning to peace. Then, within two weeks of the November 11 armistice, President Joseph F. Smith died and Heber J. Grant became the new leader of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Not only did the Church get a new President, but as Heber J. Grant began his administration new patterns could also be seen in several aspects of Saints' activities. While the nineteenth century had been an era of gathering, the 1920s saw the first substantial outward migration from the centers of Mormon settlement in the Intermountain states. A world tour of missions by Elder David O. McKay further reflected the Church's outward reach. During this decade the Saints also commemorated important events that had occurred just a hundred years earlier. Thus the Saints' appreciation of their historical heritage was being strengthened at the same time as they were moving out into new spheres of activity. Many facets of this heritage and of the Church's experience were reflected in the personal life of President Heber J. Grant.

1856November 22: Born in Salt Lake City; father died nine days later1875Member of first local YMMIA superintendency (18)1880Called to serve as president of Tooele Stake (23)1882Filled vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve (25)1897Member of general YMMIA superintendency1901Appointed to open new mission in Japan (45)1904-6Presided over European Mission1918Became President of the Church (62)1919Dedicated Hawaii Temple; Church membership reached half a million1923Dedicated Alberta Temple1927Arizona Temple dedicated1928Purchase of Hill Cumorah completed1930Church celebrated its centennial1933Prohibition of alcohol repealed1936Churchwide Welfare Plan organized1937Visited missions in Europe1939Missionaries withdrawn from Europe as World War II began1941Assistants to the Twelve appointed1945May 14: Died in Salt Lake City (88)

Heber J. Grant's Earlier Life

Heber J. Grant represented a personal link with the early leaders of the Restoration. He was the son of Jedediah M. Grant, a New York convert, who became the first mayor of Salt Lake City and a counselor to President Brigham Young. Heber's mother, Rachel Ivins, however, had been sealed to Joseph Smith after his death and before her marriage to Jedediah. Thus, in terms of eternal family relationships, Heber J. Grant considered himself a son of the Church's first prophet, a heritage which he valued highly. [^1]He was the first Church President to be born after the Saints' exodus to the Rocky Mountains, being born in Salt Lake City in 1856, just nine years after the Mormon pioneers had arrived there. As a boy, Heber was very close to Brigham Young's family and became well acquainted with the great colonizer.

Heber was not to enjoy the companionship or counsel of his earthly father. Jedediah died suddenly at the age of forty, only nine days after Heber's birth. A talented, faithful, and persistent mother would be the major guiding light of Heber's childhood and youth. Rachel supported herself and her son by sewing and taking in boarders. Sometimes she worked at her foot-powered sewing machine for so many hours that her legs gave out, and she would have Heber help by working the treadle with his hands. Through such experiences young Heber learned lessons of thrift and industry, which would be important virtues to teach the Saints during the Great Depression of the 1930s.

His mother was convinced that Heber was a child of destiny. She cherished promises made to him during his childhood and had faith they would be fulfilled, if, and only if, he lived to be worthy of them. To this end she admonished him: "Behave yourself, Heber, and some day you will be an Apostle." After he was called to the Council of the Twelve, she reminded him of occasions when Heber C. Kimball and also Eliza R. Snow had prophesied that he would "become an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ." Elder Kimball, who like Jedediah was a counselor to Brigham Young in the First Presidency, had further prophesied that young Heber would "become a greater man in the Church" than his own father. His mother then added: "That is why I told you to behave yourself." [^2]

Overcoming Difficulties

At the youthful age of seventeen, Heber J. Grant outlined what he hoped to accomplish in his life, and then he persisted until he had achieved his goals. Ralph Waldo Emerson's words became a favorite motto: "What we persist in doing becomes easy to do, not that the nature of the task has changed, but that our capacity to do has increased." This principle was carried out repeatedly in the life of Heber J. Grant. For instance, he overcame physical frailty to develop his skill as a baseball player. When he joined a baseball club, he was permitted to play only with much younger boys, but he determined that one day he would play on the team that would win the territorial championship. He later recalled how he reached this goal:

My mother was keeping boarders... and I shined their boots until I saved a dollar which I invested in a baseball. I spent hours and hours throwing the ball against Bishop Edwin D. Woolley's barn, which caused him to refer to me as the laziest boy in the Thirteenth Ward. Often my arm would ache so that I could scarcely go to sleep at night. But I kept on practicing ....

Through these efforts Heber eventually succeeded in playing with the team that took the championship of Utah Territory and defeated champion teams from neighboring areas. [^3]<_P/>He also overcame the problem of poor handwriting, winning prizes at fairs and obtaining a coveted position as a bookkeeper because of his excellent penmanship.

Being tone-deaf, he was challenged by his inability to sing. Nevertheless, he was determined to practice. After becoming a member of the Twelve, he humorously admitted: "Upon my recent trip to Arizona, I asked Elders Rudger Clawson and J. Golden Kimball if they had any objections to my singing one hundred hymns that day. They took it as a joke and assured me that they would be delighted .... After I had sung about forty times, they assured me that if I sang the remaining sixty they would have nervous prostration. I paid no attention whatever to their appeal but held them to their bargain and sang the full one hundred." [^4]Many years later he must have derived some personal satisfaction when he learned that because he had been seated close to the microphone during a radio broadcast from the Tabernacle, listeners seemed to hear him singing a solo accompanied by the choir and organ. [^5]

Important Church responsibilities came to Heber at a young age. When the first Mutual Improvement Association was organized in the Salt Lake Thirteenth Ward in 1875, eighteen-year-old Heber J. Grant was a member of its superintendency. He subsequently helped pioneer this movement throughout the Church. At age twenty-three he was called to be president of the Tooele Stake in western Utah; he accepted this call even though it required him to move away from Salt Lake City at just the time he was getting established in his business career. Then, two years later, he was called to fill a vacancy in the Council of the Twelve Apostles.

Call to the Apostleship

President Grant later recalled the circumstances of his call to be a General Authority:

I met the late Elder George Teasdale at the south gate of the Tabernacle grounds. He shook hands with me and said: "Brother Grant, I am delighted to see you. You and I are going to be-" and he stopped suddenly and his face turned red. But the Lord gave me the balance of the sentence. The balance of Brother Teasdale's sentence was-"sustained this afternoon as apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ to fill the vacancies in the Quorum." And that went through me like a shock of electricity. Those of you who were at that conference remember that it adjourned without filling those vacancies. I do not believe any mortal man ever more humbly supplicated God during the next few days to forgive him for his egotism than I did for thinking I was to be chosen an apostle.<_P> [^6]

Within a week, President John Taylor published a revelation which read in part: "Thus said the Lord to the Twelve, and to the Priesthood and people of my Church: Let my servants George Teasdale and Heber J. Grant be appointed to fill the vacancies in the Twelve, that you may be fully organized and prepared for the labors devolving upon you, for you have a great work to perform .... " [^7]

Even though this call was preceded by a spiritual premonition and came in the form of a written revelation, still Elder Grant did not feel comfortable in his new position. He later wrote:

I felt that the honor was beyond anything that ought to have come to me, that I was too young, too inexperienced and really unworthy of such a great honor. The adversary tried to convince me that I should resign. On more than one occasion when I would testify of my knowledge that Jesus is the Savior it seemed-although I did not hear a voice-as though I was told: "You lie. You have never seen the Savior, and you have no right to testify of him." On more than one occasion I woke up in the night with a strong feeling: You ought to resign; you ought to resign as an apostle.

I was riding through the Navajo Indian reservation in Arizona .... I was feeling very, very depressed. All at once I stopped the mule on which I was riding, and, in the language of Nephi, "I seemed to see," I didn't see but I seemed to see a council in heaven, where they were discussing the fact that the general conference of the Church had adjourned and that no choice had been made to fill the two vacancies in the quorum of the Apostles. A general discussion ensued, and the Prophet and my father favored sending a revelation that I should be one of the two persons chosen to fill those vacancies. I had with me a copy of the revelation to John Taylor calling George Teasdale and myself to the apostleship, and I took it out of my pocket and sat there and wept for joy to think that it had been manifested to me that the Prophet Joseph and my father had interceded in my behalf. [^8]

In 1877 Heber J. Grant had married Lucy Stringham, and in 1884 he married Emily Wells and Augusta Winters. This thrust him into the midst of the difficulties caused by the anti-plural marriage persecution of the late nineteenth century. By the time he became President of the Church, however, only Augusta was still living. Despite the many demands placed on his time as a General Authority, Heber J. Grant consistently was a considerate husband and devoted father. His ten daughters and their families always had an important place in his life.

Elder Grant's mission to Japan was one of the most challenging assignments he ever received. The ability to converse in Japanese did not come easily to him but required much tedious effort. After about two years Elder Grant went out into a woods and prayed, saying that when his work was finished in Japan, he would "appreciate it" if he were called to the British Isles. Two or three days after uttering that prayer he received a cable to come home on the first vessel. [^9]Soon after his return from Japan his prayer was answered; he was sent to preside over the British Mission for three years. These experiences did much to round out his personal understanding of the opportunities as well as the challenges facing the Church worldwide.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCPresident Grant's Character and Teachings

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCFollowing the death of President Joseph F. Smith in November 1918, Heber J. Grant became the seventh prophet and President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He was not sustained publicly for several months, however. Because of the serious flu epidemic, the general conference normally held in April was not convened until June 1, 1919. On that occasion President Grant was sustained in a solemn assembly, the vote being cast by individual priesthood groups. He would preside longer than any other president except Brigham Young. His twenty-seven-year administration stretched from the conclusion of World War I to the end of World War II.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCPresident Grant delegated much of the detailed administrative responsibility for ecclesiastical programs to his capable counselors, leaving him more time to make important contributions in the realms of business affairs and personal relations. Heber J. Grant was at home with the financial leaders and chief executives of many of the nation's largest corporations. They were his personal friends who "welcomed him warmly" and listened as he related faith-promoting experiences or spoke of the Saints' aspirations. These businessmen "found in President Grant a man of simple faith, one whose utter frankness bespoke an honesty that could be relied upon implicitly .... " [^10]These contacts were not only an important force in developing a more favorable attitude toward the Church and its members but were also vital in securing aid during periods of financial difficulty. On several occasions he was instrumental in arranging necessary financing for Church-related enterprises.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCHeber J. Grant's ability to make friends, to deal with people both great and small, and to show concern for the individual were important qualities of his life. A close associate observed that "he had no particular interest in the accumulation of money except for the good he could do with it." For example, "no one will ever know how many mortgages on homes of widows he paid out of his own funds." [^11]He loved to present good books to his associates or even to casual acquaintances, each year distributing scores, or probably hundreds, of volumes in this way.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCPresident Grant was a particularly powerful advocate of the need to obey God's commandments. He often reflected a strong personal commitment to the principles of tithing and to abstinence from liquor and tobacco as taught in the Word of Wisdom. Concerning tithing he declared:

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCNow, I Believe that people are blessed in proportion to their liberality. I am not saying that they always make more dollars, perhaps, than the other man, but so far as an increase in the faith and in the testimony and the knowledge of the divinity of the work in which we are engaged, men that are honest with the Lord in the payment of their tithing grow as men never grow that are not honest; there is no question in my mind .... I believe that to those who are liberal the Lord gives ideas, and they grow in capacity and ability more rapidly than those that are stingy. I have that faith, and I have had it from the time I was a boy. [^12]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCOn the subject of the Word of Wisdom he testified: "There is absolutely no Benefit to any human being derived from breaking the Word of Wisdom, but there is everything for his benefit, morally, intellectually, physically, and spiritually, in obeying it." [^13]<_P/>In 1931 President Grant and his counselors lamented: "Never before have the emissaries of the tobacco interests been so active as now in the endeavor to fasten the cigarette habit upon our boys and girls." They Believed this was a fulfillment of the Lord's warning against the "evils and designs which do and will exist in the hearts of conspiring men in the last days." "In view of the present conditions," the First Presidency concluded, "we feel constrained to call upon all Saints to be faithful in observing the warning contained in this revelation [the Word of Wisdom], that they may enjoy the wonderful promises made By the Lord to those who walk in obedience to his commandments." [^14]President Grant increasingly emphasized observance of the Word of Wisdom as an appropriate measure of worthiness for baptism, priesthood advancement, or temple privileges.

<_P>

Administration of Heber J. GrantHC"Keep the commandments" was an oft-repeated admonition by President Heber J. Grant. In his first sermon as President of the Church he anticipated this emphasis:

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCI will ask no man to be more liberal with his means than I am with mine in proportion to what he possesses, for the advancement of God's kingdom. I will ask no man to observe the Word of Wisdom any more closely than I observe it. I will ask no man to be more conscientious and prompt in the payment of his tithes and his offerings than I will be. I will ask no man to be more ready and willing to come early and to go late and to labor with full power of mind and body than I will labor, always in humility. [^15]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCRelated to President Grant's emphasis on the Word of Wisdom was his keen interest in personal fitness. "I have excellent health," he wrote during his mature years, "and attribute part of it to the fact that for several years past I have seldom missed a day without taking exercise unless I had the privilege of playing a game of golf." President Grant often combined business with pleasure, discussing important ecclesiastical or financial matters with his golfing companions. Another feature of his regimen was a one- or two-hour nap taken each afternoon in his office. [^16]

President Heber J. Grant, a physical-fitness enthusiast, often transacted Church business while golfing with ecclesiastical and business associates. Shown here are (from left) Stephen H. Love, James H. Wattis, President Grant, President Charles W. Nibley, and Elder Reed Smoot. (Church Archives)

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCStill, Heber J. Grant did not waste time. President Grant's personal secretary, Joseph Anderson, concluded: "I am convinced that one of the qualities most responsible for his prodigious achievements was his love of work." For example, thousands of Latter-day Saints or business associates received long letters dictated by President Grant when he could not sleep at night. In later years these would provide a valuable insight into his thinking and activities. Furthermore, in hotel rooms or when traveling by train he was often at work with Brother Anderson by six or seven in the morning taking care of necessary business. [^17]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCPresident Grant did not depend on his resources alone. Another important quality of his character was his deep spirituality and faith in God. His dependence on divine guidance was illustrated in an experience he had just after becoming President of the Church. For two months he pondered who should fill the vacancy he had left in the Quorum of the Twelve. As he considered those whom he regarded as worthy and qualified, he returned again and again to the name of Richard W. Young, a lifelong friend who had served as a general in the army, lawyer, successful businessman, and stake president. Finally, with the approval of his counselors, President Grant wrote the name Richard W. Young on a slip of paper, intending to present this nomination at the regular weekly meeting of the First Presidency and the Twelve in the temple. "President Grant removed the paper with the name written on it, fully intending to present him to the council for approval. But for a reason he could never fully explain, he was unable to do so; instead, he presented the name of Melvin J. Ballard, president of the Northwestern States Mission, a man with whom he had had very little personal contact." [^18]<_P/>This was a valuable lesson to President Grant, and confirmed the counsel he had received from President Joseph F. Smith just before that prophet's death: "The Lord bless you, my boy, the Lord bless you: you have got a great responsibility. Always remember that this is the Lord's work and not man's. The Lord is greater than any man. He knows whom he wants to lead his Church, and never makes any mistake." [^19]

<_P>

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCNot only did President Heber J. Grant represent a personal link with nineteenth-century beginnings but he was also well qualified to lead the Church in the twentieth century. His spiritual experiences, his example of overcoming difficulties through persistent effort, his business acumen, and his love for people, all combined to prepare him to meet the challenges that would face the Church and its members.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCGeographical Expansion

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCWithin the first few months of President Heber J. Grant's administration, Church membership passed five hundred thousand. Three-fourths of these Saints still lived in the essentially rural Intermountain area in western America. The next few years, however, would bring a definite geographical expansion of the Church's membership. Evidences of this trend included the growing number of Latter-day Saints in major cities, the dedication of new temples, and the increased personal involvement of General Authorities in supervising and directing the Church's progress worldwide.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHC Exodus from the Intermountain Area

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCFollowing the close of World War I, thousands of Latter-day Saints left the traditional centers of Mormon colonization in Utah and Idaho. The basically agricultural economy of the semi-arid Intermountain West did not share in the general prosperity of the 1920s. Furthermore, the coming of the tractor and other machinery reduced the need for manpower, thus lessening the number of jobs available on the farm. This resulted in the exodus, especially of younger people, from these areas to seek improved economic opportunites in major metropolitan centers, particularly in southern California. This outward flow was increased during the 1930s by the unusually severe impact of the Great Depression in the Mountain West. The Latter-day Saints therefore were part of the continuing westward movement and the prevailing rural-urban shift of the general population. Church activity came to play a new and important role in the lives of these transplanted Saints. Though living in large cities, they found through their branches or wards the close friendships and associations they had enjoyed in the small towns left behind.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCIn 1920 there were 3,967 Church members in California; during the next ten years this number soared to 20,599, and by 1940 the total reached 44,784. During these same twenty years, the portion of all Latter-day Saints living in the Pacific Coast states increased from 2.8 percent to 10.9 percent.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCWhile most nineteenth-century migrations of the Saints had been encouraged or even sponsored by the Church, the movements during the twentieth century were the results of individual decisions. At least some of the Saints leaving the Intermountain area wondered if they were doing the right thing. A group in Santa Monica, California, for example, asked President Heber J. Grant in 1921 if they were out of harmony with Church policy by living there. President Grant answered their letter in person during one of his frequent visits to the Golden State. He assured them that "at the present time the idea of a permanent Mormon settlement at Santa Monica was in full accordance with Church policies." [^20]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe formation of new stakes was clear evidence of Latter-day Saint growth in widely scattered urban centers. In 1844 Joseph Smith had declared: "I have received instructions from the Lord that from henceforth wherever the Elders of Israel shall build up churches... there shall be a stake of Zion. In the great cities, as Boston, New York, etc., there shall be stakes." [^21]<_P/>In 1923 and 1927 stakes were established in Los Angeles and San Francisco, respectively, and during the 1930s stakes were organized in several other prominent United States cities.

<_P>

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe first stake east of the Intermountain area in modern times was formed in New York City in 1934. Mission President James H. Moyle had helped prepare the mission district to become a stake by setting up a stake organization in every detail.

The Washington D.C. Chapel (above) and the Hollywood (now Los Angeles) Stake Center symbolize the strength of the Church's growth in areas outside the Intermountain West. (Church Archives)

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCA series of other "firsts" followed: The Oahu Stake was formed in Hawaii in 1935. In 1936 the Chicago Stake became the first in the Midwest. The first stakes in the Pacific Northwest were organized two years later at Portland and Seattle. In 1940 the Denver and Washington stakes Became the first along the east front of the Rockies and in the nation's capital, respectively. The construction of substantial chapels also was evidence of Latter-day Saint growth in these urban centers. Examples included the Beautiful Hollywood (or Los Angeles) Stake Center and the Washington D.C. Chapel, dedicated in 1929 and 1933 respectively. Not only did these buildings provide adequate facilities for Church activities, but they were attractive places where the Saints could bring their nonmember friends.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCNot all Church members leaving the Intermountain area went to large cities. Many joined the thousands already scattered throughout the United States and Canada. Organization of the Church's first branch in Alaska during 1938 was symbolic of this diffusion. In some areas nearly half of the members lived too far from the nearest chapel to participate in any group programs. Providing meaningful activity for these scattered Saints was a challenge. To relieve this problem, several missions had sponsored regional colonies where the scattered Saints might gather. Kelsey in northeast Texas, for example, flourished as a Mormon colony during the first several decades of the twentieth century.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe dispersion of Church membership was reflected by the location of the first three temples dedicated during the twentieth century. In contrast to the previous four temples, all located in Utah, these new structures all were located far from the headquarters of the Church. Construction of the Hawaii and Alberta temples had begun under the leadership of President Joseph F. Smith, but they were dedicated in 1919 and 1923, respectively, by President Heber J. Grant. In 1921 President Grant selected the site for a temple in Mesa, Arizona; he dedicated that beautiful structure six years later. These three imposing buildings attracted much favorable comment and symbolized the Church's commitment to continued activity and growth in Hawaii, western Canada, and Arizona.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCDevelopments Abroad

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCAs missionary work began to revive following the close of World War I, the General Authorities felt the need to have at least one of their number become personally acquainted with conditions in all parts of the world. President Grant therefore assigned Elder David O. McKay of the Quorum of the Twelve to undertake a personal inspection tour of the Church's far-flung missions and schools. At the time of this appointment, Elder McKay was serving as head of the Church's educational system, as General Superintendent of the Sunday School, and as chairman of the committee assigned to correlate priesthood and auxiliary activities. This broad experience would enable him to be an effective observer of Church activities around the globe. Assigned to be his companion was Hugh J. Cannon, editor of the Improvement Era, who had served a mission to Germany and as president of the Liberty Stake in Salt Lake City. Elders McKay and Cannon were set apart for their tour by President Heber J. Grant on December 2, 1920, and departed almost immediately.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCDuring the next thirteen months the two men traveled approximately fifty-six thousand miles by sea and By land. They visited the Church's missions on the islands of the Pacific, dedicated China for the preaching of the gospel, experienced the unique challenges in the non-Christian lands of southeast Asia, witnessed firsthand the Jewish-Arab tensions in the Holy Land, and finally toured the missions of Europe before returning home.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCTheir report gave the General Authorities an unprecedented worldwide vision of the Church's challenges and opportunities. More than ever before, Church leaders were now in a position to weigh the needs of one area against those of another. This perspective undoubtedly influenced developments in many parts of the world.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCBy 1924 the outlook for missionary work in Japan had become quite bleak. Since the mission had opened in 1901, only 174 converts had been baptized. Linguistic and cultural differences were now compounded by a growing sense of Japanese nationalism. The 1924 United States immigration law greatly restricted the number of Orientals who could enter the country and was very offensive to the Japanese. These and other conditions led President Heber J. Grant, who had opened the mission twenty-three years earlier, to order the temporary removal of all Latter-day Saint missionaries from Japan. Although the accomplishments of the mission may have appeared meager, there were some lasting contributions. The Book of Mormon and other Church literature had been translated into Japanese. There were a few active Saints who worked to keep the Church organization functioning and who remained faithful during the dark years that would follow. Some of them would be present to help the Church get reestablished in Japan following World War II.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCWhile proselyting was being closed in Asia, missionary work in South America was about to begin. The first gospel seeds were sown not by missionaries from North America but by immigrants from Europe, and not among South America's Spanish-speaking majority but among a German-speaking minority. Following the close of World War I, a large number of Germans left Europe in quest of a better future in South America, particularly in Argentina and southern Brazil. Wilhelm Friedrichs, a Latter-day Saint convert, and his family arrived in 1923. Emil Hoppe, whom Friedrichs had helped convert in Germany, followed soon afterwards. Friedrichs and Hoppe eagerly shared the gospel with other German immigrants, and soon several families were interested. Friedrichs reported his activities to the First Presidency and requested that missionaries be sent to Argentina.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCIn the fall of 1925 Church leaders sent Elder Melvin J. Ballard of the Quorum of the Twelve to South America to open a mission there. He was accompanied by two members of the First Council of the Seventy-Elder Rulon S. Wells, who spoke fluent German, and Elder Rey L. Pratt (then serving as president of the Mexican Mission), whose knowledge of Spanish and of Latin American culture would prove essential. Upon their arrival in Buenos Aires, they were greeted by the Friedrichs and Hoppe families with tears of gratitude. Early on Christmas morning 1925, Elder Ballard and his companions went to a secluded grove of weeping willows near the banks of the La Plata. On this beautiful summer morning the group knelt and Elder Ballard offered a prayer dedicating South America for the proclamation of the gospel. He especially petitioned that promises made to the descendants of Lehi might soon be fulfilled. Just before returning home a few months later, Elder Ballard prophesied that the work would grow slowly at first, but that eventually thousands would be baptized. Within a few years, missionary work had spread into southern Brazil, but the full realization of Elder Ballard's prophecies would not come until after World War II. [^22]

On Christmas day of 1925, Elder Melvin J. Ballard (center) dedicated the continent of South America for the preaching of the gospel. (Church Archives)

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCChurch leaders continued to counsel European Saints to remain in their homelands and build up the Church there. Despite this counsel, however, many remembered the earlier ideal of "gathering to Zion" and believed that they could escape from poverty by emigrating to America. Therefore the years 1923 to 1930 witnessed the heaviest emigration the German Mission had ever experienced up to that time. Consequently, Church membership in Europe grew very slowly, increasing from 25,500 in 1920 to only 28,000 a decade later. There was, however, at least one new area into which the gospel was introduced during these years; Czechoslovakia was opened to missionary work in 1929.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe Church's Centennial

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe decade of the 1920s witnessed a series of centennial observances. At the April general conference in 1920, Church leaders marked the one-hundredth anniversary of Joseph Smith's vision of the Father and the Son by stressing the authenticity of his testimony and by paying tribute to his work. A cantata entitled "The Vision," especially prepared for the occasion by Evan Stephens, was also presented. In 1923 and 1927 Saints and missionaries from the eastern states gathered at the Hill Cumorah and the Sacred Grove near Palmyra, New York, to commemorate respectively the first visit of the Angel Moroni and Joseph Smith's receiving the gold plates of the Book of Mormon one hundred years earlier. In 1928 the Church completed the purchase of 283 acres that included the entire Hill Cumorah. Two years earlier, the Church had also purchased the Peter Whitmer farm near Fayette, New York, where the Church was organized in 1830. In 1937 the Church would purchase a portion of the Martin Harris farm near Palmyra, and would also begin to acquire property in Nauvoo, Illinois, including the former temple site. All these celebrations reached a climax with the centennial of the Church's organization. A group of General Authorities were assigned to plan the 1930 observance. George Albert Smith, a member of the Twelve deeply interested in Church history, was chairman. The appointment of these key leaders reflected the importance the Church gave its centennial observance.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCAs the time of the centennial conference drew near, Saints began pouring into Salt Lake City from all parts of the Church. To accommodate the huge crowds desiring to attend one of the sessions in the Tabernacle, Church leaders added a fourth day to the usual three-day conference format. The opening day, Sunday, April 6, the one-hundredth anniversary of the Church's organization, was the highlight.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCSpecial services were outlined for the opening session Sunday morning. President Heber J. Grant read the First Presidency's centennial message to the peoples of the world. It bore witness to the divine mission of the Savior and to the latter-day restoration of his Church through the Prophet Joseph Smith. The message called on Church members around the world "to rededicate their lives to the service of the Master and the establishment of His kingdom upon the earth." [^23]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCChurch leaders were sustained by the vote of the various orders of the priesthood separately and then by the entire congregation. Each priesthood group sat in an assigned area on the main floor in the Tabernacle and stood as a body to vote when its turn came. Normally this procedure is reserved for "solemn assemblies" at which a new president of the Church is being installed. When the voting was concluded, the entire congregation stood and rendered the hallowed "Hosanna Shout" by waving white handkerchiefs as they shouted in unison: "Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna to God and the Lamb; Amen, Amen, and Amen." Because the Saints identified it with such special events as temple dedications, the shout, like the special manner of voting, added impressively to the spirit and solemnity of the conference.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe Church's seven temples were illuminated for the first time during conference week "to indicate the joy of the people that the work of the Lord had successfully completed its first century of existence." [^24]A centennial pageant, "The Message of the Ages," opened in the Tabernacle on Sunday evening, April 6. A working force of fifteen hundred persons included the cast, the Tabernacle Choir, and an orchestra. The pageant reviewed how the gospel, known to ancient prophets, was again restored in the latter days.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe centennial observances reinforced the Latter-day Saints' interest in Church history. During the Sunday afternoon session of conference, Elder B. H. Roberts presented the several large volumes of his Comprehensive History of the Church, which was being published as an official part of the centennial. He indicated that this work contained the sermon he would like to preach and the testimony he would like to bear on the occasion of the Church's centennial. The six volumes represented a publication in book form of the history originally written by Elder Roberts for Americana magazine between 1909 and 1915. Two of Elder Roberts's associates in the Church historian's office were also making significant contributions: Elder Joseph Fielding Smith's Essentials in Church History, which had been published in 1921 as a lesson manual for the Melchizedek Priesthood quorums, would continue to be the most popular single-volume Church history for more than half a century. Andrew Jenson had compiled eight hundred large manuscript volumes, about half giving histories of specific local units and the remainder being the day-by-day "Journal History of the Church." At the time of the Church's centennial, Jenson was completing publication of his multi-volume Latter-day Saint Biographical Encyclopedia and was condensing his histories of Church units for publication in a single reference volume to be known as the Encyclopedic History of the Church.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe opening years of Heber J. Grant's administration, then, saw a substantial geographical expansion in Church membership at the same time as the series of centennial observances was focusing the Saints' attention on their heritage. But there were other important developments occurring during these same years. One of the most important of these was a redefinition of emphasis in the Church's educational program, which is discussed in the next chapter.

Notes

Chapter 5. Heber J. Grant Begins His Administration

<_P> <_P> <_P>

---
Notas:
[^1] Conference Report, October 1915, p. 4.
[^2] Board of Education minutes, March 15, 1920, MS, Church Archives.
[^3] Board of Education minutes, February 3, 1926; Conference Report, April 1926, p. 4.
[^4] Board of Education minutes, February 3 and March 18, 1926.
[^5] Jerry C. Roundy, Ricks College: A Struggle for Survival (Rexburg, Idaho: Ricks College Press, 1976), pp. 113-51.
[^6] Joseph F. Merrill, "Brigham Young University, Past, Present and Future," Deseret News, December 20, 1930, D&C 2, p. 3.
[^7] Enrollment Resume 1963-64 (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University, 1965), p. 2.
[^8] I. L. Williamson, "On the Existing Relationship Between Religious Seminaries and Public High Schools in the State of Utah," report to the Utah State Board of Education, January 8, 1930; Journal History of the Church, May 3, 1930, p. 4, and September 24, 1931, p. 3, MS, Church Archives; Board of Education minures, November 4, 1931.
[^9] J. Wylie Sessions, interview with author, July 29, 1965.
[^10] G. Homer Durham, "University Religious Training and the LDS Deseret Clubs, Weekday Religious Education 1 (March 1937): 1-2.
[^11] Ernest L. Wilkinson and W. Cleon Skousen, Brigham Young University: A School of Destiny (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1976), pp. 196-209.
[^12] James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 4:205; see the discussion in chapter 3 herein.
[^13] Ernest L. Wilkinson and W. Cleon Skousen, Brigham Young University: A School of Destiny (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1976), pp. 211-12.
[^14] Joseph F. Smith, editorial, Juvenile Instructor 46 (April 1911): 209.
[^15] Ernest L. Wilkinson, ed., Brigham Young University: The First One Hundred Years, 4 vols. (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1975), 2:262-69.
[^16] James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 6:47-58; Improvement Era 41 (September 1938): 520.
[^17] Ernest L. Wilkinson, ed., Brigham Young University: The First One Hundred Years, 4 vols. (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1975), 2:360.
[^18] Souvenir of the Dedication of the Joseph Smith Building, Brigham Young University Quarterly 28 (November 1, 1941): 1; Proceedings of the Dedicatory Service in Founders' Day Report, October 16, 1941, MS, BYU Archives.
[^19] Utah Economic and Business Review, December 1974, p. 58, citing 1940 U.S. Government census data.
[^20] E. L. Thorndike, "The Origin of Superior Men," Scientific Monthly 56 (May 1943): 424-33; "Utah as Birthplace of Scientists," Improvement Era 43 (October 1940): 606.
[^21] Joseph Smith, Jr., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), p. 363.
[^22] A. Theodore Tuttle, "South America: Land of Prophecy and Promise," Improvement Era 66 (May 1963): 352-60.
[^23] First Presidency statement in Conference Report, April 1930, pp. 3-13.
[^24] B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1930), 6:537.
