Richard O. Cowan, Church in the Twentieth Century ( 1985)

Chapter 7

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCTemporal Concerns and Current Issues

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCLatter-day Saints regard their religion as embracing a total way of life. They accept the President of the Church as prophet not only to the Saints but to the whole world. Hence there is no hard line between that which is spiritual and that which is temporal, or between that which is religious and that which is secular. In an early revelation, the Lord had stated that "all things unto me are spiritual, and not at any time have I given unto you a law which was temporal" (D&C 29:34). Furthermore, as President Joseph F. Smith had declared: "It is the purpose of God in restoring the Gospel and the holy priesthood, not only to benefit mankind spiritually, but also to benefit them temporally." [^1]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCIt is no wonder, then, to find the Church involved in what may be regarded as temporal or secular matters. During President Heber J. Grant's administration, for example, the Church launched several programs for the temporal benefit of the Saints, and its leaders found it necessary to speak out on a variety of current issues including gambling, prohibition of liquor, and communism.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThree new Church agencies were particularly interested in seeking remedies for some rather diverse social problems. In 1916 the First Presidency had appointed the Social-Advisory Committee to coordinate the work of the auxiliary general boards in supporting higher community standards. This committee, plus Social-Advisory committees at the stake and ward levels, promoted "moral retrenchment," including more wholesome conditions at dances, sought to curb immorality, advocated professional standards in social work, and led anti-tobacco campaigns. [^2]In 1919 the Relief Society organized its Social Service Department to promote maternal health and child welfare, working in cooperation with public social welfare agencies. This department would play a key role in supervising the adoption of children The Relief Society's general board conducted a special summer course at Brigham Young University in 1920 followed by 126 local institutes to teach "scientific methods in family welfare work." Then, in 1922, the Primary Association opened its children's hospital in Salt Lake City. The Church remodeled and equipped a large home on North Temple Street across from Temple Square for this purpose. The hospital resulted from the desire to help crippled children on the part of Primary President Louie B. Felt and her counselor May Anderson.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCGovernment and Politics

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThroughout the twentieth century, Church leaders have urged the Saints to fulfill their responsibilities as good citizens by prayerfully considering and supporting worthy candidates and issues, and by getting involved in the political party of their choice. Over the years Church authorities have suggested guidelines for members' political involvement, explaining that the Church as such also has a responsibility to let its voice be heard on some, but not all, issues. "While strictly political matters should properly be left in the field of politics where they rightfully belong," the First Presidency has affirmed, "on moral issues the Church and its members should take a positive stand·" [^3]The Presidency has given this admonition and caution concerning Church members' responsibility:

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCWe encourage all members, as citizens of the nation, to be actively involved in the political process, and to support those measures which will strengthen the community, state, and nation-morally, economically, and culturally We urge Latter-day Saints everywhere to become actively engaged in worthy causes to improve our communities and to make them more wholesome places in which to live and to rear families.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe many and varied circumstances in which our Church members live, however, make it inadvisable for the Church to involve itself institutionally in every local community issue. These challenges are best responded to by members as they meet their obligations as citizens-preferably in concert with other like-minded individuals. Only the First Presidency and Twelve can declare a particular issue to be a moral issue worthy of full institutional involvement ....

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCAgain we emphasize the long-stated policy of the Church of not endorsing political candidates or parties in elections and of not using Church facilities for political purposes. [^4]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCNevertheless, Church leaders have urged the Saints to protect their spirit of unity despite differences in political persuasions. Speaking for the First Presidency, Stephen L Richards declared:

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCA threat to our unity derives from unseemly personal antagonisms developed in partisan political controversy ....

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCIt is reasonable to assume that men may entertain honest differences of opinions with reference to governmental policy. . . . I hope with all my heart that men of the priesthood, of the same quorum perhaps, and women of the sisterhood of the Church will not permit themselves to be estranged in any degree by these considerations, and that they will always subordinate such differences and their own personal ambitions to the achievement of the lofty and exalted goal to which they have pledged their eternal allegiance-the building of the kingdom of God. [^5]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCPresident Heber J. Grant, for example, had been very active in Democratic party politics during his earlier life. He therefore had strong opinions on most political issues. As President of the Church, however, he was very cautious in expressing his personal feelings. He respected the principle of the separation of church and state, and he did not want to offend faithful Church members who might hold views opposite to his own. Nevertheless, as will be seen in this chapter, there were many issues on which the Church felt compelled to take a stand, although it refrained from declaring a position on others.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCAn issue on which the Church did not take a stand was the question of America's joining the League of Nations following the close of World War I. During 1919 United States President Woodrow Wilson was urging the importance of joining the league as the only effective means of preserving the peace so recently won. President Wilson had the support of the members of his Democratic party in the Senate, but most Republican senators favored entry into the league only if there were certain "reservations" or amendments made which they believed were necessary to protect America's sovereignty. Elder Reed Smoot was one of these "Reservationists" and spoke out in opposition. A large group of Church leaders, notably Elder B. H. Roberts, on the other hand, were open in their support of the league. Both sides recited passages from the Book of Mormon to support their respective positions. Speaking at a stake conference on September 21, 1919, President Grant acknowledged that he favored joining the league, but clearly stated that this was his personal belief and not the official stand of the Church· "I regret exceedingly," he declared, "that the standard works of the Church have been brought into this controversy." President Grant had his remarks published with the report of the general conference which convened two weeks later. [^6]<_P/>Soon afterward the Senate defeated the treaty that would have involved the United States in the League of Nations and this question faded as a topic for debate. That Heber J. Grant did not allow differences on this issue to divide him from his brethren is reflected in the fact that he subsequently called as counselors three men-Charles W. Nibley, J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and David O. McKay-who had questioned the wisdom of joining the league. [^7]In coming years there were other issues on which the Church did declare an official position·

<_P>

Protecting Moral Virtues

Over the years, Church leaders have taken positive stands on a variety of issues affecting the Saints' basic way of life. For example, the First Presidency has exhorted:

We urge our members and people of good will everywhere to unite to protect and honor the spiritual and religious heritage of our nation and to resist the forces that would transform the public position of the United States from the constitutional position of neutrality to a position of hostility toward religion.<_P> [^8]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCCommunity Standards

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCDuring the 1920s, President Grant and his counselors had the occasion to speak out on a number of matters affecting the moral standards of the community· For example, in 1925 when the demand arose to legalize betting on horse races, the Presidency declared:

Administration of Heber J. GrantHC. . . The Church has been and now is unalterably opposed to gambling in any form whatever· It is opposed to any game of chance, occupation, or so-called business, which takes money from the person who may be possessed of it without giving value received in return. It is opposed to all practices the tendency of which is to encourage the spirit of reckless speculation, and particularly to that which tends to degrade or weaken the high moral standard which the members of the Church, and our community at large, have always maintained .... [^9]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe following year Church leaders also condemned card playing as a waste of time which "brings no good, bodily, intellectually, or in any way," and may lead children to take up gambling as they become expert card players. [^10]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCIn many parts of the nation the 1920s were a decade of expanding prosperity. A spirit of speculation was engendered as stock prices spiraled upward, and many people borrowed heavily to invest in securities which they were sure would continue to increase in value. Others went into debt to buy luxury goods they really didn't need. In the spirit of the foregoing counsel against gambling, Church leaders urged the Saints to resist the lure of quick profits, and never to risk funds they could not afford to lose The pioneer virtues of industry and thrift were advocated as more sure means to financial prosperity.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe wider availability of automobiles during the 1920s created new pressures on proper Sabbath observance. In 1928 the First Presidency counseled:

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe Lord's day is a holy day-not a holiday. It has been set apart as a day of rest and worship. A sacred Sabbath begets reverence for God. It is not pleasing in His sight that the day be given over to pleasure seeking in places of amusement or elsewhere.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCSunday Schools and meetings have been so arranged as to meet the convenience of the people and leave a considerable portion of the Sabbath day without Church appointments. We earnestly appeal to the people to keep their meeting appointments faithfully and to utilize that portion of Sunday not appointed for meetings in promoting family association in the home, with the purpose of stimulating and establishing greater home fealty, a closer companionship among parents and children, and more intimate relations among all kindred.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCWe believe that it is unnecessary for families to go beyond their own homes or those of their kindred for the relaxation and association which are proper for the Sabbath day, and we therefore discourage more traveling than is necessary for this purpose and attendance upon appointed meetings.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCLet all unnecessary labor be suspended and let no encouragement be given by the attendance of members of the Church at places of amusement and recreation on the Sabbath day. If Sunday is spent in our meetings and in our homes greater blessings will come to our families and communities. [^11]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHC"Latter-day Saints with a testimony of the Gospel and a knowledge of the spiritual blessings that come from keeping the sabbath," a later First Presidency statement asserted, "will never permit themselves to make it a shopping day, an activity that has no place in a proper observance of the Holy Day of the Lord .... " [^12]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe Repeal of Prohibition

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCPerhaps no other political issue of the early twentieth century touched the standards and beliefs of Mormonism more than did the question of prohibition. Latter-day Saints accept as revelation from God the Word of Wisdom, which declares: "Inasmuch as any man drinketh wine or strong drink among you, behold it is not good .... And again, tobacco is not... good for man .... "(D&C 89:5, 8.)

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe question of prohibiting the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages had become a hot political issue in Utah as early as 1908. A senator and Apostle, Elder Reed Smoot, advocated local option, the position of the national Republican party, which held that each locality should be free to decide whether or not to outlaw liquor. Most Latter-day Saints favored total national prohibition. Perhaps the most vocal spokesman for this point of view was Elder Heber J. Grant of the Council of the Twelve. His position was based on strong personal convictions. Two of his close friends died in early manhood after taking up the tobacco and alcohol habits. "As I stood at their graves," Heber J. Grant later emphasized, "I made a solemn pledge to give the best that was in me to fight the cigarette and liquor habits.<_P>" [^13]The Church, however, did not officially endorse either local option or outright prohibition at that time. President Joseph F. Smith declared: "We endorse any movement looking to temperance...." [^14]In 1917 the Utah legislature approved prohibition for the state, and by 1920 the Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution made it the law of the land nationwide.

<_P>

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe benefits of prohibition were accompanied by some problems. Bootleggers illegally produced and sold alcoholic beverages, and much of this traffic came to be dominated by criminal gangs. As the 1920s progressed, the demand for repealing the prohibition amendment increased. President Heber J. Grant rejected these demands. The Eighteenth Amendment, he argued, was "one of the greatest benefits that has come to the people of the United States." He countered arguments of increased crime with the statement that one should not give equal weight to the few who break the law as to the millions who benefit from it. He believed there had been a dozen times as much drinking before prohibition went into effect. Millions of homes were thus being spared from being wrecked through drunkenness. [^15]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCDuring the early 1930s, various Church organizations gave renewed emphasis to living the Word of Wisdom. Each week during the 1931-32 season, the young people of the Church recited the following slogan in their Mutual Improvement Association meetings: "We stand for Physical, Mental and Spiritual Health through Observance of the Word of Wisdom." Observing the Word of Wisdom's centennial, February 27, 1933, helped focus still more attention on this principle. Throughout the Church this revelation had been the theme of all meetings of the previous Sunday.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThus the anti-prohibition planks in the 1932 platforms of both major political parties were diametrically opposed to the stand being taken by the Church. Although both parties opposed a "return of the saloon," the Republicans advocated states' rights in dealing with the problem. The Democrats more specifically declared: "We advocate the repeal of the Eighteenth Amendment.<_P>" [^16]

<_P>

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe Church had declared its opposition to repeal as the 1932 election drew near. This issue, the First Presidency declared, "concerns very intimately the personal moral welfare of the men and women and youth of the Nation and of the Church in the Nation." The Presidency emphasized that the prohibition of alcohol was still part of the United States Constitution, and that strict enforcement was the only way to test ultimate worth of this law. "The Church is so firmly committed to the maintenance and support of the governments in which its members have citizenship, that it must regard violations of the law of the land as serious infractions of its own discipline and principles of Church government."

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCWhile the Church had "complete sympathy" with prohibition's objective of promoting "the cause of temperance," the First Presidency insisted that it was not their desire to get involved in partisan controversies. "It is our earnest hope," the Presidency concluded, "that the members of the Church may be foremost among the citizens of the Country in living and otherwise encouraging and fortifying the maintenance of our laws under the Constitution of the Nation.<_P>" [^17]

<_P>

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe heavy Democratic victories (including Utah) were at least in part a vote for the repeal of prohibition. After the election, the campaign against prohibition accelerated. By February 1933 the Twenty-first Amendment, which would repeal the Eighteenth, had passed both houses of Congress. By the fall of that year, thirty-three of the necessary thirty-six states had ratified the new amendment. A special election was called for November to elect delegates (whose stand for or against repeal would be known) to conventions that would decide whether or not Utah and some other states would ratify the Twenty-first Amendment. As the election drew closer, the pace of the campaign quickened. Numerous articles appeared in the Church's Deseret News and monthly magazines. At the October general conference, President Heber J. Grant warned:

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCLet me promise you right here and now that if you vote for the repeal of the Eighteenth Amendment, there will be a great many more professing Latter-day Saints who will be drunkards than there have been while the Eighteenth Amendment has been in force.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCBy the way, I received a postal card-the man who sent it did not have the courage to sign his name-asking me not to talk on the Word of Wisdom at this conference.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCI request each and every Latter-day Saint within the sound of my voice to read what I said about the Word of Wisdom just six months ago. Every word that I said I meant, and among other things I said I hoped and prayed that we as a people would not vote for the repeal of the Eighteenth Amendment. Really, I was almost tempted this morning to read my whole sermon over again, and let it go at that .... [^18]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe election returns clearly indicated that many of the Saints did not follow their Church President's counsel. Salt Lake City, for example, defeated prohibition by a margin of better than three to one. These facts were reported widely in the press. On December 5 conventions met in three states. The group in Utah prolonged its proceedings to allow Pennsylvania and Ohio to vote first. Thus Utah, a majority of whose population were Latter-day Saints, deliberately gained the distinction of being the final state needed to ratify the Twenty-first Amendment repealing prohibition. Upon receiving word of the vote in Utah, the pro-liquor forces in New York City staged a parade featuring a banner proclaiming "Thank God for Utah!"

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe defeat of prohibition was a keen disappointment to Church leaders and was a recurring theme in their talks for at least a decade. Elder George F. Richards of the Council of the Twelve expressed these sentiments: "When the President of the Church ... who I believe expressed the mind and will of God unto this people... stands up in general conference and declares in favor of prohibition, it has been a source of great regret to me that prominent, leading, faithful men in this Church have felt justified in voting in favor of the return of liquor.<_P>" [^19]As late as 1941, President Grant lamented that the Saints' love did not extend far enough for them to pay any attention to his counsel. He wrote: "Many of them have such a bad case of politics that they ought to have a provision attached to their singing of 'We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet'-provided he keeps his mouth shut politically.<_P>" [^20]The following year he declared in conference: "... may I never live long enough that when I am in favor of a thing and all the Brethren are in favor of it, such as was the case when we were opposed to bringing whiskey back, that Utah and the Mormons will be in opposition to us.<_P>" [^21]In 1943 Elder George Albert Smith recalled: "From this very stand he [President Grant] pleaded with us not to repeal the Eighteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States. He didn't speak as Heber J. Grant, the man. He spoke as the President of the Church and the representative of our Heavenly Father. And yet in a state where we could have retained what we had, there were enough Latter-day Saints, so called,... who paid no attention to what the Lord wanted, ignored what He had said through his prophet, and what is the result? Such delinquency as we have never known in our community today, and the sons and daughters and grandchildren, and in many cases the fathers and mothers, who defied the advice of our Heavenly Father and said 'we will do as we please,' are paying the penalty and will continue to do so until they turn away from their foolishness and desire with all their hearts to do what our Heavenly Father desires us to do." [^22]

<_P><_P><_P>

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe repeal of prohibition in 1933 did not end the Church's involvement with the liquor question. Utah and several other states chose to have liquor sold only in state-operated stores. Over the years various business interests advocated making alcoholic beverages available in restaurants. In 1969 the First Presidency would oppose such a "liquor by the drink" proposal, as they believed it would only make alcohol more readily available. [^23]<_P/>In opposing such measures the Saints were not alone, but were able to cooperate with several non-Mormon groups having similar ideals.

<_P>

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe Great Depression and the New Deal

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCFew external forces had a greater impact on the course of Church history in the twentieth century than did the Great Depression of the 1930s. The seeds of this economic calamity were actually sown during the 1920s as the wave of speculative buying drove prices and production to ever-new heights. During the autumn of 1929, however, this optimism cooled. A wave of selling then drove stock prices downward, and, on October 29, known as "black Tuesday," the bottom fell out of the market and millions of investors were ruined. People stopped buying unnecessary goods, and many businesses failed. The impact of the Great Depression was particularly severe in the semi-arid Mountain West, the home of most Latter-day Saints, where mining and agriculture were particularly hard hit. In 1932 unemployment in Utah reached 35 percent, compared to a national peak of 24.9 percent. During these years, average personal income in the Beehive State fell by 48.6 percent. [^24]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCAlong with its members, the Church as an institution felt the brunt of the depression, although the Latter-day Saints did not share in the slump in religious activity experienced by most other denominations. A serious problem, however, was the decline in tithes, the Church's major source of income. Even though the amount of tithes dropped substantially, the number of those paying their tithing decreased only slightly; the Saints' continued faithfulness was gratifying to Church leaders. Nevertheless, expenditures from tithes dropped from $4 million in 1927 to only $2.4 million in 1933, expenditures for building dropping most sharply. [^25]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCAs the General Authorities urged economizing throughout all departments, the Church was able to preserve its financial solvency. Nevertheless, this was accomplished only through curtailing worthwhile activities, such as local congregations postponing or having to forget about building badly needed chapels. Many members also had to put off the blessing of serving a mission.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCIn the midst of these difficulties, the 1932 United States elections were of special interest to the leaders and members of the Church. Elder Reed Smoot, whom President Grant regarded as a staunch defender of prohibition, was up for reelection to the Senate. In the presidential race, the Republicans praised Herbert Hoover's handling of the depression crisis, while the Democrats and their candidate Franklin D. Roosevelt promised a "new deal" for the "forgotten man." The result was a landslide victory for the Democrats that swept most Republicans, including Senator Smoot, out of office. During the "one hundred days" following Roosevelt's inauguration in 1933 the Congress enacted a series of sweeping measures giving the federal government power to combat the depression. These "New Deal" programs included the Agricultural Adjustment Administration, which subsidized and regulated farm production; the Tennessee Valley Authority, which constructed dams and hydroelectric generating plants; the Civilian Conservation Corps, which put more than 1.6 million youth to work at camps across the country; the Federal Emergency Relief Administration, which provided aid to the needy; and the National Recovery Administration, which curbed unfair competition and regulated wages and hours. As these programs got under way, they had the general support of most Latter-day Saints, and Church leaders encouraged cooperation with the government's efforts to relieve suffering. Elder Stephen L Richards called on the Latter-day Saints to support the government's policies. "It is true that we may entertain some different views, and we have the right to our opinion," he conceded, "but in an emergency an army follows its commander .... "He urged the Latter-day Saints to support, "not only the form of government under which they live, but [also] those who preside over them .... " [^26]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCAlthough Church leaders generally approved of the New Deal during its first years, they did, nevertheless, voice some reservations. Perhaps the greatest worry to Church leaders was that some of the Saints could possibly succumb to a "dole mentality." President Grant sadly acknowledged that many were saying: "Well, others are getting some government relief, so why should not I get some of it?" "I believe that there is a growing disposition among the people," he said, "to try to get something from the government... with little hope of ever paying it back. I think this is all wrong." [^27]"The practice of 'sponging' off the government," Elder Stephen L Richards lamented, "is perverting the finest virtues of American citizen-ship-self-respect, self-reliance, and integrity. Furthermore, I cannot but conclude that this distortion to the morale of our people makes fertile ground for the seeds of disloyalty and anarchy which those inimical to our form of government are ever seeking to sow." [^28]<_P/>Another concern was the government's going into debt in order to finance relief programs. The United States national debt, which had peaked at $25.5 billion at the end of World War I, had dropped to $16 billion by 1930. As New Deal programs multiplied, however, the debt doubled by 1936, reaching $33.8 billion. This expansion of the federal government's role raised yet other concerns. President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., stressed that the United States Constitution had been framed by inspired men, quoting the Lord's declaration that it had been established "by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose" (D&C 101:80). He believed that the inspired Constitution's greatest contribution was the separation of powers by which the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government checked one another and yet worked harmoniously together. He feared that the New Deal was upsetting this balance as well as the proper division of power between the national government and the states. [^29]<_P/>The First Presidency would raise a similar concern a quarter of a century later in relation to the question of federal aid to education:

<_P><_P>

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCWe are frankly gravely concerned over the increasing tendency of the Federal Government to assume more responsibilities with an ever-increasing indebtedness .... In our judgment, the tendency of the Federal Government more and more to control the revenue of the country should be reversed, not increased. [^30]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCDuring the depression decade the First Presidency declared the Church's position on two other issues relative to political and social philosophy .

Communism

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCRussia and communism became a frequently discussed point of controversy following the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917. Throughout the United States, congregations of Catholics, Protestants, and Jews joined on Sunday, March 23, 1930, to protest religious intolerance in the Soviet Union. In Salt Lake City the First Presidency personally presided over and participated in the service held for that purpose in the Tabernacle. The official recognition of the Soviet Union by the United States government under President Franklin D. Roosevelt in November 1933 sparked further debate. Finally, during the depression of the 1930s a few Latter-day Saints advocated communism as the means of solving the world's economic problems and of reestablishing the Law of Consecration or United Order. In the light of all these developments the First Presidency in 1936 wrote:

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCTo our Church members we say: Communism is not the United Order, and bears only the most superficial resemblance thereto; Communism is based upon intolerance and force, the United Order upon love and freedom of conscience and action; Communism involves forceful despoliation and confiscation, the United Order voluntary consecration and sacrifice. Communists cannot establish the United Order, nor will Communism bring it about. The United Order will be established by the Lord in His own due time and in accordance with the regular prescribed order of the Church.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCFurthermore, it is charged by universal report, which is not successfully contradicted or disproved, that Communism undertakes to control, if not indeed to proscribe the religious life of the people living within its jurisdiction, and that it even reaches its hand into the sanctity of the family circle itself, disrupting the normal relationship of parent and child, all in a manner unknown and unsanctioned under the Constitutional guarantees under which we in America live. Such interference would be contrary to the fundamental precepts of the Gospel and to the teachings and order of the Church. [^31]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCLabor Unions and the Right to Work

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe growing labor movement during the 1930s provided still another issue on which the Church leaders took a stand. Widespread difficulties accompanied attempts by the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) to apply collective bargaining to entire industries for the first time. The Church's labor philosophy was influenced by the traditional pioneer virtues of industry, freedom, and self-reliance on one hand, and of cooperation and love and concern for one's fellows on the other. In 1934 President Heber J. Grant wrote: "We have never at any time advised our people that they should not join labor unions, neither have we recommended that they should do so." Church leaders, however, clearly regarded one of the unions' weapons, the "closed shop," as a violation of free agency. As early as 1919, President Grant had approved men banding together in labor unions to protect their rights as long as they did not infringe on the rights of others. He described the practice of using strikes or boycotts to protest a nonunion man being on the job as being "in direct opposition to the law of God.<_P>" [^32]

<_P>

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCUnfortunately, violence sometimes accompanied strikes during the later 1930s. In 1941 the First Presidency endorsed a Deseret News editorial that declared:

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCNo one at all conversant with industrial history and practices can deny that in many places and under adverse conditions labor must have organization in order to protect its members against exploitation. Furthermore, labor is entitled to a fair return for its work .... As President McKay once said: "The right to work is a divine right."... The worker must be left free to work when he will, be idle when he will, and to work for what he wishes, when he wishes, and where he wishes... there must be no "closed shop" because this means the denial of the divine right to work ....

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCWhere there are Latter-day Saints in unions they should assume a conservative attitude and never arouse men's prejudices by inflaming their passions. There can be no objections to a firm and persistent contention for the right of labor, if the contention is maintained in the spirit of reason and fairness. [^33]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThus, during the 1920s and 1930s the Church took a stand on a variety of contemporary issues. Many were related directly or indirectly to the Great Depression, which profoundly affected the Church and its members. This crisis became the setting for the Church's launching of its Welfare Plan during the mid-1930s.

Notes

Chapter 7. Temporal Concerns and Current Issues

<_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P>

---
Notas:
[^1] Conference Report, October 1930, p. 103.
[^2] James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 5:331-34; for a discussion of President Clark's role in formulating the Welfare Plan, see D. Michael Quinn, J. Reuben Clark: The Church Years (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1983), pp. 251-78.
[^3] Conference Report, April 1941, p. 121; October 1972, p. 124; Church News, August 26, 1961, p. 8.
[^4] Deseret News Church Section, April 25, 1936, p. 1; in Clark, Messages, 6:10-13.
[^5] Conference Report, October 1936, pp. 3-4.
[^6] Conference Report, p. 103.
[^7] Conference Report, April 1937, p. 26.
[^8] J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Church Welfare Plan, a discussion before the Citizens' Conference on Government Management at Estes Park, Colorado, June 20, 1939 (Salt Lake City: General Church Welfare Committee, n.d.), pp. 11-21.
[^9] J. Reuben Clark's statement, November 1933, recounted by John A. Widtsoe in an interview with Lauritz G. Petersen, December 1, 1940, written summary in Church Archives.
[^10] William E. Berrett, "Teaching by the Spirit" and "Revelation" addresses at BYU, June 27, 1966, and June 27, 1956.
[^11] Conference Report, April 1943, p. 126.
[^12] Conference Report, April 1941, p. 121.
[^13] Conference Report, October 1942, p. 57.
[^14] Conference Report, October 1908, p. 8.
[^15] Heber J. Grant to the President of the Association Against the Prohibition Amendment, May 31, 1930, First Presidency Letterbooks, Church Archives.
[^16] Kirk H. Porter and Donald Bruce Johnson, National Party Platforms, 1840-1964 (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1966), pp. 332, 348-49.
[^17] James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 5:309-10.
[^18] Conference Report, October 1933, p. 6.
[^19] Conference Report, October 1935, p. 30.
[^20] Heber J. Grant to Leo J. Muir, September 22, 1941, Muir Papers, Brigham Young University Library.
[^21] Conference Report, April 1942, p. 11.
[^22] Conference Report, October 1943, p. 47.
[^23] Deseret News, May 11, 1968, p. 1.
[^24] Thomas G. Alexander, "The Economic Consequences of the War: Utah and the Great Depression of the Early 1920s," in A Dependent Commonwealth: Utah's Economy from Statehood to the Great Depression, ed. Dean May (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1974), pp. 57-89.
[^25] 25. Conference Report, April 1928, pp. 3-4, and April 1934, pp. 4-5.
[^26] 26. Conference Report, October 1933, p. 65.
[^27] 27. Conference Report, p. 5; see also Presiding Bishop Sylvester Q. Cannon's comments, pp. 33-35.
[^28] 28. Conference Report, October 1934, p. 6.
[^29] 29. Conference Report, April 1935, p. 93.
[^30] 30. David O. McKay to Congressman Ralph R. Harding, June 15. 1961, in Church New, November 10, 1962, p. 3.
[^31] 31. James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 6:18.
[^32] 32. Heber J. Grant to J. Harold Long, August 23, 1934, First Presidency Letterbooks, Church Archives; Conference Report, October 1919, pp. 13-14.
[^33] 33. First Presidency statement, Deseret News, November 29, 1941; compare Deseret News, June 25, 1963; see also David O. McKay, "On Unionism," Improvement Era 40 (August 1937): 496.
