Richard O. Cowan, Church in the Twentieth Century ( 1985)

Chapter 8

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe Welfare Plan

As the Great Depression of the 1930s spread economic suffering throughout the world, Latter-day Saint leaders were not left without guidance as to how they should respond to the crisis. From the beginning the Lord had commanded, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself," a principle which the Apostle James designated "the royal law" (see Lev. 19:18; Matt. 22:36-40; James 2:8). When the Lord gave this commandment to the children of Israel he also instructed them to provide for the poor (see Lev. 19:10). During his earthly ministry the Savior linked helping the poor with becoming perfect (see Matt. 19:21). In the present dispensation the Lord again commanded his Saints to remember, visit, and administer to those in need (see D&C 44:6; 52:40). He has vigorously condemned those who are able to but refuse to help their less fortunate brethren (see, for example, Mosiah 4:16-18; D&C 56:16; 104:18).

In 1834 the Lord declared that it was his purpose to care for his Saints, but cautioned, "it must needs be done in mine own way" (D&C 104:15-16). Three years earlier he had revealed his "own way." The Saints had been commanded to consecrate their property to the bishop (the Lord's earthly representative in temporal matters) for the care of the poor. Each individual then received a stewardship based not only on his or her family's needs but also on their circumstances (such as abilities or talents) and on their "just" wants (see D&C 42:30; 51:3; 82:17). Each person was then expected to work to the extent of his ability for what he would receive (see D&C 42:42; 68:30; 75:29). The individual then felt not only the usual economic pressures but also a religious or spiritual obligation to develop or magnify his stewardship for the benefit of others. Any surplus beyond his family's wants and needs was transferred to the bishop's storehouse for the good of the whole group. Latter-day Saints often refer to living this law of consecration as the united order.

1929Stock market crash led to Great Depression1930Presiding Bishop urged Church to care for the needy; local projects begin in various areas1932Pioneer Stake storehouse established by Harold B. Lee1933First Presidency outlined basic principles for aiding those in need1935Harold B. Lee called to formulate Churchwide welfare program1936Churchwide organization launched at April general conference; general welfare committee and regions formed1937President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., challenged Church members to store a year's supply of food, clothing, and other supplies; Cooperative Securities Corporation organized to hold title to and coordinate welfare projects1938Deseret Industries created

As Church leaders contemplated the needs of the Saints during the depression they could also look back at the examples of at least two groups who had lived the united order-Enoch's city of Zion, and the Book of Mormon people following the Savior's visit to America (read Moses 7:13-19, esp. verse 18; 4 Ne. 1:2-5; 15-17, esp. verse 3). The New Testament suggests that early Christians may also have lived this principle (see Acts 4:32-35).

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCEven before the depression decade, the Church had an ongoing welfare program. During the 1920s the Presiding Bishopric and the Relief Society general board were especially active in finding employment, maintaining a storehouse, and in other ways aiding the needy. As economic conditions grew worse, therefore, the Church was able to build on already existing foundations. In 1930 Presiding Bishop Sylvester Q. Cannon declared that "it is our business... to see to it that none of the active members of the Church suffer for the necessities of life." He explained that the object was to "help the people to help themselves," aiding them to become independent rather than having to depend on the Church for assistance. [^1]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCLocal leaders were quite innovative as they sought solutions to the economic distress of their members. The Granite Stake in Salt Lake City put the unemployed to work on various stake projects, operated a sewing shop where donated clothing was renovated, and helped secure food for the needy through cooperative arrangements with nearby farmers. The Pioneer Stake, also in Salt Lake City, was probably hardest hit by the depression. Under the leadership of Stake President Harold B. Lee, a stake storehouse was established for the benefit of the poor. It was stocked with goods produced on a variety of stake projects or donated by Church members.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCA Churchwide Effort

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe General Authorities were extremely concerned about the suffering caused by the depression. They therefore gave encouragement, counsel, and support to efforts by local Church units to meet the emergency.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCFirst Presidency's Instructions, 1933

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCAn especially important document in the history of the welfare program was the First Presidency's circular letter issued in July 1933. J. Reuben Clark, Jr., President Grant's newly appointed counselor, had a significant role in formulating these instructions. It not only set forth basic governing principles, but for the first time it outlined activities and practices that were to be implemented Churchwide. "While it seems that our people may properly look, as heretofore, for relief assistance from governmental and perhaps other sources," the Presidency acknowledged, "reported conditions in the state and nation suggest that a considerable burden may rest upon our Church relief activities in the near future." The Church had a particular responsibility to care for those who had faithfully paid their tithes and offerings before losing their jobs. The First Presidency believed that the regular Church organization, "if properly coordinated by the bishops and presidents of stakes," would be capable of meeting the emergency. "The spiritual condition and faith of the members of any ward or stake may be gauged by their response to this urgent call of the unfortunate for help." Nevertheless, the Presidency cautioned:

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCOur faithful Church members are independent, self-respecting, and self-reliant; they do not desire charity. Our able-bodied members must not, except as a last resort, be put under the embarrassment of accepting something for nothing. In recognition of this wholly praiseworthy and admirable attitude of mind, Church officials administering relief must devise ways and means by which all able-bodied Church members who are in need, may make compensation for aid given them by rendering some sort of service.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCLocal leaders were assured that the Church stood "ready to assist the wards in this relief work to the utmost of its ability," but the first Presidency reminded them that the plan's success depended on "a most generous, free giving by the people of all materials needed for relief purposes." Individual wards were to be not only prepared to meet the needs of their own members but also ready to help other units that might require extra assistance.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe Presidency specifically called for a "detailed and exhaustive study of the actual condition of every ward." Careful yet prompt response by bishops and stake presidents was imperative so that plans for the coming winter might be completed in time.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe Presidency concluded its message by urging upon the members "the paramount necessity of living righteously, of avoiding extravagance, of cultivating habits of thrift, economy, and industry, of living strictly within their incomes, and of laying aside something, however small the amount may be, for the times of greater stress that may come to us. By no other course will our people place themselves in that position of helpful usefulness to the world which the Lord intends we shall take.<_P>" [^2]This important message anticipated many of the points that would be stressed when the Church more fully organized its welfare program three years later.

<_P>

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCNinety-five of the 104 stake presidents responded. Of these, only ten knew of members who needed direct relief who were not receiving it, and nine were aware of members receiving help who didn't need it. All but eleven presidents reported that they had coordinated efforts with governmental agencies in providing relief or employment to needy members.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCHarold B. Lee's Call, 1935

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCA most significant step and perhaps the key turning point in developing the Church's welfare program occurred on April 20, 1935, when the First Presidency consulted with Stake President Harold B. Lee. The Presidency was familiar with his experience in the Pioneer Stake and had previously asked him to make a study of stake statistics respecting the welfare of the Saints. "I was astounded to learn," President Lee later recalled, "that for years there had been before them, as a result of their thinking and planning and as the result of the inspiration of Almighty God, the genius of the very plan that is being carried out and was in waiting and preparation for a time when in their judgment the faith of the Latter-day Saints was such that they were willing to follow the counsel of the men who lead and preside in this Church." The Presidency informed Harold B. Lee that he was to have a part in educating the people and introducing the new welfare program Churchwide. They would release him as stake president and wished him to resign from the city commission so he could give full time to this assignment. This important interview took place on a Saturday morning when Presidents Grant and McKay did not have other commitments so they could spend the entire forenoon with President Lee. "I had thought I was overstaying their hospitality," he later reflected, "but they were instructing, encouraging, and outlining what I was supposed to do."

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCAt the conclusion of this meeting, Harold B. Lee drove his car up to the head of nearby City Creek Canyon and walked up into the trees where he could be alone.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCI prayed most earnestly. I had started out with the thought that there would have to be some new kind of organization set up to carry forward the Welfare Program .... My spiritual understanding was opened, and I was given a comprehension of the grandeur of the organization of the Church and the Kingdom of God, the likes of which I had never contemplated before. The significant truth which was impressed upon me was that there was no need for any new organization to do what the Presidency had counseled us to do. It was as though the Lord was saying: "All in the world that you have to do is to put to work the organization which I have already given." [^3]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCLaunching the Welfare Program, 1936

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCOn Monday afternoon, April 6, 1936, following the close of the final regular general conference session, a special priesthood meeting for stake presidencies and ward bishoprics convened in the Assembly Hall on Temple Square. The First Presidency reviewed the results of the 1935 survey, pointing out the distressing fact that nearly one-sixth of all Church members were being supported by public relief, and many of them were not being required to work for what they received. The Presidency appealed to the local leaders "to build again within the ranks of the Latter-day Saints a feeling of financial independence and social security." Church leaders counseled that "for the time being" Latter-day Saints employed on such government work projects as the Works Progress Administration "should endeavor to retain their positions, being scrupulously careful to do an honest day's work for a day's pay." Church authorities estimated that approximately $842,000 would be required annually for the Church to assume responsibility for those "actually needing relief and without means of self-help." Nevertheless, the First Presidency concluded, "the curtailment of Federal aid which is now forecast, makes it imperative that the Church shall, so far as it is able, meet this emergency." The First Presidency declared: "The Lord has given us, within our Church, the government, organization and leadership to accomplish this great purpose, and if we fail we stand condemned."

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCPresident David O. McKay read a lengthy document (which would be issued the following day as a circular letter of the First Presidency) setting forth basic principles and specific guidelines for the Church's new program. An immediate goal was to provide sufficient food and clothing for all the needy in the Church by October 1, 1936. This was to be accomplished largely through the existing organization. "Ward teachers," who for decades had been assigned to visit the homes of all Church members monthly, were to work closely with the Relief Society, the women's service organization, in "discovering and appraising the wants of the needy in the ward." While "the bishop is the father of his ward," President J. Reuben Clark later observed, "the Relief Society is the mother. The Church Welfare Plan could not be carried on without them. ..." While tithing in cash was still preferred, "tithing in kind" (commodities) could be paid. The Saints were also challenged to increase their per capita annual fast offerings to one dollar (the figure at the time was less than one-fourth that amount). Available funds were to be spent first for relief in the ward where they were donated. Surpluses, if any, could be shared with other wards within the stake or with other stakes in the Church. The First Presidency's message concluded with the admonition that the program's success depended on the faithfulness of the Saints themselves. [^4]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe First Presidency reaffirmed the Presiding Bishopric's prime responsibility in directing the welfare program. The Presidency appointed a Church Relief Committee to aid the Bishopric with the details of administration. Elder Melvin J. Ballard of the Council of the Twelve was named chairman of the committee and Harold B. Lee and Mark Austin as members.

The Church Security (Welfare) Committee in April 1938: (from left) Ted De Bry, J. Frank Ward, Mark Austin, Stringham A. Stevens, Campbell M. Brown, Harold B. Lee, J. Reuben Clark, Heber J. Grant, David O. McKay, Melvin J. Ballard, John A. Widtsoe, Albert E. Bowen, Sylvester Q. Cannon, Henry D. Moyle, and Robert L. Judd. (Church Archives)

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCTheir assignment was to motivate and coordinate the welfare activities of local Church units.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCA new level of Church administration, the region, was created to coordinate the functioning of the welfare program. A quarter of a century later the functions of these regions would be expanded to include the correlation of other Church activities besides welfare, and in 1967 Regional Representatives would be called to play a key role in training and supervising stake leaders.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe original fourteen welfare regions were set up at a series of meetings beginning April 21, 1936, in Ogden, Utah, and continuing at other points in the western United States and Canada through May 8. Each region, consisting of four to sixteen stakes, was to have a storehouse where surpluses from its own stakes or from other regions could be exchanged.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCFundamental Principles Reemphasized

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCAt the October 1936 general conference, the First Presidency reviewed the welfare program's accomplishments during the past six months. An immediate objective had been to provide for the estimated fifteen thousand Church members receiving direct public relief rather than being involved in work programs. The Presidency, however, reminded the Church that there had been a more fundamental objective:

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCOur primary purpose was to set up, insofar as it might be possible, a system under which the curse of idleness would be done away with, the evils of a dole abolished, and independence, industry, thrift and self-respect be once more established amongst our people. The aim of the Church is to help the people help themselves. Work is to be re-enthroned as the ruling principle of the lives of our Church membership.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCOur great leader, Brigham Young, under similar conditions, said: "Set the poor to work-setting out orchards, splitting rails, digging ditches, making fences, or anything useful, and so enable them to buy meat and flour and the necessities of life."

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThis admonition is as timely today as when Brigham Young made it. [^5]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe First Presidency in outlining the program had cautioned: "Relief is not to be normally given as charity; it is to be distributed for work or service rendered."

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCExpanding on this idea, President David O. McKay declared:

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCIt is something to supply clothing to the scantily clad, to furnish ample food to those whose table is thinly spread, to give activity to those who are fighting desperately the despair that comes from enforced idleness, but after all is said and done, the greatest blessings that will accrue from the Church Security Plan are spiritual. Outwardly, every act seems to be directed toward the physical: re-making of dresses and suits of clothes, canning fruits and vegetables, storing foodstuffs, choosing of fertile fields for settlement-all seem strictly temporal, but permeating all these acts, inspiring and sanctifying them, is the element of spirituality. [^6]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCIn a key general conference address in 1937, President J. Reuben Clark focused on the responsibilities of individuals and families. He exhorted:

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCLet us avoid debt as we would avoid a plague; where we are now in debt let us get out of debt; if not today, then tomorrow.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCLet us straitly and strictly live within out incomes, and save a little.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCLet every head of every household see to it that he has on hand enough food and clothing, and, where possible, fuel also, for at least a year ahead. You of small means put your money in food stuffs and wearing apparel, not in stocks and bonds; you of large means will think you know how to care for yourselves, but I may venture to suggest that you do not speculate. Let every head of every household aim to own his own home, free from mortgage. Let every man who has a garden spot, garden it; every man who owns a farm, farm it.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCLet us again clothe ourselves with these proved and sterling virtues-honesty, truthfulness, chastity, sobriety, temperance, industry and thrift; let us discard all covetousness and greed. [^7]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCA most comprehensive exposition of the philosophy underlying the welfare program was presented by President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., in 1939 at a citizens conference in Estes Park, Colorado. President Clark explained:

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCWhile ... the first task of the Church Welfare Plan is to supply food, clothing and shelter, it was recognized from the outset that the measures taken to meet this task would not be cures but palliatives, would be treating the symptoms and not the disease, and that as rapidly as possible treatments must be developed to meet the financial disorders of the social and economic body. Many of these disorders appeared so clearly discernible and so urgent that a tendency to broaden the scope of our operations to include them all has had to be constantly and consciously restrained.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe general economic principle behind the Church Plan is to build up, develop, and establish individual security which promotes and preserves religious free agency and civic freedom and liberty, as against the presently touted tendencies to set up an alleged mass security which destroys all three.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCPresident Clark believed that all able-bodied individuals were entitled to the opportunity of earning "the necessaries and the essential comforts of life, which embrace food, clothing, shelter, hospitalization, education, amusement and cultural activities, and above all, opportunity for spiritual growth and joy." Yet everyone's needs are not the same. Instead of handing out a standardized cash allotment to all, "the Church Plan aims to give wisely in kind and amount... the exact help which each individual needs." President Clark was convinced that seeking absolute economic equality has generally meant "a leveling downward not upward."

Administration of Heber J. GrantHC"Not all Church members believe in the plan," President Clark regretted. "It is hard to persuade some people who can get something for little or nothing that they should labor for what they get .... "But, President Clark gratefully recognized, "the bulk of the Church has been devotedly loyal to the Plan, else it would not have worked at all."

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCPresident Clark contrasted the Church's plan with the large bureaucratic agencies of government that are often quite impersonal. The Church's program helps Latter-day Saints keep the commandment to love their neighbors. The sack of flour given across the back fence "hallows the giver, and raises and inspirits with the human love and sympathy behind it, him who thankfully eats it "President Clark further pointed out that only a handful of administrators at the general level received a salary, a modest one, while some fourteen thousand supervisors at the regional or local levels served without any material compensation.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCFinally, President J. Reuben Clark insisted, the Church Welfare Program was not designed to set up any collectivism nor to compete with private enterprise. "The Church does not aim to destroy but to promote individualism." [^8]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCExpansion of the Welfare Program

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCStatistics during the later 1930s reflect a quickening of the pace in providing relief for the economically distressed. Reported Church expenditures for welfare increased by more than one-third between 1935 and 1936. The output of welfare projects in the latter year included 37,661 bottles of fruit, 175,621 cans of fruit or vegetables, 134,425 pounds of fresh vegetables, 105,000 pounds of flour, 1,393 quilts, and 363,640 items of clothing. Fast offerings, a major source of cash within the welfare program, continued to receive emphasis. Consequently, there were substantial gains in both the number paying and in the size of the offerings. Furthermore, wards and stakes continued to acquire farms, canneries, and other projects to produce food, clothing, or other items required to help those in need.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe Co-operative Securities Corporation was created in 1937 to hold title to welfare program properties and to coordinate its finances. This corporation also made loans to individuals who could not borrow from banks or through other ordinary channels.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCFrom the beginning, an objective of the welfare program had been to inculcate the virtue of productive work and self-reliance. Many Latter-day Saints who wanted to work, however, could not find jobs because of age or because of physical, mental, or emotional handicap. Consequently, in 1938 Church leaders decided to launch a new program which they named "Deseret Industries." The new venture was

Deseret Industries, established in 1938, provides jobs for the elderly, the handicapped, and others who cannot obtain employment. Early administrative offices were located in an old warehouse in Salt Lake City. (Church Archives)

The first Deseret Industries truck. (Church Archives)

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCpatterned after the Good Will Industries sponsored by a group of Protestant churches in southern California. Members would donate clothing, furniture, appliances, newspapers, magazines or other items they no longer needed. Employees would sort, clean, and repair these materials, which could then be sold at thrifty prices in the Deseret Industries' own retail stores. Proceeds from these sales would pay the employees' wages and cover other operating expenses. The modest salary could be supplemented with help from the bishops' storehouse if necessary. The important thing was that these members were doing worthwhile work, and had proven to themselves and to the world that they could earn their own way.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe Relief Society continued to play a vital role in helping families to help themselves. With the encouragement of the First Presidency, the Relief Society in 1937 sponsored courses in such homemaking skills as sewing, baking, food preserving, etc. Individual instruction was provided in the home, and group classes convened at welfare program canning or sewing centers.

Welfare Plan in Perspective

Even though the welfare plan followed already well-known principles, Latter-day Saints often refer to it as an example of the Church being guided by divine revelation. As early as 1933, President J. Reuben Clark referred to President Heber J. Grant's having received a revelation directing him to prepare a plan from out of the Doctrine and Covenants.<_P> [^9]Harold B. Lee's testimony of divine guidance in 1935 has already been cited above. William E. Berrett, a well-known Latter-day Saint historian, described the process by which the welfare program was then developed by 1936. "President Grant related that individuals had asked him whether he had been talking to heavenly beings, whether the Lord had given him a vision. His answer was, 'No, I have not talked to angels; I have not had a vision.' And he recounted that the word of the Lord... was already given. A plan was worked out in accordance to earlier revelations." On another occasion Berrett recalled that President Grant had stated: "We have been meeting morning after morning for months .... After we had evolved a plan I went especially in prayer to the Lord and prayed with all earnestness to know whether or not this plan met with his approval. In response there came over me, from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet such a sweet spirit and a burning within, that I knew God approved." Berrett concluded that this revelation was in the form of a divine confirmation of what had been developed through the exercise of free agency by the Lord's servants. [^10]

Elder Harold B. Lee regarded the welfare program of the 1930s as a fulfillment of prophecy:

. . . the voice of the Lord was declared back in 1894, in October of that year, by that man whom we sustained then as the prophet, seer, and revelator unto this Church· He said:

"So far as temporal matters are concerned we must go to work to provide for ourselves· The day will come, as we have all been told, that we shall see the necessity of making our own shoes and our own clothing, and providing our own foodstuffs, and uniting together to carry out the purposes of the Lord. We will be preserved in the mountains of Israel in the days of God's judgments I therefore say unto you, my brethren and sisters, prepare for that which is to come."

The voice of the Lord was again heard in 1936, when again we were told by our leaders that there should be a production of all the things needed by those who would otherwise be unable to provide for themselves. [^11]

Did the welfare program have any significance beyond relieving economic distress during the depression? Elder Lee recalled that in 1936 some stake presidents were critical of the Church's efforts, believing that the effort of reacquiring projects like the old tithing yards was not worthwhile.

It was in August [1936]... there was an upturn in business, so much that some were questioning the wisdom of this kind of activity, and why hadn't the Church done it before now? There came to me... a distinct impression that was as real as though someone had spoken audibly, and this was the impression that came, and has stayed with me through these years: There is no individual in the Church that knows the real purpose for which the program then launched had been intended, but hardly before the Church has made sufficient preparation, that reason would be made manifest, and when it comes it will challenge every resource of the Church to meet it. [^12]

What is this purpose? Elder Lee recalled that in 1936 Elder Melvin J. Ballard was repeatedly asked, "Is this the beginning of the United Order?" He consistently replied in the negative and added: "... but it may be that in this movement the Lord may be giving his people an examination to see how far they have come toward a condition where they might live as one."

The role of the welfare program as a "schoolmaster" was clearly set forth in an oft-quoted statement by President Clark:

We have all said that the Welfare Plan is not the United Order and was not intended to be. However, I should like to suggest to you that perhaps, after all, when the Welfare Plan gets thoroughly into operation-it is not so yet-we shall not be so very far from carrying out the great fundamentals of the United Order. [^13]

Notes

Chapter 8. The Welfare Plan

<_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P>

---
Notas:
[^1] Improvement Era 31 (January 1929): 257.
[^2] Conference Report, April 1906, p. 3.
[^3] Improvement Era 31 (June 1928): 744-45, 794.
[^4] Council of the Twelve circular letter, November 11, 1927, in Juvenile Instructor 61 (November 1927): 620-21.
[^5] Juvenile Instructor 62 (November and December 1928): 620-26, 681;63 (June 1928): 299-309; Improvement Era 31 (June 1928): 792-94.
[^6] Council of the Twelve circular letter, March 12, 1928, in Improvement Era 31 (April 1928): 516-19.
[^7] First Presidency circular letter, May 29, 1929, in James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 5:267-68.
[^8] In the Realm of Quorum Activity, Second Series, 1931, p. 3.
[^9] A Guide for Quorums of the Melchizedek Priesthood, 1928, p. 4.
[^10] Minutes of the Aaronic Priesthood Convention held April 4, 1931, p. 3., MS, Church Archives.
[^11] Minutes of the Aaronic Priesthood Convention held April 4, 1931, p. 3., MS, Church Archives.
[^12] Minutes of the Aaronic Priesthood Convention held April 4, 1931, pp. 4, 9-10. MS, Church Archives.
[^13] General Priesthood Committee minutes, December 12, 1911, p. 265.
