Richard O. Cowan, Church in the Twentieth Century ( 1985)

Chapter 9

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCNew Strides in Church Activity 1928-1941

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe second decade of Heber J. Grant's administration not only brought the formation of the Church's welfare plan but also witnessed a series of rather extensive restructurings of other basic program and activity patterns. Church leaders were seeking the optimum method of accomplishing the weighty assignment of perfecting the Saints and sharing the gospel with the world.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe Priesthood-Auxiliary Movement, 1928-1937

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCEfforts to enhance the effectiveness of Church programs by consolidating activities sponsored by the priesthood quorums and auxiliary organizations came to be known as the Priesthood-Auxiliary Movement. There were two important guiding principles:

Administration of Heber J. GrantHC(1) The priesthood was to assume its proper place at the center and core of all Church activity. Declared the Presiding Bishopric: "The priesthood is the very foundation upon which the Church is built, as also the framework which supports the structure. It is the most potent means of real service. Unless the quorums of the Priesthood generally are trained and active in the performance of their duties, there cannot be the progress that there should be.<_P>" [^1]Official publications made frequent reference to President Joseph F. Smith's 1906 prophecy of a time "... when every council of the Priesthood... will understand its duty; will assume its own responsibility, will magnify its calling, and fill its place in the Church .... When that time shall come, there will not be so much necessity for work that is now being done by the auxiliary organizations, because it will be done by the regular quorums of the Priesthood." [^2]

<_P>

1928Priesthood-Auxiliary Movement launched1929Tabernacle Choir network broadcasts began MIA magazines merged; Primary and Religion Classes combined1931Aaronic Priesthood youth correlation program outlined1933Churchwide program launched to reactivate Aaronic Priesthood adults1935General Authorities released from auxiliary presidencies and boards1936Welfare plan, stake missions, and youth award programs instituted1937President Heber J. Grant visited missions in Europe1938LeGrand Richards, new Presiding Bishop, emphasized youth work1940First Presidency declared Church organizations exist to strengthen the home; formerly separate genealogy meetings became class in Sunday School1941Assistants to the Twelve appointed

Administration of Heber J. GrantHC(2) Church programs needed to be simplified. Because all Church organizations served the same group of members, Elder Melvin J. Ballard asserted that "There must be one unified, simplified program for this work. No one organization in the Church can do everything for the entire group. There has been delegated to each organization its specific field." He was concerned about the frequent duplication in the lessons and activities of the priesthood quorums and auxiliary organizations and explained that the priesthood-auxiliary plan should remedy "this competition and rivalry and multiplicity of meetings." [^3]These same two objectives would also be at the heart of the priesthood correlation developments of the 1960s.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCChurch leaders announced that Beginning in 1928 formal theological study would be shifted from the weekly priesthood meetings into the Church Sunday School, which was to be lengthened to a full two hours. [^4]<_P/>Lessons for adults were to be prepared under the direction of the Council of the Twelve. Changing the name "Parents' Class" to "Gospel Doctrine Class" reflected this course's heightened status as the official gospel study period for the priesthood and adult women of the Church. Sunday School Superintendent David O. McKay regarded these developments as a "distinct epoch" in the seventy-nine-year history of Sunday School.<_P> [^5]

<_P><_P>

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCChurch leaders also announced that the quorum Business instruction in basic duties could be conducted in Brief priesthood activity meetings held in conjunction with MIA on Tuesday nights. This made a separate weekly priesthood meeting unnecessary. [^6]<_P/>MIA officials anticipated that this combination would lend impetus to the association's activities. By the early 1930s, however, most wards and stakes had found greater success in scheduling the priesthood activity meetings on Sunday mornings Before, during, or following Sunday School. Numerous reports from the field indicated that Church members found the resulting schedule changes to be confusing; therefore the attempt to combine priesthood and Sunday School meetings was dropped.

<_P>

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCEven though the familiar pattern of a separate Sunday morning priesthood meeting was restored in 1938, the priest-hood-auxiliary movement had more firmly established some important principles: (1) The auxiliaries were truly "aids to the priesthood." For example, the concepts of the MIA as the "activity arm of the priesthood" and of the Gospel Doctrine class as the prime occasion for formal scripture study continued to influence the direction of Church programs in later decades. (2) Emphasis on the primacy of the priesthood led to new efforts at strengthening the quorums and making their activity more effective in the lives of Church members.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCConsolidating Activities

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe effort to simplify Church meetings and programs resulted in the consolidation of formerly separate activities in several areas. Since 1889 the Young Woman's Journal had served the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association as its official organ. In 1897 the Improvement Era replaced the Contributor as the official publication of the Young Men's association. As the work of the two MIAs came more and more to be united, the idea of consolidating these two magazines gained popularity. In fact, as early as 1907 the auxiliary organizations' Committee on Adjustments proposed a unification of all adult Church periodicals.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCAs part of the priesthood-auxiliary movement's spirit of simplifying Church programs, the decision was made in 1929 to combine the two MIA-sponsored magazines. At the June conference during that year, a "storybook wedding" dramatized the union of the two publications. The name Improvement Era was retained Because it fit the two associations equally. The first of the combined issues appeared in November 1929. Not only had it been enlarged, but other improvements in format were made as well. The editorial board included representatives from both former magazines.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCBeginning in 1878 the Primary Association had provided religious training for boys and girls one afternoon each week. Another program had resulted when in 1890 the Utah Territory prohibited the teaching of religion in public schools. In October of that same year the Church Board of Education organized the Religion Class program to provide religious instruction for children, supplementing the secular training they received in the elementary schools.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCAmong the 1907 recommendations of the Committee on Adjustment was the proposal that the similar programs of the Primary Association and the Religion Class be merged. This was accomplished in 1929 when the activities sponsored by Religion Class were absorbed into those of the Primary. [^7]This step was consistent with the desire to consolidate and simplify Church programs which characterized the priesthood-auxiliary movement.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCStrengthening Melchized ek Priesthood Quorums

Administration of Heber J. GrantHC"For over a hundred years the Lord has had in his Church ... a force for good," Church leaders asserted, "but until recently part of this force (the quorums of the priesthood) has been left unused. The quorums are a mighty potential power for good. The clarion call for the present is to turn this potentiality into actuality." [^8]To this end in 1928, the first year of the priesthood-auxiliary movement, the Church issued A Guide for Quorums of the Melchizedek Priesthood. After considering the nature and authority of the priesthood, this manual then devoted most of its space to the work of the quorum. In his preface, Elder Rudger Clawson, President of the Council of the Twelve, wrote: "... by a simple but definite organization for quorum activity, the miscellaneous and scattered undertakings of the Priesthood may be concentrated and made more effective for the good of the Priesthood and the Church." [^9]The Guide called for the organization of standing committees to supervise such concerns as personal welfare-spiritual, intellectual, financial, and physical; class instruction; encouragement of Church service and instruction in performing ordinances; and the sponsoring of social or athletic events. This committee system of administering quorums, though modified somewhat from time to time, has continued.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe Guide may well be regarded as the Church's first Melchizedek Priesthood handbook. Its material was quoted repeatedly and extensively in subsequent instructions, and it became the foundation for later handbooks. When Elder John A. Widtsoe compiled his Priesthood and Church Government a decade later, he drew heavily from this work in his chapters dealing with the priesthood quorums.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCAaronic Priesthood Youth Correlation Plan

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCChurch leaders devoted considerable thought to how the Aaronic Priesthood should be strengthened. Their attention focused on qualifications for missionary service and on the various Church organizations working with the youth. They realized that "there should be, and necessarily must be, correlation of the work of these various agencies... in preparing the young men for missions.<_P>" [^10]

<_P>

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCAfter extensive preparation, the Aaronic Priesthood Correlation Plan was introduced at a special meeting held April 4, 1931, in conjunction with the general conference. A pamphlet outlined how various Church programs were to be correlated in working with the young men of Aaronic Priesthood age: Quorums would train members in priesthood responsibilities, promote worthiness and Church activity, and provide for social or fraternal needs. The Sunday School would teach gospel principles and ordinances, Church history, and doctrine. The Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association would provide a practical application of gospel principles in the physical, moral, social, recreational, cultural, as well as spiritual dimensions of life. The overall objective was "to prepare young men for missionary activity, for other Church service, and for life." [^11]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCIt can be seen that the above assignments did not represent a redefinition of the roles of these Church organizations. The new plan's contribution was that the work of these agencies was to be correlated more completely than ever before.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCAchieving this objective was facilitated in monthly ward "correlation meetings." Under the personal direction of the bishopric, executives and teachers working with the boys in Aaronic Priesthood quorums, Sunday School, and YMMIA would meet "to correlate activities and cooperate in the welfare of the young men"; special attention was to be given to leadership training and to involving the youth in planning and directing their own activities. Similar meetings would be held at the stake and all-Church levels to coordinate programs and instructions. [^12]<_P/>A special survey revealed that many boys had not yet been reached by Church programs, and through the Aaronic Priesthood Correlation Plan positive steps were taken to reclaim these youth. The Presiding Bishopric announced a goal of having one million priesthood assignments performed during 1935, and that every boy ought to perform at least one assignment. The following year they introduced certificates of award for those quorums meeting specified minimum standards. When LeGrand Richards became Presiding Bishop in 1938, the Aaronic Priesthood received further stimulus and made even greater progress.

<_P>

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCReactivating Aaronic Priesthood Adults

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCDuring the 1920s and especially during the 1930s, Church members began moving from the Intermountain area to seek better economic opportunities. At the same time, more non-Mormons began moving into Latter-day Saint communities. This meant that an increasing number of Church members were living in non-Mormon environments. One result of this influence was a larger number of young men becoming inactive and growing to adulthood without receiving the Melchizedek Priesthood. Even before the 1920s, however, the Church had been concerned about adult bearers of the Aaronic Priesthood.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCAs early as 1911 the General Priesthood Committee considered what should be done for these men. Because there was a campaign to have everyone enrolled in his proper quorum, the Committee wondered if inactive men should now associate with the younger members of their respective Aaronic Priesthood quorums. President Joseph F. Smith answered that question: "It is not a good idea to mix up the old men with bad habits with young boys. If they are not worthy to meet with their quorums," he instructed, "they should be labored with and that to get them to reform." [^13]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCIn 1926 the Presiding Bishopric emphasized that these "overgrown members" of Aaronic Priesthood quorums cannot be dropped, but should be invited to attend whatever priesthood class was closest to their age and interests. [^14]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCMuch of the credit for pioneering a successful program belongs to A. P. A. Glad, bishop of the Salt Lake Twenty-eighth Ward. At first he invited senior members of the Aaronic Priesthood to attend the elders quorum, but he soon discovered these men did not feel at home. "The elders are so far advanced," the inactive men explained. "We would like to attend but feel out of place."

Guide for Stake and Ward Leaders of Adult Members of Aaronic Priesthood

Throughout the Adult Aaronic Priesthood program, instituted in the 1930's, the Church reached out to reclaim those who had fallen into inactivity. This cartoon appeared on the cover of a guide for program leaders. (Harold B. Lee Library, BYU)

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe bishop realized that these men needed a separate class they could feel was their own. He called a distinct group of enthusiastic and devoted men to give their full attention to this program. The first session of the class convened September 18, 1932. Group members were involved in planning their own activities; one of Bishop Glad's slogans was "We learn to do by doing." [^15]After eight months of persistent effort and consistent missionary labor, forty men had been brought into activity. M. Main Stauffer, a member of the original group, recalled how Bishop Glad rousted him out of bed to get him to attend the class. For him this began a pattern of regular Church activity, which led to his receiving the Melchizedek Priesthood. He went on to serve as high priests group leader, bishop, and high councilor. [^16]<_P/>Bishop Glad's work became the basis of the program introduced Churchwide during the fall of 1933.

<_P>

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCMissionary Work During the Depression Decade

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCWhile the Church was taking steps to reactivate those who were already members, it was also reaching out to those who had not yet heard the gospel. The Church continued to place emphasis on missionary work despite the problems caused by the Great Depression. Unusual missionary service characterized the lives of the General Authorities who presided over the Church in the 1930s. Almost all had served personally as missionaries, many for periods far longer than the two years normally given by faithful Latter-day Saints. President David O. McKay had made a yearlong around-the-world tour of the Church's missions in 1921. In addition, he and several other members of the Twelve had taken their turns presiding over the European Mission. Almost all who served in the First Council of the Seventy had acted as mission presidents, either before or following their calls as General Authorities, some for prolonged periods of time. Charles A. Callis had presided over the Southern States Mission from 1908 until 1934, when he became a member of the Twelve. Rey L. Pratt of the First Council of the Seventy had been president of the Mexican Mission from 1907 until his death in 1931. Samuel O. Bennion, who was called to the First Council of Seventy in 1933, presided over the Central States Mission and directed Church publishing activities in Independence, Missouri, from 1906 until 1935. Elder Joseph W. McMurrin, also a President of the Seventy, had served fifteen years as a short-term or local missionary, plus nearly twenty-five years as a full-time missionary; he acted as a counselor to the European Mission president just before the turn of the century, and presided over the California Mission for more than a decade, 1919-31. With such a background, these leaders enthusiastically gave impetus to the Church's missionary efforts.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCEconomic hardships of the early 1930s, however, curtailed many missionary activities, and reduced the number of missionaries. Because of the depression, many families felt that they needed their sons to work at home, and therefore could not afford a mission experience. Consequently the number of missionaries entering the field fell sharply as the effects of the depression spread throughout the country. During the 1920s eight hundred to thirteen hundred were called by the First Presidency as missionaries each year; this represented from 13 percent to 20 percent of the total young men of missionary age. In 1932, on the other hand, only 399 were able to respond, or only 5 percent of the potential. The shortage of missionaries was compounded by the fact that many had to be released early because of economic difficulties at home.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCMission presidents from all over the world reported that the work was being handicapped severely because of the lack of missionaries, and urgently requested that more be sent. In France, for example, all but four branches had to be closed to missionary work; the scattered members were organized into a "branch at large" and could be contacted only by letter. The decision to begin proselyting in Italy was delayed, not because of possible religious opposition but because of depression-caused missionary shortage. [^17]However, the consequences of the missionary shortage were not all negative.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCTo compensate for reduced numbers, the remaining missionaries were determined to work harder and more systematically in order to maintain productivity. Ideas on effective methods of contacting and teaching were incorporated in The Missionary's Handbook, published in 1937. In that same year, President LeGrand Richards of the Southern States Mission first issued "The Message of Mormonism," outlining twenty-four weekly presentations of basic gospel topics. Missionaries also employed more innovative techniques to find interested persons to teach: A missionary chorus attracted favorable note in England and Ireland. Athletics were especially useful; a missionary basketball team made friends in Czechoslovakia, and in Germany four Elders were recruited as basketball judges for the 1936 Berlin Olympics. Lectures featuring colored slides of ancient America were particularly productive in making contacts. The Church Radio, Publicity, and Mission Literature Committee was organized in 1935 to supply materials for these illustrated lectures. With Gordon B. Hinckley (recently returned from a mission to Britain) as executive secretary, the committee directed the preparation of tracts and other mission literature and prepared scripts for special radio programs.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCOne beneficial by-product of the Great Depression was a greater involvement of local members in missionary work. In California, members' having missionaries stay in their homes to cut expenses proved to be a blessing to both the members and the missionaries. Alabama Saints traveled long distances in order to take investigators to district conferences. In many areas members provided referrals, enabling missionaries to phase out less productive door-to-door tracting. The missionary corps around the world was expanded as local members donated several hours a week to go out with the full-time missionaries or accepted special short-term mission calls. Church members became involved in yet another way. In many areas, congregations had been led by missionaries rather than by local officers. But as the Great Depression cut the number of Elders, the Saints had to assume more responsibility for their own affairs. This not only freed the missionaries' time for proselyting, but it also enabled the local Saints to take greater pride in their own branches. The shortage of missionaries "has probably been a blessing in disguise," President Heber J. Grant concluded, "because it has forced us to make greater use of the local Saints.<_P>" [^18]The depression decade also witnessed a new missionary thrust within the stakes.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCStake Missions

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCStake missions were implemented Churchwide during the 1930s. Latter-day Saints began to move into areas of predominantly non-Mormon population, such as California and the Pacific Northwest, and as non-Mormons began to move into the predominantly Mormon Intermountain region, many stake leaders began to organize efforts to preach the gospel to their new nonmember neighbors.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCIn 1932 J. Golden Kimball, a member of the First Council of the Seventy, reported that hundreds had been converted to the Church as result of missionary efforts in Los Angeles, Maricopa, Liberty, Salt Lake, Grant, East Jordan, and other stakes. This work was going forward under the direction of the several stake presidents. Elder Kimball emphasized that all who held the office of seventy had the particular duty of preaching the gospel and, therefore, admonished them to be willing to serve as stake missionaries. He wrote: "We know of no more promising field for missionary activity than right here at home where, who knows, precious souls are brought to us or we to them for the express purpose that they might hear the gospel sound." [^19]

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCAt the general conference in April 1936, Church leaders announced that supervision of these stake missions was being assigned to the First Council of the Seventy and that a mission was to be organized immediately in each stake. The Twelve and the Seventy anticipated that the new stake missionary work "can be made to rival in importance" the accomplishments of the full-time missionary work "for which the Church is so universally noted." [^20]

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCStatistics for the first full year of operation of the expanded stake missionary program revealed its effectiveness. By the end of 1937, some 105 of the 118 stakes had organized missions. A total of 2,030 missionaries were instrumental in the baptism of 1,757 converts. In addition, 2,756 members of the Church had been brought back into activity. One ward reported that as a result of stake missionary efforts there had been a 50 percent increase in overall activity among its members. [^21]

Tabernacle ChoirHCReaching the Public

Tabernacle ChoirHCDuring the Great Depression the Church employed a variety of methods to supplement the work being done by its increasingly scarce proselyting missionaries. These methods, developed during the 1930s, would become even more important in later decades.

Tabernacle ChoirHCThe new medium of radio broadcasting emerged during the 1920s, and the Church was involved almost from the beginning. In 1924 the Church purchased a radio station whose call letters soon were changed to the familiar KSL. The Tabernacle Choir began its weekly nationwide broadcasts in 1929. At first the announcer had to climb a tall ladder to reach the only microphone available. The series was planned for only three months, but favorable response from throughout the United States and from Europe prompted the network to continue the program indefinitely. During its first three years the broadcasts were on Monday afternoons. An average of two hundred choir members donated their time without compensation, and Salt Lake area employers cooperated by giving singers time off from the job. The choir program proved to be a very productive source of goodwill toward the Church and fifty years later would be acclaimed as the oldest continuous program in the history of American network radio. Several local Latter-day Saint groups also originated radio programs of their own. Elders in the Eastern States Mission were especially successful in broadcasting their messages over the air. The Church early showed an interest in international shortwave radio, and a portion of general conference was broadcast to Europe via this medium on April 5, 1936. Later that same year the Church applied for a license to operate its own shortwave station, but was not able to obtain its own shortwave transmitters until 1962.

Tabernacle ChoirHCPartly as a result of the Tabernacle Choir's increasing popularity, Temple Square continued to be an effective missionary tool. Many visitors went miles out of their way to be present for the choir broadcasts or noon organ recitals. Temple Square attracted even more visitors than Yellowstone or other popular national parks in the area.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCExhibits at fairs were another means of sharing the Church's message with the world. An exhibit at the International Hygiene Exposition in 1930 at Dresden, Germany, featured the Mormon health code revealed in the Word of Wisdom. It attracted an average of five thousand visitors per day and resulted in the distribution of over 250,000 pieces of missionary literature. An estimated 2.3 million persons visited the Church's booth at the Chicago Century of Progress Exposition in 1933 and 1934. A changed attitude was reflected as Elder B. H. Roberts, who had been denied the opportunity to speak at Chicago's 1893 Columbian Exposition, was well received as he spoke at the Congress of Religions in conjunction with the 1933 Chicago fair. At the California-Pacific International Exposition held in San Diego during 1935 and 1936, the Church for the first time erected its own exhibit building. The Golden Gate International Exposition was held on Treasure Island in San Francisco Bay in 1939 and 1940. Capitalizing on the Tabernacle Choir's popularity, the Church designed its exhibit building in the form of a "miniature Tabernacle" with a fifty-seat auditorium in which missionaries could present illustrated lectures on the history and beliefs of the Church.

Scale model of the Salt Lake Tabernacle on display at Chicago's "Century of Progress" exposition in 1933 helps to tell the Church's story to hundreds of visitors. (Church Archives)

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCBeginning in 1937, the annual Hill Cumorah Pageant became one of the Church's most successful public relations ventures. Featuring a cast composed mostly of missionaries serving in the area, "America's Witness for Christ" was presented on three large stages constructed on the slopes of the hill. It depicted scenes from the Book of Mormon, culminating with the Savior's visit to the ancient inhabitants of America. Just a month before the first pageant was presented, Elder Harold I. Hansen, who had just received his bachelor's degree in drama, entered the Eastern States Mission. He was immediately assigned to help with the final preparations and rehearsals. He believed that his call to that mission at that time resulted from divine guidance. He would continue to be associated with the pageant for the next forty years, most of the time as its director. Over the years, additional stages, lighting, and other technical effects were added. During post-World War II years the annual attendance would regularly top one hundred thousand.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCMoves Toward Greater Correlation, 1939-1940

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCWith the stimulation of Church activities during the 1930s came an increased financial burden as well as greater demands on the time and energy of the Saints. To lessen this load, the General Authorities undertook a new study of all Church programs with the goal of correlation and simplification where possible.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCIn January 1939 the First Presidency affirmed that the real reason for all Church organizations "is to instruct the people in the gospel, to lead them to a testimony of its truthfulness, to care for those in need, to carry on the work entrusted to us by the Lord, to promote culture among the people, and to encourage, foster, and secure among the people the living of righteous lives .... The work of the auxiliary organizations and of our educational institutions should be coordinated, unified, and standardized to avoid duplication and overlapping, and to provide the training which is required by the young people." The Presidency therefore appointed a Committee of Correlation and Coordination, headed by three members of the Twelve. The committee's assignment was "to define, to simplify, to intensify, and to correlate the work of each auxiliary and educational group in the Church .... " [^22]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCFollowing this study, President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., representing the First Presidency, convened a meeting of auxiliary executives on March 29, 1940. He first emphatically declared:

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThat the sole ultimate aim and purpose of the Auxiliary organization of the Church is to plant and make grow in every member of the Church a testimony of the Christ and of the Gospel, of the divinity of the mission of Joseph Smith and of the Church, and to bring the people to order their lives in accordance with the laws and principles of the restored Gospel and Priesthood.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThat the home is the basis of a righteous life, that no other instrumentality can take its place nor fulfill its essential functions, and that the utmost the Auxiliaries can do is to aid the home in its problems, giving special aid and succor where such is necessary.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCPresident Clark next outlined the specific role each organization was to play in achieving these objectives. He then announced the formation of the Church Union Board of the Auxiliaries to "coordinate, consolidate, eliminate, simplify and adjust the work of the auxiliary organizations" in accordance with the outline he had set forth. [^23]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCIn July 1940 the First Presidency announced that "the auxiliaries had taken the first step in the direction of eliminating duplication and overlapping of classes and meetings by providing for the incorporation into the curriculum of the Sunday School classes the work which had previously been accomplished (since the early 1920s) in the weekly genealogical meetings." [^24]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCIn his presentation to the auxiliaries, President Clark had also proposed the possible merger of existing Church magazines. One action in this direction was discontinuing the Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, which had been published since 1910, and transferring its material to the Improvement Era.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCDevelopments in Administration

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCDuring the 1930s the Church continued to grow throughout North America and abroad. This expansion was reflected in two extended trips overseas taken by General Authorities. During a three-month tour, President Heber J. Grant and other Church leaders visited the Saints throughout the missions of Europe. Wherever he went, the president encouraged the Saints to stay where they were and build up the Church there. Large crowds at public meetings and extensive press coverage helped build goodwill for the Mormons in areas where they had generally been unknown or misunderstood. When President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., joined President Grant to commemorate the British Mission's centennial, this marked the first occasion when two members of the First Presidency were in Europe at the same time. Then, in 1938, Elder George Albert Smith of the Council of the Twelve made a six-month visit to the Pacific missions. He was received very warmly by the Saints in the various island missions. A high point was his participation in the Maori Saints' annual "hui tau" conference. As President Grant had done in Europe the year before, Elder Smith not only strengthened Church members in the Pacific, but also developed more favorable attitudes toward the Church through interviews with the press, speaking on the radio, and meeting with governmental officials.

President Heber J. Grant and other Church leaders mark the British Mission's centennial in 1938 at the River Ribble, site of the first baptisms in England. Shown here (front row, from left) are Ruth May Fox, George D. Pyper, J. Reuben Clark, Jr., President Grant, Richard R. Lyman, and Hugh B. Brown. (Deseret News photo)

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCContinued Church growth and a multiplication in the number of stakes and missions around the world placed an ever heavier administrative load on the shoulders of the General Authorities. Consequently, steps needed to be taken to lighten their assignments and to provide more help.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCGeneral Authorities and the Auxiliaries

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCWhile leading sisters in the Church have served as the presidents of the Relief Society, YWMIA, and Primary, General Authorities served for some years as the superintendents of the Sunday School and YMMIA.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCWilford Woodruff, for example, was serving as superintendent of the YMMIA when he became President of the Church in 1889, and he continued in both capacities. Upon President Woodruff's death in 1898, Lorenzo Snow was sustained in both of these offices. When Joseph F. Smith became President of the Church in 1901, he also became superintendent not only of the YMMIA but also of the Sunday School. Following President Smith's death in 1918, Elder David O. McKay became superintendent of the Sunday School, and Elder George Albert Smith became superintendent of the YMMIA. When Elder McKay was called as Second Counselor in the First Presidency in October, 1934, he was released from the Sunday School superintendency, being succeeded by a non-General Authority. Consistent with this new pattern, the First Presidency decided to release the superintendency of the YMMIA, all three of whom were Apostles. On January 18, 1935, the First Presidency wrote to them:

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCFor some time past it has been evident that the growth of the Church and the ever-increasing demands upon the time and strength of the General Authorities would make imperative the releasing of members of the First Presidency and of the Council of the Twelve from the direct responsibility of presiding over the general boards of the auxiliary organizations. It has been seventeen years since one of the First Presidency so officiated.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCIt is now deemed advisable, indeed absolutely necessary, to relieve members of the Twelve of their duties not only as presiding officers, but also as members of the general boards. The duties of the Apostleship, as well as the health of the individuals, demand that this action be taken without further delay. <_P> [^25]

<_P>

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCBeginning in the mid-1930s one or more members of the Twelve were assigned as advisers to each of the auxiliary organizations. This pattern continued until the late 1970s when General Authorities once again were called to form the presidencies of the Sunday School and the Young Men. They were not members of the Twelve, however, but were drawn from the recently expanded ranks of the First Quorum of Seventy.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCAssistants to the Twelve

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCAs the number of stakes and missions multiplied, the administrative load carried by the General Authorities increased accordingly. At the close of 1900 there had been forty-three stakes; the one hundredth stake was organized in 1928, and by April 1941 there were 137 of these units. Not only did this mean a greater number of stake conferences to meet, but during the 1930s the Saints had increasingly moved to scattered areas, and stakes had been organized in such distant centers as New York, Washington, Chicago, Seattle, and Honolulu. This was the setting for the decision to create a new group of General Authorities to help shoulder the load. At the April general conference in 1941 the First Presidency announced:

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCIn the past history of the Church, especially in President Brigham Young's time, it was found necessary for the First Presidency or the Twelve or both to call brethren, frequently designated as counselors, to help carry on their assigned work in the Church.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe rapid growth of the Church in recent times, the constantly pressing necessity for increasing our missions in numbers and efficiency that the Gospel may be brought to all men, the continual multiplying of Church interests and activities calling for more rigid and frequent observation, supervision and direction-all have built up an apostolic service of the greatest magnitude.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThe First Presidency and Twelve feel that to meet adequately their great responsibilities and to carry on efficiently this service for the Lord, they should have some help.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCAccordingly it has been decided to appoint Assistants to the Twelve, who shall be high priests, who shall be set apart to act under the direction of the Twelve in the performance of such work as the First Presidency and the Twelve may place upon them.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCThere will be no fixed number of these Assistants. Their number will be increased or otherwise from time to time as the necessity of carrying on the Lord's work seems to dictate to be wise. [^26]

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCInitially five men were named Assistants to the Twelve. As the administrative burden continued to increase, their number was enlarged from time to time so that by 1975 two dozen were serving in this office.

Administration of Heber J. GrantHCEven though the decade of the 1930s is best known in the Church for the formation of the welfare plan, there were many other important strides in refining Church activities. These included improvements in Melchizedek and Aaronic Priesthood programs, efforts to reactivate Church members and to reach out to nonmembers in new ways, and significant moves toward a greater correlation and consolidation of Church activities. These developments have continued to benefit the Saints during succeeding decades.

Assistants to the Twelve were first appointed in 1942. Pictured here are four of the first five men called to this position: (from left) Marion G. Romney, Clifford E. Young, Thomas E. McKay, and Alma Sonne. Not included in this photo is Nicholas G. Smith, who died in 1945. (Church Archives)

Notes

Chapter 9. New Strides in Church Activity 1928-1941

<_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P>

---
Notas:
[^1] Gilbert Scharffs, Mormonism in Germany (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), pp. 80-81; Joseph M. Dixon, "Mormons in the Third Reich: 1933-1945," Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 7 (Spring 1972): 71-85; see also reports by presidents of the German missions in Mission Annual Reports, 1933-1939, MS, Church Archives.
[^2] Reports by President Alfred C. Rees of the East German Mission and M. Douglas Wood of the West German Mission, Mission Annual Reports, 1938, pp. 256 and 736, MS, Church Archives.
[^3] M. Douglas Wood, interview with author, February 3, 1978; M. Douglas Wood in Conference Report, April 1940, pp. 79-81; David F. Boone, "The Worldwide Evacuation of Latter-day Saint Missionaries at the Beginning of World War II" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1981), pp. 35-43.
[^4] Martha Toronto Anderson, A Cherry Tree Behind the Iron Curtain (Salt Lake City: Martha Toronto Anderson, 1977), pp. 31-32; Czechoslovak Mission Manuscript History, June-December 1939, Church Archives.
[^5] Franklin J. Murdock Oral History, interviews by Gordon Irving, 1973, typescript pp. 54-55, Oral History Program, Church Archives.
[^6] Conference Report, April 1940, p. 20.
[^7] Gilbert Scharffs, Mormonism in Germany (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), pp. 104-5.
[^8] Frederick W. Babbel, On Wings of Faith (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1972), pp. 110-11; Scharffs, Germany, p. 111.
[^9] Lee A. Palmer to the Presiding Bishopric, September 21, 1944, LeGrand Richards papers, Church Archives.
[^10] First Presidency circular letter, January 17, 1942, in Improvement Era 45 (February 1942): 74.
[^11] Conference Report, April 1943, pp. 127-28.
[^12] Conference Report, October 1939, pp. 11, 13; see also D. Michael Quinn, J. Reuben Clark: The Church Years (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1983), pp. 201-3.
[^13] James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 6:96.
[^14] James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 6:140-41.
[^15] Conference Report, April 1942, pp. 90-96.
[^16] Joseph F. Boone, "The Roles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Relation to the United States Military, 1900-1975" (Ph.D. diss., Brigham Young University, 1975), pp. 548-52; see also Richard Maher, For God and Country: Memorable Stories from the Lives of Mormon Chaplains (Bountiful, Utah: Horizon Publishers, 1976).
[^17] Joseph F. Boone, "The Roles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Relation to the United States Military, 1900-1975" (Ph.D. diss., Brigham Young University, 1975), pp. 698-99.
[^18] Conference Report, April 1945, pp. 108-9.
[^19] Lowell Eliason Call, "LDS Servicemen in the Philippine Islands" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1955).
[^20] Melden J. Smith, "An Escape From Death," Improvement Era 49 (September 1946): 568, 580.
[^21] Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), pp. 97-98.
[^22] Conference Report, October 1942, p. 73.
[^23] Church News, February 8, 1969, p. 3; June 10, 1972, pp. 3, 13.
[^24] Board minutes of the Genealogical Society of Utah, 5:159, MS, Church Archives; see also Improvement Era 43 (August 1940): 480.
[^25] First Presidency letter, January 18, 1935, in Improvement Era 38 (March 1935): 134.
[^26] Conference Report, April 1941, pp. 94-95.
