Richard O. Cowan, Church in the Twentieth Century ( 1985)

Chapter 10

World War IIHCThe Latter-day Saints and World War II

World War IIHCMost people hoped that World War I had been the "war to end all wars" and that it had "made the world safe for democracy." After two decades, however, it was obvious that war had not been eradicated from the earth. The world was still recovering from the Great Depression when World War II began in Europe. Under the leadership of Adolf Hitler and the Nazis, Germany sought to expand the "Third Reich" in quest of Lebensraum, or room in which to live. During these same years Japan was pushing into China, Southeast Asia, and the Pacific seeking new sources of raw materials and expanded markets for her industries. The United States did not become actively involved in the hostilities until the Japanese attack on the Pearl Harbor naval base in Hawaii on Sunday morning, December 7, 1941. Even as the Great Depression had profoundly affected Latter-day Saint history during the early and middle 1930s, in like manner World War II became the single most important external influence on Church developments during the later 1930s and the 1940s. These tragic circumstances led the Latter-day Saints to ponder their attitudes about war and provided the occasion for the Church to expand its programs for members in military service. The coming of war not only disrupted Church activities but altered the lives of most Latter-day Saints worldwide.

World War IIHCEver since the National Socialists or Nazis had gained control in 1933, the Church and its members in Germany had had to walk an increasingly sensitive line. Gestapo agents frequently sat in to observe Church meetings, and most branch and mission leaders were thoroughly interrogated by the police about Mormon doctrines, beliefs, and practices, and were warned not to concern themselves with political matters. Latter-day Saint meetings increasingly had to be canceled during Nazi rallies, and the Church-sponsored Boy Scout program was replaced by the Hitler Youth Movement. Latter-day Saint teachings about Israel were out of harmony with the Nazis' anti-Jewish policies. Copies of Eider James E. Talmage's popular doctrinal work The Articles of Faith were therefore confiscated and burned because of frequent references to Israel and Zion. In one town, police ripped out of hymnbooks all pages referring to these topics.

World War IIHCThese conditions caused feelings of uneasiness and concern, which led some members to quit coming to Church lest the police cause trouble for them. Among other Saints these worries tended to increase the interest in emigration. Nevertheless, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was never officially persecuted, nor was it forced to cease functioning, as was the fate of some other small religious groups in Germany. This may have been due at least in part to the Saints' emphasis on the separation of Church and state and on obeying the constituted law of the land.

World War IIHCAt least three Nazi policies or programs actually benefited the Church: When Mormon Elders were invited to coach the German basketball teams and to officiate at the 1936 Berlin Olympics, the Church received favorable publicity. When the police banned door-to-door tracting, missionaries were forced to develop a more efficient "friend-to-friend" referral system. The Nazis' emphasis on racial purity stimulated an interest in genealogy. Earlier government officials had often regarded the Mormons as an unpopular sect and so denied them access to vital records; now the Saints were honored as patriotic because of their genealogical research. [^1]<_P/>Nevertheless, the situation for the Church and its missionaries became much more precarious during the later 1930s as Hitler launched his program of expansion.

World War IIHCThe Evacuation of Missionaries

World War IIHCAs tensions mounted in Europe, the General Authorities became increasingly concerned over the safety of Latter-day Saint missionaries serving there. As early as autumn 1937 Adolf Hitler vowed to expand Germany by annexing Austria and the Sudetenland region of Czechoslovakia, areas both inhabited by large German-speaking populations. In March 1938 Germany carried out the anschluss or annexation of Austria. By September of that year Hitler was accusing the Czechs of persecuting the German minority in that country and asserted the right to intervene in their behalf. As troops were massed on both sides of the German-Czech border, war seemed inevitable. On September 14 the First Presidency ordered the evacuation of all missionaries from Germany and Czechoslovakia. At a meeting with Hitler in Munich held September 29 and 30, however, Britain and France capitulated to his annexation of the Sudetenland on the condition that he commit no further aggression. Thus war was averted at least temporarily, and the First Presidency permitted the evacuated missionaries to return to their fields of labor. This brief evacuation had a sobering effect on the missionaries, causing them "to rededicate their efforts with greater fervor than ever to the work of the Lord" and to feel that "Germany was the most wonderful place in the world to work, and that we must not let any time pass without making the most of it." [^2]

World War IIHCHowever, Britain's and France's yielding at Munich to Hitler's demands did not sustain peace for long. By the spring of 1939 Hitler's troops had occupied not only the Sudetenland, but all of Czechoslovakia. Hitler next turned his attention to Poland, demanding greater access through the Polish Corridor to German-populated East Prussia. Echoing his charges against Czechoslovakia a year earlier, Hitler now accused Poland of maltreating its German minority. To strengthen his

European Mission-1938

World War IIHCposition, Hitler signed a military pact with Benito Mussolini of Italy, creating the Rome-Berlin Axis.

World War IIHCIn the midst of these tensions, Elder Joseph Fielding Smith of the Council of the Twelve received the assignment to tour the missions in Europe and to conduct the annual mission presidents' conference there. Meanwhile, in August 1939 Germany and Russia were concluding a non-aggression treaty and a secret pact to partition Poland, thus clearing the way for a new German offensive. As these tensions mounted in Europe, President J. Reuben Clark's diplomatic background proved to be valuable to the First Presidency. Through his contacts at the State Department, he was able to keep Church leaders apprised of developments in Europe on almost an hour-by-hour Basis. Finally, on Thursday, August 24, the First Presidency ordered the evacuation of missionaries from Germany and Czechoslovakia and directed Elder Joseph Fielding Smith, who was still in Europe, to take charge of this operation.

World War IIHCThe evacuation of missionaries, particularly from the West German Mission, posed great challenges and provided the setting for what participants in these events regarded as remarkable instances of divine assistance. The First Presidency's telegram arrived Friday morning, August 25. At that time, Elder Smith and Mission President M. Douglas Wood were in Hanover to conduct a conference, but they immediately returned to mission headquarters at Frankfurt. By Friday afternoon they had sent telegrams to all missionaries, directing them to leave at once for Holland. On Saturday morning, however, the Netherlands closed its borders to almost all foreigners, fearing that the influx of thousands of refugees would deplete the already short food supply. At the same time, Bulletins broadcast on German radio warned that by Sunday night all railroads would be placed at the disposal of the military, and that no further schedules could be guaranteed for civilian travel.

World War IIHCWhen the Dutch closed their border a serious crisis re-suited that challenged the resourcefulness of Mission President Wood and his missionaries. Knowing that they could take no more than ten marks (about $2.50) out of the country, most West German missionaries had used their excess funds to purchase cameras or other goods that they could take with them. When they discovered that their rail tickets into Holland could no longer be used, they did not have enough money to buy tickets to Copenhagen, Denmark, the alternate point of evacuation. Several groups of missionaries were therefore stranded at the Netherlands border.

World War IIHCThe rescue of these stranded missionaries along the Dutch border was particularly dramatic. In Frankfurt President Wood gave Norman G. Seibold, a missionary and a former football player from Idaho, a very special assignment: "Elder, we have thirty-one missionaries lost somewhere between here and the Dutch border. It will be your mission to find them and see that they get out." The mission president instructed him "to follow his impressions entirely" because there was no way of knowing exactly where the Elders were. After four hours on the crowded train, Elder Seibold arrived at Cologne. "I rode the entire distance from Frankfurt to Cologne standing up," Elder Seibold recalled, "the trains were so crowded. It was almost impossible to get off the train at Cologne because of the crowds."

World War IIHC"Cologne was not his destination," President Wood explained, "but he felt impressed to get off the train there." The huge station was crowded with thousands of people trying to reach their destinations. Elder Seibold continued: "I had no idea where the brethren would be, so I hunted through the station for anyone that looked like a missionary. I jumped up on a baggage cart and whistled 'Do What Is Right,' a favorite mission hymn. I couldn't whistle nor sing, but I did the best I could. We picked up about eight missionaries there."

World War IIHCAs he rode along on the train he was impressed to remain on board at some towns, but at others he was impressed to get off and whistle. Elder Seibold continued: "I had the feeling to stop at the station in a small town .... I had a premonition to go out of the station into the town, which seemed silly to me at the time. I went inside a restaurant. As surely as someone had taken me by the hand, I was guided there. I found two missionaries who were happy to see me. They had spent their last dime for a soft drink."

World War IIHCHaving arrived in Copenhagen by Monday, August 28, President Wood learned that fourteen of his thirty-one missing missionaries had entered Holland safely. That afternoon he received a telegram from the football player stating that the remaining seventeen would arrive in Denmark that evening. [^3]

World War IIHCWhile the West German missionaries were struggling to reach Denmark, quite a different drama was unfolding in Czechoslovakia. On July 10 two Elders had been arrested for exchanging money illegally. The next day two more were also arrested when they happened to come looking for their mission associates at the time the Gestapo were searching the latter's apartment. All four were put in the Gestapo's Pankrac Prison, where political prisoners were held. For the next six weeks Mission President Wallace Toronto worked persistently for the Elders' release. This was not achieved until August 23, the day before the Czech Mission received the First Presidency's directive to evacuate. Most of the missionaries, as well as Sister Toronto and her children, left promptly, but President Toronto remained behind to help the Elders who had been in prison recover their passports and other possessions. As Hitler's armies were massing for their invasion of Poland, all communications with Czechoslovakia were cut off. Sister Toronto recalled: "Naturally I was very upset over the whole thing and expressed my concern and worry to President Joseph Fielding Smith. Seeing that I was very worried and getting more upset by the minute, President Smith came over to me, put his protecting arm around my shoulders and said, 'Sister Toronto, this war will not start until Brother Toronto and his missionaries arrive in this land of Denmark.'"

World War IIHCIn Czechoslovakia President Toronto and his missionaries were able to conclude their business by Thursday, August 31. Just before leaving, however, one of the missionaries was re-arrested and again thrown into Pankrac Prison. Following quick action by President Toronto and American diplomatic representatives, it was learned that there had been a case of mistaken identity: the missionary had the same name as a man sought by the Germans as a British spy. The Elder was promptly released. At midnight, August 31, the group boarded a special train which had been sent to evacuate the British legation; this was the last train to leave Czechoslovakia. They passed through Berlin early Friday morning, September 1, and that afternoon boarded the last ferry to cross from Germany to Denmark. [^4]<_P/>This was the very day that the Germans commenced their invasion of Poland, the event generally regarded as the beginning of World War II. Thus Elder Joseph Fielding Smith's prophetic promise to Sister Toronto was fulfilled.

World War IIHCIn Salt Lake City, the First Presidency continued to monitor the mounting war crisis and soon ordered the evacuation of all missionaries from Europe. Finding passage back to America presented a monumental problem. The Netherlands Mission president was sure that he had divine help in making necessary arrangements: "As I got close to the Holland America Line office I noticed a great crowd of people around the front door. I thought to myself, 'Oh, how am I going to get through that crowd of people.' A voice came to me just as clear as if you and I were talking. It said, 'Telephone.'" President Murdock went directly to a pay phone and called the general manager, with whom he had done business on other occasions. This official told him to come to the back door, where he was admitted.

World War IIHCPresident Murdock stated, "I need ninety spaces on your first ship going to the United States."

World War IIHC"You don't realize what you are asking," the manager replied. "I'm sorry; our ships are booked up until February." Just then he was called away from the office for a few minutes. While he was gone, the mission president did some urgent praying. When the manager returned, he unexpectedly said: "How did you know we were going to charter a new boat? You can have the first ninety spaces on it." Although President Murdock did not have any money, he was able to book the space simply by signing the name of the Church. [^5]

World War IIHCMost missionaries, however, were not fortunate enough to secure passage on passenger liners. Most crossed the Atlantic on cargo ships with makeshift accommodations for two to three hundred passengers each. Typically, the ships' holds were filled with bunks, with only a curtain separating the men's and women's dormitories. President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., regarded the successful evacuation as truly miraculous: "The entire group was evacuated from Europe in three months, at a time when tens of thousands of Americans were besieging the ticket offices of the great steamship companies for passage, and the Elders had no reservations. Every time a group was ready to embark there was available the necessary space, even though efforts to reserve space a few hours before had failed. ... Truly the blessings of the Lord attended this great enterprise." [^6]

World War IIHCIn 1940 more areas of the world were drawn into the rapidly expanding war. By June the Low Countries and France had fallen to the Germans, and Britain was preparing to fight for its life. This crisis made the overseas colonies of these countries more vulnerable to attack. In September 1940 Japan signed a ten-year mutual assistance treaty with Germany and Italy and began occupying French Indochina. These developments provided the background for the First Presidency's decision the following month to withdraw all Latter-day Saint missionaries from the South Pacific and South Africa. Unlike the situation in Europe, communications between these areas and Church headquarters in America were not cut off, and mission presidents were permitted to remain in their areas. Missionaries were not evacuated from South America, but after 1941 no new missionaries were sent to that continent, and by 1943 none remained there. Thus, by that time proselyting by regular full-time missionaries was limited to North America and Hawaii, although even in these areas the number of missionaries was drastically reduced as more and more young men were drafted into military service during the war.

World War IIHCThe Saints Who Were Left Behind

World War IIHCWhen the missionaries were withdrawn, local Saints were left on their own, often in isolated circumstances. Many personally witnessed the destruction and death brought by war. Even beyond the actual combat zone, the preoccupation with war was demoralizing and tended to diminish interest in spiritual things. Another problem faced the Saints in the occupied countries: While some felt that the wisest course was to collaborate with the Nazis, others were convinced that their patriotic duty was to resist the German occupation. The Saints had to face these challenges cut off from the General Authorities and mission leaders to whom they had been accustomed to turn for spiritual guidance and strength. Evacuated missionaries were encouraged to write letters of faith and hope to members where they had served, and the mission presidents were given a special assignment to keep in touch through correspondence with the local leaders whom they had left in charge. Unfortunately, however, the war disrupted the mails, and even from neutral Switzerland no letters were received for a period of two years.

World War IIHCAlthough there were some isolated exceptions, the Saints' faithful adherence to Church doctrines and procedures was actually strengthened during the war. In several areas the contribution of tithes and fast offerings and the attendance at Church meetings increased. In Switzerland local missionaries gave two evenings per week and succeeded in baptizing more converts than the full-time missionaries had done just before the outbreak of the war. Much credit is due the local Saints who assumed responsibilities as the missionaries from America were withdrawn. During prewar years mission presidents had actively prepared the Saints for just such an eventuality. Time and again during his 1937 visit to Europe, President Heber J. Grant urged the Saints to assume their own responsibilities and not to lean so much on the Elders from America. Max Zimmer, who assumed responsibility for the Swiss Mission during the war, is a good example of these capable local leaders. He conducted regular training programs for local priesthood and auxiliary leaders, and distributed current Church periodicals to the Saints.

World War IIHCOf course the greatest suffering was experienced by the Saints in the areas of actual fighting, and local leaders felt they were often inspired as they carried out their responsibilities amid these trying conditions. For example, Hamburg was bombed 104 times during a ten-day period in 1943. During Church meetings it was necessary for a member of each branch presidency to monitor the radio for information about possible air raids. On one Sunday, Branch President Herbert Baarz in Hamburg had not heard anything about a raid, but he felt inspired to close the meeting abruptly and to have the congregation go immediately to the nearest shelter, a ten-minute walk. Branch members had no sooner reached the shelter than bombs hit the area near the meetinghouse. [^7]

World War IIHCWhen regular meeting places were destroyed, the Saints continued to hold religious services in their homes. But in one mission, some 95 percent of the Saints also lost their homes. Local leaders launched a variety of self-help programs to meet this emergency. Mission leaders directed that food, clothing, and household supplies be stockpiled at branch meeting places. The Saints willingly responded, agreeing that all should share alike in whatever was available. "Family after family brought their entire stores... and shared them with their brothers and sisters who were destitute." All contributed to a fund with which the Relief Society purchased material to patch or remodel old clothing or to sew new garments. Members in Hamburg also participated in the loeffelspende or "spoon contribution," bringing a spoonful of flour or sugar to each Church meeting. Although one spoonful might seem insignificant, when "multiplied by 200 it was sufficient to bake a cake for a young couple for their wedding or to give to a mother who was expecting or nursing a baby.<_P>" [^8]

World War IIHCImpact on North American Saints

World War IIHCWhile the Saints in North America did not suffer in the way that their counterparts in Europe did, still the war had a substantial impact on Church members and programs. As World War II began, shipyards, aircraft plants, and other defense industries created many new jobs along the West Coast. These economic opportunities lured many Mormons from the Intermountain area to the Pacific Coast. This represented a continuation of the pattern established during the 1920s and accelerated during the depression of the 1930s-that of younger people leaving home in the quest for improved employment opportunities.

World War IIHCThis population drain might have been even larger except for two factors: (1) Wartime demands had brought an unaccustomed prosperity even to Intermountain area agriculture. (2) Establishment of defense industries such as the Geneva steel plant near Provo created new jobs in Utah and surrounding areas. Many who had left the Intermountain area during earlier decades wanted to return and establish their permanent homes in a predominantly Latter-day Saint environment. These improved economic conditions made it possible for them to do so.

World War IIHCThese war-stimulated population shifts created several challenges for the Church. Mormon youth were among those seeking employment in defense industry. Near the end of the war, more than half of the priests in the Aaronic Priesthood, most of whom were young men of high school and college age, were living away from home. The General Authorities encouraged local Church leaders to take a special interest in these youth who were deprived of the stabilizing influence of home and family. [^9]<_P/>The coming of new industries to predominantly Mormon areas resulted in a sudden influx of new people into certain communities. While some longtime residents were concerned about the introduction of such a large "outside element," Church leaders encouraged the Saints to fellowship the newcomers and to share the gospel with them where possible. This created a fertile field for the stake missions which had been established just a few years before.

World War IIHCWartime conditions affected programs sponsored by the Church in still other ways. In January 1942, just a month after the United States entered World War II, the First Presidency announced that all auxiliary institutes and stake leadership meetings were being suspended immediately for the duration of the war. This cutback in leadership instruction came at the very time when Church activities had to reach, more effectively than ever before, the growing numbers of members cut free from the guiding and sustaining influence of home and family. "This action," the Presidency stressed, "places increased responsibility upon the ward and branch auxiliary organizations to see that their work not only does not suffer, but is increased in intensity, improved in quality, and in general made more effective." Auxiliary general boards kept in touch and gave direction by mail, and the home was stressed more as the key to preserving the faith among the youth. [^10]<_P/>The First Presidency also limited attendance at general conferences to specifically invited priesthood leaders. At the same time, the Tabernacle was closed to the public and the weekly choir broadcasts made without audiences present. Observations of the Relief Society's 1942 centennial had to be postponed and the annual Hill Cumorah Pageant was cancelled for the duration.

World War IIHCThus, when United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt on April 27, 1942, spoke of the need of wage and price controls, rationing, and increased taxes, Latter-day Saint Church leaders had already taken steps to adapt programs to these conditions.

World War IIHCElder Harold B. Lee was convinced that the timing of the Church's precautions was the result of revelation. Referring to the January 1942 restrictions on auxiliary meetings and travel, he declared:

World War IIHC. . . When you remember that all this happened from eight months to nearly a year before the tire and gas rationing took place, you may well understand if you will only take thought that here again was the voice of the Lord to this people, trying to prepare them for the conservation program that within a year was forced upon them. No one at that time could surely foresee that the countries that had been producing certain essential commodities were to be overrun and we thereby be forced into a shortage.

World War IIHCFurthermore, Elder Lee was convinced that Church leaders were inspired when, beginning in 1937, they counseled the Saints to produce and store a year's supply of food. He believed that this helped prepare Church members for rationing and scarcity and anticipated the government's emphasis on "victory gardens." [^11]

World War IIHCChurch activities were hampered in yet other ways. As building supplies were diverted to military use, construction of meetinghouses and even of the Idaho Falls Temple came to a halt. Perhaps no Church activity felt the impact of war more than did the missionary program. In 1942 the Church agreed not to call young men of draft age on missions. Hence the number of missionaries serving plummeted. While 1,257 new full-time missionaries had been called in 1941, only 261 were called two years later. Before the war, five-sixths of all missionaries were young men holding the offices of elder or seventy; by 1945, most new missionaries were women or high priests. Members living in mission fields again assumed more responsibilities, just as they had done when the number of missionaries dropped during the Great Depression a decade earlier. Throughout North America these Saints accepted calls as local part-time missionaries and assumed greater roles in district or branch organizations.

World War IIHCThe Church sponsored special wartime programs and in other ways encouraged its members to patriotically support the war effort. The first Sunday in 1942 was designated as a special day of fasting and prayer. As they had done during World War I, the General Authorities again commended the Saints for their generous contributions to the Red Cross and other charitable funds. Women in the Relief Society put together first aid kits for home use and prepared bandages and other supplies for the Red Cross. During the winter of 1942-43 the Church's twelve- and thirteen-year-old Beehive Girls donated 228,000 hours, collecting scrap metal, fats, and other needed materials, making scrapbooks or baking cookies for soldiers, and tending children for mothers working in defense industries. A special "Honor Bee" award was offered for such service. Then in 1943, Mutual Improvement Association youth in the United States and Canada raised more than three million dollars to purchase fifty-five badly needed rescue boats to save the lives of downed airmen.

World War IIHCThe Saints' Attitudes on War

World War IIHCAs war engulfed the world, Latter-day Saints again had to examine their feelings relative to the appropriateness of resorting to arms. They were guided by the Book of Mormon's teachings, which denounced offensive wars but condoned fighting "even to the shedding of blood if necessary" in defense of home, country, freedom, or religion (see Alma 43:45-47 and 48:14). During the early years of the Church's history the Saints had been called on to do just that as they were repeatedly driven from their homes by force. Nevertheless, in the midst of these persecutions the Lord called on his people to "renounce war and proclaim peace" (D&C 98:16), and this injunction has continued to shape the Saints' Basic feelings about war.

World War IIHCLatter-day Saints in the United States, along with the majority of their fellow citizens, continued to cling to the hope for peace. Speaking in general conference only a month after Hitler's 1939 invasion of Poland, President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., emphatically declared that "nothing is more unrighteous, more unholy, more ungodly than man-declared mass slaughter of his fellow man for an unrighteous cause." [^12]"I pray with all the earnestness of my heart," President Heber J. Grant declared the following year, "that our country may not get into war." [^13]

World War IIHCIn their annual Christmas message issued less than a week after the attack on Pearl Harbor, the First Presidency insisted that only through living the gospel of Jesus Christ would enduring peace come to the world. Echoing the counsel given by President Joseph F. Smith at the outbreak of World War I, the Presidency now exhorted members in the armed forces to keep "cruelty, hate, and murder" out of their hearts even during Battle. [^14]

World War IIHCThe above points were all incorporated in the First Presidency's official statement read at the April 1942 general conference just four months after the attack on Pearl Harbor. This declaration represented the most comprehensive and authoritative review of the Church's attitude on war, and it was widely distributed in pamphlet form. "Hate can have no place in the souls of the righteous," the Presidency declared, emphasizing the Savior's injunction to love one another.

World War IIHCNevertheless, the Presidency explained that members of the Church were also members of "the body politic," so "must give allegiance to their sovereign," and therefore urged the Saints, "fully to render that loyalty to their country and to free institutions which the loftiest patriotism calls for.

World War IIHC"... Obedient to these principles," the Presidency continued, "the members of the Church have always felt under obligation to come to the defense of their country when a call to arms was made .... In the [First] World War, the Saints of America and of European countries served loyally their respective governments, on both sides of the conflict. Likewise in the present war, righteous men of the Church in both camps have died, some with great heroism, for their own country's sake. . . . The Church has been benefited by their service and sacrifice.

World War IIHC"Nevertheless, God commanded, 'Thou shalt not kill.'" Addressing this delicate question, the First Presidency explained that if in the course of combat, servicemen "shall take the lives of those who fight against them, that will not make of them murderers, nor subject them to the penalty that God has prescribed for those who kill... for it would be a cruel God that would punish His children as moral sinners for acts by them as the innocent instrumentalities of a sovereign whom He had told them to obey and whose will they were powerless to resist.

World War IIHC"This Church is a worldwide Church. Its devoted members are in both camps .... On each side they believe they are fighting for home, and country, and freedom. On each side, our brethren pray to the same God, in the same name, for victory." The Presidency conceded "both sides cannot be wholly right; perhaps neither is without wrong."

World War IIHCIn conclusion, the First Presidency exhorted: "... live clean, keep the commandments of the Lord, pray to Him constantly to preserve you in truth and righteousness, live as you pray, and whatever betides you the Lord will be with you and nothing will happen to you that will not be to the honor and glory of God and to your salvation and exaltation Then, when the conflict is over and you return to your homes, having lived the righteous life, how great will be your happiness-whether you be of the victors or the vanquished-that you have lived as the Lord commanded.<_P>" [^15]

World War IIHCLatter-Day Saints in Military Service

World War IIHCHeeding the counsel of their Church leaders, Latter-day Saints responded when calls came for military service. By the war's end, the number in military service approached one hundred thousand, or in other words, about one out of every ten Church members.

World War IIHCEven though LDS servicemen's groups were organized during the Spanish-American War and Elder B. H. Roberts served as a chaplain during World War I, the most complete development of the Church's programs for servicemen came during World War II.

World War IIHCIn 1940, over a year before the United States entered the war, the Church appointed Hugh B. Brown, a former stake president (and future General Authority), to serve as servicemen's coordinator. Having attained the rank of major in the Canadian army during World War I, he was able to capitalize on this title in making contact with military authorities. Elder Brown traveled extensively, meeting with LDS servicemen, giving them encouragement, and receiving from them recommendations concerning what the Church could do. His warm personality and deep spirituality made him particularly well suited for this assignment.

World War IIHCA Church Servicemen's Committee was organized in October 1942, with Elder Harold B. Lee, a new member of the Twelve, as chairman. The committee worked with United States military officials to secure the appointments of Latter-day Saint chaplains. Achieving this aim posed a formidable challenge. Army and Navy officials were reluctant to appoint chaplains who did not meet the usual requirements of a professional clergyman. The Army Chief of Chaplains, however, remembered favorably how a local Mormon bishop had cared for the spiritual well-being of the servicemen in his area. Through the committee's efforts military officials gradually approved the appointment of additional LDS chaplains, and by the end of World War II the number peaked at forty. [^16]

World War IIHCCertainly forty chaplains were not enough to give religious leadership to the thousands of Latter-day Saints scattered throughout the widely separated theaters of war. As early as the Spanish-American War the Mutual Improvement Association had sponsored servicemen's groups. During the course of World War II this program was revived under the direction of the Servicemen's Committee, and approximately a thousand group leaders served. Once set apart by proper Church authorities, these group leaders could officiate anywhere their services might be needed. Each received a certificate identifying him as "an Elder in the Church" and as "an authorized Group Leader in the Mutual Improvement Association" empowered, with approval of appropriate military officials, "to conduct study classes and other worshipping assemblies .... " [^17]

World War IIHCThe Church sponsored several other measures to benefit members in the service. Servicemen's "homes" were opened in Salt Lake City and California. For servicemen away from home, "budget cards" became "passports" to the social and recreational activities offered by the Church. Members entering military service received pocket-size copies of the Book of Mormon and Principles of the Gospel. A miniature version of the Church Section carried messages of inspiration, reports of servicemen's activities, and important announcements.

World War IIHCLatter-day Saint servicemen set an outstanding example of faith and devotion. Military officials frequently reported astonishment at the initiative and ability of the Mormon soldiers to conduct their own religious worship without the need for professional clergymen. On Saipan a group of LDS Marines who had no place to meet set to work building their own chapel. German LDS soldiers during the occupation of Norway shared their rations with needy Saints in that land. Similarly, LDS American soldiers helped German Saints to rebuild as the war drew to a close. Always eager to share the gospel, Church members took advantage of opportunities even under wartime conditions. Numerous conversions resulted from Mormon buddies' worthy examples. While in a German prison camp, a Dutch member shared the gospel with a fellow POW who later became the first stake president in their native country. Eldin Ricks, an LDS chaplain, presented a copy of the Book of Mormon to Pope Plus XII at the Vatican.

World War IIHCElder Ezra Taft Benson lamented the wartime drop in the number of full-time missionaries, but added: I cannot help feeling that we are probably doing more total missionary work today than we have ever done in the history of the Church. While our number of full-time missionaries has been reduced, we have, it is estimated, almost one hundred thousand of our young men in the service of their country, hundreds and thousands of whom are doing effective missionary work ....

World War IIHCOnly this week there came to my office several young men, in the uniform of their country, who were thrilled with the experiences they were having in the mission field, although in the service of their country. One of them said, "Brother Benson, it is just like being on another mission. Conditions are different, but we have opportunities to preach the gospel, and we are taking advantage of it.<_P>" [^18]

World War IIHCLatter-day Saint servicemen were even responsible for introducing the gospel into new areas of the world. For example, they provided the Church's first contact with the Philippine Islands. [^19]

World War IIHCLatter-day Saint servicemen, like many of other faiths, often saw divine protection in the preservation of their lives amid the terrors of combat. For example, Melden J. Smith tells how his life was spared when a copy of the Improvement Era in his shirt pocket retarded a machine gun bullet. [^20]<_P/>A widely recounted incident involved two United States marines who were seriously wounded during the invasion of Kwajalein early in 1944. A war correspondent described how the less severely wounded marine, a Latter-day Saint, refused attention until his buddy was helped and then pronounced a blessing on him: "In the name of Jesus Christ and by virtue of the Holy Priesthood which I hold, I command you to remain alive until the necessary help can be obtained to secure the preservation of your life." His life was saved, and his recovery was the "wonder of the medical unit." To testify of the power of the priesthood, President George Albert Smith on several occasions read the United Press account of this story, dateline Honolulu, February 8, 1944. [^21]

World War IIHCOf course, the lives of many servicemen were not spared. Why some were saved, even miraculously, and others were not, is difficult or impossible to know. The Servicemen's Committee reported that a total of 5,714 were killed, wounded, or missing in action. Speaking at a 1942 general conference, Elder Harold B. Lee offered one possible justification for the death of faithful Latter-day Saint servicemen: "It is my conviction that the present devastating scourge of war in which hundreds of thousands are being slain, many of whom are no more responsible for the causes of the war than are our own boys, is making necessary an increase of missionary activity in the spirit world and that many of our boys who bear the Holy Priesthood and are worthy to do so will be called to that missionary service after they have departed this life.<_P>" [^22]

World War IIHCThe need for military forces continued even after the close of World War II in 1945. The spread of the "Cold War" meant that a large number of Latter-day Saints would always be serving in the armed forces, and the Church would continue its interest in them. Programs developed for servicemen during World War II would continue to play a key role, and they would be supplemented by several important new activities. The Church conducted annual conferences for servicemen beginning in 1953 in Europe and 1967 in Japan. Often attended by more than a thousand, these gatherings would become the largest retreats conducted among American military personnel. These conferences featured leadership workshops, recreational activities, and addresses by General Authorities, and were generally climaxed by inspirational testimony meetings. A further boost came with the organization of the first servicemen's stake in 1968; assuming responsibility for a wide range of Church programs contributed substantially to the servicemen personal spiritual growth. In 1969 the Servicemen's Committee was renamed and its assignment broadened. The Military Relations Committee would be responsible not only for the well-being of men and women while in military service, but also for preparing them beforehand for this experience, and then for reorienting and fellowshipping them following their discharge from the service. The General Authorities announced their commitment to give the growing number of members entering the military service "encouragement and help similar to that given to departing missionaries." To this end, the Church inaugurated in 1970 the practice of conducting orientation seminars for those entering one of the armed services. These sessions reviewed the challenges and opportunities that young men and women would encounter in military service, and provided counsel on how to make the most of this experience<_P>. [^23]Latter-day Saints who served in the military during these postwar years would also be instrumental in opening doors for the gospel in new parts of the world even as their predecessors had done during World War II.

Notes

Chapter 10. The Latter-day Saints and World War II

<_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P>

---
Notas:
[^1] Quoted in Glen R. Stubbs, "A Biography of George Albert Smith, 1870-1951" (Ph.D. diss., Brigham Young University, 1974), p. 29.
[^2] Glen R. Stubbs, "A Biography of George Albert Smith, 1870-1951" (Ph.D. diss., Brigham Young University, 1974) pp. 55-57.
[^3] Quoted in Glen R. Stubbs, "A Biography of George Albert Smith, 1870-1951" (Ph.D. diss., Brigham Young University, 1974) p. 83.
[^4] George Albert Smith, "Your Good Name," Improvement Era 50 (March 1947): 139.
[^5] Bryant S. Hinckley, "Superintendent George Albert Smith," Improvement Era 35 (March 1932): 295.
[^6] George Albert Smith, "After Eighty Years," Improvement Era 53 (April 1950): 263.
[^7] J. Reuben Clark, Jr., "Our Dwindling Sovereignty," address at the University of Utah, February 13, 1952, in Stand Fast by Our Constitution (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1962), p. 118. See also James B. Allen, "J. Reuben Clark, Jr., on American Sovereignty and International Organizations," Brigham Young University Studies 13 (Spring 1973): 117-42; Stanley A. Taylor, "J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and the United Nations," ibid., pp. 185-95.
[^8] Frank B. Jex, "As I Saw the Church in Holland," Improvement Era 49 (June 1946): 400.
[^9] Church News, March 23, 1946, p. 6.
[^10] Church News, August 25, 1945, pp. 8, 12.
[^11] George Albert Smith in Conference Report, October 1947, pp. 5-6; see also Church News, November 10, 1945, p. 1, and November 17, 1945, p. 1.
[^12] Improvement Era 49 (February 1946): 67; Church News, January 19, 1946, p. 1.
[^13] Quoted by Frederick W. Babbel, On Wings of Faith (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1972), p. 46.
[^14] Ezra Taft Benson in Conference Report, April 1947, p. 153.
[^15] Frederick W. Babbel, On Wings of Faith (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1972), pp. 7-8.
[^16] Frederick W. Babbel, On Wings of Faith (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1972), p. 36.
[^17] Ezra Taft Benson in Conference Report, April 1947, pp. 153-54.
[^18] Frederick W. Babbel, On Wings of Faith (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1972), pp. 131-34, 148-49.
[^19] Report by Ezra Taft Benson in Conference Report, April 1947, pp. 152-57; see also Babbel, On Wings of Faith, pp. 25-26.
[^20] Report by Richard Ranglack, Church News, November 24, 1945, pp. 5, 9.
[^21] Joseph Anderson, Prophets I Have Known (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1973), p. 103.
[^22] Special report to the First Presidency, October 22, 1946, in European Mission Manuscript History, p. 70, Church Archives.
[^23] Frederick W. Babbel, On Wings of Faith (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1972), pp. 126-38.
