Richard O. Cowan, Church in the Twentieth Century ( 1985)

Chapter 11

Administration of George Albert SmithHCGeorge Albert Smith and Recovery from War

Administration of George Albert SmithHCPresident Heber. J. Grant died on May 14, 1945, one week after Germany's surrender in Europe, and just three months before Japan's surrender would bring World War II to its close. His funeral was held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, which was opened to the public for the first time in over three years, and the building was filled to overflowing. His successor, George Albert Smith, would face the challenging task of leading the Saints during an era when the world needed to overcome hate and to rebuild following the end of the war. President Smith's experience and character suited him well for this task.

George Albert Smith's Earlier Life

The new President was born in Salt Lake City in 1870. When he was almost fourteen years of age, a patriarchal blessing gave him an understanding of the direction his life should take: "And thou shalt become a mighty prophet in the midst of the sons of Zion. And the angels of the Lord shall administer unto you, and the choice blessings of heaven shall rest upon you... for thou art destined to become a mighty man before the Lord, for thou shalt become a mighty apostle in the church and kingdom of God upon the earth .... " [^1]

1870April 4: Born in Salt Lake City, Utah1883Began work in ZCMI's overall factory (age 13)1891Special mission in southern Utah for the YMMIA (21)1892Married Lucy Emily Woodruff (22)1892-94A mission in the southern states (22-24)1898Appointed receiver of United States Land Office1903Called as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve (33)1919-21Presided over European Mission (49-51)1921-35Superintendent of Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association1930Founded Pioneer Trails Association1931Elected a member of the National Executive Board of the Boy Scouts of America (61)1943Became President of the Quorum of the Twelve (73)1945World War II ended; sustained as President of the Church1946 Ezra Taft Benson directed reopening work in Europe; Spencer W. Kimball named chairman of Church's Indian Committee1947Utah pioneer centennial is celebrated (77)1951April 4: Died in Salt Lake City, Utah (81)

On May 25, 1892, he married his childhood sweetheart, Lucy Emily Woodruff, the granddaughter of President Wilford Woodruff. Only a month later, the new husband departed for a two-year mission in the southern states. On at least two occasions he was convinced that his life was spared only through divine intervention-once when a hostile mob fired shots into the house where he was sleeping, and again when he was warned on a dark night to stop just short of the edge of a high precipice. [^2]<_P/>After he had been only a few months in the field, Mission President J. Golden Kimball called Elder Smith to be his secretary. When the president had to be absent for a prolonged period, he placed George Albert Smith in charge of mission affairs.

Nine years later, George Albert Smith's call to the Apostleship came as a complete surprise to him. Because of a particularly busy day at his office, he had not been able to attend general conference. As he came home that afternoon, a woman congratulated him enthusiastically. He was at a loss to know what she was talking about. She told him he had been sustained that afternoon as a new member of the Council of the Twelve Apostles. With characteristic modesty he insisted that she must certainly be mistaken, as he knew nothing at all about it. Becoming flustered, she returned to the Tabernacle to verify what had happened and soon returned to assure him that she had not heard wrong. That evening he confided to his journal: "I was completely dumbfounded and I could hardly believe it possible at this time, although I felt that I might some day succeed my father, as my patriarchal blessing under the hands of Zebedee Coltrin indicated that I might become an apostle. I didn't feel capable or worthy, but if it pleases the Lord I will try to do my full duty .... " [^3]

Elder Smith became the fourth generation in his family to serve as a General Authority and even in the First Presidency. His great-grandfather, John Smith, the uncle of the Prophet Joseph, served as an assistant counselor to Joseph Smith and as Patriarch to the Church. His grandfather, George A. Smith, after whom the Apostle was named, had been an Apostle and a counselor in the First Presidency to Brigham Young His father, John Henry Smith, was serving in the Twelve at the time of George Albert's call. These two served together in the Quorum until 1910, when John Henry was called into the First Presidency. This was the only time that a father and a son had served simultaneously in the Council of the Twelve.

Throughout his life George Albert Smith was plagued with illness. A few years after his call to the Apostleship he was convalescing from an especially serious siege when he had a dream in which he saw his grandfather after whom he had been named:

. . . he looked at me very earnestly and said:

"I would like to know what you have done with my name. "

Everything I had ever done passed before me as though it were a flying picture on a screen I smiled and looked at my grandfather and said:

"I have never done anything with your name of which you need be ashamed."

He stepped forward and took me in his arms, and as he did so, I became conscious again of my earthly surroundings. My pillow was as wet as though water had been poured on it-wet with tears of gratitude that I could answer unashamed. [^4]

From 1919 to 1921 George Albert Smith presided over the European Mission· In the aftermath of World War I, food was scarce in Europe, and so several countries refused to admit any foreigners. As Elder Smith negotiated with these governments to gain permission for missionaries to enter their borders, he gained experience which would be valuable when he would face similar circumstances following the close of World War II.

Upon his return home, Elder George Albert Smith was called to preside over the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association. This service continued until 1935, when the First Presidency released all members of the Twelve from auxiliary boards. His interest in the youth was of long standing. At the age of twenty-one he had served four months as a special "MIA missionary" in southwestern Utah, working to stimulate activity among the young men there. From the earliest days of the Boy Scout movement, Elder Smith had been a prime booster. He became an active local Scout council member and was proud to wear his Scouter's uniform. In 1932 he was elected to the national executive committee. Two years later Elder Smith received the Silver Buffalo, the highest award presented by the national Boy Scout organization in recognition of outstanding service. This concern for young people would aid President Smith as he counseled returning servicemen about meeting their challenges following the close of World War II.

George Albert Smith was actively interested in preserving and marking historic sites. In 1930 he founded the Utah Pioneer Trails and Landmarks Association, and he served as its president until his death. He supervised the erection of more than one hundred substantial markers at historic sites throughout the western United States Elder Smith linked these activities with his concern for youth. As superintendent of the YMMIA he involved Latter-day Saint young people in numerous projects to suitably mark points of local interest. He saw this as a means to help the youth identify and better appreciate their heritage. Appropriately he would be serving as President of the Church at the time of the pioneer centennial celebration in 1947.

A Christlike love was perhaps the outstanding quality George Albert Smith would bring into his calling as President of the Church. Years earlier Elder Smith had formulated a creed to guide his life:

I would be a friend to the friendless and find joy in ministering to the needs of the poor. I would visit the sick and afflicted and inspire in them a desire for faith to be healed. I would teach the truth to the understanding and blessing of all mankind. I would seek out the erring one and try to win him back to the righteous and a happy life. I would not seek to force people to live up to my ideals but rather love them into doing the thing that is right. I would live with the masses and help to solve their problems that their earth life may be happy. I would avoid the publicity of high positions and discourage the flattery of thoughtless friends. I would not knowingly wound the feeling of any, not even one who may have wronged me, but would seek to do him good and make him my friend. I would overcome the tendency to selfishness and jealousy and rejoice in the successes of all the children of my Heavenly Father. I would not be an enemy to any living soul. Knowing that the Redeemer of mankind has offered to the world the only plan that will fully develop us and make us really happy here and hereafter I feel it not only a duty but a blessed privilege to disseminate this truth.

After quoting these ideals, Bryant S. Hinckley declared: "You can put this creed in the past tense and it epitomizes his life-this is what he has actually done." [^5]<_P/>Looking back on his life, President Smith affirmed: "I do not have an enemy that I know of, and there is no one in the world that I have any enmity towards. All men and all women are my Father's children, and I have sought during my life to observe the wise direction of the Redeemer of mankind-to love my neighbor as myself. . . ." [^6]This capacity to love would prove invaluable to George Albert Smith as he assumed the Presidency of the Church at the very time when the world was turning its attention from war to a quest for a lasting peace. The Council of the Apostles and the Patriarch, meeting in an upper room of the Salt Lake Temple on May 21, 1945, sustained George Albert Smith as the new President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Administration of George Albert SmithWorld War IIHCThe Close of World War II

Administration of George Albert SmithWorld War IIHCThe formal end to World War II came on August 14, 1945, when Japan accepted the Allies' terms for surrender. Even before the war had ended, machinery was set in motion to create a new international organization designed to prevent future conflict. In 1945 at a special conference in San Francisco, the charter for the United Nations was adopted. In contrast to the heated and prolonged debates over the League of Nations following World War I, the United States Senate's approval of participation in the new UN was swift and almost unanimous. The Church did not take an official stand either for or against the new international body. Even though President J. Reuben Clark feared that membership in such a body would compromise the nation's sovereignty, there was none of the active campaigning by prominent Latter-day Saints against the UN that there had been against the League of Nations a quarter century earlier. [^7]<_P/>Nevertheless, Church leaders reminded the Saints that the only hope for enduring peace was the world's acceptance of and adherence to the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Administration of George Albert SmithWorld War IIHCBeginning with the later months of 1945, thousands of Latter-day Saints were discharged from military service. This was the joyous time eagerly anticipated by relatives and sweethearts, and of course by the servicemen themselves, when "Johnny would come marching home." Nevertheless, the return to civilian life was not free from perils, and the Church took steps to help its members successfully make this transition. The General Authorities encouraged bishops to interview returning servicemen promptly and see that they received callings to Church service. Priesthood quorums sponsored welcome-home parties and assisted with finding employment. The Mutual Improvement Association played a key role in fellowshipping veterans in athletic and social activities.

Administration of George Albert SmithHCA high priority for Church leaders following the close of World War II was to reestablish contact with the Saints who had been cut off from any communication for up to six years. Nowhere was this need more pressing than in Europe, where war-caused devastation was so great. Hundreds of Saints were left homeless as cities were destroyed, especially in Germany and Holland. An acute shortage of food compounded the suffering immediately after the war.

Administration of George Albert SmithHCLatter-day Saint servicemen in the Allied armies brought the first help to the suffering members.

Administration of George Albert SmithHC. . . I attended Sunday School in the Apeldoorn Branch. With me I brought what food we were able to save from our army rations. After Sunday School we held a "banquet" for the thirty-five members who were present.

Administration of George Albert SmithHC"Dear Lord," prayed Brother Dodenbier, "forgive us for holding a feast on thy holy day, but the need is great."

Administration of George Albert SmithHCAfter a song of rejoicing, each person was served one small meat or cheese sandwich, two raisin pancakes, a cup of cocoa. For the children there was the added treat of a small piece of chocolate, the first candy many of them had ever tasted. They were children of the occupation, born during the darkest years of their country's history. The "banquet" was received with an appreciation unknown to us who have never suffered for want of food.

Administration of George Albert SmithHC"It has come in answer to our prayers," concluded the branch president. [^8]

Administration of George Albert SmithHCThese contacts often strengthened the faith of the needy Saints as well as of the servicemen providing succor.

Administration of George Albert SmithHCSummarizing the impact of Mormon men in the military, Elder Ezra Taft Benson later wrote from Europe: "The willing service and clean, exemplary lives of the LDS servicemen who have been among the peoples of Europe, have left a splendid impression over here.<_P>" [^9]

<_P>

Administration of George Albert SmithHCHugh B. Brown, president of the British Mission, was the first Church official to visit the European continent following the close of the war. On July 20, 1945, only two months after the formal end of hostilities in Europe, President Brown flew to Paris. There, in the large ballroom of an exclusive hotel, he conducted a meeting which was attended by some 350 servicemen and local Saints. He then continued by train to Switzerland for a hectic series of meetings. At Lausanne, not a member was absent even though the meeting was held during normal working hours. Elder Brown wrote: "The sheer joy of these humble folk at seeing someone from 'Zion' again made me realize how really lonely they had been during the isolation of the war years.<_P>" [^10]

<_P>

Administration of George Albert SmithHCAs early as the fall of 1945 the Church was sending relief supplies to Europe. These were addressed to branch presidents or other responsible individuals. The supplies had to be sent through the regular mails, which meant that only small packages were accepted and that the cost was prohibitive. By January 1946 the Church had shipped some thirteen thousand of these packages, besides many more mailed by individuals. In the meantime the Church was seeking means of shipping larger quantities. This would require the special cooperation of government officials. Consequently, President George Albert Smith together with Elders John A. Widtsoe and David O. McKay went to Washington, D.C., where they spent considerable time conferring with ambassadors and other officials of foreign nations. On November 3 President Smith and his party had a twenty-minute interview with United States President Harry S Truman at the White House. President George Albert Smith later reported the following concerning this important occasion:

Administration of George Albert SmithHCWhen the war was over, I went representing the Church, to see the president of the United States. When I called on him, he received me very graciously-I had met him before-and I said: "I have just come to ascertain from you, Mr. President, what your attitude will be if the Latter-day Saints are prepared to ship food and clothing and bedding to Europe."

Administration of George Albert SmithHCHe smiled and looked at me, and said: "Well, what do you want to ship it over there for? Their money isn't any good."

Administration of George Albert SmithHCI said: "We don't want their money." He looked at me and asked: "You don't mean you are going to give it to them?"

Administration of George Albert SmithHCI said: "Of course, we would give it to them. They are our brothers and sisters and are in distress. God has blessed us with a surplus, and we will be glad to send it if we can have the cooperation of the government."

Administration of George Albert SmithHCHe said: "You are on the right track," and added, "we will be glad to help you in any way we can... How long will it take you to get this ready?"

Administration of George Albert SmithHCI said: "It is all ready."

President George Albert Smith confers with U.S. President harry S. Truman about shipping food and clothing to suffering peoples of Europe in the wake of World War II. (Church Archives)

Administration of George Albert SmithHCThe government you remember had been destroying food and refusing to plant grain during the war, so I said to him:

Administration of George Albert SmithHC"Mr. President, while the administration at Washington were advising the destroying of food, we were building elevators and filling them with grain, and increasing our flocks and our herds, and now what we need is the cars and the ships in order to send considerable food, clothing, and bedding to the people of Europe who are in distress."

Administration of George Albert SmithHCPresident Truman also gave the Church leaders advice on procedures to follow in arranging for the shipment of the welfare supplies. [^11]

Administration of George Albert SmithHCElder Benson's Mission to Europe

Administration of George Albert SmithHCOn January 14, 1946, the First Presidency announced that Elder Ezra Taft Benson of the Council of the Twelve, who had extensive experience in national agricultural organizations, was called to preside over the European Mission. Elder Benson would reopen the missions in Europe, "attend to the spiritual affairs of the Saints," and "make available food, clothing, and bedding for the members of the Church in these distressed areas." [^12]

Administration of George Albert SmithHCIn Elder Benson's letter of appointment, the First Presidency declared: "... your influence [will] be felt for good by all you come in contact with, and... you and they [will] be made to feel that there is a power and spirit accompanying you not of man.<_P>" [^13]Events of succeeding months would amply demonstrate the prophetic nature of this promise.

<_P>

Elder Benson was accompanied by Frederick W. Babbel, who had served in the Swiss-German Mission just before the outbreak of World War II. They left Salt Lake City on January 29, 1946, and arrived in England on February 4. From the beginning of their mission they frequently referred to a scriptural promise which they regarded as being fulfilled in their behalf: "And they shall go forth and none shall stay them, for I the Lord have commanded them" (D&C 1:5). Elder Benson recalled:

Barriers have melted away. Problems that seemed impossible to solve have been solved, and the work in large measure has been accomplished through the blessings of the Lord.

I remember well our first inquiry as to the time we could set sail, either by plane or boat. We were told it would take three months, that all Bookings were filled for that period. Yet within twenty-one days from the time our appointment was announced, we landed at Hurn Airport sixty miles south of London. And in spite of a most acute housing shortage in London, two days thereafter suitable headquarters had been established; how, I do not know, except through the blessings of the Almighty; and had we been free to select a spot for our headquarters, as it developed later, we could not have clone better for our purpose. [^14]

Elder Ezra Taft Benson became the first strictly civilian American authorized to travel throughout all four occupied zones of Germany. Furthermore, his travels were often characterized by an "amazing series of events" enabling him to meet his demanding schedule. He and his associates accepted these circumstances as manifestations of divine intervention. Typical were his experiences as he traveled with Chaplain Howard S. Badger from Paris to the Hague. He reported that railway officials in Paris advised him that there would be a day's delay Because Holland must be entered through the eastern Border rather than via a more direct route. Elder Benson continued:

We were almost resigned to taking the service they recommended. It was then that I noticed a train on one of the tracks preparing to leave. "Where is that train headed?" I asked the stationmaster. "Antwerp, Belgium," he answered. I told him we would take that train and he assured me that we would lose an extra day because all connections between Antwerp and Holland had been cut off as a result of the war.

But I felt impressed to board that train in spite of his protestations.

When we arrived at Antwerp, the stationmaster was very upset and advised us that we would have to back-track somewhat and lose an extra day. Again I saw another train getting ready to leave and inquired where it was going. We were advised that this was a local shuttle-service which stopped at the Dutch Border where the large bridge across the Maas river still lay in ruins. I felt impressed that we should board that train in spite of the stationmaster's protests.

When we reached the Maas river, we all had to pile out. As we stood picking up our luggage, we noticed an American army truck approaching us. Brother Badger flagged it down and, upon learning that there was a pontoon bridge nearby, he persuaded them to take us into Holland. When we arrived at the first little village on the Dutch side, we were pleasantly surprised to find this local shuttle-service waiting to take us into The Hague. [^15]

One of Elder Benson's early visits was to Karlsruhe, a key German city on the Rhine River. Upon inquiring where the Latter-day Saints might be meeting, the group was directed to an area of almost totally demolished Buildings. Elder Babbel wrote:

Parking our car near massive heaps of twisted steel and concrete, we climbed over several large piles of rubble and threaded our way between the naked blasted walls in the general direction which had been pointed out to us. As we viewed the desolation on all sides of us, our task seemed hopeless. Then we heard the distant strains of "Come, Come Ye Saints" being sung in German. We were overjoyed. No strains of music were ever more welcome!

We hurried in the direction of the sound of the singing and arrived at a Badly scarred building which still had several usable rooms. In one of the rooms we found 260 joyous saints still in conference, although it was already long past their dismissal time ....

With tears of gratitude streaming clown our cheeks, we went as quickly as possible to the improvised stand. Never have I seen President Benson so deeply and visibly moved as on that occasion. [^16]

Elder Benson later described his feelings during the meeting:

I well remember our first meeting at Karlsruhe .... The Saints had Been in session for some two hours waiting for us, hoping that we would come Because the word had reached them that we might be there for the conference. And then for the first time in my life I saw almost an entire audience in tears as we walked up onto the platform, and they realized that at last, after six or seven long years, representatives from Zion, as they put it, had finally come back to them. Then as the meeting closed, prolonged at their request, they insisted we go to the door and shake hands with each one of them as he left the bombed-out building. And we noted that many of them, after they had passed through the line went back and came through the second and third time, so happy were they to grasp our hands. As I looked into their upturned faces, pale, thin, many of these Saints dressed in rags, some of them barefooted, I could see the light of faith in their eyes as they bore testimony to the divinity of this great latter-day work, and expressed their gratitude for the blessings of the Lord. That is what a testimony does. [^17]

Elder Benson felt a sense of urgency in visiting the scattered Saints in what had been East Prussia but was now Polish territory. Repeated visits to the Polish embassy in London, however, failed to secure the needed visas to Warsaw. Elder Babbel reported the latest of these failures to Elder Benson:

I sensed deeply with him that we were faced with a seemingly insurmountable problem. After moments of soul-searching reflection, during which neither one of us broke the silence, he said quietly but firmly, "Let me pray about it."

Some two or three hours after President Benson had retired to his room to pray, he stood in my doorway and said with a smile on his face, "Pack your bags. We are leaving for Poland in the morning!"

At first I could scarcely believe my eyes. He stood there enveloped in a beautiful glow of radiant light. His countenance shone as I imagine the Prophet Joseph's countenance shone when he was filled with the Spirit of the Lord.

Flying to Berlin, Elder Benson there obtained the necessary clearances for his party to go to Poland, even though he had been told definitely that the Polish Military Mission in Berlin had no authority to provide it.

Upon arriving in Poland, Elder Benson's party drove to a small town where a German branch of the Church had been located.

Not a sign of life was upon the streets as we entered the little village of Zelbak. Proceeding to the further end of the village we spied the branch chapel-the only Church-owned chapel in all of what was formerly Germany-and upon alighting from our vehicle we asked the only woman in sight if this was the Mormon chapel and where we might find the branch president.

We had spotted the woman hiding behind a large tree. Her expression was one of fear as we stopped, but upon learning who we were she greeted us with tears of gratitude and joy ....

Within minutes the cry went from house to house, "The brethren are here! The brethren are here!" Soon we found ourselves surrounded by about fifty of the happiest people we had ever seen.

Having seen our strange jeep approaching with what they feared to be Russian or Polish soldiers, they had abandoned the street as if by magic. Likewise, when they learned of our true identity and mission, the village became alive with joyous women and children-women and children, because only two of our former twenty-nine priesthood holders remained.

That morning in fast and testimony meeting over one hundred saints had assembled together to bear their testimonies and to petition Almighty God in song, in fasting and prayer, to be merciful to them and let the leaders again come to visit them. Our sudden and unheralded arrival, after almost complete isolation from Church and mission headquarters since early 1943, was the long-awaited answer, so wonderful they could scarcely believe their good fortune. [^18]

Administration of George Albert SmithHCElder Benson found the European Saints eager to move forward again in promoting the Lord's work. Nevertheless, substantial problems had to be overcome before Church programs could be reimplemented. Many branches could not be fully organized because so many of their priesthood leaders had been lost during the war. Furthermore, as meetinghouses and homes had been destroyed, the Saints lost not only material possessions but items of spiritual importance as well. In some branches, for example, not even copies of the scriptures remained. Nevertheless, "the faith of the Saints is stronger than ever before," Elder Benson reported. "Everywhere in war-torn Europe, the faithful members of the Church, bereft of earthly possessions, face the future with courage undaunted. This is in great contrast to the melancholy, suicides, and discouragement all around them." [^19]

Administration of George Albert SmithHCOne of Elder Benson's most important assignments was to see that the critical temporal needs of the Saints in Europe were met. Supplying the desperately needed food and clothing posed a substantial challenge to the Church's decade-old welfare program. Its prompt and efficient response, however, provided the occasion for extensive favorable comment. Elder Benson discovered that the needs were great, particularly in the war-affected areas.

Administration of George Albert SmithHCAn exception was Denmark, where the people appeared to have plenty to eat. The Danish Saints regarded this to be the fulfillment of Elder Joseph Fielding Smith's prophetic promise made at the outbreak of the war-that because Denmark had opened its doors to the missionaries being evacuated from Germany and Czechoslovakia, her people would not want for food during the war. Germany, on the other hand, had been devastated by the war, so her Saints' needs were acute. The German Saints exhibited courage, faith, and resourcefulness in meeting the emergency. During the closing months of the war, Saints in the East German Mission began gathering clothing, hiding it in safe places and sharing it cooperatively. The mission president compared the German members to the early Latter-day Saints who were driven closer together by the difficulties they suffered. [^20]

Administration of George Albert SmithHCBy March 14, 1946, Elder Benson had made necessary arrangements with government and military authorities in Europe to have the relief supplies sent. To supplement the supplies already in storage, the Church launched drives for used clothing and other goods. President George Albert Smith took the lead in demonstrating his love and concern for the suffering Saints in Europe. He donated at least two suits fresh from the cleaners and several shirts still in their wrappings from the laundry. During a visit to Welfare Square to inspect the results of these clothing drives, he took off his own topcoat and laid it on one of the piles of clothing being prepared for shipment to Europe. Despite the protestations of his associates, the weather being quite cool, he insisted on returning to the office without his coat. [^21]

Administration of George Albert SmithHCElder Benson reported that military and other officials were amazed at the dispatch with which the shipments arrived from the Church in America. European Church leaders wept for joy and gratitude when they visited the storehouses where the welfare goods had been received. Elder Benson wrote: "I wish you could have seen the clothes as they had them neatly arranged on the floors and in cabinets at the mission home and witnessed the expressions of gratitude, both facial and by word of mouth, from the mission presidency and other Saints.<_P>" [^22]Many wept openly as they examined clothing or ran their fingers through sacks of grain.

<_P>

Elder Ezra Taft Benson (right) and Brother Max Zimmer inspect Church welfare supplies sent to Europe by the Saints in America. (Improvement Era photo)

Administration of George Albert SmithHCIn addition to supervising the distribution of these welfare supplies, Elder Benson was also instrumental in extending regular missionary work to Finland. Prior to World War II there had been only infrequent contacts by missionaries from the Swedish Mission with the few scattered Swedish-speaking Saints living in Finland. In 1946, however, Elder Benson directed that regular proselyting be inaugurated in Finland, and then, on July 15, on a beautiful hill near Larsmo, he dedicated and blessed Finland that it might be receptive to the gospel. The following day, a surprising 245 persons attended a meeting in Helsinki and manifested a genuine interest in the Latter-day Saints' message. [^23]<_P/>A separate Finnish Mission would be organized the following year.

<_P>

Administration of George Albert SmithHCElder Benson returned home in December 1946, having traveled more than sixty thousand miles during his ten-month assignment in Europe. Some ninety-two carloads of welfare supplies, about two thousand tons, had been received and largely distributed. By this time, newly called presidents were directing the work in the missions of Europe. American missionaries "were busily engaged in teaching the restored gospel in all of the pre-war missions of Europe; and where military restrictions did not yet permit their entry, local missionaries had been called to serve full-time and were doing a commendable work.<_P>" [^24]

<_P>

Administration of George Albert SmithHCBy the spring of 1947 Church leaders had not yet been able to find a Finnish-speaking member with sufficient experience to serve as president of the new Finland Mission. On a trip to the East, Elder Benson (now back in the United States) got off his train in Chicago to make a special purchase. Even though he had been assured he would have plenty of time, the train left without him. He immediately telephoned the president of the Chicago Stake to have someone pick him up and drive him to the airport. He was picked up by Henry A. Matis, the stake clerk. Matis expressed a particular interest in Finland. Elder Benson learned that Matis had been born of Finnish parents and could speak the language with some fluency. The Apostle had found the man for whom he had been seeking, and Elder Matis was soon called as the first president of the Finnish Mission. [^25]

Foundations for Growth in Other Areas

Church in Australia and the PacificHCReopening missionary work in the Pacific did not involve as much effort as in Europe. Although missionaries had been withdrawn, except from Hawaii, mission presidents had been able to remain at their posts. Furthermore, areas served by these missions were never in actual combat zones (except Pearl Harbor). Following the end of hostilities, therefore, missionaries were again assigned there, without the complications that had been experienced in Europe.

Boyd K. Packer, serving in the U.S. Air Force, participates in first Japanese baptisms following the close of World War II. (Photo courtesy of Elder Boyd K. Packer)

Church in AsiaHCA different situation existed in Japan. The Latter-day Saint mission there had been closed in 1924, long before the outbreak of World War II. By 1945 only about fifty members remained in the Land of the Rising Sun. Latter-day Saint servicemen among the American occupation forces made an important contribution to the future of the Church in Japan. Many were anxious to bless the Japanese people with the spirit and message of the gospel. When three Mormon soldiers were offered a cup of tea in a curio shop in the village of Narumi, they declined and took the opportunity to explain the Church's teachings concerning the sanctity of the body. This led to further gospel conversations, and on July 7, 1946, the shop's proprietor, Tatsui Sato, and his family became the first postwar converts baptized in Japan. The young serviceman who baptized Mrs. Sato was Boyd K. Packer, a future member of the Council of the Twelve. [^26]Other convert baptisms followed, and thus foundations were laid for the eventual reopening of the Japanese Mission.

Elder Matthew Cowley, president of the Pacific Mission during the postwar years, had a special love for the Polynesian peoples. He is shown here with local residents.

Church in Australia and the PacificHCThe appointment of Elder Matthew Cowley to be president of the Pacific Mission was announced by the First Presidency on December 7, 1946, just five years after the attack at Pearl Harbor. Elder Cowley had presided for eight years over the New Zealand Mission, including the period of World War II. He had been called to the Council of the Twelve almost immediately following his release from his mission assignment. He would fulfill a function to the missions of the Pacific similar to Elder Benson's in Europe. During the next three years he would travel widely and have many remarkable experiences in the Pacific. On one occasion, for example, he blessed fifty people. On another day he gave blessings to seventy-six, many getting in line as early as 5:00 A.M. "This seemed the usual thing," Elder Cowley noted in his journal. "And they are made well, such is their faith. I know that when I lay my hand upon their heads that they are made whole," he testified. "It is not my faith. I just have faith in their faith." [^27]Elder Cowley's deep faith in the gospel of Jesus Christ, his great love for the peoples of the Pacific, and his enthusiastic leadership helped provide the impetus for postwar Church growth throughout the area.

Church in AsiaHCIn 1947 the First Presidency called Elder Edward L. Clissold, who had served in Japan as part of the allied occupation forces, to return and open the mission there. Upon his arrival in Tokyo, he found the climate far more conducive for successful missionary work than in former decades. There was a spiritual void that needed to be filled.

Church in AsiaHCTwo of President Clissold's most urgent tasks were to get the Japanese Mission formally registered and to find a suitable mission home. Fortunately his earlier experience with the occupation authorities provided him with key contacts with Japanese government officials and others. Still, several weeks of diligent searching, persistent contacting, and frequent fasting and prayer were required before these objectives could be achieved. Finding a home was not easy, so much housing having been destroyed by the war. Finally a building was found in a good location near many embassies, across the street from a beautiful park, and only five minutes from downtown Tokyo. About a year later, when Elder Matthew Cowley was in Tokyo, he dedicated this home, praying that the Lord's work might progress and that temples might be erected in this land. Thirty years later, this home would be torn down to make way for the Tokyo Temple, the first of these sacred structures in the Orient.

Church in AsiaHCOn June 26, 1948, the first five missionaries arrived. All five were former servicemen, come to share the gospel with the nation that so recently had been their enemy. By 1949 there would be 135 Church members in Japan.

Church in Australia and the PacificHCThe second half of the twentieth century would be a period of unprecedented growth for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The reopening of missionary work in Europe and in the Pacific were only two of the important foundations for this growth laid during the years immediately following the close of World War II.

The Church continued to gain strength in many new areas of North America where the Saints had been attracted during the war. This was reflected in the creation of several new stakes along the Pacific Coast. In 1947 the formation of the Florida and South Carolina stakes, the first in the South, evidenced progress in that area.

Church in South AmericaHCSome important developments in Latin America anticipated the great growth that would soon occur there. In Mexico, a large group of members, responding to the growing spirit of nationalism in their country, in 1936 had demanded a mission president of their own Blood and had Become disaffected from the regular Church organization. Arwell L. Pierce, who became president of the Mexican Mission in 1942, devoted his major effort to bringing these people back into full harmony with the Church. He repeatedly demonstrated genuine love for them and a spirit of helpfulness as he held out the goal of eventually having a stake in Mexico under local leadership and urged the Saints to unite in working toward that objective. The climax carne at a special mission conference in 1946, attended by George Albert Smith, the first Church President ever to visit Mexico. He radiated his Christlike love as he stressed the need for harmony and unity. Former differences were overcome. The fifteen hundred attending the conference were eager to show their love and respect for the prophet and thronged around him. Though ill, President Smith graciously received their attention, further cementing the spirit of unity which would be vital for future progress. [^28]<_P/>In 1947 a new era of growth in Latin America was evidenced as missionary work was extended from Mexico to Central America and as a new mission was opened in Uruguay.

The Church passed a significant milestone in 1947 as its membership reached the one million mark. President George Albert Smith's administration not only witnessed a growth in numbers and geographical expansion, however, but these postwar years were also a significant period of revitalization and refinement for the Church's varied programs and activities.

Notes

Chapter 11. George Albert Smith and Recovery from War

<_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P>

---
Notas:
[^1] Church News, April 12, 1947, p. 1; statement by Spencer W. Kimball quoted in James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 6:256-58.
[^2] Melvin K. Johnson, "A History of the Temple Square Mission of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to 1970" (master's thesis, Brig-ham Young University, 1971), pp. 50-51; David K. Jacobs, "The History of Motion Pictures Produced by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1967), pp. 69-99; Church News, October 5, 1949, pp. 1, 12-13.
[^3] Church News, March 3, 1945, p. 5; January 26, 1946, p. 1; and October 25, 1947, p. 1; George H. Fudge Oral History, pp. 1-3, Oral History Program, Church Archives; Improvement Era 53 (April 1950): 273.
[^4] Conference Report, April 1948, p. 166.
[^5] Church News, May 11, 1946, p. 1.
[^6] Ralph W. and Emma B. Evans, "The Navajo-Zuni Mission," MS, Church Indian Committee files, p. 3.
[^7] Church News, November 10, 1945, p. 1.
[^8] Conference Report, April 1947, pp. 144-45.
[^9] Church News, February 19, 1977, p. 3; compare December 20, 1947, p. 9.
[^10] Golden R. Buchanan Oral History, interviews by William G. Hartley, 1974, Church Archives, pp. 3-12.
[^11] First Presidency Centennial message, Improvement Era 50 (July 1947): 422-23.
[^12] I See Alvin R. Dyer, The Refiner's Fire (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1960), pp. 111-30.
[^13] Conference Report, April 1950, pp. 5-6.
[^14] Church News, March 14, 1981, pp. 7-10; see chart in chapter 4 herein.
[^15] Church News, April 11, 1951, p. 10.
[^16] Frederick W. Babbel, On Wings of Faith (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1972), p. 36.
[^17] Ezra Taft Benson in Conference Report, April 1947, pp. 153-54.
[^18] Frederick W. Babbel, On Wings of Faith (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1972), pp. 131-34, 148-49.
[^19] Report by Ezra Taft Benson in Conference Report, April 1947, pp. 152-57; see also Babbel, On Wings of Faith, pp. 25-26.
[^20] Report by Richard Ranglack, Church News, November 24, 1945, pp. 5, 9.
[^21] Joseph Anderson, Prophets I Have Known (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1973), p. 103.
[^22] Special report to the First Presidency, October 22, 1946, in European Mission Manuscript History, p. 70, Church Archives.
[^23] Frederick W. Babbel, On Wings of Faith (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1972), pp. 126-38.
[^24] Frederick W. Babbel, On Wings of Faith (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1972), p. 168.
[^25] Frederick W. Babbel, On Wings of Faith (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1972), pp. 129-30.
[^26] Harrison T. Price, "A Cup of Tea," Improvement Era 65 (March 1962): 161 ff.; see also Spencer J. Palmer, The Church Encounters Asia (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), pp. 65-69; Boyd K. Packer in Conference Report, April 1975, p. 155.
[^27] Henry A. Smith, Matthew Cowley: Man of Faith (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954), p. 160.
[^28] Church News, June 1, 1946, p. 1; June 15, 1946, pp. 2-3.
