Richard O. Cowan, Church in the Twentieth Century ( 1985)

Chapter 12

Administration of George Albert SmithHCPostwar Resurgence

Administration of George Albert SmithHCThe Salt Lake Tabernacle was opened to he public on August 13, 1945, for the first time in nearly four years. Audiences were again able to enjoy the daily organ recitals and attend the weekly choir broadcasts. The first general conference without wartime restrictions on travel and attendance convened that October. These developments typified the ushering in of an era when Church activities revived and expanded, and provided the occasion for reevaluating and refining Church programs. In the midst of these postwar developments, the Latter-day Saints also marked the centennial of the Mormon pioneers' arrival in Utah. Hence President George Albert Smith's administration provided the occasion for reflection on past accomplishments as well as looking forward to and preparing for future opportunities.

Administration of George Albert SmithHCRevival and Expansion of Church Programs

Administration of George Albert SmithHCMissionary work and the construction of Church buildings were undoubtedly the activities most hampered by wartime restrictions. With the ending of hostilities, however, these and other activities not only revived but also expanded in order to better meet the needs of the Saints.

Administration of George Albert SmithHCThe rapid influx of missionaries after the war pushed their numbers to the new peak of 2,244 in 1946; by 1950 some 5,156 were serving. As had been the case before the war, most missionaries again were young Elders. The sudden explosion in the number of missionaries led to measures designed to enhance their effectiveness. The development of improved proselyting plans in these postwar years will be considered in a later chapter.

Administration of George Albert SmithHCAs the pace of missionary work picked up, the administrative load of mission presidents increased. Unlike ward bishops, stake presidents, or most other executives in the Church who enjoyed the assistance of two counselors, mission presidents served alone despite their responsibilities for missionaries and members. Therefore in 1947 the General Authorities directed mission presidents to call counselors from among the missionaries and local Melchizedek Priesthood bearers. Elder Spencer W. Kimball later declared that the decision to appoint counselors was a revelation to the Presidency of the Church. [^1]

Administration of George Albert SmithHCWhile mission organization was being strengthened and proselyting missionaries were refining their methods, the Church was also taking advantage of other means to share its message with the world. With the end of wartime gasoline rationing and the consequent upsurge in travel, the importance of Temple Square as a missionary tool revived. In 1948 the number of visitors topped the one-million mark for the first time. In that same year the annual Hill Cumorah Pageant, "America's Witness for Christ," resumed. The Church's first major involvement in motion picture production also came during these postwar years. Several Church leaders had been especially impressed with teaching and training films produced by the Wait Disney Studios as part of the war effort. New Latter-day Saint motion pictures appearing during the later 1940s treated Church historic sites, Temple Square, and the welfare program. Likewise, as television developed during the postwar years, the Church was quick to make use of it. The October 1949 general conference was the first to be telecast. [^2]<_P/>A later chapter will consider in greater detail the importance of these media in sharing the gospel with the world.

<_P>

Administration of George Albert SmithHCThe shortage of critical materials had brought the Church building program almost to a complete halt during the war. With the return of peace, Latter-day Saints looked forward to the construction of meetinghouses and other badly needed facilities. As materials became available, the Church embarked on an ambitious chapel-building program. By 1949 some two hundred local meetinghouses had been completed, and the total reached nine hundred only three years later. As early as the mid-1950s, more than half of all Latter-day Saint buildings in use had been constructed since the close of World War II. Expenditures for these building projects accounted for more than half of the appropriations from general Church funds during these years.

Administration of George Albert SmithHCThe need for new buildings was particularly acute at Brigham Young University as it experienced a sudden expansion of its student body following the close of World War II. BYU's prewar enrollment had stood at just less than 3,000, but as more and more young men responded to calls into military service, the student body shrank to a wartime low of only 1,155 during the 1943-44 school year. As the conflict ended and veterans began pouring back onto the campus, the school's enrollment soared to 5,082 for the 1946-47 year and continued to grow. Over 2,200 veterans enrolled as freshmen during the 1946 fall quarter. Thus almost overnight Brigham Young University was transformed from a dormant wartime campus dominated by coeds into a bustling campus on which men outnumbered women for the first time. To meet the resulting housing shortage, BYU purchased twenty-six bar-racks-type temporary buildings from the Army to provide accommodations for two hundred married students and three hundred single veterans.

Administration of George Albert SmithHCThe Church's administration building in Salt Lake City was remodeled during 1948 and 1949. A central light well was filled in to create more office space. As a result, all the General Authorities' offices were under one roof for the first time.

Administration of George Albert SmithHCIn 1937 President Heber J. Grant had announced plans to build a temple in Idaho, and construction got under way two years later. The work moved forward, and on October 19, 1941, the capstone was laid. From the outside the structure appeared to be completed. But less than two months later, the attack at Pearl Harbor propelled the United States into war, and the temple's completion had to be postponed as strategic building materials suddenly became scarce. Finally by mid-1945 the Idaho Falls Temple was completed and 'ready for dedication. In his dedicatory prayer President George Albert Smith expressed gratitude for the cessation of war and for the coming of peace. He prayed that the peoples of the world might be inclined to live the gospel of Jesus Christ, thereby making the peace permanent and hastening the time of the Lord's coming.

Administration of George Albert SmithHCThe General Authorities encouraged and gave greater direction to the Saints' temple and genealogical activity. Elder Joseph Fielding Smith, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve and president of the Genealogical Society, was called in 1945 to become president of the Salt Lake Temple and hence to give general supervision to the work of all the Church's temples.

Administration of George Albert SmithHCOne of the society's most valuable services was the micro-filming of vital records from many countries and making them available to genealogical researchers. This project had commenced during the late 1930s but was interrupted with the coming of World War II. It resumed even before the war ended. In March 1945 the Church began microfilming 365 English parish registers that had been sent to Salt Lake City for this purpose. During 1947 Archibald F. Bennett, Secretary of the Genealogical Society, spent four months in Europe conferring with government and religious officials. He was successful in obtaining permission for the society to microfilm records in England, Scotland, Wales, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Holland, Germany, Finland, Switzerland, northern Italy, and France. George Fudge, who many years later would become Director of the Genealogical Society, was called to inaugurate the work of microfilming records in England. At first he had only a used camera with no light meter, and he had to work alone. Nevertheless, within three months nearly a quarter of a million pages had been filmed. Only occasionally did the Church representatives encounter anti-Mormon opposition from local churchmen. In the wake of war most archivists were eager to cooperate with the microfilmers in order to ensure that a copy might be preserved in case the original records were destroyed. Furthermore, the society presented each library or church with a copy of the material microfilmed, allowing the public to have access to this information without having to handle the already fragile originals. By early 1950 twenty-two full-time microfilmers were at work in the United States and several European countries. Prior to the war some 3,340 records had been microfilmed and cataloged. By 1950 this total reached 24,579. [^3]

George Fudge, who pioneered microfilming of genealogical records in Britain, later managed the Genealogical Department of the Church. (Utah State Historical Society)

Administration of George Albert SmithHCPostwar social trends placed stress on the family and caused Church leaders to give added attention to the home. The close of World War II witnessed a sharp increase in the number of marriages, followed by what demographers have called the postwar baby boom. Hence there were probably more new families and new parents than at any previous time in the Church's history. Unfortunately, however, the rate of divorces in the United States almost doubled from 1940 to 1945. Elder Richard L. Evans considered this highest divorce rate in history as one of the appalling "costs of war" and acknowledged that it was a subject very much on Church leaders' minds. [^4]<_P/>It should be no surprise, therefore, to find that the home and family received considerable attention during these critical postwar years. Under the leadership of the General Authorities, therefore, various Church organizations in 1946 inaugurated programs to strengthen families and specifically to promote a regular "family hour."

<_P>

Administration of George Albert SmithHCThe same wartime conditions that undermined family stability also posed significant challenges for the youth. The General Authorities had repeatedly instructed local Church leaders to look out for the welfare of these young people. The Granite Stake in Salt Lake City had developed a method of checking on and encouraging the activity of young women, similar to the Presiding Bishopric's program for young men bearing the Aaronic Priesthood. In 1944 the Twelve recommended that all stakes adopt this girls' program. In order to avoid unwanted duplication of effort, responsibility for the LDS Girls Program was formally assumed by the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association in 1950. Under the leadership of the Young Men's and Young Women's MIAs, new age-group and activity programs were sponsored for the youth. As a result, active Latter-day Saint young people typically spent many wholesome hours in dramatic, cultural, recreational, social, and athletic activities. Road shows, dance festivals, speech competitions, and Churchwide softball and basketball tournaments attracted widespread attention and praise. Involvement in such activities helped the Church's youth retain their religious faith at a time when others were restless in their search for new values and beliefs.

Administration of George Albert SmithHCIn the spirit of refining activities in order to more adequately meet the needs of the Saints, the General Authorities made adjustments in the sacrament meeting, the Church's basic weekly worship service. Over the years, the practice had developed of having soft instrumental or even vocal music during the passing of the sacrament. In 1946, however, the First Presidency specified that there should be absolute quiet during this time, that nothing should distract the Saints from reflecting on the atonement of Jesus Christ and on the sacred covenants they had made with him. [^5]<_P/>The Church certainly was not opposed to music as such. To the contrary, during these postwar years Church leaders encouraged special courses of instruction for Church musicians. A new edition of the Latter-day Saint hymnal was prepared. Publication of Recreational Songs and The Children Sing in 1949 and 1951, respectively, represented an important new expansion of Latter-day Saint music literature.

<_P>

After moving into its new facilities, dedicated in 1952, the Primary Children's Hospital developed into one of America's leading pediatric facilities. (Church Archives)

Administration of George Albert SmithHCThe Church was also taking steps to enhance the temporal welfare of its members. For some time the Church had operated a few hospitals in the Intermountain area, and during the years immediately following World War II it took steps to strengthen this system. Hospitals in Salt Lake City and Ogden underwent major renovation and expansion. The Church also cooperated with rural communities in Utah, Idaho, and Wyoming to open and operate several small hospitals. Then, in 1949, ground was broken for the new Primary Children's Hospital in Salt Lake City. This $1.25-million facility would provide badly needed hospital care to children of all religions and races-free of charge to the families unable to pay.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCThe Day of the Lamanites

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCThe Latter-day Saints have always had an interest in the American Indians and related groups, whom they identify as descendants of the Book of Mormon Lamanites. The scriptures describe great future blessings for these people (see 2 Ne. 30:3-6 and D&C 49:24), and the Saints have always believed that it was their unique responsibility to help the Lamanites realize this glorious destiny. As a result, the Church since its beginning has sponsored missions and other programs to benefit the Lamanites. The 1940s brought a significant expansion of these activities, and many Church members became more involved than ever before in working with the Lamanites.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCModern missionary work among the North American Indians dates from 1936, when the First Presidency directed the Snowflake Stake in northeastern Arizona to open formal missionary work among these people. Soon other stakes became involved.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCMissionary work among the Indians received a significant boost in November 1942. George Jumbo, a Navajo Latter-day Saint, had gone to Salt Lake City for back surgery. Before returning home, his wife Mary expressed the desire to meet President Heber J. Grant. Arrangements were made. "Mary stood before him in her beautiful Navajo costume and eloquently pleaded that missionaries be sent to her people. President Grant, eyes filled with tears, turned to Elder George Albert Smith and said, 'The time has arrived for the preaching of the gospel to the Lamanites of the Southwest,' "and directed the Apostle to give more attention to this matter. [^6]<_P/>Early the following year the Navajo-Zuni Mission was organized. The work soon spread beyond these tribes, reaching Indians throughout the United States and Canada. The second half of the twentieth century would also witness very successful missionary work among other Lamanite groups, particularly in Latin America and Polynesia.

<_P>

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCWhile these Indian missionary programs were moving forward, another group of Lamanites was being blessed in quite a different way. Most Spanish-speaking Saints did not understand the full meaning of the temple ceremonies as presented in English, so in 1945 the temple endowment was presented for the first time in a language other than English. Most of the Saints who attended had had to make a substantial economic sacrifice to travel the long distances to Mesa, Arizona, some even giving up jobs to attend. Nevertheless about two hundred gathered, some coming from as far away as Mexico City. At a special Lamanite conference on Sunday, November 4, 1945, President David O. McKay congratulated those who had gathered. The history-making Spanish-speaking endowment sessions commenced two days later. [^7]<_P/>Those who attended discovered that the Church included more than just the small branch with which most of them worshipped each week. During succeeding years the Lamanite conference and Spanish-speaking temple sessions at Mesa became eagerly anticipated annual events.

<_P>

President George Albert Smith took a personal interest in expanding missionary work among the American Indians and other Lamanites. Here he shows the Book of Mormon to two Navajos, Many Turquoise (left) and Manuelito Begay. (Improvement Era photo)

Administration of George Albert SmithHCPresident George Albert Smith had over the years manifested a special interest in the Lamanites, and soon after he became President of the Church he called Spencer W. Kimball (who had lived among the American Indians), Matthew Cowley (whose service among the Polynesians is well known), and Antoine R. Ivins (who had been reared in Mexico) to give special attention and leadership to these people. "I do not know when I began to love the children of Lehi," Elder Kimball reflected. "It may have come from my patriarchal blessing which was given to me... when I was nine years of age. One line of the blessing reads: 'You will preach the gospel to many people, but more especially to the Lamanites .... ' And now, forty-two years after the promise, President George Albert Smith called me to this mission, and my blessing was fulfilled." Elder Kimball testified that "a great thrill came to me, such as I have had few times in my life. " [^8]

While touring the Mexican Mission in 1947, Elder Kimball envisioned a glorious future for the Lamanites, which he related at the Lamanite conference in Mesa during November of that year. Some thirty years later, as President of the Church, he would conduct an area conference at Mexico City. As he addressed the large audience, he again told them of his 1947 vision, which he could see well on its way to fulfillment:

Maybe the Lord was showing to me what great things this people would accomplish.

I could see you children of Lehi with your herds and flocks on thousands of hills.

In my dream I no longer saw you the servant of other people, but I saw you as the employer, the owner of banks and businesses.

I saw the people of Lehi as engineers and builders building lofty bridges and great edifices. I saw you in great political positions and functioning as administrators of the land. I saw many of you as heads of government and of the counties, states, and cities.

I saw you in legislative positions where as good legislators and good Latter-day Saints you were able to make the best laws for your brothers and sisters.

I saw many of your sons become attorneys. I saw doctors, as well as lawyers, looking after the health of the people ....

I saw you as owners of newspapers with great influence in public affairs. I saw great artists among you. Many of you I saw writing books and magazines and articles and having a powerful influence on the thoughts of the people of the country ....

I saw the Church growing in rapid strides and I saw wards and stakes organized. I saw stakes by the hundreds: I saw a temple .... " [^9]

Administration of George Albert SmithHCOne of the Lamanites' most critical needs has been for education. The postwar years brought the development of Latter-day Saint schools in Polynesia and later in Latin America. Two programs, which had their beginning during the later 1940s, would be of particular benefit to American Indians.

Administration of George Albert SmithHCGolden R. Buchanan was a member of the Sevier Stake presidency in central Utah. During the autumn of 1947 he had occasion to observe the deplorable condition of some migrant Indian agricultural workers in the area. Speaking at a stake conference he admonished the Saints to take better care of their Lamanite brethren. Shortly afterwards a member from a neighboring town came to President Buchanan and told him of a teenage Indian girl named Helen John who did not want to return to the reservation with her family but was determined to remain and go to school. "If you'll let me pitch my tent out back of your house," she pleaded to her Latter-day Saint employers, "I promise I won't be any bother to you. I'll take care of myself, but I would like to live where I can go to school with your girls."

Administration of George Albert SmithHCPresident Buchanan was impressed with the idea. "If a program of this sort were undertaken by the Church," he envisioned, "literally hundreds of Indian children would have the privilege of living in LDS homes where they not only could be taught in school but they could be taught the principles of the gospel." He outlined his ideas in a letter to Elder Spencer W. Kimball. Elder Kimball personally invited the Buchanans to take Helen into their home. Several other Indian youth were placed in other homes in the area. The Saints had to overcome prejudices that stemmed from the era of Indian wars in pioneer times. From these beginnings the program grew and became an official Church-sponsored activity in the 1950s. Eventually as many as five thousand students were placed in Latter-day Saint homes, especially throughout the western United States and Canada. Many of the Indian students achieved marked success in school and became leaders among their people. [^10]

By the 1970s, educational opportunities would improve on the reservations, allowing an increasing number of Indian youth to remain at home while going to school. Still, the placement program would represent the key to success for hundreds of other Indian students.

Administration of George Albert SmithHCAnother special education program designed particularly for Lamanites was the Indian Seminary. When a military hospital near Brigham City, Utah, was converted in 1949 into the Intermountain Indian School, local Church authorities took steps to provide seminary classes for the new Latter-day Saint Indian youths attending the school. A key role was played by Boyd K. Packer, member of one of the local stake high councils (and future member of the Council of the Twelve), who served as the first teacher. In 1949 the Church bought property adjacent to the school's entrance and later erected a seminary building there. By the mid-1950s the need for similar programs at other government Indian schools had become apparent, and in 1955 Indian Seminaries were officially inaugurated as a distinct program of the Church's educational system. Within a few years more than ten thousand Indian students, from kindergarten through the twelfth grade, were being served. Some Indian Seminary classes met daily as did other seminaries, but most were allowed to provide instruction to the Indian students only once a week.

Administration of George Albert SmithHCBrigham Young University would also inaugurate specialized programs for Indian students on campus and also to help train those interested in working with Indians. BYU would also sponsor a special institute to conduct research and service projects on numerous Indian reservations aimed at improving the standard of living.

Administration of George Albert SmithHCThe Pioneer Centennial

Administration of George Albert SmithHCIn the midst of this postwar revival of Church activity, the celebration of the pioneer centennial in 1947 focused the Saints' attention on their heritage. President George Albert Smith, who seventeen years earlier had become president of the Utah Pioneer Trails and Landmarks Association, was now appointed chairman of the committee to plan appropriate observances for the pioneer centennial. Few, if any, Church leaders excelled his zeal in commemorating the achievements of the past. It was fitting, therefore, that he should be serving as President of the Church at the time of the 1947 centennial. At the April 1947 general conference, just about all the speakers paid tribute to the faith and courage of the early pioneers and reflected on the accomplishments during the intervening years. During the spring and summer, dozens of musical performances, art exhibits, sporting events, and dramatic productions marked the occasion. The pageant, "Message of the Ages," which had been so popular during the 1930 centennial, was again staged in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. Some 1,400 persons were involved in the production, and a total of 135,000 persons witnessed the twenty-five performances between May 5 and June 5. A musical production, "Promised Valley," was presented in the University of Utah stadium from July 21 through August 10 with more than 85,000 people attending. Featuring the original music of Crawford Gates, this production depicted the frustrations and dedication of the early pioneers. It was presented throughout the Church by local MIA groups, and in later years became a popular annual attraction in Salt Lake City during the summer tourist season.

Administration of George Albert SmithHCA feeling of goodwill accompanied the centennial celebrations. During July the nation's governors held their annual meeting in Salt Lake City. President George Albert Smith hosted the group, and the friendship manifested by these leaders was a far cry from the persecutions of a century earlier. Members of the Sons of Utah Pioneers reenacted the original pioneer trek, following the 1846-47 route from Nauvoo, Illinois, to the Salt Lake Valley. Each of their seventy-two vehicles was outfitted with wagon box, canvas cover, and plywood oxen to give the appearance of a covered wagon. The "trekkers" presented programs and were well received in each of the towns where they stopped along the way.

Administration of George Albert SmithHCThe centennial celebration climaxed on July 24, exactly one hundred years from the day the first pioneer company had entered the Salt Lake Valley. A gigantic "Days of '47" parade included numerous floats honoring these early founders. On this day the United States Post Office issued a commemorative stamp in memory of the pioneers. The highlight of the celebration was the unveiling of the sixty-foot-high "This is the Place" monument near the mouth of Emigration Canyon. Fifteen separate sculptures honored the early settlers in the Great Basin. It was located near the spot where Brigham Young had gazed out over the valley, recognized it as the Saints' resting place shown him in vision, and therefore declared, "This is the right place, drive on." The entire monument was dedicated by President George Albert Smith.

Automobiles made to look like covered wagons attract attention during the Salt Lake City parade that concluded a reenactment of the pioneer trek, part of Utah's 1947 centennial celebration. (Church Archives)

Administration of George Albert SmithHCReflecting on the significance of the pioneer centennial, the First Presidency declared: "As that small group of pioneers looked upon what appeared to be a sterile desert, so today the Church faces a world lying in moral lethargy and spiritual decline. A sense of responsibility should be and is in the Church today." The Presidency compared the physical dangers faced by the pioneers with the temptations confronting the Church, particularly the youth, in the twentieth century and charged the Saints to be prepared to meet these challenges as their forbears had been. [^11]

Administration of George Albert SmithHCThe Saints' continuing interest in their heritage was reflected in efforts during and following World War II to acquire additional sites of historic importance. In 1944 the Church began purchasing land at Adam-ondi-Ahman in northern Missouri. Not only was this the site of a small Mormon settlement in the late 1830s, but Latter-day Saints also identified this as the place where Adam met his posterity just before his death, where Book of Mormon Nephites had erected an altar, and where a great priesthood conference will convene just before Christ's second coming. [^12]<_P/>In 1946 and 1949 nearly two hundred acres were purchased at Harmony, Pennsylvania, including the banks of the Susquehannah River where John the Baptist had restored the Aaronic Priesthood in 1829. These purchases were made on behalf of the Church by Wilford C. Wood, who had taken great personal interest in researching, identifying, and acquiring historical sites. President George Albert Smith also took a personal interest in acquiring and suitably marking these sites.

<_P>

Administration of George Albert SmithHCThe Saints at Mid-Twentieth Century

Administration of George Albert SmithHCThe midpoint of the twentieth century was reached as the year 1950 came to its close. Just over three months later, President George Albert Smith would die and a new leader would be sustained. Both of these milestones provided the occasion for the Latter-day Saints to reflect on the Church's status-what had been accomplished, and what still lay ahead.

Administration of George Albert SmithHCThe first half of the twentieth century had been a period of substantial growth for the Saints, Church membership passing the one-million mark only three years before mid-century. At the general conference held in April 1950, President George Albert Smith shared his feelings about this growth: "The Church has increased more during the past year than in any other year since it was organized... How happy we should be," he continued, "not that we have increased in numbers, but that more of our Father's children . . . have been brought to an understanding of the truth.<_P>" [^13]

<_P>

Administration of George Albert SmithHCNot only had there been an increase in the quantity of Church members, but during the years following the close of World War II there was also an improvement in the quality of the Saints' religious activities. This improvement was reflected in the level of participation in Church meetings. Attendance at sacrament meetings, for example, had only improved from 17 percent to 19 percent between 1920 and 1940, but it reached 24 percent in 1950. [^14]The postwar refinement in Church activities and the construction of hundreds of new meetinghouses undoubtedly had a positive impact on this trend.

Administration of George Albert SmithHCPresident George Albert Smith had been afflicted with poor health throughout his life. Following a prolonged illness, he died peacefully on his eighty-first birthday, April 4, 1951. Countless individuals, both small and great, paid tribute to the departed leader. Almost all made specific reference to President Smith's great capacity to love his fellowmen. His second counselor, President David O. McKay, affirmed that George Albert Smith had "lived as nearly as it is humanly possible for a man to live a Christ-like life. He found that the answer to the yearning of the human heart for fulfillment lies in living outside oneself by love.<_P>" [^15]President Smith's emphasis on love had heightened the Saints' spirit of unity. Under his leadership there had been a revival, refinement, and resurgence in Church activity and growth. In these and other ways he had helped lay the foundations for the unprecedented growth during the following decades.

<_P>

Notes

Chapter 12. Postwar Resurgence

<_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P>

---
Notas:
[^1] Quoted in My Kingdom Shall Roll Forth (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1979), p. 110.
[^2] Llewelyn R. McKay, Home Memories of President David O. McKay (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1956), pp. 5-6.
[^3] Quoted in Preston Nibley, The Presidents of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1959), p. 389.
[^4] David O. McKay, "Personal Testimony," Improvement Era 65 (September 1962): 628-29.
[^5] Clare Middlemiss, comp., Cherished Experiences from the Writings of David O. McKay (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1967), p. 174.
[^6] McKay, "Personal Testimony," p. 629.
[^7] Bryant S. Hinckley, "David O. McKay," Improvement Era 35 (May 1932): 389 ff.
[^8] Clare Middlemiss, comp., Cherished Experiences from the Writings of David O. McKay (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1967), pp. 50-56.
[^9] Clare Middlemiss, comp., Cherished Experiences from the Writings of David O. McKay (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1967), pp. 63-65.
[^10] Clare Middlemiss, comp., Cherished Experiences from the Writings of David O. McKay (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1967), pp. 73-74.
[^11] Clare Middlemiss, comp., Cherished Experiences from the Writings of David O. McKay (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1967), pp. 79-83.
[^12] Conference Report, April 1951, p. 113.
[^13] Conference Report, October 1953, p. 10; Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1966), p. 240.
[^14] David O. McKay, "The World Needs to Be Saved from Dominating Animal Instincts," Instructor 97 (June 1962): 181-82.
[^15] Conference Report, October 1936, p. 103.
