Richard O. Cowan, Church in the Twentieth Century ( 1985)

Chapter 13

Administration of David O. McKayHCDavid O. McKay and His Administration

Administration of David O. McKayHCDavid O. McKay holds the distinction of having lived more years than has any other President of the Church. His mortal lifetime extended from the days of Brigham Young to the space age. The gold spike completing the first transcontinental railroad was driven only four years before David O. McKay was born, and yet he lived to see the first men land on the moon. The two decades in which he presided over the Church were an era of unprecedented growth and expansion.

David O. McKay's Earlier Life

David O. McKay was born on September 8, 1873, in Huntsville, a small agricultural community in northern Utah. His father and mother were converts who had immigrated from Scotland and Wales, respectively. The wholesome home environment they created was one of the profound influences in young David's life, and he frequently referred to their worthy example in later sermons.

"My home life from babyhood to the present time has been the greatest factor in giving me moral and spiritual standards and in shaping the course of my life. Sincerity, courtesy, consistency in word and deed exemplified in the lives of my parents and others... have proved a safeguard and guidance." [^1]

1873September 8: Born in Huntsville, Utah1881-83Father served mission to Britain (ages 7-9)1897Graduated from University of Utah (23)1897-99Mission in Scotland (24-26)1899Became faculty member at Weber Stake Academy in Ogden (26)1906Member of Twelve and of General Sunday School superintendency (32)1908Chairman of General Priesthood Committee1918-34General Superintendent of the Sunday School1919-20Church Commissioner of Education (46-47)1920-21Toured Church missions worldwide (47-48)1922-24Presided over European Mission (48-50)1934Chosen as Second Counselor in the First Presidency (61)1951April 9: Sustained President of the Church (77)1952Toured missions of Europe (78)1954Toured missions in South Africa and Latin America (80)1955Visited missions in the Pacific; dedicated Swiss Temple1956Dedicated Los Angeles Temple1958Dedicated New Zealand and London Temples and Church Colleges of New Zealand and Hawaii; organized Auckland Stake1964Dedicated Oakland Temple1967Regional Representatives first called1970January 18: Died in Salt Lake City, Utah (96)

David was only seven years old when his father was called to return as a missionary to Great Britain. The two oldest girls in the family had recently died from serious illnesses, and the mother was now expecting another child. Under these trying circumstances David's father felt that he shouldn't leave his wife, and considered asking for a postponement. "Of course you must accept," David's mother insisted; "you need not worry about me. David O. [who was the eldest son] and I will manage things nicely!<_P>" [^2]During his father's absence, young David learned how to assume responsibility and how to work. As "man of the house," he rapidly matured beyond his years.

An important event occurred when David O. McKay was not quite fourteen years old. During the summer of 1887, John Smith, the Patriarch to the Church, visited the McKays' rural community in order to give patriarchal blessings to the faithful Saints. As he blessed David, Patriarch Smith clearly anticipated the vast contributions this young man would one day make in the Lord's work:

Thou art in thy youth and need instruction, therefore I say unto thee, be taught of thy parents the way of life and salvation, that at an early day you may be prepared for a responsible position, for the eye of the Lord is upon thee The Lord has a work for thee to do, in which thou shalt see much of the world, assist in gathering scattered Israel and also labor in the ministry. It shall be thy lot to sit in council with thy brethren and preside among the people and exhort the Saints to faithfulness. [^3]

David's quest for spiritual development began early. He later recalled how as a teenager he prayed fervently for a sure testimony: "I had in mind that there would be some manifestation come, that I should receive some transformation that would leave me without doubt." But, as shall be seen, the desired answer would come only after several more years of seeking.<_P> [^4]

David O. McKay had a well-rounded college experience. Besides attending to his studies, he played the piano for dances, was left guard on the University of Utah's first football team, courted his sweetheart, and graduated as president and valedictorian of his class.

Upon graduating from the university, David had planned to go to work immediately in order to finance the education of other family members. Shortly before graduating, however, he received a mission call to the British Isles. Even though this represented a financial sacrifice for his family, he accepted the call. After being in Scotland for a short time, he was discouraged and homesick. Then one day in Stirling he noticed an inscription on an unfinished building: "Whate'er thou art, act well thy part." He accepted this message "as if it came from One in whose service we were engaged," and he resolved to act well his part as a Latter-day Saint missionary. [^5]

David O. McKay's missionary experience brought great spiritual growth that laid the foundation for his lifetime of service. During a very spiritual conference session in Scotland, an unusual feeling of harmony and faith prevailed. One Elder's declaration that there were angels in the room was confirmed by James L. McMurrin, a counselor in the mission presidency. President McMurrin then prophesied the future of several of the missionaries who were present, including David O. McKay, who later wrote: "His words made an indelible impression upon me: 'Let me say to you, Brother David, Satan hath desired you that he may sift you as wheat, but God is mindful of you.' Then he said: 'If you will keep the faith, you will yet sit in the leading councils of the Church.' I knew that the answer to my boyish prayer had come." [^6]

Soon after returning from the mission field, David O. McKay married his college sweetheart, Emma Ray Riggs, their sealing being the first one performed in the Salt Lake Temple in the twentieth century. He accepted a teaching position at the Church's Weber Stake Academy in Ogden. His service as a teacher confirmed his love of reading the scriptures and the works of Shakespeare, Robert Burns, and other literary masters, whom he would quote in sermons throughout his life. At the same time he was called to the Weber Stake Sunday School superintendency with particular responsibility for instruction. Here he introduced features which would "find their way into all the Sunday Schools of the Church and which resulted in revolutionizing the teaching throughout the entire organization." For the first time formal outlines were prepared, stake preparation meetings held, and lesson work unified and made progressive from grade to grade. [^7]

In April 1906 David O. McKay was called to the Council of the Twelve, at the age of thirty-two. In October of the same year he became assistant to the General Sunday School superintendent, who was none other than Church President Joseph F. Smith. Upon the latter's death in 1918, Elder McKay succeeded him as superintendent, and the following year also became the Commissioner of Education for Church Schools. In these capacities he influenced the improvement of teaching throughout the Church. During these same years he profoundly influenced the development of Church programs in his capacity as chairman of the General Priesthood Committee and of several other committees appointed to better correlate the programs of various Church organizations.

At the end of 1920 Elder McKay was assigned by the First Presidency to make a worldwide tour in order to assess conditions in the Church's far-flung missions. He spent Christmas of that year with missionaries in Tokyo, Japan.

On January 9, 1921, Elder McKay and Hugh J. Cannon, his traveling companion, felt they were guided as they located a secluded cypress grove within the "Forbidden City" at Peking, China. There, away from the noisy throngs, Elder David O. McKay blessed the land and its people, that famine and superstition might be removed, that the government might become stable, and that missionaries might come who can "comprehend the Chinese nature, so that in the souls of this people an appreciation of the glorious gospel might be awakened."

In Hawaii Elders McKay and Cannon enjoyed some remarkable spiritual experiences. During a prayer, they were made aware of the presence and blessing of Joseph F. Smith and George Q. Cannon (the father of Hugh J. Cannon), who had introduced the gospel to the Islands seventy years earlier. On another occasion, Elder McKay was impressed to get off a lookout ledge just before it crumbled into the crater of Kilauea Volcano. [^8]They visited a small missionary-conducted elementary school in the town of Laie where the Hawaii Temple had been dedicated about a year and a half earlier. As Elder McKay witnessed a flag-raising ceremony in which students representing many races participated, he was impressed that Laie would become an educational as well as spiritual center for the peoples of the Pacific. His prophetic vision would be fulfilled with the opening of the Church College of Hawaii during the 1950s.

One of the last stops in their three-week visit to the Samoan Mission was at the small mountain town of Sauniatu, which had been colonized by the Latter-day Saints. Elder McKay was the first Apostle these people had ever seen. As the last meeting closed, the Saints formed a line so that they might shake hands with the special visitors. They began singing a beautiful Samoan farewell hymn, but their sobbing soon interrupted their singing as they fondly embraced the visitors. Finally, Elder McKay and his party rode off on horseback, but after going only a short distance were prompted to turn back. As they reached the point where the Saints were still gathered, Elder McKay dismounted, and pronounced a beautiful Apostolic blessing on the Samoan Islands and people. After he had ridden away again, the Saints recorded the words of the prayer, and marked the spot with a pile of stones. A year later they erected a permanent stone monument to commemorate this inspiring moment. [^9]

At a meeting in New Zealand, Elder McKay faced an audience "that had assembled with unusual expectations." In other meetings he had spoken through a translator, but on this occasion he longed to speak directly to the people. He informed Brother Stuart Meha, who stood at his side ready to translate, that he would speak without a sentence-by-sentence translation. After Elder McKay had spoken for about forty minutes, Brother Meha gave a synopsis in Maori. Several times, however, he was corrected by his Maori listeners-who did not know English but who had understood Elder McKay's words by the gift of tongues. [^10]

In the Holy Land, Elder McKay received instructions by telegram to meet J. Wilford Booth, with whom they were to tour the Armenian Mission. Booth had served a mission among those people, and without his knowledge of the area the tour would be impossible. Elders McKay and Cannon had no idea where to meet Booth, but as they were preparing to leave Jerusalem, Elder McKay felt impressed to travel by train rather than by car. While waiting a few minutes on the railway platform at Haifa, the Apostle met another traveler, who tapped him on the shoulder and asked, "Isn't this Brother McKay?" This stranger turned out to be Brother Booth. They were astonished to have found one another, and realized that they couldn't have met at a better time. "As we recounted to each other our experiences," Elder McKay reflected, "we had no doubt that our coming together was the result of divine interposition." [^11]

Before returning home, Elders McKay and Cannon visited the Church's missions in western Europe. By the time they returned to Utah on Christmas Eve of 1921, they had traveled more than twice the distance around the globe. These experiences gave Elder McKay a worldwide vision of the Church's challenges and opportunities, which would be invaluable to him in later years, especially during the rapid growth which would be part of his Presidency.

Elder McKay's missionary expertise was further enhanced as he presided over the European Mission from 1923 to 1925. Using the motto "Every Member a Missionary," he encouraged the European Saints to share the gospel with their neighbors. This slogan would become a well-known emphasis of President McKay's teachings during the 1960s.

An even more important assignment carne to David O. McKay in 1934 when he was called to fill a vacancy in the First Presidency of the Church. During the next seventeen years he would serve as the Second Counselor to Presidents Heber J. Grant and George Albert Smith. He carried the responsibility for missionary work and many other Church programs. He served in the First Presidency during the Great Depression of the 1930s and during World War II and its aftermath in the 1940s. This experience gave him further preparation for the greatest calling of all, which would occupy the last two decades of his life.

Administration of David O. McKayHCPresident McKay's Teachings

Administration of David O. McKayHCPresident George Albert Smith died on Wednesday, April 4, 1951, just two days before the scheduled opening of general conference. The Saturday sessions of conference were canceled so President Smith's funeral could be held. The conference had been scheduled to conclude on Sunday, but a special "solemn assembly" session convened on Monday, April 9, at which David O. McKay was sustained as the ninth President of the Church. As he accepted this high and holy office, President McKay sounded a theme which would be central to his teachings:

Administration of David O. McKayHCNo one can preside over this Church without first being in tune with the head of the Church, our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. He is our head. This is his Church. Without his divine guidance and constant inspiration, we cannot succeed. With his guidance, with his inspiration, we cannot fail ....

Administration of David O. McKayHCI pledge to you that I shall do my best so to live as to merit the companionship of the Holy Spirit, and pray here in your presence that my counselors and I may indeed be "partakers of the divine spirit." [^12]

Administration of David O. McKayHCPresident McKay recommended a similar standard of conduct for everyone: "An upright character is the result only of continued effort and right thinking, the effect of long-cherished associations with Godlike thoughts. He approaches nearest the Christ spirit who makes God the center of his thoughts. . . ." President McKay was convinced that "man's chief concern in life should not be the acquiring of gold, or of fame, or of material possessions. It should not be development of physical powers, nor of intellectual strength, but his aim, the highest in life, should be the development of a Christlike character.<_P>" [^13]He believed that in order to live on this loftier plane, man must overcome the more worldly or carnal aspects of his character. The world and individuals need "to be saved ... from the dominating influence of animal instincts, of passions, of appetities." Selfishness, he believed, was a major cause of man's ills. [^14]"The development of our spiritual nature should concern us most," President McKay insisted. "Spirituality is the highest acquisition of the soul, the divine in man; 'the supreme, crowning gift that makes him king of all created things.' It is the consciousness of victory over self and of corn munion with the infinite. It is spirituality alone which really gives one the best in life." [^15]

<_P>

This emphasis on spirituality was underscored by a special experience Elder McKay had during his 1921 world tour. Aboard his ship in Apia Harbor, Samoa, he witnessed an unusually spectacular sunset. As beautiful and glorious as this was, he realized that it did not stir his emotions nearly as much as do the worthy lives of loved ones. He wrote:

I then fell asleep, and beheld in vision something infinitely sublime. In the distance I beheld a beautiful white city. Though far away, yet I seemed to realize that trees with luscious fruit, shrubbery with gorgeously-tinted leaves, and flowers in perfect bloom abounded everywhere. The clear sky above seemed to reflect these beautiful shades of color. I then saw a great concourse of people approaching the city. Each one wore a white flowing robe, and a white headdress. Instantly my attention seemed centered upon their Leader, and though I could see only the profile of his features and his body, I recognized him at once as my Savior! The tint and radiance of his countenance were glorious to behold! There was a peace about him which seemed sublime-it was divine!

The city, I understood, was his. It was the City Eternal; and the people following him were to abide there in peace and eternal happiness.

But who were they?

As if the Savior read my thoughts, he answered by pointing to a semi-circle that then appeared above them, and on which were written in gold the words:

"These Are They Who Have Overcome The World-Who Have Truly Been Born Again!<_P>" [^16]

Administration of David O. McKayHCAs will be seen hereafter, home and family became a major emphasis in President David O. McKay's teachings. He felt that the home was the most important place for Latter-day Saints to manifest the noble attributes of character which grow out of increased spirituality. He urged husbands to treat their wives with loving courtesy and respect, and parents to teach their children through precept and proper example. The loving relationship between David O. and Emma Ray Riggs McKay became for the Saints a model of ideal family life. President McKay's declaration that "no other success can compensate for failure in the home" quickly became one of the Church's most widely quoted mottos during the second half of the twentieth century.

Administration of David O. McKayHCPresident of a Worldwide Church

Administration of David O. McKayHCPresident David O. McKay's administration was a period of unprecedented growth. By 1950, after one hundred and twenty years of the Church's existence, the number of members reached approximately 1.1 million. During the next two decades, the period of David O. McKay's Presidency, the number of Latter-day Saints almost tripled, reaching over 2.9 million. Taking into account those who had died during this period, it is probable that as many as two-thirds of all Church members living at the Beginning of 1970 had known no other President than David O. McKay. When he had taken office in 1951, there were 184 stakes. The five-hundredth stake was organized on the very day he died in 1970. In 1951 the Oahu Stake in Hawaii was the only one outside of continental North America. President McKay would direct the formation of the first South Pacific, European, and Latin American stakes. His personal background suited him well to give leadership during this era of expansion. His mission to Scotland, his round-the-world tour, his service as president of the European Mission, and his responsibility for missionary work as a counselor in the First Presidency all made him personally aware of the Church's worldwide opportunities and responsibilities. His commitment to gaining a Broad understanding of the world around him made it easier for him to relate to the wide spectrum of leaders he contacted in the interest of spreading the gospel.

Administration of David O. McKayHCAs President McKay's administration opened, however, certain forces were at work that appeared as though they might actually block Church growth. Within the past year, international tensions had led to the closing of Latter-day Saint missions in the Near East and in Czechoslovakia. The 1949 Communist takeover in China and the 1950 outbreak of the Korean War also led to the temporary closing of the Chinese Mission in Hong Kong. The impact of the Korean War was not limited to the Far East, however. As the United States assumed a major share in the United Nations peacekeeping force, young men were again Being drafted into military service. As had been the case during World War II ten years earlier, the number of elders available for missionary service was cut drastically. In contrast to the 3,015 called by the First Presidency in 1950, only 872 were able to receive mission calls in 1952. To make up for the loss in the number of missionary Elders, the General Authorities called upon the seventies quorums throughout the Church to provide a thousand additional missionaries. This would represent a significant sacrifice, inasmuch as typical seventies were older than the elders and most were married and already established in their careers. Nevertheless, the seventies regarded missionary service as their special responsibility and opportunity, so they responded to the call from their Church leaders. Hence many of the missionaries serving during the early 1950s were young married men who had left their wives, families, and jobs behind. Fortunately, By 1953 a negotiated end to the Korean War was at hand, and the Church was able to resume calling more of its younger single men as missionaries. Despite continuing tensions incident to the "Cold War," conditions during the remainder of President McKay's administration were more favorable for Latter-day Saint growth in most parts of the free world.

Administration of David O. McKayHCDavid O. McKay Became the most widely traveled President in the history of the Church. In 1952 he visited the several missions in Britain and on the European continent. The following year he returned to Europe to dedicate sites for the first "overseas" temples-outside of North America or Hawaii. In 1954 he stopped briefly in London on the first leg of a thirty-seven-thousand-mile tour that took him to South Africa and Latin America. On this trip he Became the first General Authority ever to visit South Africa (it being the one area he had not visited during his 1921 tour) and the first President of the Church ever to be in South America. Then, in 1955, he traveled throughout the South Pacific, returning to places where he had enjoyed sacred experiences some thirty-four years earlier. While on this trip he announced plans to construct a temple in New Zealand, which represented yet a further step in making the blessings of the house of the Lord available to the Saints in various parts of the world. A few months later he was in Europe for the fourth time in four years, this time to dedicate the Swiss Temple. In 1958 he returned to the Pacific to dedicate the New Zealand Temple. While in that country, he also organized the Auckland Stake, the first outside of North America or Hawaii and a further evidence of the Church's international growth. Later that same year he was back in Europe to dedicate the London Temple.

Argentine Saints enthusiastically greet President David O. McKay and his wife on their arrival at the Buenos Aires airport in 1954. President McKay was the first President of the Church to visit South America, as well as other parts of the world. (Improvement era photo)

Administration of David O. McKayHCEverywhere President McKay went he was greeted with love and respect. He was the first living prophet most of the scattered Saints had ever seen in person. At airport after airport they welcomed him with tear-filled eyes and choked voices as they sang the familiar strains of "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet."

President McKay often felt the reality of divine blessings and guidance as he traveled. In 1955, for example, his flight was delayed because of warnings that a hurricane was headed toward Fiji, their next stop. By the time they reached the area, however, they were able to land safely. Officials in Fiji were puzzled to see how the hurricane "had suddenly reversed its course" at the very time of President McKay's arrival. The President remarked that truly "something very unusual had happened." Heavy tropical rains continued, delaying the McKays' departure from Fiji. Until he unexpectedly met two Elders on the street, President McKay was not aware that Latter-day Saint missionaries had begun working in the area only three months earlier. He immediately arranged to meet with the small group of Latter-day Saints living in Suva. They met at the home of Brother C. G. Smith, who, all alone, had kept the little flock of Saints together for many years. As Brother Smith welcomed God's prophet to his home and to their meeting "he broke down and wept tears of joy and thanksgiving." The congregation with tears in their eyes sang "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet" with feeling and humility, singing "every word as if it were a prayer." President McKay remarked that "this was a significant meeting." He explained that he was not aware that there were Church members in Suva and that his schedule had called for him to be on his way to Tonga by then. He compared this occasion to the meeting at Philippi where the Apostle Paul and his associates had started the first European branch of the primitive Church. He also reported that he had stopped at Fiji in 1921, "but decided that the time was not ripe for the preaching of the gospel to the people of that country" at that time. He declared that circumstances had now caused them to remain so that they might "commence the building up of the Kingdom of God" in Suva. "Surely," he concluded, "God has had a hand in changing our schedule so that we can be with you members of the Church.<_P>" [^17]

Administration of David O. McKayHCPresident McKay's travels were a source of inspiration to more than just those scattered Saints he visited. The Church News carried day-by-day accounts of his experiences, and they were followed with great interest. Even those in the strong central areas of the Church found their faith being strengthened as they read about the feelings of faith and gratitude manifested by their fellow Saints in far-flung countries.

The worldwide Church growth which accelerated so dramatically during President David O. McKay's administration will be the subject of the next chapter. There were, however, other dimensions to Church progress under his leadership. The process of refining Church programs continued, leading to "Priesthood Correlation" and a renewed emphasis on the home during the 1960s. These, too, will be treated in later chapters. Few, if any, Church programs experienced more growth or development during President McKay's administration than did the educational system.

Administration of David O. McKayHCEducational Expansion During the McKay Years

Administration of David O. McKayHCBy the 1930s the Church's educational program had assumed the basic pattern that would characterize it during subsequent decades of the twentieth century. Henceforth growth, especially following World War II, would be the major feature of its history. As can be seen from the accompanying figures, enrollment in the Church's various educational programs increased approximately fivefold during the two decades while David O. McKay presided over the Church. His backbround and personal commitment to education suited him well to give leadership during this era of phenomenal growth. At only twenty years of age he became the principal of the district school in his hometown of Huntsville. He then completed a three-year teacher-education course at the University of Utah, thus becoming the first President of the Church to hold a college degree. As has been seen, he served as a teacher and then as principal of the Church's Weber Stake Academy and later became superintendent of the Church's entire educational system. His continuing commitment to education was demonstrated by developments while he served as President of the Church.

1950Building missionaries began erecting schools in the Pacific; early-morning seminaries pioneered in southern California1953Ernest L. Wilkinson became administrator of all educational programs1955Church College of Hawaii opened1956First student stake organized at Brigham Young University1957Pacific Board of Education organized1960Expansion of Church schools in Mexico began1966Home-study seminary pilot program inaugurated1970Neal A. Maxwell became Church Commissioner of Education

Few individuals had greater impact on Church education during the McKay years than did Dr. Ernest L. Wilkinson. He was an attorney in Washington, D.C., at the time of his appointment as president of Brigham Young University in 1950. Three years later he was also named administrator of the unified Church system including schools, seminaries, and institutes of religion worldwide. [^18]In these capacities he would give a dynamic and powerful direction to the entire Church educational program during the next two decades.

Administration of David O. McKayHCChurch Schools in the United States

Administration of David O. McKayHCBrigham Young University was not alone in facing the pressures caused by the surging enrollments following the close of World War II. Ricks College, the Church's two-year school in southeastern Idaho, also was affected by the postwar expansion. In 1948 the Church Board of Education approved Ricks's becoming a four-year school. Not only did this provide additional badly needed educational opportunities, but it also allowed the school to accommodate persons seeking to comply with a 1947 Idaho law requiring four years of college train ing for a public school's teaching certificate. In 1954, however, the board decided to return Ricks to its junior college status. By that time the postwar pressures had lessened, and Wilkinson and his associates were planning a system consisting of a single university supported by other schools. [^19]

Student Enrollment

YearSeminariesInstitutes<_HEADING __="">BYUOther Church Schools190040191011119202,980438193027,0753211,448194026,1283,3522,715195028,6774,3095,429195538,2855,5589,440196062,25310,27011,5551965103,50030,05221,28612,0761970132,05344,00525,92117,459 (1968)1975174,01073,64325,95015,6951980199,317124,93927,77227,449

Administration of David O. McKayHC"After long and careful consideration," the First Presidency wrote, "we have come to the conclusion that Ricks College will be of more service to the Church and have a greater destiny as an integral and permanent part of the Church School System by being a first-class Junior College than by continuing as a relatively small four-year college." [^20]A few years later the Church Board of Education announced plans to move Ricks College from Rexburg to Idaho Falls, a larger community offering more employment opportunities and other resources. The hope was to allow a larger number of students to obtain their education close to home. Following persistent efforts by Rexburg residents, however, the board in 1961 decided to leave the school in Rexburg. In later years it would continue to fill an important place in the Church's educational system.

Administration of David O. McKayHCAt the time of Ernest L. Wilkinson's appointment as president of Brigham Young University in 1950, he was assured that the First Presidency wanted BYU to become "the greatest educational institution in the world." [^21]For the next two decades Wilkinson labored energetically to see this hope realized. As a well-trained lawyer, he argued persuasively and successfully before the board that Brigham Young University needed to expand significantly in order to more effectively meet the educational needs of the Saints. Under his leadership and with the board's backing, BYU launched an unprecedented building program. Major new academic buildings were constructed; the capacity of on-campus student housing was tripled; and other facilities including a motion picture studio, a student center, and a new stadium were also added. During the years 1951 to 1971 the estimated value of BYU's physical plant, including buildings and equipment, soared from just over six million dollars to well over one hundred million. [^22]President Wilkinson took steps to see that academic progress kept pace with physical growth. He actively recruited faculty members with doctor's degrees from the prestigious universities of the land. In 1960 BYU offered its own doctorates for the first time. In that same year it also launched the Honors Program, allowing serious students to enjoy contact in small classes with the university's most outstanding faculty members.

Administration of David O. McKayHCThe Church activity of students was also a source of concern. In some wards adjacent to college campuses, students sometimes tended to crowd out local members. At the same time, there were other students who did not affiliate with any Church unit when away from home. As early as 1947 two special branches were formed to meet the needs of married and single students, respectively, at Brigham Young University. At first these units were considered experimental, but they soon demonstrated their success by setting the highest attendance record in the East Provo Stake. As enrollment mushroomed, the first complete student stake in the Church was organized at BYU in 1956. This made a unique and significant contribution to life at BYU and to the students' personal development.

Administration of David O. McKayHCSoon student stakes or wards were organized on many other campuses wherever numbers were sufficient. Typically a faculty member or a person from the community would be the

During postwar decades, Brigham Young University grew to become one of the largest privately owned institutions of higher education in the United States. (Photo courtesy of mark Philbrick, BYU)

Administration of David O. McKayHCbishop, but students would fill most other positions. Thus they gained experience as quorum or auxiliary leaders, teachers, clerks, and so on. Mature students even had the opportunity to serve as counselors in the bishopric or as members of the stake high council. In contrast to campuses of most major universities, which were almost deserted on Sundays except for the handful attending chapel services, at Brigham Young University and Ricks College the buildings where the students wards met were as crowded on Sunday as during the week. The success of these units at Church schools soon led to the organization of student stakes and wards for the benefit of Latter-day Saints attending other universities or colleges. As President Wilkinson reflected on his two decades of leadership at BYU, he declared that the organization of the student stakes and wards was "the most satisfying accomplishment during the time I have been here." [^23]

Administration of David O. McKayHCPart-Time Religious Education

Administration of David O. McKayHCWhile the foregoing developments were occurring on the campuses of the Church's schools, significant progress was also being made in its programs of part-time religious education. Seminaries and institutes were spreading throughout the United States and around the world to meet the needs of high school and college students.

Adaptations in the seminary program made possible the rapid growth in the number of high school students enrolled. Originally all seminaries were of the "released-time" variety. In predominantly Latter-day Saint communities of Utah and adjoining areas a seminary building was erected near the high school and students were released during the regular school day to take a seminary class as one of their electives. As the Latter-day Saints spread beyond the Intermountain states, they increasingly lived in areas where such an arrangement was not possible. Therefore early-morning and home-study programs developed to meet their needs.

Early-morning seminary classes had been inaugurated in Salt Lake City and Pocatello in 1929; the program in the latter location was discontinued after only one year. As early as 1941 the institute director in southern California reported that there were five high schools in the Los Angeles area alone having more than one hundred Latter-day Saint students each, and that there were several others approaching that number. However, wartime restrictions precluded any new programs at that time. In 1950 the eleven Los Angeles area stake presidents unanimously urged that early-morning seminaries be started at once.

Enrollment in Various Types of Seminaries

Source: Seminaries and Institutes 1972-73 Annual Report (This does not include the Indian seminary enrollment.)

Formidable obstacles had to be overcome: Most classes would have to serve more than one high school; differences in schedules from one school to another meant that the only possible time for seminary was before school. Classes would have to begin at 7:00 A.M. or even earlier. Almost no chapels were located within walking distance of the high schools, so car pools or other transportation would need to be arranged. In September 1950 six pilot classes were inaugurated; their success led to the addition of seven more classes that same school year. Despite the difficulties of time and distance, the 461 southern California seminary students registered an average attendance of 88 percent that first year. Three years later there were fifty-nine classes achieving an average attendance of 92 percent. This record was a tribute to the devotion of students and their parents who were willing to get up as early as five-thirty in order to attend or help their children attend a religion class before school. During the next quarter century, early-morning classes would make seminary instruction available to Latter-day Saint students in many parts of the world, especially in centers of Church population in the United States and Canada beyond the Intermountain area. <_P> [^24]

Home-study seminaries were next established where there were not enough students to make a regular daily class possible, where distances were too great to make transportation to and from a seminary class before school feasible, or where there were no Church buildings in which the classes could meet. The first home-study programs were started as pilot projects in the Midwest during the 1966-67 school year. The young people would study their seminary lessons at home during the week and then meet with others in their branch to go over this material with a volunteer teacher as part of their regular meetings on Sunday. Then about once every month or so all the students from a district would gather at a central location under the direction of a full-time seminary coordinator. During the morning they reviewed with him the highlights of their past month's study. In the afternoon the students enjoyed social or recreational activities conducted by MIA leaders, and the local teachers received a preview of the coming month's lessons from the seminary coordinator. These home-study programs have made seminary instruction available to Latter-day Saints no matter where they live throughout the world. A similar home-study institute course for college students was inaugurated in 1972. [^25]

Administration of David O. McKayHCDevelopments Abroad

Administration of David O. McKayHCThe worldwide growth of the Church as a whole brought a corresponding expansion in the educational system during the years of President David O. McKay's administration. In the Pacific and in Latin America, two areas of particularly rapid growth, public education was not widely available, so Church leaders were concerned that a substantial portion of the Saints did not have the opportunity for even an elementary education. In these areas, therefore, the Church returned to the practice of nineteenth-century pioneer times-establishing schools to teach the basics of secular education along with religious instruction.

Administration of David O. McKayHCDuring the early twentieth century several of the Pacific missions had conducted schools, generally small, for the benefit of Latter-day Saint children. An outstanding example was the Maori Agricultural College in New Zealand. Full-time missionaries were called on to act as teachers in these schools. Church growth following the close of World War II heightened the need for these schools to be expanded. During the early 1950s the Church opened the Liahona College in Tonga, the Pesega and Mapusaga high schools in Samoa, the Church College of New Zealand near Hamilton, and several elementary schools in these same countries. Even though two of these schools were called colleges, they included work only to the high school level. As will be seen in a later chapter, buildings for these badly needed schools were constructed through the "building missionary" program that had its beginning at this time in the South Pacific.

Administration of David O. McKayHCThe Church College of Hawaii, a four-year institution of higher education at Laie, opened in 1955. The school carne to serve about a thousand students, most coming from the Pacific islands. Emphasis was on teacher education, thus making it possible for many Polynesian young people to return to their homelands and become faculty members in the Church schools there. In 1958 President David O. McKay dedicated a complex of fine new buildings on the CCH campus. A thirty-three-foot mosaic on the facade of the administration building depicted the flag-raising ceremony which had prompted Elder McKay to prophesy some thirty-seven years earlier that Laie would one day become the educational center for the Saints in the Pacific. In 1963 the Church opened the Polynesian Cultural Center adjacent to the college campus. It not only helped to preserve and share the unique cultures of several Pacific peoples, but it also became a very popular tourist attraction which created goodwill for the Church and also provided meaningful employment for a large number of CCH Polynesian students. In 1974 the Church College of Hawaii became the Hawaii Campus of Brigham Young University, emphasizing subjects which could be taught more advantageously in the Pacific setting than on BYU's main Provo campus.

Administration of David O. McKayHCAt first the Church's schools in the Pacific were operated under the supervision of the respective missions where they were located. By 1957, however, the system had grown to the point that the First Presidency formed a separate Pacific Board of Education to give direction to these schools as a group. Called as chairman of the Board was Wendell B. Mendenhall, who was also head of the Church's building program in the Pacific. Under the Board's leadership, the transition from missionary teachers to a professionally trained faculty accelerated, the process being virtually completed by 1959. [^26]

Administration of David O. McKayHCThe expansion of the Church's educational program in Latin America also came during these same years. As has been seen, the Juarez Academy in the Mormon colonies of northern Mexico dated from near the turn of the century. Beginning in 1960, however, with the encouragement of President David O. McKay, a system of some forty elementary and secondary schools was established to meet the educational needs of Saints in various parts of Mexico. Over two thousand students, many at the college level, attend the Church's school "Benemerito de las Americas," near Mexico City. Here again, emphasis is on teacher preparation. As in the Pacific, these schools have made a significant contribution to Latter-day Saint activity as a whole, a sizable number of local Church leaders having graduated from them. The Church also operated a few schools in Chile and Peru.

Administration of David O. McKayHCAn especially important contribution was made by the Church's literacy program. In some developing areas, people were being called as leaders and teachers who did not know even how to read or write. Under the direction of Brigham Young University, a simple plan was developed to teach these basic skills. In Bolivia, for example, members received fifteen hours of one-to-one instruction teaching them to read Spanish. Having completed this course, an additional four hours of training prepared these people to teach others. In this way hundreds of Latter-day Saints were enabled for the first time to read the scriptures as well as handbooks, lesson manuals, and other Church literature. Not only were many able to obtain better employment, but their self-esteem received a substantial boost. One branch president commented that before he had learned to read, opportunities had been like a closed book for him; now his life was rich and full like an open book.

Guidelines for the Future

With the growth of the Church's schools and other educational programs, it became necessary in 1964 to divide the administrative responsibility. Ernest L. Wilkinson continued as president of Brigham Young University, while Dr. Harvey L. Taylor became "chancellor" of the remainder of the Church educational programs. By June 1970 (just five months after President McKay's death), the General Authorities felt the need to have a more thorough unification of the entire system under one leader. Dr. Neal A. Maxwell, the executive vice president of the University of Utah (and future member of the Council of the Twelve), was appointed commissioner of the Church Educational System.

Commissioner Maxwell and his staff gave thorough consideration to what should be major objectives of the Church's efforts in education. With the approval of the General Authorities, the following report of what had been accomplished under President McKay's leadership, together with guidelines for future developments, was published:

(1) Literacy and basic education are gospel needs. Without literacy, individuals are handicapped-spiritually, intellectually, physically, socially, and economically. Education is often not only the key to the individual member's economic future, but also to his opportunities for self-realization, for full Church service, and for contributing to the world around him -spiritually, politically, culturally, and socially.

In response to special needs there are 75 Church-operated elementary and middle schools and seven secondary schools in Mexico, Chile, Peru, Bolivia, New Zealand, Tonga, Tahiti, Western Samoa, Fiji, and American Samoa. Without such schools, many members in these areas would be almost totally deprived of education. More than 15,200 students are enrolled in these programs.

(2) Church programs will not duplicate otherwise available opportunities, especially in higher education. Post-high school education is within reach of a majority of Church members. Of the more than 200,000 members presently enrolled in colleges and universities, only 32,000 of them are in a Church school. However, 50,000 LDS college students on 320 other campuses are enrolled in LDS institutes of religion to receive instruction in religion and enjoy social and cultural opportunities.

The Church has four institutions of higher education. Brig-ham Young University at Provo, Utah, with 25,000 students; the four-year Church College of Hawaii at Laie, with 1300 students [redesignated BYU Hawaii campus in 1974]; Ricks College (a junior college) at Rexburg, Idaho, with 5100 students; and LDS Business College in Salt Lake City, with 800 students.

(3) Ultimately, all high school and college-age Latter-day Saints should have access to weekday religious education, in tandem with secular education. The greatest impact, in terms of numbers of individuals served by Church educational programs, comes from seminary and institute programs, which enroll 190,000 students. Seminary classes (high school level) are held in all 50 United States and 10 other countries. A recent innovation in the seminary system is a home-study program, which today enrolls 10,000 students, and is conducted in the United States, Canada, the British Isles, Germany, Switzerland, Austria, Australia. New Zealand, Guatemala, El Salvador, Brazil, Uruguay, and Argentina.

Commissioner Maxwell anticipated that Church Education in conjunction with priesthood and auxiliary programs could help individual Latter-day Saints to: (1) develop stronger testimonies of the gospel of Jesus Christ, (2) become more effective Church leaders, (3) be more effective parents, (4) give community leadership, (5) develop employment skills and industriousness, and (6) heighten their creative abilities and self-esteem. [^27]

Administration of David O. McKayHCEducation was only one branch of Church activity that experienced significant development during the administration of President David O. McKay. During an era of unprecedented worldwide growth, missionary work, public relations, temporal resources, correlation of Church organizations, th0e home and family, and temples, as well as other activities, all took on increasing importance. These will be considered in the following chapters.

Notes

Chapter 13. David O. McKay and His Administration

<_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P>

---
Notas:
[^1] Spencer W. Kimball, "When the World Will Be Converted," Ensign 14 (October 1974): 3ff.
[^2] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Here We Build Our Zion," Ensign 13 (August 1973): 6.
[^3] Victor L. Brown in Conference Report, April 1967, pp. 35-37.
[^4] Church News, October 6, 1965, p. 11.
[^5] Victor L. Brown in Conference Report, April 1967, pp. 35-36.
[^6] Doyle L. Green, "The Church Sends Its Messages to the World Through the Unified Magazine," Improvement Era 72 (August 1969): 4-7.
[^7] Victor L. Brown in Conference Report, April 1967, pp. 35, 37.
[^8] Clare Middlemiss, comp., Cherished Experiences from the Writings of David O. McKay (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1967), pp. 50-56.
[^9] Clare Middlemiss, comp., Cherished Experiences from the Writings of David O. McKay (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1967), pp. 63-65.
[^10] Clare Middlemiss, comp., Cherished Experiences from the Writings of David O. McKay (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1967), pp. 73-74.
[^11] Clare Middlemiss, comp., Cherished Experiences from the Writings of David O. McKay (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1967), pp. 79-83.
[^12] Conference Report, April 1951, p. 113.
[^13] Conference Report, October 1953, p. 10; Jeanette McKay Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1966), p. 240.
[^14] David O. McKay, "The World Needs to Be Saved from Dominating Animal Instincts," Instructor 97 (June 1962): 181-82.
[^15] Conference Report, October 1936, p. 103.
[^16] Clare Middlemiss, comp., Cherished Experiences from the Writings of David O. McKay (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1967), pp. 108-9.
[^17] Church News, January 22, 1955, p. 2; January 29, 1955, p. 2.
[^18] Church News, July 11, 1953, p. 2.
[^19] Jerry C. Roundy, Ricks College: A Struggle for Survival (Rexburg, Idaho: Ricks College Press, 1976), pp. 168-72, 178-79.
[^20] Open letter of the First Presidency to the administration, faculty, students and friends of Ricks College, April 7, 1955, quoted in ibid., p. 184.
[^21] Ernest L. Wilkinson and W. Cleon Skousen, Brigham Young University: A School of Destiny (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1976), p. 433.
[^22] Ernest L. Wilkinson and W. Cleon Skousen, Brigham Young University: A School of Destiny (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1976), p. 592.
[^23] Ernest L. Wilkinson, remarks at BYU devotional assembly, March 9, 1971, p. 7.
[^24] William E. Berrett, "A General History of Week-day Religious Education: The Seminaries and Institutes of Religion," MS, Church Educational System Archives.
[^25] Church News, December 1, 1973, p. 12.
[^26] Leon R. Hartshorn, "Mormon Education During the Bold Years" (Ph.D. diss., Stanford University, 1965), pp. 185-88.
[^27] "Report for 1971 from the Commissioner of Education of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."
