Richard O. Cowan, Church in the Twentieth Century ( 1985)

Chapter 14

Growth into a Worldwide Church

The gospel of Jesus Christ is intended to less all the peoples of the earth. Hence worldwide growth, especially beginning with David O. McKay's administration, was essential to the Church's fulfilling its mission and was also the fulfillment of prophecy. The Old Testament prophet Daniel declared that in the latter days the Lord would set up a kingdom which would fill the earth (read Dan. 2:26-45, esp. verse 44; compare D&C section 65).

One of the clearest and most forceful expositions of the Church's worldwide responsibilities would be set forth in 1974 by President Spencer W. Kimball.

It seems to me that the Lord chose his words when he said [the gospel must go to] "every nation," "every land," "uttermost bounds of the earth," "every tongue," "every people," "every soul," "all the world," "many lands." Surely there is significance in these words! A universal command! My brethren, I wonder if we are doing all we can. Are we complacent in our approach to teaching all the world?...

I believe the Lord can do anything he sets his mind to do. But I can see no good reason why the Lord would open doors that we are not prepared to enter. Why should he break down the Iron Curtain or the Bamboo Curtain or any other curtain if we are still unprepared to enter? I believe we have men who

Rate of Growth Per Decade

could help the apostles to open these doors-statesmen, able and trustworthy-but, when we are ready for them. [^1]

Following visits to the Far East and Latin America, President Kimball declared that he "seemed to envision a great movement when there would Be thousands of local men prepared and anxious and strong to go abroad... in great numbers qualifying themselves for missionary service within their own country and then finally in other lands until the army of the Lord's missionaries would cover the earth as the waters cover the mighty deep."

If the Church is to fulfill its mission, it must not only be numerically strong, But its membership must Be geographically distributed around the world. The accompanying graphs illustrate the extent to which these requirements are being met. Notice how the Church's rate of growth is increasing; this is in marked contrast to the usual pattern by which the rate of increase drops off as an organization grows larger. Notice also how the Church's members are increasingly widely distributed. This is clue to increased missionary success throughout the world and to Church leaders' urging the Saints to remain in their own lands and to Build up the kingdom there.

Patterns of Growth

Latter-day Saint growth began in some lands much earlier than in others. By the 1850s missionaries had established lasting footholds in many of the countries of western Europe and in the Pacific. Because large numbers of converts emigrated to America, however, the rate of growth in these areas was not as great as it might otherwise have been. Most Church members were gathering in the Intermountain area of the western United States. The last quarter of the nineteenth century, however, witnessed missions opening or reopening in other parts of North America, in Mexico, and in other parts of the South Pacific.

As has been seen, at about the turn of the century the General Authorities Began emphasizing that the need to gather into one place had passed, anti that the more important task was to build up the Church in other places around the world.

Membership Distribtion

Key:

1-Intermountain West

2-Pacific Coast

3-Middle and Eastern U.S.

4-Latin America

5-Europe

6-Pacific and Far East

1923Los Angeles Stake, first outside of Intermountain area1925South America dedicated and mission opened1928One-hundredth stake organized1929Czechoslovak Mission, first in eastern Europe1934New York Stake, first in eastern U.S.1935Oahu Stake organized in Hawaii1936Chicago Stake, first in Midwest1938Portland and Seattle stakes, first in Northwest1947Florida Stake, first in South; Finland Mission opened; membership passed one million1953Houston and Dallas stakes, first in Southwest1958Auckland Stake, first outside U.S. and North America1959Andes Mission opened in western South America1960Manchester Stake, first in Europe1961First Latin American stake formed in Mexico City1962Korean Mission organized1966Sao Paulo Stake, first in South America; Italian Mission opened1969Southeast Asia Mission organized1970500th stake organized; Tokyo and Johannesburg stakes, first in Asia and Africa respectively; Spain Mission opened1972International Mission formed; Jerusalem Branch organized1975Indonesia and Utah missions created; ten new stakes formed in Mexico City on a single weekend1978Membership passed four million19791000th stake organized at Nauvoo

A new era of growth followed the close of World War I. Many Saints in the Intermountain area began an exodus, particularly to southern California, in quest of improved economic opportunity. Elder David O. McKay's yearlong inspection tour of the Church's far-flung missions in 1921 brought a heightened worldwide vision. A door was opened to the gospel in South America when German immigrant Saints in Argentina actively shared the gospel with their neighbors. During the 1930s preaching also began among German immigrants in Brazil, but as World War II approached, that government's restrictions on the use of German in public meetings led the missionaries to give more attention to the Portuguese-speaking majority. The interwar years also brought the inauguration of missionary work in Czechoslovakia in eastern Europe.

The impact of World War II on Church growth was both negative and positive. As has been seen, proselyting continued during the war only in North America and Hawaii, and even in these areas the missionary force was reduced to a skeleton crew. The Saints in Europe demonstrated faith and devotion as they withstood the intense suffering brought by the conflict; never before had such a large number of Church members lived within an active war zone. As Latter-day Saints around the world assumed more responsibility for local Church activity, they gained experience that would prove valuable in the years of rapid growth which would follow. The positive role Latter-day Saint servicemen played in carrying the gospel to new areas, particularly to southern Europe and eastern Asia, has been described in an earlier chapter. These areas, together with predominantly Lamanite Central America and western South America, became important new mission fields during the second half of the twentieth century.

Unprecedented growth and expansion characterized the years following the close of World War II. During the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s the Church's membership increased more than 50 percent each decade, far exceeding the rates of growth during the previous century. This growth was especially strong along the United States' West Coast and in Latin America.

The establishment of new stakes is probably a better measure of true Church progress than is a mere increase in membership. The scriptures have identified "stakes" as sources of strength. The prophet Isaiah, seeing the latter-day glory of Zion, wrote figuratively about her preparation for rejoicing: "Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes" (Isa. 54:2, italics added; compare D&C 82:14, 115:5, and 133:9). In contrast to a

Percentage of Church Members Living in Stakes

Melchizedek Priesthood Bearers (as a percentage of total numbers of Church members in the area)

mission district, which generally must receive strength and leadership from the church, a stake is able to give strength and stability to the Church, just as stakes support a tent. Church leaders have pointed out that "stakehood" is the ideal for which every mission district is preparing. Stakes cannot be organized until there is not only sufficient membership but also leaders trained and experienced in operating the full programs of the Church. Hence, the formation of new stakes and the consequent increased percentage of Church members living in stakes is a reliable measure of maturity and development in Church activity and spirituality. One of the greatest barriers to this progress is the lack of the Melchizedek Priesthood bearers required to provide the necessary leadership. During the brief period 1958 to 1961, the first South Pacific, European, and Latin American stakes were created. The first stakes in Asia and Africa were organized in 1970. As the thousandth stake was organized in 1979, these units were strengthening the Saints in many parts of the world.

Another evidence of mature growth is the erection of temples. The unprecedented pace of temple construction in the late 1970s and early 1980s (to be described in a later chapter) reflected the increasing spirituality of the Saints around the globe. Yet another evidence of the Church's growing international strength is the appointment of General Authorities from areas outside of Anglo-America. Beginning in 1975 these Church leaders have been called from such diverse areas as the Netherlands, Germany, England, Japan, and Argentina.

Perhaps the greatest benefit of Church growth is seen in the lives of the Saints around the world. Elder Gordon B. Hinckley declared:

It is my judgment that the work today is on a more stable basis in Europe than it has ever been. We have stakes of Zion. We have strong missions. We have capable local leaders. We have Regional Representatives of the Council of the Twelve from those nations. We have mission presidents coming out of those lands, and missionaries who are working among their own people as well as going to other lands to serve. There is stability in the work in Europe such as I think we have never before had. This is most encouraging. [^2]

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCWhile the Church was growing rapidly in some parts of the world, formidable barriers still remained in others. The postwar spread of communism closed large sections of the world to the gospel. Furthermore, local laws made other countries inaccessible. Nevertheless, as the final quarter of the twentieth century was dawning, even these obstacles were beginning to be overcome. An ever-increasing number of faithful Latter-day Saints were living in almost every nation of the earth as a result of government, military, or business assignments. In 1972 the new International Mission was organized to meet the special needs of these scattered members. Largely through the efforts of David M. Kennedy, special consultant on diplomatic affairs, the Church during the later 1970s began sending "special representatives" to countries where traditional missionaries would not be allowed. These mature and experienced couples were careful to observe local laws and customs while making friends for the Church and helping to strengthen the few Saints who might be living in the area.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsChurch in AfricaHCFollowing the 1978 revelation authorizing priesthood eligibility for all races, missionary work was opened in West Africa. Here hundreds of people had already become interested in the Church primarily through correspondence, and upon the arrival of the missionaries whole congregations were baptized within a few weeks.

Although the Church's growth in recent decades has been phenomenal, still there is ample room and a pressing need for much more expansion. During the 1970s Church membership passed the four million mark, but the estimated world population was about four billion. Hence, only one in a thousand was being blessed by the gospel of Jesus Christ and the program of the restored Church.

The Church in Many Lands

As the Church increasingly became a worldwide movement, it faced ever more diverse circumstances and challenges. Although the gospel provides universal ideals and truths, these must be understood and applied by members who live in quite distinct environments and cultures. Therefore, Church programs must be flexible enough to take into account the unique customs and aspirations of Latter-day Saints in many nations.

Saints in different parts of the world face unique challenges. In many parts of Europe prosperity has contributed to religious indifference; although some countries require their citizens to pay taxes to support established state churches, attendance at their Sunday services has slumped to less than 5 percent. High taxes and other economic pressures make having more than one or two children a real sacrifice and require many mothers to be employed outside of the home. Lax moral standards and liberal laws on pornography also threaten to undermine strong families. In European society drinking is an accepted part of life which faithful Latter-day Saints must reject; and because so many diverse languages are spoken by peoples living in relatively close proximity to one another, Church conferences, temple sessions, and other activities must generally be multilingual.

Church in Australia and the PacificHCThe Polynesians of the South Pacific have been characterized as the sweetest and most lovable people on earth. Their spirituality is evidenced by remarkable healings and inspiring manifestations of the gift of tongues. Traditions describe how their forbears sailed in primitive craft thousands of miles from the Americas to the South Pacific. Latter-day Saints in Polynesia therefore identify themselves with the peoples of the Book of Mormon. Families are important to the Polynesians, as evidenced by elaborate genealogies memorized and recited orally or intricately carved in wood. The Church has flourished among these people. Nowhere outside of Utah is there a higher ratio of Church members to the total population, 13 percent in Samoa and approximately 20 percent in Tonga, compared to only 1 percent in the United States as a whole. In 1974 Samoa became the first country in the world to be completely covered by stakes. Nevertheless, life in this "tropical paradise" is not always easy. In some areas dependence on a single crop often provides only a meager living. In the past, LDS missionaries had to face opposition by governments strongly influenced by Europe-based missionary societies. Transportation is still a practical challenge faced by Church leaders, as they need to visit local units on separate islands.

Church in South AmericaHCThe Saints in Latin America face yet a different set of challenges. Perhaps nowhere else in the world is another, single religion so pervasively reflected throughout the culture-place names, holidays, and so on. Hence, conversion to the restored gospel represents more of a change to the convert than in areas where religion is not so closely identified with everyday life. Revolutions in Mexico during the mid-nineteenth century brought greater religious freedom, helping to set the stage for the gospel's introduction there. Another series of revolutions in the early twentieth century, however, provided the circumstances leading to the martyrdom of two Latter-day Saints near Mexico City. Such difficulties have generally strengthened the faith and resourcefulness of the Saints. Church members in Latin America, especially in Mexico, Central America, and western South America, regard themselves as being among the descendants of the Nephites and Lamanites described in the Book of Mormon and hence as heirs to the great promises contained in that volume. In no other area was there greater Church growth during the third quarter of the twentieth century: Church membership in Latin America skyrocketed from less than 9,000 in 1950 to over 650,000 just three decades later. In 1950 only .8 percent of all Latter-day Saints lived in Latin America, while by 1980 the figure had reached 16.4 percent. Such rapid growth has posed significant challenges as well as opportunities, notably in providing adequate leadership and buildings.

Church in AsiaHCMissionaries carrying the gospel to the Orient feel they are entering almost a different world. Christianity is not the dominant religion, but rather is only a very small minority. Not even the familiar alphabet is used, so languages seem strange and terrifying. Despite these cultural differences, the gospel has taken root in several of the nations of Asia, and the Church is beginning to experience rapid growth there. Latter-day Saint emphasis on the importance of families has struck a responsive chord in the hearts of many whose families for generations have revered their ancestors.

Challenges Posed by Worldwide Growth

Administration of Joseph Fielding SmithAdministration of David O. McKayHCTranslation and Distribution of Church Literature

Making the Church's programs accessible to an expanding worldwide membership has created yet another formidable challenge. One of the greatest needs has been to provide Church literature in the native languages of the growing numbers of Saints around the world. During the Church's first century almost all translation was done by the staff in the various overseas mission offices. It was not until 1939 that Eduardo Balderas became the first full-time translator assigned to work at Church headquarters in Salt Lake City. Just after World War II he was joined by a few others who were brought to Salt Lake City from several of the missions of Europe. In more recent years, however, the responsibility for translation has been increasingly transferred to local areas.

Administration of David O. McKayHCIn 1963 the distribution of supplies by various Church organizations was consolidated. Then in 1965 the Presiding bishopric was given responsibility for the translation of Church literature, and in the following year these two operations were brought together in one department. "In approaching such an assignment," Presiding Bishop Victor L. Brown observed, "one first begins by developing an organization. This involves people. It is my conviction that the Lord has touched the hearts and the lives of men and women in many lands who have been preparing for such a work, and then he has led us to them." The original charge was to see that Spanish-speaking members receive materials "at the same time they were received by the members of the Church in the center stakes." This assignment was soon expanded to include Portuguese and other languages of Europe. The Polynesian languages of the South Pacific were added at a later date. [^3]

Officials estimated that twelve thousand pages of material [^4]<_P/>had to be translated yearly into each language:

Melchizedek Priesthood and home teaching1000 pagesAaronic Priesthood youth and adults1000Genealogy manuals150Relief Society650Sunday School2700 Young Men and Young Women3100Primary1700Books or other general materials1800

Bishop Brown explained that translation poses a very demanding challenge and requires extensive preparation:

There are many words and terms in English that cannot be translated directly into other languages. The translator must have the ability to transfer the author's meaning from one language and culture to another with an absolute minimum of distortion. This is most difficult. It is even difficult sometimes to be sure one understands the author's intent in English.

Take, for instance, the translator who received a Relief Society lesson for translation. In the lesson was a recipe calling for "Chicken of the Sea." Every Relief Society sister knows that "Chicken of the Sea" is a brand of tuna fish-that is, every sister in the United States. The translator checked her encyclopedia and other reference books. She checked the library and university. Finally, in desperation, she translated "Chicken of the Sea" as "hen of the ocean."

The speaker then testified that translators often recognize divine assistance in their exacting task. He spoke of one of them who was assigned to translate some children's hymns.

Music is most difficult to translate, and The Children Sing is no exception. In this case, however, the translator could not write fast enough to keep up with the flow of words as they came to her. There was no doubt in her mind as to the source of her inspiration. [^5]

Administration of Joseph Fielding SmithHCBy 1970 a worldwide organization had been developed with publishing plants and distribution centers in Manchester, England; Copenhagen, Denmark (for the Scandinavian languages); Liege, Belgium (for French and Dutch literature); Frankfurt, Germany (for German and Italian); Mexico City (for Spanish); Sao Paulo, Brazil (for Portuguese); Auckland, New Zealand (for the Polynesian area); Tokyo (for Japanese); Seoul (for Korean); and Hong Kong (for Chinese and southeast Asian languages); as well as the center in Salt Lake City. These international facilities enable the Church to avoid the delays and expense of long-distance shipping, as well as eliminating the problems of bringing imported materials through customs.

A high-quality monthly magazine has been another important means of instructing and inspiring Church members throughout the world. Over the years most missions had developed publications of their own. The Church's magazines director explained:

The idea for a unified magazine for the non-English-speaking peoples of the Church was developed by Elder Howard W. Hunter of the Council of the Twelve in 1966 when he was supervising the European Mission.

As he traveled from one mission to another and observed the workings of the mission staffs, Elder Hunter noted the great amount of time that was being spent by mission presidents and missionaries in producing mission magazines. Also, he was concerned because the magazines varied so much in quality and in content. He then set about to unify and correlate the efforts going into the publications with the goal in mind of saving precious missionary hours, cutting expenses, and at the same time upgrading the quality of the publications. [^6]

Material for this "unified magazine" is selected from the Ensign, the New Era, and the Friend. The English manuscript, together with necessary graphics, is sent from Church headquarters to the areas concerned for translation and publication. Space is provided in the magazine for news or other features of local interest. The magazine first appeared in nine European languages in 1967. It is now issued in a total of seventeen languages, including the English edition for American Indians. The unified magazine retains such traditional names as La Liahona (Spanish), Der Stern (German), and L 'Etoile (French).

ChineseShengtao che shengThe Voice of the SaintsDanishDen danske StjerneThe Danish StarDutchDer SterThe StarEnglish(for American Indians)The LiahonaThe Liahona FinnishValkeusThe LightFrenchL'EtoileThe StarGermanDer SternThe StarItalianLa StellaThe StarJapaneseSeito No MichiThe Way of the SaintsKoreanSongdo Wi BotThe Friend of the SaintsNorwegianLys over NorgeLight over NorwayPortugueseA LiahonaThe LiahonaSamoanO Le LiahonaThe LiahonaSpanishLa LiahonaThe LiahonaSwedishNordstjarnanNorth StarTahitianTe TiaramaThe StarTonganKo E TuhuluThe Torch

Providing the full range of Church curriculum materials has placed members speaking various languages on more of an equal footing than ever before. Members in Europe were pleased to point out that they were actually the first to commence new courses of study each year-being ahead of the Saints in Salt Lake City because of the difference in time. One mission president had stated that members in his area were ready to be organized into a stake but were only waiting for necessary handbooks and other materials to be translated. The great expansion of non-English stakes has come since the Church enlarged its translation program. Because the Lord indicated that "every man shall hear the fulness of the gospel in his own tongue, and in his own language" (D&C 90:11), those involved in Church translation feel that their service is a "literal fulfillment of prophecy." [^7]

Other Challenges

Growth into a worldwide Church has posed yet other challenges. Chapels must be provided for wards and branches throughout the earth. During the later twentieth century the number of these local congregations was increasing by several hundred each year. Even if an average of two congregations shared each meetinghouse, about one new building needed to be completed every day just to keep up with the new units being created. The Church's rapid growth carne at a time when construction costs were escalating. This compounded the financial burden placed on the Church and its members.

The growing number of Saints in distant lands needed access to temples to obtain the eternal blessings available only in these holy places. Yet an increasing share of these Saints lived hundreds or even thousands of miles from the nearest temple, so going to the house of the Lord often wiped out their life's savings.

Worldwide growth has also affected the planning of Church programs. Members living in diverse circumstances have a variety of social, intellectual, physical, and spiritual needs. No longer can activities be planned for a single and rather homogeneous group in western America. Church writers have had to keep an international audience in mind. More flexibility has had to be built into manuals and handbooks. This in turn has placed added responsibility on local leaders who had to suit the implementation of Church programs to meet local needs.

The sheer growth in the number of stakes and missions places an increasingly heavy administrative load on the Church's leadership. More conferences need to be conducted. More local leaders need to be called and trained.

Thus, it is apparent that the Church's organization and programs have had to be flexible enough to respond to the varied challenges of international growth. Just as revelation through living prophets led the Saints in meeting the challenges of the past, so also is divine guidance evidenced in meeting present-day opportunities, needs, and responsibilities of growth and expansion worldwide. Later chapters will consider how these challenges are being met.

Notes

Chapter 14. Growth into a Worldwide Church

<_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P>

---
Notas:
[^1] Church News, May 27, 1978, p. 5.
[^2] A Systematic Program for Teaching the Gospel, 1952, p. 6.
[^3] Church News, June 3, 1961, p. 7.
[^4] Ensign 3 (September 1973): 90-91.
[^5] Journal History, January 17, 1925, p. 2; February 3, 1925, p. 3; September 9, 1926, p. 3; LeRoi Snow, "The Missionary Home," Improvement Era 31 (May 1928):552-54.
[^6] Church News, February 15, 1969, pp. 8-10; December 15, 1973, p. 3; January 3, 1976, p. 3; September 9, 1978, p. 10.
[^7] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "Twenty-five Years of Radio Ministry," Church News, April 26, 1947, pp. 4-5.
