Richard O. Cowan, Church in the Twentieth Century ( 1985)

Chapter 15

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCSharing the Gospel

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCFrom the beginning, Latter-day Saints have been a missionary-minded people, eager to share the message of the restored gospel. They have been seriously mindful of the Savior's injunction to his ancient Apostles, "Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature" (Mark 16:15). Their own commitment to missionary work has been authorized and strengthened by latter-day exhortations and promises: "Now behold, a marvelous work is about to come forth among the children of men ....

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCFor behold the field is white already to harvest; and lo, he that thrusteth in his sickle with his might, the same layeth up in store that he perisheth not, but bringeth salvation to his soul." (D&C 4:1-4.) "... the thing which will be of the most worth unto you will be to declare repentance unto this people..." (D&C 15:6). "And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father! And now, if your joy will be great with one soul that you have brought unto me into the kingdom of my Father, how great will be your joy if you should bring many souls unto me!" (D&C 18:15-16.)

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCEach year thousands of Church members volunteer for missionary service. Approximately three-fourths of them are young men about nineteen years of age. Most of the remaining missionaries are either young women or older couples who have reached retirement age. Although this service is a broadening experience, missionaries are willing to give approximately two years of their lives and to pay their own expenses primarily because of their faith that they represent the true Church of Jesus Christ restored by divine authority in these latter days. They are also motivated by the conviction that they are preaching his gospel and that its teachings actually have the power to change the lives of men and women for the better. These Latter-day Saint missionaries have largely been responsible for the Church's worldwide growth as described in the preceding chapter.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCProselyting Methods

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHC"The harvest truly is plenteous," the Savior exclaimed to his disciples, "but the laborers are few" (Matt. 9:37). The same can be said of the present dispensation as well. Consequently, Church leaders have always urged the Saints to be well prepared and to give their best efforts in the Lord's service. During the Church's first century, door-to-door "tracting" had been the missionaries' primary method of contacting people. The object was to leave a religious tract at every home, hoping for a possible discussion later if individuals had any questions from their reading. Often weeks would go by without any apparent results from the missionaries' efforts.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCSeveral twentieth-century mission presidents compiled materials to help missionaries be more effective in their work. Two early examples were 1924 suggestions on contacting people at the door in "On Tracting," by President B. H. Roberts of the Eastern States Mission, a member of the First Council of the Seventy, and further instructions by Elder John A. Widtsoe of the Council of the Twelve, president of the European Mission, in "The Successful Missionary." The content of all these publications was incorporated into The Missionary's Handbook, which appeared in 1937.

Another publication in that same year was destined to have a long-lasting impact on Latter-day Saint missionary

Level of Missionary Service

Number of regular full-time missionaries compared with one-half the estimated number of male members 20-24 years of age (approximately the number of young men and women available for missionary service).

1925Missionary home in Salt Lake City began providing instruction1929Tabernacle Choir inaugurated weekly network broadcasts1933LDS booth at Chicago's Century of Progress exhibition1935Church had its own building at California-Pacific Exposition in San Diego; Radio, Publicity and Mission Literature Committee formed1936Shortwave radio beamed First Presidency's message to Europe1937Missionary Handbook and LeGrand Richards's proselyting outline published1939Church exhibit at Golden Gate International Exposition in San Francisco1947Richard L. Anderson developed improved proselyting methods in Northwestern States Mission1952First official proselyting outline published by the Church1957Church Information Service established1961Worldwide mission presidents seminar; missionary language training inaugurated at BYU1964Church pavilion opened at New York World's Fair1972Public Communications Department organized1973Uniform System for Teaching Families adopted1978All missionaries began receiving instruction at Missionary Training Center near BYU

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCwork. As LeGrand Richards, a future Presiding Bishop and member of the Council of the Twelve, concluded his presidency of the Southern States Mission, he left with each missionary a copy of The Message of Mormonism. This outline was prepared to assist the missionaries in their study and presentations of the gospel in a systematic and logical manner. In twenty-four weekly topics the missionary could cover the Restoration and basic doctrines of the gospel. Under each topic President Richards outlined key scriptures, listed tracts or other available reading matter, and suggested questions which should be answered in the discussion. During the next several years many other missions adopted this plan. Repeated requests for copies eventually led Elder Richards to enlarge his material and to publish it in book form, under the title A Marvelous Work and a Wonder. This has become one of the most popular Latter-day Saint doctrinal works of the twentieth century, selling more copies than any other Church book except the Book of Mormon. [^1]

Elder Richard L. Anderson pioneers improved proselyting methods while serving as a missionary in the Northwestern States Mission during the later 1940's. (Photo courtesy of Richard L. Anderson)

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCFollowing the close of World War II the Church's full-time missionary force soared from an average of 477 in 1945 to 2,244 a year later. This meant that there were many new missionaries in the field who lacked experience and who could profit from some help and direction. To help meet this need, Roy W. Doxey, president of the Eastern States Mission, authored his "Missionary Guide." Without question the most widely circulated postwar proselyting outline was that

Converts Per Missionary

Data compiled by Richard O. Cown from annual mission reports.

prepared by Richard L. Anderson, a young Elder who arrived in the Northwestern States Mission in the fall of 1946.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCElder Anderson built on a teaching program he had worked out as a stake missionary while in the military service. Under this program, rather than merely handing out tracts at the door, the missionaries' objective was to get inside the homes in order to present their message. Placing copies of the Book of Mormon was another important goal. Fifteen doctrinal discussions were arranged in a logical sequence to bring conversion. These discussions stressed a careful study of the scriptures and the bearing of testimony. Elder Anderson gained some key ideas from earlier successful missionaries. As these improved methods were adopted throughout the mission, the results were apparent. The number of converts per missionary climbed from 1.87 in 1946 to 5.72 in 1949. In this latter year the Northwestern States Mission baptized 1,001 converts, thus becoming the first mission in the Church to exceed one thousand baptisms during a single year.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCThe first proselyting plan published officially by the Church for use in all missions worldwide appeared in 1952. A Systematic Program for Teaching the Gospel condensed the missionaries' presentation into only six discussions. The plan's preface explained: "Experience has shown that it is not always necessary to take people through an extended series of lessons before they become converted to the Church. Agreement may be gained on... fundamental doctrines in a relatively short time through a logical presentation of gospel principles, fortified by scripture, together with reading, convincing testimony, and sincere prayer.<_P>" [^2]

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCIn 1961 Church leaders convened the first worldwide seminar for mission presidents. Under the leadership of the General Authorities the mission presidents pooled their experience in refining proselyting methods. The result was a new missionary plan, A Uniform System for Teaching Investigators. Using President David O. McKay's slogan of "Every Member a Missionary," stress was placed on the Saints' role in finding and fellowshipping potential converts. Church members were admonished to lead exemplary lives that would win the respect of others and open the way for gospel discussions. For some time the referral system, in which the Saints gave names of interested friends to the missionaries, had proved successful. Now the Saints were encouraged to invite nonmembers into their homes for "group meetings" to hear the missionaries' message. This method proved even more successful and had at least two important advantages: (1) Missionaries could use their time much more efficiently. One mission president reported that in contrast to tracting, in which missionaries had spent 90 percent of their time looking for contacts and only 10 percent teaching, the cooperation of Church members enabled the missionaries to spend 90 percent of their time actually teaching the gospel and only 10 percent hunting. (2) The same families who first introduced nonmembers to the missionaries could also fellowship these friends as they became converted to the gospel and help them make the transition from one way of life to another and often from one circle of friends to another. [^3]

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCA new missionary outline which appeared in 1973 reflected the growing emphasis on the family. The Uniform System for Teaching Families suggested that missionaries might introduce the gospel by working with nonmember parents in presenting family home evenings. Seven proselyting discussions then taught the following gospel principles:

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHC1.The Restoration. The Lord has shown his love and concern for all his children in our time by appearing to a prophet, revealing the Book of Mormon, and restoring his church with his authority and power. One can discover the truth of these things by reading and pondering the teachings in the Book of Mormon and praying sincerely.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHC2.Eternal progression. As we are obedient to the commandments of the Lord, we earn the right to live with him forever in the celestial kingdom.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHC3.Continuing revelation and individual responsibility. God spoke to many prophets in ancient times and he speaks to prophets today. We will be blessed as we follow the counsels of the living prophet and other priesthood leaders.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHC4.Truth versus error. Knowledge of truth helps us to become free. Our Heavenly Father wants each of his children to learn and live the truth. He has given us several ways to discern truth from error. As we apply the first four principles and ordinances of the gospel, we will begin our preparation to enter the kingdom of God.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHC5.Obedience to the Lord's commandments brings his blessings. Commandments are guidelines to happy living, given because of God's love for us. By obeying them, we an have peace in this life and eternal life with our families; we can become like God.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHC6.Our relationship to Christ. Jesus Christ is our Creator, Savior, and Redeemer-the Light and Life of the world. By him we shall be judged. His atoning sacrifice assures each of us a resurrection from death and opens the way to redemption from sin. (In 1982 this discussion would be moved to the first position in order to give more prominence to the Latter-day Saints' faith in the Savior.)

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHC7.Membership in the kingdom. After baptism, which is the gate to the straight and narrow path leading to eternal life, we must press forward with determination to serve the Lord and obey his commandments.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCThe missionary was encouraged to seek guidance from the Lord's Spirit to know the best order in which to present these discussions to each individual family. A set of visual aids was also provided to enhance the effectiveness of these lessons. [^4]

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCMissionary Preparation

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCFollowing World War I, as new missionaries came to Salt Lake City to be endowed and set apart, President Heber J. Grant and his counselors recognized the need to provide a suitable place for them to stay, where the environment would be conducive to reading the scriptures and other appropriate learning activities. In 1924 the First Presidency approved a "Church Missionary Home and Preparatory Training School." Homes on State Street just north of the Beehive House were purchased, and the first group of missionaries entered March 4, 1925.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCBefore leaving for their respective fields, the missionaries spent a week at the home receiving instructions on Church programs and points of doctrine, being trained in etiquette and other practical skills, and hearing messages of inspiration from the General Authorities. [^5]<_P/>Over the years other facilities have been provided, and the instructional program has been refined to provide the best possible orientation for outgoing missionaries.

Beginning in 1925, the Salt Lake Missionary Home provided orientation for outgoing missionaries. Junius F. Wells is shown here addressing a group of missionaries outside the home in June 1925. (Church Archives)

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCA further step in missionary preparation was taken in 1961. Elders were experiencing lengthy delays in obtaining visas to enter Argentina and Mexico. A special language training program was set up for them at BYU to take advantage of this waiting period.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCThe aim was "to place a missionary in the field ready to speak the language," explained Ernest J. Wilkins, the program's first director. The daily schedule was full of intensive instruction emphasizing conversation. The "Live Your Language" program encouraged the missionaries to speak only in the tongue they were learning.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCIn addition to language instruction, there was opportunity to practice the missionary discussions with native speakers posing as contacts. Furthermore, the Elders and Sisters adhered to standards of missionary dress and conduct, so were able to develop proper habits and attitudes even before reaching the field.

Architect's rendering of the new complex in Provo, Utah, designed for the training of missionaries. (Photo courtesy of BYU Physical Plant Dept.)

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCBecause of its success, the program was organized as a formal mission in 1963, and all going to Spanish- or Portuguese-speaking countries were sent first to BYU for training. In 1964 German was added to the program, and more than a dozen other languages have followed since.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCThe Language Training Mission was expanded in 1969 to include instruction in Dutch and the Scandinavian languages at Ricks College, and training in the languages of the Pacific and Orient at the Church College of Hawaii. Four years later, however, Church leaders announced that all of these activities were to be consolidated at BYU and ground was broken for a $15-million complex near the Provo campus.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCBeginning in 1976 all missionaries called to non-English missions reported directly to the LTM rather than first receiving training at the Missionary Home in Salt Lake City. Then in 1978 all full-time missionaries began to receive their complete orientation at the Provo facility rather than in Salt Lake City. Those going to English missions received four weeks of training (later reduced to two) in missionary discussions and procedures. Those assigned to non-English missions continued to receive eight weeks of instruction in their language as well as in missionary matters. The name Language Training Mission was changed to Missionary Training Center to reflect its broadened function. [^6]

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCMeanwhile, missionary orientation centers were established at scattered locations around the world. They served missionaries called from lands far removed from the United States. The first of these opened in Sao Paulo, Brazil, in 1977. It was designed to provide training for missionaries called from South America to serve in Brazil or Portugal; with the opening of the Sao Paulo Temple missionaries were able to receive the blessing and instructions of the endowment, and their orientation period was extended from three days to one week.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCPublic Relations

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCTo supplement the personal contacts by proselyting missionaries, the Church has employed a variety of other methods, including the mass media, to present its message to the world. Visitors' centers and broadcasting have played an especially important part in improving the public's understanding of the Church and its people during the twentieth century.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCBureaus of Information or Visitors' Centers

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCThe Church's system of visitors' centers had its beginning at the dawning of the twentieth century with the 1902 "Bureau of Information" on Temple Square in Salt Lake City. As the volume of travel increased during the years following World War II, the annual number of visitors to Temple Square soared past the million mark. Only Yellowstone National Park attracted more visitors in the Intermountain West. During the 1960s and 1970s the Church built two new commodious structures on Temple Square, each equipped to effectively teach various facets of the gospel message and program.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCIn the light of this success, the Church continued its program of opening visitors' centers at other historic sites. Likewise, because of the positive response to the Hill Cumorah Pageant, additional pageants at other locations have become means of sharing the gospel with the public.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCThe restoration of the old Mormon city of Nauvoo began during the 1960s. This ambitious project was patterned after the very successful restoration of the colonial city of Williamsburg in Virginia. The objective was to depict interesting facets of Nauvoo life in the 1840s when this was the largest city in the state of Illinois, but more important, to communicate the faith of the Saints who sacrificed to build the city and then to leave it in the face of religious persecution.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCThe Church has also found opportunities to share the gospel message with the public at fairs and expositions. As has been seen, the Church sponsored exhibits at several major fairs during the 1930s. More than three million people visited the Mormon pavilion at the New York World's Fair during 1964 and 1965. For this exhibit the BYU Motion Picture Studio produced a new film, entitled "Man's Search for Happiness," depicting the Latter-day Saint concept of life before and following mortality. Experience gained at the New York fair enabled the Church to transform its bureaus of information, renamed "visitors' centers," into more effective tools for teaching the gospel. At Joseph Smith's birthplace in Vermont, for example, guides had formerly stressed the exact location of the family home relative to a nearby township boundary line. Now they emphasized Joseph Smith's prophetic calling in restoring the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCRadio and Television

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCAs radio broadcasting began to develop in the 1920s, the Church was quick to use this new medium as an aid in declaring its message to the world. As early as 1922 President Heber J. Grant delivered a message by radio, and two years later sessions of general conference were broadcast. The weekly nationwide broadcasts of the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir, which were to become the oldest continuous network programs in the history of radio, began in 1929. Richard L. Evans (not yet a General Authority) joined the program the following year; for over four decades his well-known "sermonettes" made many friends for the Church. [^7]<_P/>In addition to these activities in Salt Lake City, members and missionaries around the world prepared special programs for presentation on local stations.

<_P>

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCAs television was perfected during the years immediately following World War II, the Church did not delay in making use of this new means of communication. General conference sessions were carried from the Tabernacle by closed-circuit TV to other buildings on Temple Square as early as April 1948, and in October of the following year the conference was broadcast by television for the first time. Television coverage of conference was extended to California by the late 1950s, and in 1962 sessions were carried from coast to coast for the first time. The Church paid the cost of getting the conference broadcast to the local stations, many of which in turn donated air time as part of their public service activity. In recent decades, therefore, speakers at general conference have been conscious that they were not only addressing the congregation of a few thousand in the Tabernacle, but rather a potential audience of many millions.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCYet another medium of communication has carried conference proceedings. Since 1952 the general priesthood session has been transmitted by closed-circuit direct-wire to an increasing number of selected stake centers and other Church buildings. Thus well over a thousand separate groups of priesthood bearers throughout the United States and Canada as well as in Australia, New Zealand, and several other countries can have the privilege of simultaneously participating in this conference session.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCChurch leaders early became interested in international broadcasting. At the April 1936 general conference, the three members of the First Presidency beamed a message to Europe via shortwave radio. In 1962 conference broadcasts were inaugurated, in English to Europe and Africa and in Spanish to Latin America. In more recent years, however, emphasis has shifted to providing general conference and other Church programs for broadcast on standard local radio stations around the world. The perfection of communications satellites during the 1970s has made it possible to relay radio or television programs to distant points on the earth for broadcast locally. By 1980 the Church was equipping selected stake centers with their own satellite-receiving antennas, making it possible for the Saints gathered there to see as well as hear conference proceedings as well as other broadcasts directly from Church headquarters.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCOver the years the Church has developed materials to be used by the media. For example, the Radio, Publicity, and Mission Literature Committee distributed radio programs, film strips, and literature needed both in and out of the Church. As demands increased, a division of labor was effected in 1957 and the Church Information Service came into being to handle nonmember contacts. Its primary objective was to promote missionary work by projecting an accurate image of the principles and activities of the Church.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCTo accomplish this goal, CIS maintained a photo library, coordinated publicity for special events such as conferences or temple dedications, prepared feature articles on phases of Church activity in which the public was most interested-welfare plan, family home evening, youth activities, and so forth -and provided posters, displays, and other help for local open houses or other public relations.

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCA hosting service was also created to entertain important visitors to Church headquarters, including government or business officials, heads of other churches, artists, or entertainers. These groups were taken to such points of interest as Temple Square and Welfare Square. These visitors often appreciated being entertained in individual Latter-day Saint homes as well as attending Church services in local wards. [^8]

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCIn 1972 these and related activities were consolidated under the Department of Public Communications. Important assignments included producing radio and television programs, maintaining good press relations, directing the work of LDS visitors' centers, and coordinating pageants. This department also was to promote the work of local public relations representatives appointed in each stake and mission. [^9]

Twentieth-century Missionary EffortsHCThe Public Communications Department has sought new ways of using the mass media to create a climate in which the public would want to learn more about the Church. In 1976 television stations across the nation carried an hour-long professionally produced program featuring wholesome family life. Viewers were invited to write or telephone for a free brochure (a condensed version of the family home evening manual) that could help them improve relationships within their own families. Then, beginning in 1978, the Church sponsored special inserts in the Reader's Digest which explained Latter-day Saint views on the family and other gospel topics. [^10]<_P/>In addition, Bonneville International, the Church's broadcasting arm, produced a series of half-minute television and radio announcements urging better communications and more love in the family. These "Homefront" messages were identified as coming from "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the Mormons." They were carried on stations throughout the United States and abroad as a public service, and have earned several broadcasting awards for their excellence. Response to these efforts has been quite favorable, thus helping to create a better understanding, and a more positive image of the Church -a climate in which missionary work can enjoy greater success.

<_P>

The Church's Popular Image

The public's attitude about the Church, its programs, and its members, have exerted a powerful influence on the course of Latter-day Saint history. Popular misunderstanding during the Church's early decades led to intense persecution and suffering. During the last half of the nineteenth century, the relative isolation of the Latter-day Saints in the Rocky Mountains made misunderstanding and misrepresentation more likely. Articles published in nationally circulated periodicals reflected the predominantly negative image during this period. Joseph Smith was portrayed as an ignorant farm boy, and the

Shifts in Popular Attitude

(shading represents periods when more than usual attention was given Mormonism)

religion he founded was branded an "impostor." Plural marriage was the practice most widely condemned in the press. Furthermore, nationalistic writers regarded Mormon convert immigrants as "ignorant foreigners," and described the ecclesiastical "hierarchy" as a "menace" to the rest of the country.

Following President Wilford Woodruff's 1890 Manifesto officially announcing the suspension of plural marriage, Mormonism cooled as a controversial issue. The periodical press began to recognize in the Mormon people some of the virtues then being advocated by the American populist movement-industry, thrift, temperance, self-reliance, and so forth. In 1893 the Tabernacle Choir drew goodwill and favorable publicity during its concert tour to Chicago's Columbian Exposition. It was also during this decade that Utah finally became a state.

As has been seen, during the Progressive Era the election of two General Authorities, B. H. Roberts and Reed Smoot, to the United States House and Senate respectively, sparked a revival of earlier agitation against the Latter-day Saints. As a result of these attacks, the national magazines portrayed a less positive image of the Mormons.

After Reed Smoot was finally given his Senate seat in 1907, however, Mormonism again declined as a controversial issue. With the coming of World War I, the American public tended to forget old charges. The Mormon Church and people amply demonstrated their loyalty during the war crisis. In the following decade Latter-day Saints began moving away from the traditional centers of Mormon population, seeking greater economic opportunities. As the Saints thus became more integrated with American national life, the nation began to exhibit a more sympathetic understanding of the Saints.

During the decade beginning in 1930, the Church's centennial year, two new features were seen in the popular image which have characterized it ever since. Although the long-range trend had been toward a more favorable image, it was not until these years that it crossed the line from a predominantly negative to a more positive character. The second new feature was a strong interest in the programs of the Church rather than in its theology. This change reflected a general shift seen in twentieth-century American religion-interest in the "social gospel" and its program for social salvation rather than in traditional emphasis on personal salvation through the atonement of Jesus Christ.

In 1936 the Mormon Church Welfare Program attracted widespread admiration. During the next two years the titles of four-fifths of all magazine articles treating Mormonism made specific reference to the new Church security program. Observers praised the Church for taking positive steps to satisfy the temporal as well as the spiritual needs of its members. This praise was especially pronounced when Mormon welfare assistance was the most prompt and effective relief at the time of several major disasters. Admiration for the welfare program helped to confirm the new positive image of the Latter-day Saints. Magazine articles have also reflected an interest in other Church programs, especially its cultural and recreational activities and its excellent program for the youth.

During the second half of the twentieth century more and more Latter-day Saints were achieving prominence in government service, in professional circles, and in a variety of other fields. These individuals have had a very positive influence on the public's attitude. While praising them for their achievements, the press almost always explicitly identifies them as Mormons. The virtues of their religion are often described as contributing to their personal success. For example, articles about golfer Johnny Miller or the Osmond family often discuss the Mormon health code in the Word of Wisdom as well as the gospel's emphasis on family solidarity.

Even though there have been a few negative themes in recent years, such as misunderstandings about the Church's position on blacks and on women's rights, the popular attitude has continued to be largely positive. The importance of this fact is seen in the large number of converts who first became interested in the restored gospel because of favorable publicity about the Tabernacle Choir, prominent Latter-day Saints, or Church programs. Along with the key roles being played by the Church public relations organization and proselyting missionaries, the wholesome examples set by individual Latter-day Saints everywhere must be acknowledged as one of the most important factors in bringing others to a faith in the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Notes

Chapter 15. Sharing the Gospel

<_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P>

---
Notas:
[^1] Henry D. Moyle, address to special bishops' session of general conference, April 5, 1963.
[^2] Conference Report, October 1943, p. 12 (current committee titles inserted); compare Conference Report, April 1982, p. 22.
[^3] Conference Report, April 1953, p. 99.
[^4] John A. Widtsoe, Priesthood and Church Government (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), pp. 256-57; Harold B. Lee, address at welfare conference session, October 3, 1970, pp. 1-2.
[^5] Summary of Projects as of April 3, 1956, Building Committee Papers, Historical Department Archives; Harold W. Burton, Supervising Church Architect, interview with author, January 28, 1964.
[^6] David W. Cummings, Mighty Missionary of the Pacific: The Building Program of the Church (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1961).
[^7] Church News, April 3, 1982, p. 3.
[^8] Church News, August 12, 1972, p. 4; Conference Report, April 1972, p. 10.
[^9] "New Generation of Meetinghouses," Ensign 11 (November 1981): 108-10.
[^10] Church News, February 5, 1966, p. 10; January 15, 1972, p. 3; March 18, 1972, p. 3; Guide to the Historical Department, pp. 2-3.
