Richard O. Cowan, Church in the Twentieth Century ( 1985)

Chapter 19

Administration of Harold B. LeeAdministration of Joseph Fielding SmithHCJoseph Fielding Smith and Harold B. Lee

Administration of Joseph Fielding SmithAdministration of Harold B. LeeHCThe brief administrations of Joseph Fielding Smith and Harold B. Lee as Presidents of the Church during the early 1970s represented in each case the capstone of long and significant service to the Church. Each set a record for presiding for a shorter period than any of his predecessors-Joseph Fielding Smith serving as President of the Church for two and a half years, and Harold B. Lee occupying the position for only a year and a half. They are considered together in this chapter, not just because their administrations were so brief, but because most of the significant developments of this period cannot be confined to the leadership of either of these men alone. These years saw not only continued key developments of earlier decades, but also witnessed the defining of policies and new patterns of activity that would become increasingly important in later years.

Two Latter-day Prophets

Administration of Joseph Fielding SmithHCJoseph Fielding Smith

Joseph Fielding Smith was born in Salt Lake City in 1876, just one year before the death of President Brigham Young. While other boys occupied their time with hunting, fishing, or playing ball, young Joseph Fielding was more interested in reading. He had read the Book of Mormon twice before he reached ten years of age. He often carried a pocket edition of the New Testament which he could read in every available spare minute, and he began early to commit favorite scriptural passages to memory. Many years later he concluded that he had "received more pleasure and greater satisfaction out of the study of the scriptures, and reading of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and the work that has been accomplished for the salvation of men, than from anything else in all the world." [^1]Joseph Fielding Smith inherited these interests from his father, after whom he was named. (To avoid confusion, the father is generally known as Joseph F. Smith and the son as Joseph Fielding Smith.) Only four years after Joseph Fielding was born, his father was called as a counselor to President John Taylor. Joseph F. Smith had personally experienced the exodus from Nauvoo following his own father's martyrdom and had participated in the colonization of the Great Basin; he passed on to his son a keen interest in the history of the Church. Joseph F. Smith was also a clear and powerful expounder of gospel doctrines, a quality for which his son would also be known. Young Joseph Fielding Smith found in his father's library many of the volumes from which he learned so much.

1876July 19: Born in Salt Lake City1899Mission to England (age 22)1901Became clerk in Church historian's office; called as assistant Church historian five years later1910Sustained as member of the Quorum of the Twelve (33); began editing genealogical magazine1915-35Counselor to Salt Lake Temple president1921-70Served as Church historian1922Essentials in Church History published1934-63President of the Genealogical Society1939Directed withdrawal of missionaries from Europe (63)1945-49Presided over Salt Lake Temple1951Became president of the Council of the Twelve1965Became counselor to David O. McKay in the First Presidency (89)1970Sustained President of the Church (93)1972July 2: Died in Salt Lake City (nearly 96)

When Joseph Fielding Smith was twenty years of age, he received a patriarchal blessing from his uncle, John Smith, the Patriarch to the Church and the half-brother of his father. This blessing foreshadowed key activities and qualities of Joseph Fielding Smith's later life:

It is thy privilege to live to a good old age and the will of the Lord that you should become a mighty man in Israel .... It shall be thy duty to sit in counsel with thy brethren and to preside among the people. It shall be thy duty also to travel much at home and abroad by land and water, laboring in the ministry, and I say unto thee, hold up thy head, lift up thy voice without fear or favor as the Spirit of the Lord shall direct, and the blessing of the Lord shall rest upon thee. His spirit shall direct thy mind and give thee word and sentiment that thou shall confound the wisdom of the wicked and set at nought the counsels of the unjust. [^2]

In 1899 Joseph Fielding Smith commenced a two-year mission to England. Upon his return he served as a home missionary, as a member of his stake high council, and as a member of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association general board. He accepted employment as a clerk in the Church historian's office, where he would make a substantial contribution during succeeding decades.

In 1910 Elder Joseph Fielding Smith was sustained as a member of the Council of the Twelve, and was ordained an Apostle by his father, President Joseph F. Smith. In that same year he became secretary of the Genealogical Society of Utah, serving in various administrative capacities and eventually as president of that organization until 1963. He launched the Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, helped direct the formation of the Temple Records Index Bureau and the creation of the family group sheets used so widely throughout the Church, and directed the inauguration of the society's widespread micro filming program. During much of this time he also served in the presidency of the Salt Lake Temple. These experiences brought him into personal contact with the Church's important genealogical and temple activity, a theme which became prominent in his teachings and writings.

President Joseph Fielding Smith's doctrinal and historical writings constitute a significant part of his legacy to the Church. (Church Visual Resources Library)

Elder Smith was sustained as Church historian and recorder in 1921, a position in which he would serve until being sustained as President of the Church a half century later. Under his direction, report forms were standardized, countless ward and stake histories were collected and cataloged, and other significant steps were taken to preserve the history of the Church. Soon after becoming Church historian, he published Essentials in Church History, which would be the most widely read single-volume LDS history for many years to come. This work reflected his philosophy that history should record virtuous events and at the same time help us profit from the mistakes of the past. Nevertheless, he believed history must be accurate. [^3]

Despite his many pressing ecclesiastical duties, Elder Joseph Fielding Smith was a prolific author. In The Way to Perfection, published in 1931, he placed human history in the context of scriptural doctrines, emphasizing developments in early dispensations as well as prophesied latter-day events. An especially significant and widely cited volume was Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. First published in 1938, it contained chronologically arranged extracts from doctrinal sermons and writings of the Church's founder. Elder Smith's own teachings were compiled and published in the three-volume set, Doctrines of Salvation, 1954-1956. In all, Joseph Fielding Smith's writings filled twenty-five volumes.

Elder Smith's writings and sermons often cast him in the role as a defender of the faith against false notions, a role foreseen in his patriarchal blessing. To him, a proper understanding of the scriptures was essential. As he forcefully ex-pounded revealed gospel truths, he gained the popular reputation of being stern and unyielding. Those who were close to him, especially his family, saw quite a different side of his personality. After twenty-four years of marriage, his wife Ethel wrote:

I have often thought when he is gone people will say, "He is a very good man, sincere, orthodox, etc." They will speak of him as the public knows him; but the man they have in mind is very different from the man I know. The man I know is a kind, loving husband and father whose greatest ambition in life is to make his family happy, entirely forgetful of self in his efforts to do this. He is the man that lulls to sleep the fretful child, who tells bedtime stories to the little ones, who is never too tired or too busy to sit up late at night or to get up early in the morning to help the older children solve perplexing school problems. When illness comes the man I know watches tenderly over the afflicted one and waits upon him. It is their father for whom they cry, feeling his presence a panacea for all ills. It is his hands that bind up the wounds, his arms that give courage to the sufferer, his voice that remonstrates with them gently when they err, until it becomes their happiness to do the thing that will make him happy.

The man I know is most gentle, and if he feels that he has been unjust to anyone the distance is never too far for him to go and, with loving words or kind deeds, erase the hurt. He welcomes gladly the young people to his home and is never happier than when discussing with them topics of the day-sports or whatever interests them most. He enjoys a good story and is quick to see the humor of a situation, to laugh and to be laughed at, always willing to join in any wholesome activity. [^4]

Administration of Joseph Fielding SmithHCAs he assumed the leadership of the Church in 1970, President Joseph Fielding Smith affirmed that the Latter-day Saints "join with men of good will in all churches in expressing love and concern for the temporal and spiritual well-being of all our Father's children," trusting that God would "bless all the officers and teachers and members of our Father's church so they may serve him in righteousness, faithfully, and effectively; and bless the world and all men everywhere that they may turn to Him in righteousness and find peace, happiness, and purpose in life.<_P>" [^5]These thoughts reflected the spirit of Joseph Fielding Smith's Presidency. President Smith assumed the reigns of leadership at the age of ninety-three, the greatest age at which any Church President had entered that office. Many Church members expected this to be a period of waiting, until a younger man might again provide dynamic leadership. These expectations proved to be wrong. With the help of his two able counselors, Harold B. Lee and N. Eldon Tanner, President Smith directed the implementation of a variety of improvements in Church activities and programs. He traveled widely, conducting conferences, dedicating buildings, and in other ways strengthening the Church and its members. One reason why he was able to follow such a demanding schedule was that he enjoyed his work. On one sunny afternoon his sister found him busy in his office. She chided him for working too hard, citing the examples of several former Church leaders who had always taken naps in the afternoon. "Yes," responded President Smith, "but look where they are now." [^6]After serving for two and one-half years, President Joseph Fielding Smith died peacefully just two weeks short of his ninety-sixth birthday.

<_P>

Administration of Harold B. LeeHCHarold B. Lee

Administration of Harold B. LeeHCFollowing President Smith's death, Harold B. Lee was sustained as the eleventh President of the Church. Like his predecessor, President Lee had already made significant contributions that had a far-reaching impact on the Church and its programs.

Growing up on a farm in southeastern Idaho taught Harold B. Lee many valuable character traits and provided experience from which he could draw in his later life. "We began to do chores shortly after daybreak so we could start with the day's work by sunup. When the day's work was finished we had yet to do our evening chores, usually by the aid of a lantern." [^7]While gaining an appreciation for hard work, he learned an even more important lesson as a boy. One day he had the urge to explore an old broken-down shed, but he heard a voice warning: "Harold, don't go over there." Elder Lee later recalled: "I looked about to see who was speaking my name. My father was way up at the other end of the field. He could not see what I was doing. There was no speaker in sight. Then I realized that someone that I could not see was warning me not to go over there. What was over there, I shall never know, but I learned early that there are those beyond our sight that could talk to us.<_P>" [^8]

After attending the Church-operated Oneida Stake Academy, he qualified as a teacher at the Albion State Normal School. He began his teaching career at age seventeen in the small, rural one-room Silver Star School. A year later he became principal of the district school, some of whose students were older than he was. Harold's interests were varied. While in school he had played basketball and participated in debates. He also played the trombone and piano in dance bands in and around his community.

After serving in the Western States Mission, Harold B. Lee moved to Salt Lake City, where he completed his college education by attending summer sessions at the University of Utah and through taking extension and correspondence courses. He became successively principal of two schools and then district manager of a library supplies company. In 1932 he was appointed a member of the Salt Lake City Commission with responsibility for streets and public properties.

1899March 28: Born in Clifton, Idaho1916Began teaching school (age 17); became principal the following year1920Called to Western States Mission1923-28School principal in Salt Lake City1930Became president of Pioneer Stake (31)1932Appointed as member of Salt Lake City Commission1935Called to direct Churchwide implementation of the welfare plan (36)1941Became member of the Quorum of the Twelve (42)1962Directed development of the priesthood correlation program1970Set apart as First Counselor in the First Presidency (70)1972Became President of the Church (73)1973December 26: Died in Salt Lake City (74)

The activities and contributions for which Harold B. Lee is remembered, however, lay in a different area. In 1930 he became president of the Pioneer Stake at the age of thirty-one. He presided during the Great Depression, and the members of his stake, located on the west side of Salt Lake City, were particularly hard hit. Under Harold B. Lee's leadership, the stake developed a series of innovative projects to produce and preserve needed food and other supplies for the destitute. President Lee was also concerned about the social and recreational needs of his stake members. The stake constructed a gymnasium, using materials from a demolished business building, and then set up a stakewide budget plan to provide wholesome Church-sponsored activities for all, regardless of their financial status. It was because of this background that the First Presidency in 1935 appointed Harold B. Lee to develop the Churchwide welfare plan announced the following year. Dur ing the next several years he traveled widely, counseling with local leaders concerning the implementation of the welfare program. Thus he was already widely known and respected when he received his next significant calling.

On April 6, 1941, Harold B. Lee was sustained as a member of the Council of the Twelve Apostles. He later related a sacred experience he had during the week immediately following his call:

It was on the day or so following conference that President Stephen L Richards, who was then chairman of the Church radio and publicity committee, approached me and said, "Brother Lee, next Sunday is Easter, and we have decided to ask you to give the Sunday night radio talk, the Easter talk, on the resurrection of the Lord." And then he added, "You understand now, of course, that as a member of the Council of the Twelve, you are to be one of the special witnesses of the life and mission of the Savior and of that great event." The most overwhelming of all the things that have happened to me was to begin to realize what a call into the Council of the Twelve meant.

During the days which followed, I locked myself in one of the rooms over in the Church Office building, and there I read the story of the life of the Savior. As I read the events of his life, and particularly the events leading up to and of the crucifixion, and then of the resurrection, I discovered that something was happening to me. I was not just reading a story; it seemed actually as though I was living the events; and I was reading them with a reality the like of which I had never before experienced. And when, on the Sunday night following, after I had delivered my brief talk and then declared, simply, "As one of the humblest among you, I, too, know that these things are true, that Jesus died and was resurrected for the sins of the world," I was speaking from a full heart, because I had come to know that week, with a certainty which I never before had known. [^9]

Visits to stake conferences, tours of missions, and assignments to advise auxiliary organizations all broadened Elder Lee's experience. As World War II broke out, he was called as the first chairman of the Church's Servicemen's Committee. Elder Lee was particularly responsive to the challenges and needs of the younger members of the Church. In 1945 he gave a series of radio addresses which were subsequently published as a book, Youth and the Church. A revised version of this volume, Decisions for Successful Living, appeared in 1973. By 1960 Elder Harold B. Lee had become chairman of the General Priesthood Committee of the Twelve. It was in that year that the First Presidency directed him and his committee to conduct an exhaustive review of the Church's programs and curriculum. The result of this study was the Priesthood Correlation effort of the 1960s. In the priesthood session of several successive general conferences Elder Lee introduced and explained such significant developments as ward correlation councils and priesthood executive committees, home teaching, and family home evenings.

There was another dimension to Elder Lee's preparation. During the Great Depression he had learned empathy as he shared the suffering of those over whom he presided. Then, during the 1960s, he personally experienced deep sorrow as he lost his wife and then one of his two daughters through death. Reflecting on these tragic experiences and on the words of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Harold B. Lee concluded:

These thoughts now running through my mind begin to give greater meaning to some of the experiences in my life, things that have happened which have been difficult for me to understand. At times it seemed as though I too was like a rough stone rolling down from a high mountainside, being buffeted and polished, I suppose, by experiences, that I too might overcome and become a polished shaft in the quiver of the Almighty. [^10]

Administration of Harold B. LeeHCThat for which Elder Lee was being prepared became obvious when President Joseph Fielding Smith passed away on July 2, 1972, and Elder Lee succeeded to the leadership of the Church. At a press conference, he declared that the Church's greatest challenge was to keep up with the worldwide growth in its membership. President Lee declared on this occasion that his most important message to the Saints was that they should keep the commandments of God. "The safety of the church lies in the members keeping the commandments. There is nothing more important that I could say. As they keep the commandments, blessings will come." [^11]President Harold B. Lee would lead the Church for only a year and a half before his unexpected death on December 26, 1973. Though brief, his administration continued the important trends that had been inaugurated by his predecessors.

The First Presidency from 1970 to 1972: (from left) Harold B. Lee, Joseph Fielding Smith, and N. Eldon Tanner. (Church Archives)

Administration of Joseph Fielding SmithAdministration of Harold B. LeeHCThe Early 1970s: An Era of Consolidation

Administration of Joseph Fielding SmithAdministration of Harold B. LeeHCThe four years during which Joseph Fielding Smith and Harold B. Lee presided saw the Church continue its worldwide growth. During this period membership climbed from 2.8 to 3.3 million. Early in 1970, on the very day when President David O. McKay died, the five-hundredth stake was organized. During that same year sixty-four of these units were formed (the previous record was twenty-nine). These included stakes in Tokyo, the first in Asia; Johannesburg, the first in Africa; and Lima, the first on the west coast of South America. Efforts to sustain this growth through sharing the gospel also continued. Over six million people visited the Church's pavilion at "Expo '70" in Osaka, Japan. This made the Church's programs and teachings more widely known than ever before in Japan and other countries of eastern Asia. In 1972 the Church opened a visitors' center in San Diego at the terminus of the Mormon Battalion's epic march, and also opened a special public relations office in New York City. The following year a complex of restored buildings was dedicated in Nauvoo, and Japanese-language tours were inaugurated at the Hawaii Temple visitors' center.

Administration of Joseph Fielding SmithAdministration of Harold B. LeeHCYet the early 1970s was not merely an era of growth and expansion. These years also witnessed a consolidation of administrative responsibilities at Church headquarters, a continuing effort to improve the Church's varied programs, and an intensified desire to help each individual member cope with the mounting challenges of the modern world.

Administration of Harold B. LeeAdministration of Joseph Fielding SmithHCConsolidating Church Administration

Administration of Harold B. LeeAdministration of Joseph Fielding SmithHCThe rapid growth of the Church around the world during the 1950s and 1960s placed mounting responsibilities on the General Authorities. There were more stake conferences to attend, and more local leaders to call, train, and supervise. (How this challenge was met will be the subject of a later chapter.) One step taken during the early 1970s was to increase the number of the Assistants to the Twelve; this group of General Authorities grew from eleven to eighteen in 1974. Church leaders also adopted the policy of delegating whatever responsibilities they could. In 1970, for example, Neal A. Maxwell was appointed commissioner of the Church's educational system. Not yet a General Authority, he was serving as executive vice president of the University of Utah. He assumed responsibility for all the facets of the Church's education programs and thus helped to lighten the load carried by the General Authorities.

Administration of Joseph Fielding SmithAdministration of Harold B. LeeHCAs the Church's administrative structure expanded to meet these growing needs, the First Presidency carefully considered the best way to organize it. They employed two nationally known business consulting firms to make in-depth studies, the findings of which became the basis for some important reorganizations at Church headquarters. The reports pointed out that the General Authorities, particularly the Twelve, were carrying extensive responsibility for dozens of Church agencies or programs. They recommended that these activities be grouped into several large departments, and that responsibility for day-to-day operations be delegated to full-time executive directors. In 1972, therefore, the new Internal Communications Department brought together the preparation, publication, and distribution of magazines, lesson manuals, and instructional materials intended for use within the Church. (Many of these responsibilities were later transferred to the Presiding Bishopric's office.) During that same year, the External Communications Department (later renamed Public Communications) coordinated the Church's visitors' centers, broadcasting, and other public relations activities. Similarly, in 1973 the Church's Welfare, Social Services, and Health programs became part of the new Welfare Services Department.

Administration of Harold B. LeeAdministration of Joseph Fielding SmithHCThe International Mission was another example of consolidation of responsibilities. Beginning in 1972, this unit met the needs of the hundreds of Latter-day Saints living in parts of the world where there were no organized stakes or missions. At about this same time, Lee S. Bickmore, an active Church member who was chairman of the board and chief executive officer of Nabisco, was named special consultant to the First Presidency for business operations, finances, building, communications, and other related activities. [^12]

Administration of Harold B. LeeAdministration of Joseph Fielding SmithHCA tangible consolidation of Church administration came with the construction of the Church's $31-million twenty-eight-story office building in Salt Lake City. When this facility was occupied in 1972, departments that had been located in rented space in a dozen buildings in downtown Salt Lake City were housed under a single roof for the first time. This not only made for efficiency of operation but also enhanced a feeling of unity-each agency seeing itself as more clearly an integral part of the total Church program.

Completed in 1972, the 28-story Church Office Building provides much-needed facilities at the headquarters of a growing worldwide church. (Deseret News photo)

Administration of Joseph Fielding SmithAdministration of Harold B. LeeHCRefining and Consolidating Church Activities

Administration of Joseph Fielding SmithAdministration of Harold B. LeeHCThe principles of priesthood correlation, enunciated so clearly during the 1960s, continued to guide the development of Church activities during the following decade. In several instances, formerly separate programs were consolidated into a single organization. As noted in an earlier chapter, an outstanding example during the early 1970s was the uniting of the Aaronic Priesthood and the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association programs and a similar streamlining of the Young Women's organization. Another consolidation affected the important task of training teachers. A single teacher development program under the direction of the bishop served all Church organizations. Beginning in 1971 the Church published only three magazines-one each for children, youth, and adults. This consolidated production and circulation of these magazines was now handled by a single staff under the direction of the General Authorities. As has been seen, a corresponding reduction in personnel was also accomplished at the local level.

Administration of Joseph Fielding SmithAdministration of Harold B. LeeHCOther changes during this period involved abandoning long-standing names of Church programs. After ninety-nine years, the title "Deseret Sunday School Union" was replaced by the more current designation "Sunday School of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." The former title was descriptive of how the Churchwide organization had been formed through the uniting of separate local Sunday Schools in pioneer times, but this meaning became less significant during an era of worldwide growth. [^13]Other traditional names discontinued during these years included "Trail Builders" (nine- to eleven-year-old boys in Primary), "M-Men" and "Gleaners" (young single adults), and even the name "Mutual Improvement Association" itself. The newer names were generally simpler, more descriptive, and less provincial than their predecessors. However, the shift from "Senior Aaronic" to "Prospective Elder" represented a basic restructuring of this program. The former title seemed to reflect a man's past failure to advance beyond the lesser priesthood, while the new name reflected the hope for future progress. Giving the elders quorum responsibility for reactivating these men placed them in the mainstream of priesthood activity and associations. Recently returned missionaries, usually found in the elders quorums, could employ the same skills in working with their inactive brethren as they had used in teaching nonmembers. [^14]

Administration of Joseph Fielding SmithHCPresident Joseph Fielding Smith's interest in gospel scholarship was reflected in another refinement of Church activity. Within a few weeks of his death the adult Gospel Doctrine class in Sunday School began a systematic study of the standard works. Theretofore a variety of manuals had been prepared for this class, but beginning in 1972 the scriptures themselves became the sole text. The Old Testament, the New Testament, the Book of Mormon, and the Doctrine and Covenants were studied in rotation, two years (and later only one year) being spent on each. The Pearl of Great Price was studied in conjunction with relevant sections of the other works. Latter-day Saints took scripture study seriously more than ever before. Not only did they read the week's assignment for the Gospel Doctrine class, but the scriptures were cited more frequently in sermons and other instructions, and an increasing number of Saints could be seen with their copies of the standard works open during meetings. Church leaders anticipated a spiritual resurgence as a result of the Saints' added contact with the word of God.

Administration of Harold B. LeeAdministration of Joseph Fielding SmithHCUnder the leadership of Presidents Smith and Lee, the momentum in temple activity continued to build. In 1972 the Provo and Ogden temples were dedicated. These immediately became the most productive temples in terms of the number of ordinances performed. Construction of the Washington Temple, largest ever built by the Church, was commenced. The thorough remodeling of five existing temples was also announced. As will be seen in the following chapter, the level of ordinances performed soared to new heights, and a new system of submitting names promoted a resurgence in genealogical activity.

Responding to New Needs

The postwar decades had witnessed a general disintegration of institutions and traditions that in earlier years had brought stability and security. Crime rates increased. Growing numbers of divorces were breaking up families. A larger proportion of the population was living in an urban rather than a rural environment. Large cities typically were impersonal and were characterized by a hectic life-style which placed added emotional strain on the individual. In contrast to farming communities where the family was central to economic survival, the cities presented an extensive array of attractions pulling individuals in a variety of directions away from the family. Even though the gospel offered a defense against these social problems, the Latter-day Saints were not totally immune.

President Harold B. Lee was concerned about these problems, so he stressed the need of blessing each member with the program of the Church. Paraphrasing a passage from latter-day revelation (D&C 84:109-110), he declared: "The Church indeed, hath need of every member that all may be edified so that the system may be made perfect, and every member has a deep need to participate fully in the Church...."He stressed that the Church and its programs were designed to strengthen and bless the members, that they were means to this end rather than being the end in themselves. Paraphrasing Mark 2:27, President Lee asserted that "man was not made for the Church: but the Church was made for man." "We need appropriate involvement for every individual," President Lee counseled, "because there is little individual progress without participation, for it is participation by everyone which permits us to apply the principles of the Gospel.<_P>" [^15]This concern for meeting the needs of each member was reflected in the Church's efforts to help the Saints cope with the new challenges they were facing.

The Doctrine and Covenants instructed the Saints to "remember in all things" the "sick and afflicted" as well as the "poor and the needy" (see D&C 52:40). It can be seen that some of the twentieth century's greatest challenges lie in the areas of physical health and emotional well-being. To meet these challenges the Church established its health and social services programs.

Administration of Spencer W. KimballAdministration of Joseph Fielding SmithHCHealth Services

The importance of physical and emotional health is affirmed by the scriptures. Healing is one of the gifts of the Spirit, and many of the Lord's miracles were of this nature. The Apostle Paul taught that we are the "temple of God" and that this temple must be kept holy (see 1 Cor. 3:16, 17). In our own day the Lord has revealed the Word of Wisdom, which is concerned with the "temporal salvation of all saints in the last days" (see D&C 89:2). Church programs as well as teachings have focused on the physical well-being of Latter-day Saints.

Health needs were critical as the Mormon pioneers conquered the desert wilderness. Later, with the help of a dollar-a-month contribution by Relief Society and MIA members, the Deseret Hospital provided the first nurses' training and maternity care in the Intermountain area. In 1890, after only eight years of operation, this badly needed institution was forced to close because of financial problems. In 1905 the new LDS Hospital opened in Salt Lake City. Fifty thousand dollars of the $180,000 construction cost had come from the estate of William H. Groves, a wealthy dentist who had left this amount for the establishment of a Mormon hospital. Over the years the hospital's facilities and equipment were enlarged and modernized, and its staff became noted in such areas as heart surgery. [^16]

Administration of Joseph Fielding SmithHCOther hospitals were added in Utah, southeast Idaho, and southwest Wyoming, bringing the total in the Church system to fifteen. An administrator was appointed in 1962 to provide central coordination for the system; in 1970, under the direction of President Joseph Fielding Smith, a health services commissioner was named to head a legally distinct corporation under the leadership of the Presiding Bishopric.

Administration of Joseph Fielding SmithHCThe early 1970s, however, witnessed a new emphasis in the Church's health program. In 1971 a new Health Services Handbook outlined the fundamental objectives and the basic procedures for this expanding program.

Administration of Joseph Fielding SmithHCHealth services for worthy members in need have primarily been provided in the United States. There are, however, challenges facing the entire Church today that relate to the health of a worldwide membership. The purpose of priesthood correlation of health services is to assist priesthood leaders and, through them, Church members to meet these challenges successfully .... [^17]

Administration of Joseph Fielding SmithHCIn accordance with these concerns, the Church in 1971 called its first "health missionaries." These missionaries performed traditional proselyting duties along with providing special medical instruction. Their first task was to identify the greatest medical needs of both Church members and nonmembers in an area. They then developed programs to be implemented through existing Church organizations to meet these needs.

Administration of Joseph Fielding SmithHCMost programs sponsored by government agencies or other religious groups have featured clinics for tile curing of illness; doctors worked long hours "doing much for a few but nothing for many." In contrast to this pattern, LDS health missionaries emphasized prevention of illness. By enlisting Church members to help in teaching basic health principles and sanitation, the missionaries were able to reach thousands. The Church has sent its health missionaries into parts of the world where the need is greatest. By the end of the program's second year, 200 health missionaries were serving, but many more were needed. [^18]

Health Services missioaries bless Guatemalan Saints and friends through principles of nutrition, sanitation, and first aid. (Ensign photo)

In later years they received a wider variety of assignments and were called welfare services missionaries or missionaries with special assignments.

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCThis new direction in the Church's health activities was reflected in yet another far-reaching change announced by the First Presidency in 1974:

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHC... After a thorough study and consideration, the Council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve has decided to divert the full efforts of the Health Services of the church to the health needs of the worldwide church membership.

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCAs a result of that decision, and because the operation of hospitals is not central to the mission of the church, the church has also decided to divest itself of its extensive hospital holdings, including the 15 hospitals that have been operated in Utah, Idaho, and Wyoming by the Health Services Corporation.

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCThe growing worldwide responsibility of the church makes it difficult to justify provision of curative services in a single, affluent, geographical locality.

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCIn past years, the church responded to the appeal of communities to save an existing facility or to build a hospital because their health needs seemingly could not be met in any other way.

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCToday, however, there are other ways that these needs can be met. It is no longer necessary for the church to be involved in hospital ownership or management.

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCThe First Presidency also affirmed that the decision "in no way signifies loss of interest or concern on the part of the church for the sick and afflicted."

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHC"To the contrary," they said, "it provides greater flexibility as the church assists members and others everywhere with their temporal needs .... "

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCAn independent and self-perpetuating corporation, Intermountain Health Care, was established to own and operate these hospitals. [^19]

Administration of Harold B. LeeAdministration of David O. McKayHCSocial Services

Administration of David O. McKayHCOver the years the Church had established three special programs to meet specific twentieth-century social challenges: (1) The Relief Society Social Welfare Department, established in 1919, served as an adoption agency and provided foster homes for disadvantaged children. (2) The Indian student placement program under the chairmanship of Elder Spencer W. Kimball had extended the advantages of attending good schools and living in a wholesome LDS family environment to thousands of Lamanite youth since the mid-1950s. (3) under Elder Thomas S. Monson's direction, the "youth guidance" program worked to prevent problems and to make foster care or day camps available to youth in need. All three of these programs were required by law to employ licensed professional social workers. In 1969 they were unified to form the new Social Services Department. [^20]

Administration of Harold B. LeeHCFrom this beginning, the program expanded to provide a wide variety of services: Young people with severe social or emotional problems received, together with their parents, short-term professional counseling. Foster care was provided in extreme cases to youth when their home situation was such that a wholesome family relationship was not possible. The goal was to have them return home as soon as the problem was resolved. Summer day camps provided helpful experiences in coping with social situations for disturbed children between the ages of eight and fourteen. Indian student placement also continued to be provided through the Social Services Department. Special foster homes aided unwed parents in the process of repentance, encouraging them to marry where appropriate. The Church's adoption agency helped create families for barren couples and found Latter-day Saint homes for children. Services to Church members in prison and their families included counseling and rehabilitation; special home evenings were arranged for the inmates. In working with members having drugs or alcohol problems, Church social services coordinated with public agencies and also provided instruction for local Church leaders. [^21]

Administration of Harold B. LeeHCConcerning the efficacy of this help, President Harold B. Lee testified:

Administration of Harold B. LeeHCOur social services program has already been a great blessing to our Church members. This program seeks to respond to many problems that beset our members in an affluent society and it will no doubt increase in its importance, because so many of the problems which this cluster of agencies deals with are symptomatic of our time. Members may need counseling more than clothing, and members who, through bishops, are referred to any agency in our social services program should feel no more hesitancy in asking for help of this kind than we should in requesting help through the priesthood welfare program. [^22]

Administration of Harold B. LeeHCIn areas where Church membership is more concentrated, particularly in the western United States and Canada, the Church established social service agencies. These employed professionally trained and licensed personnel, and operated in accordance with government regulations.<_P> [^23]

<_P>

Administration of Harold B. LeeHCThe social services handbook distinguished the roles of professional counselors and that of the regular ecclesiastical structure of the Church. Priesthood officers typically dealt with the kind of social or emotional problems that could be remedied by the demonstration of warmth, firmness, and love. On the other hand, state and local laws usually required that professionally trained social workers conduct such licensed services as adoptions, foster care arrangements, and counseling with severe types of social-emotional disturbance. To carry on these licensed services and to meet legal requirements, the Church in 1973 organized a legally separate Social Services Corporation. [^24]

Administration of Harold B. LeeHCAlso in 1973 the general Church welfare program, health services, and social services were brought together to form the new Welfare Services Department under the supervision of the Presiding Bishopric. This was intended to "unify activities in meeting the total needs of the whole man." [^25]

Administration of Harold B. LeeHCAt the ward level, welfare services committees were organized to coordinate the work of the bishopric, the Relief Society, and the priesthood quorums in meeting the needs of Church members.

Administration of Harold B. LeeHCBasic lines of priesthood communication were followed in relation to the social and health programs.

Administration of Harold B. LeeHCAny member of the Church experiencing conflicts in his personal life should first seek assistance and support from his family. As additional help is required, he may, with the assistance of his home teacher and quorum leader, consult with his bishop. The bishop endeavors to aid the member on a ward level through utilizing the ward family or other special re sources he feels appropriate. If additional help is needed, the bishop counsels with his stake president, who aids through the use of stake or other resources he may select. If additional help is needed beyond this level, the stake president authorizes contact with the Social Services Department, which is able to provide the full range of social services. [^26]

Administration of Harold B. LeeHCIn areas where members are too scattered for LDS social services agencies to be organized, Church leaders were instructed to identify local professional counselors who could provide help consistent with gospel standards.

Administration of Joseph Fielding SmithAdministration of Harold B. LeeHCMeeting Other Needs

Administration of Joseph Fielding SmithAdministration of Harold B. LeeHCOver the years the Church had published literature in braille or in recorded form for blind Latter-day Saints. A concern for the unique needs of the handicapped continued and even expanded. Bishops received instructions on how to involve handicapped members more fully in Church activities. Sighted companions were invited to help blind teachers prepare their lessons. Home teachers assisted members confined to wheelchairs to get to church. Young people learned sign language in order to interpret services for deaf friends. The number of special branches for the deaf expanded throughout the United States. A special conference in 1972 considered how better to meet the needs of deaf Latter-day Saints. A film was produced to teach how priesthood ordinances can be performed without the use of speech. A new dictionary was compiled in order to standardize signs used to interpret unique gospel or Church-related terms to the deaf. [^27]

Administration of Joseph Fielding SmithHCThe early 1970s was an era of growing minority consciousness. Ethnic groups became increasingly proud of their unique heritages. The Church took steps to meet the special needs of these groups. In 1970 the name of the Indian Committee was changed to "Committee for Lamanites and Other Cultures" to reflect a broader scope. This committee did not administer programs of its own, but rather coordinated efforts of existing Church organizations in behalf of various minority groups. The committee considered how gospel principles could be taught more effectively in terms of the understanding of the various cultural groups. It also sought to identify and help preserve contributions from each culture which might benefit Church members as a whole. [^28]

Administration of Harold B. LeeHCIn 1972 President Harold B. Lee and his counselors instructed local priesthood leaders to assume the responsibility for adequately meeting the needs of minority groups residing within their boundaries. Special attention was given to those not speaking the language of the majority. As a result, translation facilities, special classes taught in the minority language, or even separate branches or wards were provided as needed. Although special needs were to be met, the basic goal was to involve minority members as fully as possible in the mainstream of Church activity.

Administration of Harold B. LeeHCAnother group with special needs was the growing number of single adults. While in 1900 only 1 percent of Church members over twenty-five years of age were divorced, this proportion increased more than fivefold by 1975. Traditional couple-oriented activities did not adequately meet the needs of single, widowed, or divorced members.

Administration of Harold B. LeeHCPresident Harold B. Lee expressed a special concern for these people:

Administration of Harold B. LeeHCWe have found that we have been neglecting some of our adult members-those over eighteen who have not yet found their companions, or who are perhaps widowed or divorced. They have been saying to us, "But you have no program for us." Instead of our saying, "Sorry, we can't do anything for you except through our existing MIA or Relief Society programs," we have said to them, "We want to find out what you need." It is still the same gospel, but we are endeavoring to reach those for whom we have had no adequate programs. [^29]

Administration of Harold B. LeeHCAn outgrowth of this concern was the creation of the new Young Special Interest program for singles twenty-six through forty years of age, and the revitalization of Special Interest activities for older single Latter-day Saints.

Administration of Harold B. LeeHCThe aging constitute yet another group that can best be helped through the regular Church organization at the local level. During the twentieth century the proportion of the United States population over sixty-five has increased from 4 percent to more than 10 percent. The challenges faced by these senior citizens are complicated by the fact that 17 percent of the men and 51 percent of the women over sixty-five are alone, most being widows and widowers. Because these experienced older Saints have much to contribute and want to feel needed, bishops were encouraged to see that they are involved in Church activity. Local Church leaders have developed a variety of ways to use home teachers and others to creatively meet the needs of their older members.

The formation of social, health, and related programs in the twentieth century illustrates how, under inspired direction, the Church is able to respond to new needs as they may arise.

Notes

Chapter 19. Joseph Fielding Smith and Harold B. Lee

<_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P>

<_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P>

<_P> <_P>

---
Notas:
[^1] James E. Talmage, The House of the Lord (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1963), p. 17.
[^2] John A. Widtsoe, "Looking Toward the Temple," Ensign 2 (January 1972): 56-58.
[^3] Boyd K. Packer, The Holy Temple (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), pp. 177-80.
[^4] Boyd K. Packer, The Holy Temple (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), p. 45.
[^5] James E. Talmage, The House of the Lord (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1963), p. 100.
[^6] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2nd ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1960), 5:1-2; quoted in Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), p. 237.
[^7] James E. Talmage, The House of the Lord (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1963), pp. 110-11.
[^8] Quoted in Richard O. Cowan, Temple Building: Ancient and Modern (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University, 1971), p. 3.
[^9] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938),p. 179.
[^10] Stanley Kimball, "The Nauvoo Temple," Improvement Era 66 (November 1963): 974-82.
[^11] Quoted in Richard O. Cowan, Temple Building: Ancient and Modern (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University, 1971), pp. 12-13.
[^12] Church News, April 11, 1953, p. 7.
[^13] Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1973), p. 436.
[^14] Harold W. Burton and W. Aird MacDonald, "The Oakland Temple," Improvement Era 67 (May 1964): 380-81.
[^15] Eugene Hilton, "Temple Hill," in Triumph, a souvenir brochure commemorating the opening of the East Bay Interstake Center in January 1959 (published by the Hayward, Oakland-Berkeley, and Walnut Creek stakes of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1959), pp. 10, 19.
[^16] Improvement Era 58 (November 1955): 795.
[^17] Church News, September 17, 1955, pp. 4, 10.
[^18] Quoted in Marba C. Josephson, "A Temple Is Risen to Our Lord," Improvement Era 58 (September 1955): 624-25.
[^19] Allie Howe, "A Temple in the South Pacific," Improvement Era 58 (November 1955): 811-13; Wendell B. Mendenhall in Conference Report, April 1955, p. 5.
[^20] Church News, March 8, 1975, p. 3.
[^21] Ensign 10 (May 1980):99.
[^22] Church News, April 4, 1981, p. 3.
[^23] Church News, March 13, 1976, p. 14; February 28, 1981, p. 3; April 11, 1981, p. 23.
[^24] Ensign 10 (May 1980): 102.
[^25] Smith, Teachings, pp. 193, 356.
[^26] Quoted in James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 3:251-60.
[^27] Merrill S. Lofthouse, "A Glance Backward-Historical Sketch of the Genealogical Society," Improvement Era 72 (July 1969): 14-17.
[^28] Merrill S. Lofthouse, "A Glance Backward-Historical Sketch of the Genealogical Society," Improvement Era 72 (July 1969), p. 15.
[^29] Church News, April 11, 1981, p. 22.
