Richard O. Cowan, Church in the Twentieth Century ( 1985)

Chapter 21

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCSpencer W. Kimball and His Administration

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCBecause of Elder Spencer W. Kimball's former battles with health problems, some Latter-day Saints conjectured that his administration would be even shorter than the previous two, and that it would bring little in the way of new developments or progress. Those who entertained such ideas were in for a great surprise. Few periods in Church history have witnessed more significant developments than has the administration of President Spencer W. Kimball.

Earlier Life

Although he was born in Salt Lake City, Spencer W. Kimball spent his formative years in the Gila Valley of southeastern Arizona. His life was not easy, but it was full of character-building experiences. Elder Boyd K. Packer wrote:

The Lord... was not just preparing a businessman, nor a civic leader, nor a speaker, nor a poet, nor a musician, nor a teacher-though he would be all of these. He was preparing a father, a patriarch for his family, an apostle and prophet, and a president for His church. There were testings along the way-examinations in courage and patience, that few would have passed. [^1]

1895March 28: Born in Salt Lake City, Utah1898May: The Kimball family moved to Thatcher, Arizona (age 3)1906Patriarchal blessing promised him a great work among the Lamanites; October 18: His mother died (11)1914June 6: Ordained a priest by his father, Andrew Kimball; September 15: Ordained an elder; October 16: Ordained a seventy by his uncle, President J. Golden Kimball of the First Council of the Seventy; October 16: Called to the Swiss-Austrian Mission, but due to World War I was sent to the Central States Mission (19)1918January 1: Named stake clerk of the St. Joseph Stake; entered banking business (22)1924Called as second counselor in the stake presidency (29)1934Released as counselor and sustained again as clerk of the St. Joseph Stake (39)1938Called as president of the Mount Graham Stake (42)1943Sustained as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve (48)1946Appointed as chairman of the Church Indian Committee (51)1957One and one-half vocal cords removed due to throat cancer (62)1969The Miracle of Forgiveness published (74)1972Underwent open heart surgery (77)

These trials included suffering a facial paralysis for several months as a boy, and losing his mother when he was only eleven years old.

Following his return from the Central States Mission, Spencer married Camilla Eyring, who was teaching school in the area. He soon became a community leader as he entered banking, real estate, and related enterprises. Church responsibilities also came to him early. These he accepted willingly, and through them he enriched the lives of many. When he was only twenty-three years of age, his father, Andrew Kimball, who was president of the St. Joseph Stake, called Spencer to be the stake clerk. At that time, this position was very demanding, because stake clerks were required to handle many financial and reporting matters later taken over by the Presiding Bishopric. A few years later Andrew Kimball died, and the new stake president called Spencer to be one of his counselors. Spencer later recalled:

Some of my relatives came to President Grant, unknown to me, after I had been chosen, and said, "President Grant, it's a mistake to call a young man like that to a position of responsibility and make an old man of him and tie him down." Finally, after some discussion, President Grant said very calmly, but firmly, "Well, Spencer has been called to this work, and he can do as he pleases about it," and, of course, when the call came, I accepted it gladly, and I have received great blessings therefrom. [^2]

For over ten years, Spencer served both as a counselor in the stake presidency and as stake clerk because no qualified replacement could be found for him as clerk. Finally, the stake president decided to release Spencer as a counselor and retain him as stake clerk. Although he would lose some of the responsibility and honor to which he had become accustomed as a member of the stake presidency, Spencer felt good about the change, as it didn't matter to him where he served. "I'd like to serve wherever I am called." [^3]When the stake was divided just a few years later, Spencer became president of the new Mount Graham Stake. He was serving in this capacity when his call to the Apostleship came in 1943. Despite his excellent preparation, Spencer W. Kimball humbly felt unprepared for this high call. In his first general conference address, Elder Kimball described the period of soul searching through which he had just passed:

As I came home at noon, my boy was answering the telephone and he said, "Daddy, Salt Lake City is calling."

I had had many calls from Salt Lake City. They hadn't ever worried me like this one. I knew that I had no unfinished business in Salt Lake City, and the thought came over me quickly, "You're going to be called to an important position." Then I hurriedly swept it from my mind, because it seemed so unworthy and so presumptuous, and I had convinced myself that such a thing was impossible by the time that I heard President Clark's voice a thousand miles away saying: "Spencer, this is Brother Clark speaking. The brethren have just called you to fill one of the vacancies in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles."

Elders Spencer W. Kimball (left) and Ezra Taft Benson are called to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in October 1943. (Church News photo)

Like a bolt of lightning it came. I did a great deal of thinking in the brief moments that I was on the wire. There were quite a number of things said about disposing of my business, moving to headquarters, and other things to be expected of me. I couldn't repeat them all, my mind seemed to be traveling many paths all at once-I was dazed, almost numb with the shock; a picture of my life spread out before me ....

I sensed immediately my inability and limitations and I cried back, "Not me, Brother Clark! You can't mean that!" I was virtually speechless. My heart pounded fiercely. [^4]

During the next several weeks Spencer went to all those with whom he had had business dealings, wanting to be sure before he embarked on his new calling that everything was right between him and them. This was also a period of spiritual preparation.

I remember reading that Jacob wrestled all night, "until the breaking of the day," for a blessing; and I want to tell you that for eighty-five nights I have gone through that experience, wrestling for a blessing. Eighty-five times, the breaking of the day has found me on my knees praying to the Lord to help me and strengthen me and make me equal to this great responsibility that has come to me. [^5]

On one occasion during this period, Elder Kimball went fasting to the top of a high mountain in order to be alone.

Hot tears came flooding down my cheeks as I made no effort to mop them up. I was accusing myself, and condemning myself and upbraiding myself. I was praying aloud for special blessings from the Lord. I was telling Him that I had not asked for this position, that I was incapable of doing the work, that I was imperfect and weak and human, that I was unworthy of so noble a calling, though I had tried hard and my heart had been right ....

... There was one great desire, to get a testimony of my calling, to know that it was not human and inspired by ulterior motives, kindly as they might be. How I prayed! How I suffered! How I wept! How I struggled!

After several hours of pleading, the desired answer came.

My tears were dry, my soul was at peace. A calm feeling of assurance came over me, doubt and questionings subdued. It was as though a great burden had been lifted.... I felt nearer my Lord than ever at any time in my life. [^6]

With his background in banking, Elder Kimball became an important member of the committees that prayerfully considered how the sacred tithing funds of the Church should be spent. Perhaps the assignment that was closest to his heart, however, was his appointment as chairman of the church's Indian Committee. As has been seen, Elder Kimball regarded this calling as a fulfillment of his patriarchal blessing.

Elder Kimball's masterful discourses had a particularly powerful impact. Using vivid imagery, he effectively taught the Saints their responsibilities. In his near-poetic expressions he usually stressed one of two themes-the importance of personal purity, and the Saints' opportunity and obligation to work with the Lamanites. In one sermon, he described how a small parasitic plant had killed a large, beautiful tree. "How like the mistletoe is immorality. The killer plant starts with a sticky sweet berry. Once rooted, it sticks and grows-a leaf, a branch, a plant. It never starts mature and full grown. It is always transplanted in infancy." In the same talk he cautioned that sin does not seem repulsive at first:

Who ever said that sin was not fun? Who ever claimed that Lucifer was not handsome, persuasive, easy, friendly? Who ever said that sin was unattractive, undesirable, or nauseating in its acceptance? Transgression wears elegant gowns and sparkling apparel. It is highly perfumed, has attractive features, a soft voice. [^7]

On another occasion he counseled:

Sinful habits may be compared to a river which flows slowly and placidly at first, then gains speed as it nears the falls over the precipice In the stream of sin, it is relatively easy to repent at first, but as the sin becomes more and more entrenched the overcoming becomes increasingly difficult.

If one ignores the roar of the falls below, he is doomed; if he will not listen to the warnings given him, he is sucked into the swift current to destruction. [^8]

Elder Kimball likewise used a graphic comparison to teach Church members their responsibility to assist the Lamanites:

A sail plane furnishes thrills and exhilarating experience to pilots in the great empty sky ....

But there is one thing the glider lacks. It has no engine; it cannot lift itself into the sky. An airplane tows it aloft some two or three thousand feet and the tow line is cut loose and the glider is then free to soar and to bank and to rise and to descend.

The sail plane is like the Lamanite; the tow plane, like the gospel and the Church; the tow line, like the programs of the Church ....

The Lamanite must have initial help-a power beyond himself. The Church and its people can give this lift. The organizations of the Church and its individuals can tow them aloft. We shall not need to worry much about them after they are soaring in the clouds and have the feel of accomplishment and security. [^9]

Serious health problems plagued Elder Kimball during his adult years. Following his call to the Twelve, he suffered a series of heart attacks, and the doctors ordered him to have more rest. He chose to spend several weeks with some of his Indian friends at their camp among the pines in the northern Arizona mountains.

One morning he was missing from camp. When he did not return for breakfast, Brother Polacca and other Indian friends began to search. They found him several miles from camp, sitting beneath a large pine tree with his Bible open to the last chapter of the Gospel of John. In answer to their worried looks, he said, "Six years ago today I was called to be an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ. And I just wanted to spend the day with Him whose witness I am." [^10]

In 1951 his voice was remarkably restored through a blessing by three General Authority colleagues. Six years later, however, throat cancer was diagnosed, and the doctors recommended that Elder Kimball's vocal cords be removed in order to save his life. He feared that the operation might rob him of his voice altogether, that never again could he bear his testimony as a special witness for Jesus Christ. "Shall I ever speak at another temple dedication?" he agonized. "Shall I ever preach again?" He wondered what he could do after the operation. "Shall I ever fit into the program again, the great work to which I was called by the Lord through President Heber J. Grant back in 1943?" Following much prayer and fasting, Elder Kimball underwent the operation, which proved to be less radical than had originally been thought necessary. Nevertheless, Elder Kimball continued to worry: "Will I ever return to [full] activity with the loss of my vocal cord and my weak, poor voice? Will the Brethren give me service? Will my gruff fringe voice be an affront to the people?<_P>" [^11]

A long period of recuperation and readjustment followed. Elder Boyd K. Packer, a colleague in the Quorum of the Twelve, later recalled: "The [old] voice was all but gone, but a new one took its place. A quiet, persuasive, mellow voice, an acquired voice, an appealing voice, a voice that is loved by the Latter-day Saints." [^12]

In 1972, when earlier heart ailments flared up again, Elder Kimball underwent a particularly complicated open-heart operation. With the faith of many and through the outstanding skill of a devoted Latter-day Saint surgeon, Dr. Russell M. Nelson (a future member of the Twelve), Elder Kimball's life was again spared.

These difficulties did not stop Spencer W. Kimball from setting an example of devoting long hours of hard work to his calling. "Prominently displayed on President Kimball's desk," observed Elder Robert L. Simpson, "is a slogan which reads simply, 'DO IT.' With this inspired leader, personal convenience comes second. Everything is clone to meet the Lord's convenience." [^13]His example for work has become legend and established an example for us all to follow. For instance, sixteen- to eighteen-hour days were not uncommon. Many times while traveling to conferences, he would have his portable typewriter in his lap, papers spread out on the seat beside him, so he could take advantage of every minute to answer the many letters he had received.

His personal character and all these experiences helped to prepare Spencer W. Kimball to meet the challenge of giving leadership to the whole Church worldwide.

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCPresident Kimball's Dynamic Administration

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCFollowing the unexpected death of President Harold B. Lee on December 26, 1973, Spencer W. Kimball became the twelfth President of the Church. "We will, in large measure," he humbly announced, "carry forward the same program, which we have helped in a small way to make .... "President Kimball continued: "I anticipate no major changes in the immediate future, but do hope to give increased emphasis to some of the programs already established. [^14]<_P/>Despite this modest declaration, President Kimball's administration would be noted for numerous and significant innovations.

<_P>

The First Presidency and the President of the Quorum of the Twelve speak to the rpess about their hopes for the future as they assume Church leadership in December 1973. Pictured are (from left) N. eldon tanner, Spencer W. Kimnball, marion G. Romney, and Ezra Taft Benson.

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHC"Lengthen Our Stride"

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCRapid Church growth continued. As President Kimball's administration began, Church membership exceeded 3.3 million, having doubled in the last fourteen years. In his first Presidential address to the Regional Representatives, he challenged the Church to "lengthen our stride" in carrying the gospel to all the earth. As was seen in chapter 14, President Kimball outlined how this could be done. Elder W. Grant Bangerter recalled that many who came to the Regional Representatives seminar recalled the powerful leadership of President Harold B. Lee, and were lamenting that "things would not be the same." These apprehensions, however, were soon dispelled.

1973December 30: Ordained and set apart as the President of the Church (age 78)1974April 4: Gave a major address to Regional Representatives of the Twelve on expanding missionary work (79)1975Announced plans for temple construction in Brazil, Japan, Mexico, and Washington State: rededicated the renovated Arizona and St. George temples (80)1976Two visions added to standard works of the Church; Assistants to the Twelve became members of the First Quorum of the Seventy1977February-March: Conducted area conferences in Mexico, Guatemala, Costa Rica, Peru, Chile, Bolivia, and Colombia (81); August 24: Dedicated the land of Poland (82)1978Announced revelation extending priesthood blessings to all worthy male recruiters (83): BYU performing group tours Soviet Union for first time; emeritus status given to designated General Authorities1979Thousandth stake organized at Nauvoo; new edition of Bible published with LDS study aids1980Sesquicentennial commemorated; ward meetings consolidated; construction of seven new temples announced

As he [President Kimball] proceeded with his address, however, he had not spoken very long when a new awareness seemed suddenly to fall on the congregation. We became alert to an astonishing spiritual presence, and we realized that we were listening to something unusual, powerful, different from any of our previous meetings. It was as if, spiritually speaking, our hair began to stand on end. Our minds were suddenly vibrant and marveling at tile transcendent message that was coming to our ears. With a new perceptiveness we realized that President Kimball was opening spiritual windows and beckoning to us to come and gaze with him on the plans of eternity. It was as if he were drawing back the curtains which covered the purpose of the Almighty and inviting us to view with him the destiny of the gospel and the vision of its ministry.

When President Kimball concluded his address, having spoken for over forty-five minutes, President Ezra Taft Benson echoed the feelings of all present as he declared with a voice filled with emotion: "Truly there is a prophet in Israel." [^15]

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCIn order to promote this worldwide expansion of the gospel, President Kimball called David M. Kennedy to be a special consultant on diplomatic affairs. Kennedy, who had served in a stake presidency in Chicago, had ample background for his significant new assignment. He had been chairman of the board and chief executive officer of one of the United States banks most heavily engaged in international business. He had also served as Secretary of the Treasury and as ambassador at large for the United States. In succeeding years he played a key role working with governments of many nations in order to resolve problems which had hindered the Church's activities there. [^16]<_P/>He was instrumental in arranging for mature couples to serve as "special representatives" of the Church in countries where traditional missionary work was not yet possible. An outstanding achievement in 1977 was the granting of legal status and the official recognition of the Church in Poland. This came as the result of efforts by local Latter-day Saints and through several visits by David M. Kennedy to Polish government officials. This, in turn, opened the way for a visit by President Kimball to Warsaw where he "dedicated the land of Poland and blessed its people that the work of the Lord might go forth." [^17]

<_P>

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCSimilar negotiations with the government of Israel led to the Church's developing the five-acre Orson Hyde Memorial Garden on the western slope of the Mount of Olives, overlooking the old city of Jerusalem. [^18]President Kimball had expressed the feeling that the time had come for the Jewish people to receive the gospel. Consequently a special series of discussions were developed for the use of missionaries. Emphasizing a spiritual rather than intellectual approach, they taught that Joseph Smith's experience was consistent with that of the Old Testament prophets, that the Book of Mormon is a second record of God's dealings with the house of Israel, and that Jesus Christ is the prophesied Messiah. These were not designed primarily for use in the country of Israel, where proselyting is restricted, but rather with the large Jewish populations in major United States cities and elsewhere around the world. [^19]

President Spencer W. Kimball (center), his wife, and their traveling companions are accompanied by Minister Kazimierz Kakol (next to President Kimball) and other Polish officials during an August 1977 visit to dedicate the land of Poland for the preaching of the gospel. (Photo from the pesonal journal of President Spencer W. Kimball)

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCPresident Kimball gave emphasis to the importance of every young man being worthy and prepared to serve a mission. In 1976, the Language Training Mission moved into a beautiful new multibuilding complex near Brigham Young University campus. Two years later, all missionaries, including those who did not need to learn a foreign language, began receiving their instruction at this facility, which was renamed the Missionary Training Center. At this same time, new missionary orientation centers were established at such locations as in Brazil, Chile, Mexico, New Zealand, and Japan in order to enhance the preparation of local young men and women called to serve in those areas.

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCStudent performing groups from Brigham Young University became another effective means of building good will for the Church. In 1978 the Young Ambassadors presented their music and dance variety shows in Poland and the Soviet Union. Before their tour, the performers spent several weeks studying the cultures and languages of the peoples they would visit. They learned enough to announce their numbers in the local language and to greet members of the audience individually following the performances. They were eager to communicate the spirit of the gospel by setting a good example and by radiating a feeling of heartfelt love. In both countries the performers were well received and were permitted to tape an extended program for later release on nationwide television. In the following year, another group of Young Ambassadors made similar preparation for a tour of mainland China. Here again their performances were highly appreciated, whether by the working people at impromptu performances in factories, or by those able to attend presentations in the most prestigious concert halls of the country. [^20]

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCPerhaps nothing has had a greater impact on the worldwide spread of the Church than did the 1978 revelation received through President Kimball extending the priesthood to worthy males of all races. Over a period of several months the General Authorities had discussed this topic at length in their regular temple meetings. In addition, President Kimball frequently went to the temple, especially on Saturdays and Sundays when he could be there alone to plead for guidance. "I wanted to be sure," he reflected later.

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCThen, on June 1, 1978, nearly all the General Authorities gathered, fasting, for their regular monthly meeting in the temple. After this three-hour meeting, which was filled with spiritual uplift and enlightenment, President Kimball invited his counselors and the Twelve to remain while the other General Authorities were excused. When the First Presidency and the Twelve were alone, he again brought up the possibility of conferring the priesthood on worthy brethren of all races. He expressed the hope that there might be a clear answer received one way or the other. "At this point," Elder Bruce R. McConkie recalled, "President Kimball asked the brethren if any of them desired to express their feelings and views as to the matter in hand. We all did so, freely and fluently and at considerable length, each person stating his views and manifesting the feelings of his heart. There was a marvelous outpouring of unity, oneness, and agreement in the council." [^21]After a two-hour discussion, President Kimball asked the group to unite in formal prayer and modestly suggested that he act as voice. He recalled:

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHC... I told the Lord if it wasn't right, if He didn't want this change to come in the Church that I would be true to it all the rest of my life, and I'd fight the world... if that's what He wanted.... I had a great deal to fight, myself largely, because I had grown up with this thought that Negroes should not have the priesthood and I was prepared to go all the rest of my life till my death and fight for it and defend it as it was. But this revelation and assurance came to me so clearly that there was no question about it. [^22]

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCElder McConkie described what happened:

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCIt was during this prayer that the revelation came. The Spirit of the Lord rested mightily upon us all; we felt something akin to what happened on the day of Pentecost and at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple. From the midst of eternity, the voice of God, conveyed by the power of the Spirit, spoke to his prophet .... And we all heard the same voice, received the same message, and became personal witnesses that the word received was the mind and will and voice of the Lord. [^23]

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCReflecting on this experience, President Spencer W. Kimball and President Ezra Taft Benson and others of the Twelve concurred that none of them "had ever experienced anything of such spiritual magnitude and power as was poured out upon the Presidency and the Twelve that day in the upper room in the house of the Lord.<_P>" [^24]

<_P>

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCThe impact of this revelation was far-reaching. Faithful black Latter-day Saints rejoiced as they received long-hoped-for ordination to the priesthood, mission calls, calls to serve in bishoprics or stake presidencies, and, of course, the eternal blessings of the temple. In November 1978, just five months after the revelation came, the First Presidency called two experienced couples to open missionary work in the black nations of Nigeria and Ghana.

Joseph Freeman, Jr., the first black to receive the priesthood following President Kimball's 1978 revelation, prizes with his family the blessings of the temple. (Photo by Eldon K. Linschoten)

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCThe Church's rate of growth accelerated under the leadership of President Kimball. By the early 1980s over a quarter of a million new members were being added every year. In 1982 Church membership passed the five-million mark. This expansion resulted in several key administrative changes. The number of General Authorities continued to be expanded, and in 1976 the First Quorum of the Seventy was organized and took its place with the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve in the revealed administrative structure of the Church. Members of this quorum became administrators of geographical areas, a new level of units introduced into the ecclesiastical chain of command. Then, in 1978, several members of this quorum were designated Emeritus General Authorities, and their workload reduced substantially. Changes were also made in the pattern of conferences conducted by the General Authorities: General conferences were shortened from three days to two, auxiliary conferences at Church headquarters were eliminated, area conferences became more numerous for a time, and the number of stake conferences was cut in halves -reduced from four to two a year. These changes, which eased the load carried by the General Authorities, will be considered in depth in later chapters.

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCDevelopments in modern technology also had a profound impact on Church administration. For years the availability of jet aircraft had enabled the General Authorities to travel to distant parts of the world within a matter of hours. The perfection of satellite communication provided a new medium by which Church members could receive counsel from the General Authorities.

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCActivity Patterns Reshaped

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCPresident Kimball's administration also witnessed a significant reshaping of Latter-day Saint activity patterns. As has been seen, regular weekly meetings of local congregations were consolidated in 1980 into a single three-hour block on Sundays. This step was taken at a time when a worldwide energy shortage had caused travel and heating costs to soar. This change, however, was not just an economizing measure. The consolidation enabled families to spend more time together and permitted the Saints to reach out through greater participation in community affairs.

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCThe worldwide expansion in temple building, discussed in the previous chapter, accelerated dramatically under President Kimball's leadership. Previous to his Presidency, no more than three temples had been under construction at any one time. Announcements of new temples by President Kimball, however, pushed the total of temples being planned or under construction to twenty-two in 1982.

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCAs has been seen, this increase in temple building was accompanied by a new direction in the Saints' genealogical responsibility. Here, again, modern technology had its impact. Using computers, the name extraction program, introduced in 1978, made the gathering of names much more efficient. As noted in the previous chapter, President Kimball declared that he felt "the same sense of urgency about temple work for the dead" as he did about "missionary work for the living·" [^25]

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCThe standard works of the Church underwent significant development in at least two ways under President Kimball's leadership. First, three new items were added to the scriptural canon-the first additions to the standard works in nearly three-quarters of a century. Two of these additions, which became D&C 137 and 138 of the Doctrine and Covenants, shed light on the subject of life after death. Concerning their importance, Elder Bruce R. McConkie declared: "Their contents have been known; their provisions have been in force; their principles have been widely taught. But now, at this hour, with their addition to the formal scriptures of the saints, they become a new commandment-they Become a new divine pronouncement Both to say and to do all that is required in the soul-expanding doctrine of salvation for the dead.<_P>" [^26]The third new item to be added was the official announcement of President Kimball's 1978 revelation on priesthood Reflecting on these additions to the scriptures, Elder McConkie said: "Nothing is better known or more greatly appreciated than the fact that the canon of scripture is not now anti never will be full. God speaks and his people hear· His words and his works are without end; they never close.<_P>" [^27]

<_P><_P>

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCThe issuing of new editions constituted the second major scripture-related development of President Kimball's administration. In 1979, a new edition of the King James Bible appeared. Although the biblical text itself was not changed, this new edition featured an improved footnote system, references to related passages in the other standard works, more meaningful chapter headings, a 598-page Topical Guide and concordance, and a 194-page dictionary section that reflects unique understandings available through latter-day revelation. Two years later a new edition of the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price "triple combination" became a companion to the new edition of the Bible. It contained many of the same improvements. Elder Boyd K. Packer regarded these improvements as extremely important:

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCThese references from the four volumes of scripture constitute the most comprehensive compilation of scriptural information on the mission and teachings of the Lord Jesus Christ that has ever been assembled in the history of the world ....

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCWith the passing of years, these scriptures will produce successive generations of faithful Christians who know the Lord Jesus Christ and are disposed to obey His will ....

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHC. . . They will develop a gospel scholarship beyond that which their forebears could achieve ....

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCAs the generations roll on, this will be regarded, in the perspective of history, as the crowning achievement in the administration of President Spencer W. Kimball. [^28]

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCA Warning Voice

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCWhen the mantle of the Church's presidency fell upon Spencer W. Kimball, his speaking style shifted noticeably. Whereas previously he would devote an entire talk to developing a single theme, as prophet he felt the responsibility to raise a warning voice on a variety of concerns. He declared that a major problem facing the Church was worldliness, "the pattern of life to which too many of our people gear their lives ....

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCThe encroachment of the world into our lives is threatening! How hard it seems for many of us to live in the world and yet not of the world .... You have come here [to conference] seeking guidance. It is the purpose of your leaders to give that direction. As the brethren speak, you will feel the inspiration of our Lord. The gospel gives purpose in our lives. It is the way to happiness." [^29]

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCPresident Kimball sounded a clear trumpet call, giving the Saints the guidance and direction they so badly needed in the face of worldly pressures. His keynote addresses at the first two general conferences after he became President of the Church each raised the warning voice on a wide range of topics. For example, he reaffirmed the Saints' political responsibilities to elect wise leaders and to obey constitutional law, and cautioned the Saints against allowing political differences to SOW the seeds of disunity. He challenged the Saints to clean up and repair their homes and farms. He urged them to plant gardens, store food, and avoid waste. He also reminded them of the virtues of work, industry, and thrift. At the same time he urged the Saints to keep the Sabbath holy, refraining from shopping on that day. He decried the growing incidence of taking the name of the Lord in vain. "Profanity is the effort of a feeble brain to express itself forcibly." He counseled against the use of playing cards. He reminded the Saints of their longstanding belief in the Word of Wisdom, and declared that "the Church has consistently opposed the improper and harmful use of drugs or similar substances under circumstances which would result in addiction, physical or mental impairment or in lowering moral standards." He also warned the Saints to have nothing to do with apostate polygamy cults.

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCMany of President Kimball's teachings were centered in the family. "All normal people should marry," he declared. "(There could be a few exceptions.) All normal married couples should become parents." "We call upon all people to accept normal marriage as a basis for true happiness." President Kimball counseled that owning one's own home and avoiding debt brings stability to the family. He was concerned about other forces that tended to break families apart. "Most divorces are unwarranted and come of weakness and selfishness and often result in great unhappiness for the divorced persons and also almost irreparable damage and frustration to the unfavored children, who are torn and disturbed." He saw selfishness as a prime cause of family breakups. The Lord planned "for a father and a mother to rear their children. Certainly any who deprive their children of a parent will have some very stiff questions to answer." President Kimball saw immoral or improper use of the body as a major threat to family happiness: "The human body is the sacred home of the spirit child of God, and unwarranted tampering with or defilement of this sacred tabernacle can bring only remorse and regret. We urge: stay clean, uncontaminated, undefiled." Abortion was a related evil. "Certainly the terrible sin of premeditated abortion would be hard to justify .... We place it high on the list of sins against which we strongly warn the people."

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCThe President also spoke out against the sin of homosexuality, the "unisex" attempts to blur the distinction between masculine and feminine, the practice of couples living together without marriage, and the performing of vasectomies as a means to limit the birth of children.

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCPresident Kimball gave special emphasis to the responsibility of parents to teach the gospel of Jesus Christ to their children, including such virtues as honor, integrity, and honesty. "The home is the teaching situation. Every father should talk to his son, every mother to her daughter. Then it would leave them totally without excuse should they ignore the counsel they have received." President Kimball particularly stressed the importance of the mother's role: "Motherhood is near to Divinity. It is the highest, holiest service to be assumed by mankind. It places her who honors its holy calling and service next to the angels." [^30]<_P/>Many of President Kimball's warnings ran diametrically counter to the prevalent norms of the world.

<_P>

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCUnder President Kimball's leadership, the Church responded to issues raised by the women's movement, which gained prominence during the 1970s. The Church's stand on the proposed Equal Rights Amendment has been considered in an earlier chapter. Although this stand was approved by the vast majority of Latter-day Saints, a small but vocal minority could not accept it. [^31]

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCOn the positive side, Church leaders were aware of the pressures facing Latter-day Saint women as more and more attention was focused on the role of women generally. Articles in national magazines increasingly extolled women who found fulfillment in business or professional careers, and saw traditional roles in the home as demeaning drudgery.

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCIn 1978, the Church inaugurated annual meetings for women, preceding the fall general conferences. Like the priesthood sessions for men, these special sessions originated in the Salt Lake Tabernacle and were carried by closed circuit to hundreds of meetinghouses throughout the United States and in other countries. Speaking at the first of these sessions, President Spencer W. Kimball observed: "Much is said about the drudgery and confinement of the woman's role. This is not so. There is divinity in each new life, challenge in raising each child. Marriage is a partnership." He challenged the women to be full and contributing partners with their husbands in marriage. He urged women to have programs of self-improvement, to reach for new levels of achievement and self-fulfillment. "Let there be no question in your mind about your value as an individual .... We want our sisters to be scholars of the scriptures as well as our men." [^32]Because many women would face the challenge of earning a living for themselves or for their families, Church leaders encouraged them to qualify themselves for this role through education, without losing sight of their primary role as mothers in the home.

Administration of Spencer W. KimballHCThus President Spencer W. Kimball came to be respected as a powerful leader who provided specific and timely counsel on the major questions and challenges facing the Saints. This leadership together with the far-reaching innovations during his administration made this an especially exciting and significant period of progress for the Church in the twentieth century.

Notes

Chapter 21. Spencer W. Kimball and His Administration

<_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P>

<_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P>

<_P> <_P> <_P>

<_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P> <_P>

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Fielding Smith, "The First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve," Improvement Era 69 (November 1966): 977-79.
[^2] Speeches of the Year 1974 (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1975), pp. 8-23.
[^3] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2nd ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1960), 2: 176.
[^4] For a discussion see Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 1:211-22.
[^5] Joseph Fielding Smith, "First Presidency," pp. 977-79.
[^6] Instructor 95 (August 1960): 257.
[^7] Conference Report, October 1970, p. 109.
[^8] Conference Report, October 1976, p. 10.
[^9] Conference Report, April 1941, pp. 94-95.
[^10] Church News, June 7, 1961, p. 3.
[^11] Conference Report, October 1975, pp. 3-4.
[^12] Conference Report, October 1976, p. 10.
[^13] See D. Michael Quinn, "The Evolution of the Presiding Quorums of the LDS Church," Journal of Mormon History 1 (1974): 32-38.
[^14] Joseph L. Wirthlin, "History and Functions of the Presiding Bishopric," Improvement Era 59 (November 1956): 794, 830.
[^15] Joseph Fielding Smith, Essentials in Church History, 25th ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972), pp. 142-43; Joseph Smith, Jr., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), p. 151.
[^16] John A. Widtsoe, Priesthood and Church Government (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1954), pp. 269-70; Suggestions to Patriarchs, 1970, p. 2.
[^17] Conference Report, October 1979, p. 25.
[^18] Conference Report, September 1978, p. 23.
[^19] Ensign 14 (May 1984): 4-5.
[^20] J. Reuben Clark, Jr., address to seminary and institute teachers at BYU, July 7, 1954; in Church News, July 31, 1954, p. 2ff.
[^21] Church News, July 31, 1954, p. 2ff.
[^22] Conference Report, April 1945, p. 90.
[^23] Conference Report, April 1946, p. 68.
[^24] BYU assembly address, May 14, 1968.
[^25] Conference Report, April 1978, p. 4.
[^26] Bruce R. McConkie, "A New Commandment," Ensign 6 (August 1976): 8.
[^27] Ensign 6 (August 1976), p. 7.
[^28] Ensign 12 (November 1982): p. 53.
[^29] Conference Report, April 1974, pp. 6-7.
[^30] Conference Report, April 1974, pp. 7-9; October 1974, pp. 7-10.
[^31] Church News, December 8, 1979, p. 4.
[^32] Church News,September 23, 1978, pp. 3, 10.
