[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="170840575" id="p_vV4Ak">Editors’ note: This Easter series explores what we can learn from individuals who knew the Savior during His earthly ministry and after His Resurrection. The series runs February through April.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

Pontius Pilate was a man who asked many questions.

Of the Savior, Pilate asked:

“Art thou the King of the Jews?” (Matthew 27:11).

“Speakest thou not unto me? knowest thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to release thee?” (John 19:10).

Of the people at the feast, Pilate asked:

“Whom will ye that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus which is called Christ?” (Matthew 27:17).

“Why, what evil hath he done?” (Matthew 27:23).

“Shall I crucify your King?” (John 19:15).

In his relatively brief appearance in the New Testament, many of Pilate’s recorded words are questions. He is a man struggling to understand: Why do the Jews want to crucify this man in whom he found “no fault at all”? (John 18:38). Why would they rather free Barabbas, a thief and a murderer? And why won’t this accused man, Jesus Christ, retract His words or even speak in His own defense?

In other words, as Pilate asks the Savior, “What is truth?” (John 18:38).

In the end, Pilate decides that truth doesn’t matter as much as public opinion. When he sees that he cannot reason with the people, he stops asking questions. He “washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person: see ye to it” (Matthew 27:24).

Pilate doesn’t seem to agree with the mob’s opinion of the Savior. In a final attempt to show the people of Jerusalem that he finds no fault in Jesus, Pilate brings Him forward one more time. “Then came Jesus forth, wearing the crown of thorns, and the purple robe. And Pilate saith unto them, Behold the man!” (John 19:5).

Pilate writes the title “Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews,” to be placed on Christ’s cross, and refuses to alter it (John 19:19–22). When Joseph of Arimathea asks for the body of Jesus, Pilate allows him to have it (see Mark 15:43–45).

We can’t know Pilate’s exact motives, but he seems to believe that Jesus isn’t a criminal. He knows that Christ was delivered to him because of envy (see Matthew 27:18). We also don’t know precisely what he thought of the Son of God, but Pilate seems to know there’s something different about Him.

And yet, he still delivers the Savior to be crucified.

We can learn a lot from Pilate’s struggle. A major part of following Christ today is asking “What is truth?” and seeking to find it. A daily part of our discipleship is trying to hear His Spirit over the loud voices of the world, those we encounter both in person and online.

Pilate seeks the truth, but he doesn’t see that it’s right in front of him—Jesus Christ, “the way, the truth, and the life” (John 14:6; emphasis added). He cannot “behold the man” for who He really is.

President Dieter F. Uchtdorf, Acting President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, testified, “The most important day in your life and mine is the day when we learn to ‘behold the man’; when we see Him for who He truly is; when we partake with all our heart and mind of His atoning power; when with renewed enthusiasm and strength, we commit to follow Him.”

In Pontius Pilate’s story, we find two invitations for our own discipleship: to seek the truth of Jesus Christ’s divinity, and once we find our answer, never to abandon that truth.

When we know Jesus Christ—when we truly behold Him—we “shall know the truth, and the truth shall make [us] free” (John 8:32).
