[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="170840673" id="p_vTNoU">Editors’ note: This Easter series explores what we can learn from individuals who knew the Savior during His earthly ministry and after His Resurrection. The series runs February through April.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

When the angel Gabriel told Mary that she was chosen to bear the Son of God, he gave her a powerful reassurance: “For with God nothing shall be impossible” (Luke 1:37). Beyond inspiring faith and courage, this was also a truth—one that Mary could know for herself, if she was willing.

Fortunately, Mary was willing and chose to accept God’s call (see Luke 1:38), even if she didn’t have all the answers. And because of her faith and humility, God’s plan of salvation—which at that point “was entirely dependent upon [her] actions”—was able to move forward.

She did not know it then, but this sacred responsibility would open Mary to experiences she otherwise would not have had. Some she would treasure and keep in her heart (see Luke 2:15–19, 41–51). Others would cause her pain (see Luke 2:34–35). But all would bring her closer to God and the divine truth she learned as a young woman that “with God nothing shall be impossible.”

Mary’s willingness to accept God’s will did not make her safe from trial, grief, or disappointment. In fact, she faced new challenges as the mother of the Messiah, including on the night of the Savior’s birth. Of that moment, President Jeffrey R. Holland (1940–2025), President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, taught:

“Second only to the child himself, Mary is the chiefest figure, the regal queen, mother of mothers—holding center stage in this grandest of all dramatic moments. And … save for her beloved husband, she was very much alone.

“I have wondered if this young woman, something of a child herself, here bearing her first baby, might have wished her mother, or an aunt, or her sister, or a friend, to be near her through the labor. …

“But it was not to be so. With only Joseph’s inexperienced assistance, she herself brought forth her firstborn son, wrapped him in the little clothes she had knowingly brought on her journey, and perhaps laid him on a pillow of hay.”

Mary’s challenges as a young mother continued when she and Joseph had to flee their homeland for Egypt to protect Jesus’s life. She also had to learn what it meant to raise a Son with a divine mission that seemed to make Him mature quickly and demanded much of His time as an adult (see Matthew 12:46–50).

As His mother, Mary had the privilege of being close with Jesus and saw Him do seemingly impossible things. She watched Him teach learned men in the temple when He was only 12 years old (see Luke 2:41–51; Joseph Smith Translation, Luke 2:46 [in Luke 2:46, footnote c]). She knew she could call on Him for a miracle (see John 2:1–11). And she was standing by Him at the cross as He continued to make the impossible possible by suffering for all the sins, sorrows, and struggles of humankind (see John 19:25–27).

And so, the words of the angel Gabriel that “with God nothing shall be impossible” took on new meaning. Not only could God bring new life into the world, but He could bring life to the world through the atoning sacrifice of Jesus Christ.

Mary’s readiness to accept God’s will, allowing her to reach her divine potential, echoed Jesus’s own readiness to accept His Father’s will, allowing Him to fulfill His divine mission as the Savior. As a result of Jesus’s humility, seemingly impossible things—including His victory over death through the Resurrection—took place, reminding us that if we desire to reach our potential and have the impossible happen in our lives, we must turn our will over to God.

Elder Ulisses Soares of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles taught: “It takes a courageous and a willing heart to … submit ourselves to God, and ultimately decide to adopt His way rather than our own. The ultimate test of our discipleship is found in our willingness to give up and lose our old self and submit our heart and our whole soul to God so that His will becomes ours.”

Aligning our will with God’s is not always straightforward or easy, but we do not have to make this transformation on our own. As we exercise faith in Jesus Christ and His Atonement, we can reach our divine potential and become who He wants us to be (see 2 Corinthians 5:17–19).

President Russell M. Nelson (1924–2025) testified: “Faith in Jesus Christ is the greatest power available to us in this life. All things are possible to them that believe [see Mark 9:23].”

President Nelson also taught that when our “greatest desire is to let God prevail” in our lives, “many issues become nonissues!” Our decisions will be less difficult, we will make better use of our time, and our broken hearts can be healed. He promised, “As you choose to let God prevail in your lives, you will experience for yourselves that our God is ‘a God of miracles’ [Mormon 9:11].”

Of course, it takes courage to let the Lord prevail instead of relying on our own capabilities (see Psalm 118:8). This might especially be true when we don’t have all the answers or when we believe there might be a better path to follow than God’s. But once we choose Him, our lives in fact become easier. Because when our will is aligned with the Lord’s, we are united with Him. He gives us His strength, support, and power. And we can move forward with increased confidence, just as Mary did, knowing that with God, nothing is impossible.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="170840782" id="p_vOdDt">How has your celebration of the Easter season strengthened your faith in Jesus Christ? What Easter activities or traditions have helped you draw closer to Him? Share your experiences at <a href="https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/inspiration/magazines/liahona">liahona.ChurchofJesusChrist.org</a> (select “Submit Your Story”).</p> [/SIDEBAR]
