Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Acknowledgments

Though writing a book of this nature must of necessity be done in solitude, bringing it to publication has been a team effort.

Time constraints made it impossible for me to conduct all of the primary research alone. Ariel Silver, Camille Lots, Joan Willes Peterson, and Blake Johnson each helped with important segments of this critical function. As part of my research involved traveling to other countries, I am grateful for the assistance of Peter Trebilcock in Preston, England; Hanno Luschin at the Preston Temple site; President Pak Byung Kyu in Seoul, Korea; and David Fewster in the Philippines. I am also indebted to Bruce Olsen, managing director of the Church Public Affairs Department, for helping me arrange important interviews and obtain access to press conferences.

Trusted associates read various versions or portions of the manuscript. I appreciate the constructive criticism and helpful insights I received from Eleanor Knowles, Robert L. Millet, and Richard Turley.

Finally, I am deeply grateful for the support I have received from my colleagues at Deseret Book. Ron Millett, our president, has been encouraging and reassuring from the outset. I appreciate his expressions of confidence. Fellow vice presidents Gary Swapp, Keith Hunter, and Roger Toone have been supportive and enthusiastic. And the publishing staff has come to my rescue again and again. In particular, I am indebted to Jack Lyon for his constant optimism, Suzanne Brady for her technical editorial skills, Anne Sheffield for the savvy to effectively oversee the production of this complicated project, and Elsha Ulberg for rendering ongoing assistance. Most of all, I express my deepest thanks to Emily Watts, my editor, Kent Ware, our senior art director, and Tonya Facemyer, our typographer, who entered thousands of changes and corrections. The three of them turned the manuscript into a finished product and in the process made it a much better book than it would have been otherwise. I am grateful not only for their excellent professional skills but for their patience, perseverance, and friendship.
