Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Two

Of Pilgrims and Pioneers

It was 1635 when the first Hinckley reportedly left his homeland and set sail for America. Samuel Hinckley, who hailed from Harrietsham in England's county of Kent, was among a small group who had severed ties with the Church of England and embraced the faith of the Puritans. [^1] What may have seemed an impetuous decision to leave a home of relative serenity in search of religious liberty was not uncommon in seventeenth-century England, which witnessed a phenomenal migration of Britons to the American continent.

Bearing a surname that had survived in England for centuries, Samuel and his progeny were destined to make a significant contribution in the new world. Upon arriving in America, he proceeded to Scituate, Cape Cod, Massachusetts, and is believed to be the ancestor of most of the Hinckleys in America. His eldest son, Thomas, later distinguished himself as governor of the Plymouth Colony from 1681 to 1692.

One biographer wrote that Governor Thomas Hinckley was "a man of more than ordinary ability and influence." [^2] And among his virtues was a strong devotion to his faith. Even before he became governor, a law was passed at his insistence, dubbed "Hinckley's Law," providing "that if any neglect the worship of God in the place where he lives, and set up a worship contrary to God, and the allowances of this Government, to the publick profanation of God's Holy Day, and ordinances, he shall pay 10 shillings." [^3] On the whole, the record of the Hinckleys in America is "that of an alert, keen-minded, and sincere race, possessed of prudence and sound judgment, and an understanding nature." [^4]

The Hinckleys intermarried with other prominent families. Governor Hinckley's great-grandson, also named Thomas, married Ruth Merrick, the great-great-granddaughter of Stephen Hopkins, who had sailed on the Mayflower in 1620 and, at age thirty-five, was the fourteenth signer of the Mayflower Compact. [^5]

Governor Thomas Hinckley's sixth great-grandson, Ira Nathaniel Hinckley, was born in Ontario, Canada, on October 30, 1828. By the age of fourteen, he had lost both his parents. [^6] And though his stepfather did not turn him out, in many respects his was the life of an orphan. The tragedies of his parents' deaths forced him to grow up quickly; after his mother died, he scoured the community of Springfield, Illinois, for odd jobs, demonstrating considerable talent with livestock and as a farmer. He also had natural mechanical skills and even as a boy became known as an efficient and talented blacksmith.

In the spring of 1843 Ira, carrying a forty-pound grip saw, walked 120 miles from Springfield to Nauvoo in just four days. Exposed to the Church as a child but not baptized, Ira was intrigued by the Mormons. In Nauvoo he frequently heard the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum preach in the grove west of the site where the temple was under construction. The spirit of the restored gospel began to fill and heal his soul, and on July 1, 1843, three months before his fifteenth birthday, he was baptized. In the gospel, Ira found a measure of peace and purpose his life had lacked.

Though in Nauvoo Ira found spiritual serenity, the atmosphere there was anything but tranquil. Mobbings and persecutions intensified during late 1843 and early 1844, culminating on June 27, 1844, with the brutal murders of Joseph and Hyrum Smith in the Carthage Jail. After the martyrdom, Ira and the body of Saints grieved the loss of their prophet-leader. But they soon rallied under the direction of Brigham Young and began working anew to complete the temple and to prepare for a massive migration west. As the Saints prepared to leave their beautiful homes for a wilderness refuge where they could openly practice their religion, wagons were built at a relentless pace, and Ira's skill as a blacksmith proved a precious commodity. [^7]

His own journey west was delayed by financial and personal considerations. In the late summer of 1848 he married Eliza Jane Evans, and the following July their daughter, Eliza Jane, was born at Estelle Mills, Platte County, Missouri. It was not until April 1850 that Ira and Eliza accumulated enough clothing, foodstuffs, and other supplies to make the trek west themselves, and that month they joined a company of fifty-four wagons organized under the direction of Elder Orson Hyde of the Quorum of the Twelve and led by Captain David Evans, Ira's father-in-law.

The company crossed the Missouri River at Council Bluffs and traveled up the Platte to the Sweetwater, where cholera broke out in camp and Eliza became violently ill. Stunned by how quickly the disease struck, Ira watched helplessly as his young wife died. The day of her passing—June 27, 1850—he lost his half-brother Joel as well. Grief stricken, he split logs for coffins and buried his wife and brother in unmarked graves on the open prairie. Not yet twenty-two years old, he had lost both parents and was now a widower with an eleven-month-old daughter, with whom he arrived in the Salt Lake Valley on September 15, 1850. [^8]

Finally in Salt Lake City, Ira built a home on the southeast corner of Seventh South and Seventh East, and on December 11, 1853, he married Adelaide C. Noble. Eighteen months later, on July 22, 1855, he entered into plural marriage with Adelaide's sister, Angeline W. Noble. [^9] The companionship of first one and then a second devoted and loving wife blessed Ira with a measure of stability and contentment.

But day-to-day living in territorial Utah was unpredictable. Scores of men and women were called to colonize remote areas or to accept other assignments incident to developing the territory and building the kingdom. And so it was with Ira, who saw Brigham Young as not only a great pioneer leader but a prophet of God.

At least twice Ira left his family to make trips back over the plains to help others. One of those times was in 1862 when, at the request of Brigham Young—who had received orders from President Abraham Lincoln to equip a Utah volunteer cavalry to guard mail and telegraph lines during the Civil War—he enlisted in the United States Army. Then, in 1864, he was called to move his family to Coalville, east of Salt Lake City, and superintend the building of the first meetinghouse there. [^10] But the year 1867 brought the most dramatic assignment when a courier arrived in Coalville with a letter from Brigham Young dated April 12: "We wish to get a good and suitable person to settle on and take charge of the Church Ranch at Cove Creek, Millard County. Your name has been suggested for this position. As it is some distance from any other settlement, a man of sound practical judgment and experience is needed to fill the place. Cove Creek is on the main road to our Dixie, Pahranagat, and Lower California, some 42 miles south of Fillmore and some 22 miles north of Beaver. If you think you can take this mission, you should endeavor to go south with us. We expect to start a week from next Monday. It is not wisdom for you to take your family there until the fort is built. . . . Should you conclude to go, let us know by the bearer of this letter, and when you start, come with conveyance to accompany us." [^11]

President Young's invitation, actually more of an assignment, was typical of the era—life-changing and without warning. Ira sent the courier back with a simple reply: "Say to the President I will be there on the appointed day with conveyance prepared to go." [^12]

Once again, life changed course instantly for Ira Hinckley and his family. The thirty-eight-year-old husband and father of twelve abandoned thoughts of a permanent home in Coalville and turned his attention to the prospects of building a fort on the lonely, windswept flats of Millard County. Just two days later he left to join Brigham Young in Salt Lake City, and together they departed for Cove Creek on April 21. As he left the green, fertile valleys of northern Utah behind and with each rotation of the wagon wheel drew closer to the hot, desolate, sagebrush-filled land of central Utah, Ira might have reflected on the cost of membership in the Lord's kingdom. There was, however, no hint of reluctance on his part. [^13]

The Cove Creek area was well-known as a favorite camping place for travelers en route from the Salt Lake Valley to southern Utah. Charles Willden had built a small adobe fort there several years before, and on occasion Brigham Young had stayed overnight with the Willdens as he traveled to and from his winter home in St. George. President Young's objective in building a more solid fort in this isolated but strategic location was twofold: to protect the stagecoach, mail carriers, and telegraph operators and lines, and also to provide a safe haven against elements and Indians for travelers making their way along the "Mormon Corridor" to and from southern Utah.

What Ira found at Cove Creek was a desert with insufficient water but plenty of snakes, Indians, and loneliness born of isolation. The Black Hawk War was still on, and Cove Creek was a rendezvous point for wandering tribes of Indians. Nevertheless, he immediately launched into the formidable project. [^14]

The lean, six-foot-one Ira Hinckley was known for his capacity for work, and his skills and talents were well suited to the challenge of building a fort on the open frontier. A natural mechanic with a reputation as the "best horse-shoer in the Territory," he was practical and self-disciplined. [^15] Those who knew him described him as a "man of action." He was also a man of faith, which quality his children saw demonstrated repeatedly. His sons Alonzo, Frank, and Ed were partial toward a pair of high-spirited chestnut-sorrel horses that had exceptional pulling capacity. One day they used the team to haul a load of hay so heavy that the wheels cut through the sod. As the three witnessed the team's strength, Frank said to his brothers, "Don't let Father know what we think of these horses, or he will turn them in for tithing." The following week, while the boys were again working the team, Ira joined them in the field and mentioned to Frank, "Isn't that a fine span of horses?" "The best span of horses we've had," Frank replied. "Well, I want you to shine them up," his father said. "I have turned them in for tithing." [^16]

That generous measure of faith combined with hard work, resourcefulness, and savvy enabled Ira and a few workers from nearby Fillmore and Beaver to build an impressive enclosure that was later described as one of the "finest structures in the territory." [^17] Most other frontier forts in territorial Utah were constructed of wood, but the eighteen-foot-high walls of Cove Fort were made of black volcanic rock and dark limestone laid up in lime mortar to form a 100-foot-square enclosure. There were six rooms on each of the north and south sides, and a main gate on the east large enough for wagons to drive through and thick enough to permit a cavity between the facing boards that was filled with sand to slow bullets. Total cost of construction was approximately $25,000. [^18]

During Ira's absence from home, Angeline had borne him a son—Bryant Stringham Hinckley—on July 9, 1867. But it was not until November 1867 that Ira returned to Coalville to move his family to Cove Fort, which was ready for occupancy.

Adelaide and Angeline worked full-time to bring civility to their remote outpost. They cooked and cared for their large families, bore children in the desert and then nurtured and educated them in the lonely abode, and prepared thousands of meals for the never-ending parade of hungry travelers.

In 1872 Colonel Thomas L. Kane, who had befriended the Saints in Iowa and again in the Salt Lake Valley when Johnston's Army arrived, came west with his wife and two sons. Their itinerary included a trip with Brigham Young to St. George, and en route the group slept overnight at Cove Fort. Colonel Kane's wife, Elizabeth, recorded her impressions:

We reached Cove Creek Fort, and drove in under its archway. Kane] soon called me outside to look at the landscape, and see how lonely a place we were in. the fort lay in a volcanic basin, geologically esteemed to be the crater of an extinct volcano. . . . Farther on the road we were to travel next day some wagons were encamped, their supper-fires already kindled. . . .

I was not sorry to see a magnificent pitch-pine fire blazing on the hearth in room], for the . . . night air was very cold. Our room was nicely furnished, and looked very cozy as we drew our chairs around the centre-table, which had a number of well-chosen books upon it. . . .

We supped in the telegraph office, where the ticking of the instrument insisted on being heard as we all knelt down for prayers.—Prayers after the patriarchal Hebrew manner; a shot-proof fort; an electric battery clicking the latest New York news; armed men; unarmed women with little children; a meal served with dainty precision in a refectory walled with rough-hewn stone: this medley of antichronisms is Mormon all over. [^19]

Despite their isolated existence, Ira's children felt as though they lived in the center of the territorial universe. News of the thriving territory sped over the lines into the fort's telegraph office, and the children sat for hours watching operators tap out messages. Twice daily the Gilmore and Salisbury Stage Lines stopped by, carrying passengers to and from the West Coast and southern Utah. Prospectors, territorial officials, aristocrats with gold and currency, and Indians begging for food and supplies came through the heavy front gates. [^20] for all who passed, the fort was a welcome oasis in the Utah desert.

Although all visitors were welcome at the fort, those most eagerly anticipated were Church leaders traveling to and from southern Utah. Over the course of ten years, nearly every leading Church authority sampled Cove Fort's hospitality. President Young was a frequent visitor, and the promise of his arrival inspired tremendous excitement. A long table set with a white linen cloth was laden with delicious foods, dozens of loaves of bread were baked, and the larder was filled with homemade butter and cheese. President Young's favorite room, beautifully appointed, was made ready.

Of Brigham Young's visit in April 1869 the following statement was recorded: "The company reached Cove Creek at 5:50 P.M. and were warmly cared for by Bro. Ira Hinckley and his family. Quite a contrast between the present comfortable quarters for the company and their animals and camping out without any shelter which the brethren had done in former times, when they stopped at this place overnight." [^21] Young Bryant was sitting on the prophet's knee one evening when the Church President reached into his pocket and presented him with a coin. Bryant subsequently spent the money, which he later regretted.

Everyday life at the fort centered on the gospel. Bryant's brother, Ira Noble Hinckley Jr., recalled: "While at Cove Fort and associated so much with non-Mormons, we had a room on the north side of the Fort, and no matter what was going on, Father took the family there, and had family prayers." [^22] Ira's faith was strong but practical. Said Bryant later: "Father was not interested in the mysteries of the Kingdom. The thing that characterized his religion was its application to everyday life. He had little use for religion that did not register in one's life, that did not manifest itself in his behavior. He never regarded religion as a cloak that could be laid off and put on at one's convenience. . . . When it came to paying tithing, helping to build a meetinghouse, assisting the poor, donating to the temple or supporting a school, he led the way. If he prayed for a thing he went to work to get what he prayed for." [^23]

For ten years Ira practiced what he professed by giving succor to those in need on the desert of territorial Utah. Then on July 22, 1877, his talents were again pulled in a different direction when Elder Wilford Woodruff called him to preside over the newly organized Millard Stake—one of twenty-five stakes in the Church at that time. Of the event Elder Woodruff recorded: "This morning at Fillmore . . . a priesthood meeting was held to arrange for the organization of the stake. In the afternoon I preached and then presented the names for officers of the stake and were all received with unanimous vote. Ira N. Hinckley was ordained as President." [^24] Ira felt unequal to the honor and responsibility, but he called his family together and told them that if they would support him, he would succeed, and if not, he would fail. He did, in fact, enjoy tremendous loyalty and love from his wives and children, who felt him to be the finest father in the world. On one occasion Susa Young Gates visited Cove Fort with her father, Brigham Young. While there she mentioned to Ira's daughter, Minerva, "I think it is one of the greatest honors in the world to be the daughter of Brigham Young." Minerva replied, "I would much rather be the daughter of Ira N. Hinckley." [^25]

With Ira's new call, life for his family again changed drastically. Feeling that he should live closer to the center of the stake, he persuaded his brother Arza to take over operation of the fort and moved his own family to a farm five miles outside of Fillmore. Ira served as stake president for more than twenty-five years. His son Frank later said, "I think I have never seen as good a man as he was. He preached the loudest by practice and the least by noise or talk of any man I ever knew." [^26] Such was the example Ira set for his immediate family as well as those who would follow in subsequent generations—that devotion to the Lord combined with hard work produces results.

Bryant Hinckley's earliest memories were of life at Cove Fort, where he and his brothers learned to ride almost as soon as they learned to walk. Many an afternoon found them atop the fort wall, their field glasses in hand, watching cowboys on fleet-footed ponies corral the wild horses and cattle that roamed the hills to the east.

Those who lived at the fort dealt with the isolation by devising their own diversions. At times their activities got out of hand. One day Bryant and his brother Edwin and a friend happened upon a six-shooter. Ed accidentally pulled the trigger and shot Bryant above the left knee. As blood ran down his leg and filled his shoe, Bryant fainted. Fortunately, Ira appeared on the scene, dispatched one of his sons to fetch a doctor in Beaver, and slowed the bleeding by applying pressure. When the doctor arrived, he probed the wound with a darning needle. Failing to locate the bullet, he finally poured St. Jacob's oil into the hole and bandaged it. How the wound ached! For nights, Ira walked the floor with his boy until he fell asleep. As long as he lived, Bryant boasted not only that he still carried a bullet in his leg, but that he was the only person ever shot at Cove Fort.

Though his first ten years at Cove Fort were filled with adventure, Bryant Hinckley came to regard Fillmore as home. As a boy, he knew every man, woman, and child in the community, and he never dreamed of living anywhere else. At age fifteen he was called as secretary of the ward Primary, and then as assistant secretary of the ward Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association. These experiences prepared him to accept other assignments—as secretary, second counselor, first counselor, and finally, at age nineteen, as superintendent of the YMMIA. [^27]

In 1883, when Bryant was sixteen, Angeline moved to Provo so that Ira's five oldest sons—Alonzo, Elmer, Frank, Ed, and Bryant—could attend the Brigham Young Academy. Bryant was at an impressionable age, and the academy opened up a whole new world for the boy from rural Utah. Perhaps the most significant aspect of his stay in Provo was his association with Dr. Karl G. Maeser, the academy principal. Bryant found the German educator to be a man with a "high-powered soul," and later wrote of him, "He could stir the best that slumbers in the human heart and could transform boys into gentlemen if anyone could." Dr. Maeser was known for his oratorical skills, and Bryant, who showed promise as a communicator, consciously emulated his mentor's techniques. From his educational experience, Bryant gained more than a degree (which he received in 1890) and a familiarity with literature, history, and science; Dr. Maeser instilled within him the conviction that dedication to truth and goodness was the foundation of a successful, productive, and happy life.

Upon graduation, Bryant was offered a teaching position at the academy on the condition that he obtain further training, so he later traveled east to Poughkeepsie, New York, and attended Eastman Business College, from which he graduated in December 1892. He also completed several months of graduate work at Rochester Business University before returning home in the spring of 1893 to teach at the BY Academy and, in June 1893, to marry Christine Johnson. A year later their first son, Bryant Stanford Hinckley, was born. Eight more children followed: Josephine, Heber, Grace, Caroline, Wendell, Waldo, Venice, and Christine.

Bryant and Christine were happy in Provo, but in early 1900 an opportunity presented itself that the young educator could not dismiss. When he was offered a post as principal of the fledgling LDS Business College in Salt Lake City, he accepted the position and moved his family north. Bryant's challenges with the underfunded school were many, and he searched for ways to improve the college. At his own expense he visited some of the East's most progressive schools and returned to incorporate what he had learned. His instincts for business as well as his skill as a teacher and communicator served the college well. As a teacher he held the attention of audiences young and old, and it became difficult to get a seat in his classes of history, political science, algebra, economics, and the Old Testament. By the time he left after ten years of service, the school was considered one of the best business colleges in the country. [^28]

But there were challenges and sorrows as well. One cold January day Christine went into labor with their fifth child. At the time both Heber and Grace had fevers severe enough that a nurse was attending them at home. That day, Grace suddenly took a turn for the worse, and with the nearest telephone two blocks away, Bryant was not able to summon a doctor in time. He held Grace in his arms as she died. Filled with grief, he tried to comfort his wife, who, a few hours later, gave birth to their third daughter, Caroline. "Those were tragic days," Bryant said. "We were poor and I was having a desperate struggle work]. . . . I could not get doctor], the nurse was terrified, and my poor wife was in agony with no one to help." The doctor and the undertaker arrived at the same time. The days that followed found the family occupied with a confusing mixture of emotions. How grateful they were for Caroline, but how they missed little Grace, who had been just two years old. [^29]

There were other losses. Just as Bryant's career was unfolding, his father passed away, on April 10, 1904, at the age of seventy-five. It was difficult to imagine life without the man he admired as much as any other. Though it had not been Ira's style to preach to his own family, he had set an example of Church service, and Bryant was following in his father's footsteps. The same year Bryant's career took him to the business college, he was called, at age thirty-three, to serve on the YMMIA General Board, a position he held for twenty-five years. For a number of years he chaired the Junior Committee of that board, which committee in 1913 urged the Church to adopt the Boy Scout program as an integral part of its own program for young men. Bryant is also believed to have written more MIA manuals than any other man in Church history. [^30]

His varied activities and high visibility put Bryant in contact with Church and civic leaders. But the relative insignificance of his accomplishments became painfully apparent when, in 1908, a series of events rocked Bryant and his children. On July 11 he and Christine set out on a routine trip to Provo; while there she suddenly became violently ill. Bryant quickly located a doctor, and Christine was rushed into emergency surgery. But it was too late: she died as quickly as she had become ill. After fifteen years of marriage, Bryant was suddenly alone, and the pain of separation was overwhelming.

Christine's death left Bryant reeling and eight children, the youngest of whom was just two months old, without a mother. Family and friends helped as they could. Carol and Christine went to live with their maternal grandparents in Provo. With the help of housekeepers and extended family, Bryant kept the other six children at home and began to work through his grief.

In time, he looked to marry again. Not only did his children need a mother, but he was lonely. Gradually he began to look differently at Ada Bitner, a beautiful and accomplished member of the business college faculty who taught English and was the first instructor of the Gregg Shorthand Method in Utah. A woman of remarkable education for that time, she was identified in various editions of the school paper, The Gold and Blue, as an exceptional teacher much loved by her students. J. Reuben Clark Jr., who would later serve in the First Presidency of the Church, was head of the school's shorthand department. Through the years, whenever Ada's name was mentioned in his presence, he would immediately volunteer how brilliant she was and how much he enjoyed teaching with her. [^31]

Ada was a petite five feet, four inches, with large, hazel eyes and long brown hair accented with red highlights. She and the lean Bryant Hinckley cut a striking figure, and as they courted Ada "fell madly in love" with the handsome educator, who was thirteen years her senior.

On August 4, 1909, Bryant and Ada were married in the Salt Lake Temple, and from that time onward they were the central figures in each other's lives. [^32] There were, however, inevitable differences: Ada had a lovely alto voice, and Bryant refused to sing; she loved to dance, and he had two left feet; he was a compelling orator, and she shied away from public speaking. Nonetheless, the two were remarkably well suited to each other. Education was important to both. Each was well schooled, interested in the arts, and something of a perfectionist. Both were avid readers and could converse for hours about their varied interests. Each was refined by nature but had a sense of humor and loved a good story. The gospel was important to both, and, like Bryant, Ada had pioneer forebears whose sacrifices for the gospel were part of family lore. [^33]

When Ada married Bryant Hinckley at the age of twenty-nine, she gained not only a husband but also a house full of children who were still suffering the loss of their mother. The children needed the influence of a woman in the home, yet they had natural reservations about that woman being anyone other than their mother.

The transition was no doubt challenging for Ada herself, whose marriage to Bryant whisked her from an orderly aca-demic environment into a large home with immediate demands from six active children. Without the luxury of time to become adjusted to married life, she faced the responsibility of caring for the physical as well as the emotional needs of "their" children. But eight years earlier, in a patriarchal blessing, she had been promised that she would find a companion "whom she would delight to honor." She was certain that that man was Bryant Hinckley. And because she had fallen in love with him, she was willing to accept everything—and everyone—that came with him. In the same blessing she had also been told that she had a particular mission to fulfill, and that the angel assigned to watch over her at birth would direct her course and remove barriers from her way and doubts from her mind. The blessing concluded with a telling prophecy: "The eye of the Lord has been upon thee from thy birth and a decree of the Father has gone forth that thou shalt have a mission to fill, a work to do. . . . Thy name shall be perpetuated and live in the memory of the Saints." [^34]

In some respects Ada was more than ready to become the mother of six. As a seasoned teacher of nearly ten years, she had a knack for relating to youth. Bright and well educated, she knew a great deal about grammar, literature, and the proper use of language, and she stepped in immediately to help the children with their homework. She was a marvelous cook, so having a large family pull up chairs to the dinner table was not intimidating to her. During her days as a single woman she had accumulated beautiful linens and Haviland china, a silver service, and tumblers made of cut crystal. The children learned the art of hostessing by watching and working with her.

Ada moved into the Hinckleys' two-story frame home in the First Ward of the Liberty Stake. The main floor consisted of a parlor (where Ada positioned her own elegant baby grand piano), a large dining room with a round oak table and chairs, and a secluded library. There was also a large, old-fashioned kitchen with a stove that heated the hot-water tank, a gas range, and a table and chairs. Upstairs were four large bedrooms and a bathroom. The front stairway with its massive banister was a tempting diversion for children who hopped aboard for a slide to the bottom.

It was into this large and well-appointed home that Ada and Bryant welcomed their first child. Bryant had been promised in a patriarchal blessing almost fifteen years earlier: "You shall not only become great yourself but your posterity will become great, from your loins shall come forth statesmen, prophets, priests and Kings to the most High God. The Priesthood will never depart from your family, no never. To your posterity there shall be no end . . . and the name of Hinckley shall be honored in every nation under heaven." [^35]

The day Bryant and Ada rejoiced in the arrival of their first son, they couldn't have foreseen that he would in great measure fulfill that prophecy. Born on June 23, 1910, and given his mother's maiden name, he would be known as Gordon Bitner Hinckley.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Salt Lake Tribune, 10 June 1910, p. 6.
[^2] Salt Lake Tribune, 23 June 1910, p. 1.
[^3] See Salt Lake Herald-Republic, 10 June 1910, p. 1.
[^4] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "Memories of My Mother: Ada Bitner Hinckley," circa 1980, unpublished manuscript in possession of family.
[^5] See Dell Van Orden, "Pres. Hinckley Stood Tall Even As Youngster," Deseret News, 23 June 1995.
[^6] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Some Lessons I Learned As a Boy," Ensign, May 1993, p. 54.
[^7] "Mutual Work," Improvement Era, June 1910, p. 761.
[^8] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "Tithing: An Opportunity to Prove Our Faithfulness," Ensign, May 1982, p. 40.
[^9] Gordon B. Hinckley, "'Behold Your Little Ones,'" Ensign, November 1978, p. 18.
[^10] Interview with Gordon B. Hinckley (hereinafter referred to as GBH in interviews, letters, and journal entries), 19 October 1994.
[^11] See "Some Lessons I Learned As a Boy," p. 53; also Interview with GBH, 19 October 1994.
[^12] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "Take Not the Name of God in Vain," Ensign, November 1987, p. 46.
[^13] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "To the Bishops of the Church," Ensign, November 1988, pp. 49, 51.
[^14] See "Tithing: An Opportunity to Prove Our Faithfulness," p. 40.
[^15] Bryant S. Hinckley to Ada Bitner Hinckley, 9 February 1915; see also "Story of Ada Bitner Hinckley," p. 63.
[^16] Interview with GBH, 19 October 1994.
[^17] Interview with GBH, 7 December 1994.
[^18] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "A Principle with Promise," Improvement Era, April 1965, p. 520.
[^19] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "'If Ye Be Willing and Obedient,'" Ensign, December 1971, p. 123.
[^20] Hymns, no. 27.
[^21] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "Praise to the Man," Ensign, August 1983, p. 2; also Gordon B. Hinckley, "Joseph the Seer," Ensign, May 1977, p. 66; Gordon B. Hinckley, "As One Who Loves the Prophet," address delivered at BYU Symposium on the Life and Ministry of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 22 February 1992.
[^22] See "Hinckley Family Herald," 25 December 1939, p. 1.
[^23] "Some Lessons I Learned As a Boy," pp. 54, 59.
[^24] Bryant S. Hinckley to Ada Bitner Hinckley, 9 February 1915; see also "Story of Ada Bitner Hinckley," p. 68.
[^25] See address delivered to Ira Nathaniel Hinckley family, 4 April 1955.
[^26] Deseret News, 10 October 1918.
[^27] See Deseret News, 28 January 1996.
[^28] Interview with Sherman Hinckley, 12 November 1994.
[^29] 29. "Autobiography of Bryant Stringham Hinckley," p. 30.
[^30] 30. Church News, 20 June 1948.
[^31] 31. See Boyd K. Packer, "President Gordon B. Hinckley: First Counselor," Ensign, February 1986, p. 5.
[^32] 32. See "The Story of Ada Bitner Hinckley," as told by Ruth Hinckley Willes, comp. Joseph Simmons Willes, 1980, unpublished manuscript in possession of family.
[^33] 33. "Story of Ada Bitner Hinckley," pp. 48-49.
[^34] 34. Patriarchal blessing given by John Smith to Ada Bitner, February 1901, reproduced in "Story of Ada Bitner Hinckley," pp. 47-48.
[^35] 35. Patriarchal blessing given by Jno Ashman to Bryant S. Hinckley, 8 August 1895, LDS Church Archives.
