Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Three

Birth and Boyhood

It was an exciting time to make one's entrance on the world stage. The twentieth century was just a decade old when Gordon arrived at the Hinckley home a few blocks from downtown Salt Lake City, and the United States was much different from the nation it would soon become, perched as it was on the brink of the modern era. In 1910, a man born in the United States, where 92 million people lived in forty-six states, could expect to live to age fifty. A can of Campbell's soup cost ten cents, a man's shirt was less than a dollar, and beef sold for thirty cents a pound in Salt Lake City. [^1]

Americans were on the verge of a phenomenal transformation. Just two years earlier, Henry Ford had built his first Model T and developed the country's original assembly line. Only a few hundred miles of paved road existed in the entire nation, but that would soon change drastically. And the day Gordon was born, the front page of the Salt Lake Tribune lauded the inauguration of the first "regular airship passenger service" in the Deutschland, which had transported twenty passengers from Friederichshafen to Dusseldorf in Germany at an average speed of thirty-three miles an hour. [^2] That same month the Salt Lake City council regulated "autoists" for the first time, fixing fifteen miles per hour as the maximum speed. [^3] During his lifetime Gordon would be the beneficiary of advances in transportation and communication that would have boggled the early-twentieth-century mind.

In 1910 President Joseph F. Smith presided over a Church that at year's end boasted nearly 400,000 members in sixty-two stakes and twenty-one missions, with 933 missionaries serving in the field. Francis M. Lyman was the President of the Quorum of the Twelve, and all four operating temples were in Utah: St. George, Logan, Manti, and Salt Lake City. Just twenty years earlier President Wilford Woodruff had declared an end to plural marriage with the "Manifesto," and two decades would pass before the Church could celebrate the centennial of its organization. Slowly, however, it was moving from its inaugural era of persecution to one of prosperity and modest respect. The gospel kingdom was poised to surge forward after surviving eighty difficult years.

Such was the environment that greeted the young Gordon Hinckley, who, though his mother's first child, was welcomed by a ready-made family of brothers and sisters. Ada had faced head-on the challenge of establishing her own place in the Hinckley home, and she and the children were adjusting. Over the years there was no such thing as half-brothers and half-sisters, or "Christine's family" and "Ada's family." It was just one family, the Hinckleys, with care taken to make no distinction about who was born to whom.

Sixteen months later Gordon was joined by a brother, Sherman. Three sisters followed: Ruth, Ramona, and Sylvia. Although all of the Hinckley children were close, Gordon and Sherman, by virtue of their ages and gender, were nearly inseparable. Gordon was older, but Sherman was larger, faster, and stronger. A spindly, frail boy susceptible to earaches and other illnesses, Gordon was a constant worry to his mother. In the evening it was common to find Ada warming two small bags of salt, which she would hold against his aching ears. There were times when she stayed with her son through the night, applying the warm bags to give him a measure of comfort.

Gordon also suffered from allergies, asthma, and hay fever, and the living conditions of the day exacerbated his problems. Nearly everyone in Salt Lake City burned coal in stoves or furnaces, and the resultant soot hung over the city, particularly in the dead of winter, like a suffocating blanket. Freshly fallen snow was soon covered by a layer of gritty, black soot. Spring housecleaning was a major ordeal. Everything inside the home had to be thoroughly cleaned of the sooty dust that had accumulated in layers through the winter. Carpets were taken up, hung on a clothesline, and attacked with carpet beaters, and every inch of wallpaper was cleaned with a doughlike substance that removed dirt and restored some of the paper's original vibrancy.

The heavy concentration of soot and other pollutants was Gordon's nemesis. At age two he contracted a severe case of whooping cough, threatening enough that a doctor told Ada the only remedy was clear, country air. Bryant responded by purchasing a five-acre farm in the rural East Millcreek area of the Salt Lake Valley and building a small summer home. One of Gordon's earliest recollections was of visiting the farm home during its construction and watching the stonemason build the rock fireplace to Ada's design.

Constructed in 1914 for $500, the country cottage was modest. Its small kitchen had a coal stove (and later an electric hot plate), a few cupboards, and a sink. A door from the kitchen led to two small bedrooms and a bath. The roomy living room had a fireplace of native cobblestone, and a large front porch was a favorite gathering place on warm summer evenings. Thus began the Hinckley tradition of spending winters downtown and summers in East Millcreek. [^4]

Rural life suited Gordon and Sherman. Though their home in the city was larger and more comfortable, their residential neighborhood didn't offer the opportunities of the country, where they were free to explore and play in the gully that ran along the south line of their five acres. They jumped off haystacks, drank warm milk fresh from the cow, played hide-and-seek in the corn patch, rode in the back of a wagon behind a horse, flew out over the big hollow in a swing, learned to "make butter" by shaking cream in a two-quart fruit bottle, and played run sheepy run, no bears are out tonight, and mumblety-peg for hours at a time, tipping the blade of a pocketknife off their noses and foreheads.

When the boys got a little older, Bryant taught them how to handle a gun, and they took their .22 rifles and went "hunting." In truth, they had more fun shooting at old bottles and other stationary targets than aiming at—or, heaven forbid, actually hitting—anything that moved. Gordon did go deer hunting once, but he got caught in a blizzard and had such a miserable experience that he never went again.

Life on the farm brought out the ingenuity in Gordon and Sherman, who even as boys were natural mechanics and applied their inventive skills to a variety of contraptions. They made all kinds of conveyances out of wheels and boards, including a horse-drawn cart, and rigged up a shower with an old water tank that used the sun to heat the water.

Over time their projects became increasingly sophisticated. And as with all inventors, at times their schemes went awry—such as the day they decided to build a carbide bomb in a can. The boys understood just enough chemistry to construct an incendiary device that exploded when they lit the match. Nothing was bruised or broken except a little of their pride and reputation as engineers. That didn't stop Sherman, however, from using dynamite to loosen up a strip of hard ground they believed couldn't be cultivated any other way. Again, the results were explosive.

Many a night the boys slept outside in the bed of a wagon underneath a sky full of stars. When it rained, they grabbed their bedding and ran for the protection of the front porch, where Ada would find them the next morning, sound asleep after the night's adventure.

The farm also presented the Hinckley children with opportunities to work. Bryant was typically up by 5:00 A.M., and he expected his family to keep an early clock. There were always plenty of chores for the boys, and each day they could plan on receiving a list of jobs to be done by noon. When the work was done, the day was theirs to do with as they pleased. But during the cooler morning hours, they had rows in the large garden to weed, several acres to irrigate, post holes to dig, fruit to pick, eggs to gather, horses to look after, and two cows to tend—a Guernsey named Polly and a high-spirited, purebred Jersey cow named Babe. The boys were to empty the water as it melted from the icebox in the cellar, but they frequently forgot and spent more time cleaning up the water that had overflowed the small pan than would have been required to take it out in the first place.

The Hinckleys grew much of what they ate. The cows gave all the milk the family could drink, and a large orchard with a variety of fruit trees—apples, peaches, cherries, pears, apricots, and plums—yielded a bounteous harvest. When Gordon and Sherman were older, their father expected them to help in the orchard and took them to pruning demonstrations put on by the agricultural college. Most Saturdays during January and February, Bryant and sons drove to the farm and pruned trees. It was not a pleasant job, but the boys' inventive natures again emerged as they built stilts of maple flooring to help them reach the higher branches. All of the pruning, year after year, yielded an important lesson that embedded itself in Gordon's subconscious: the quality of fruit picked in September is determined by the way the trees are shaped and trimmed in February.

The boys were involved in the process from beginning to end, though neither enjoyed harvesting the fruit, which was sweaty, sticky work. But the peaches had to be picked, graded, packed, and sold, and it took all hands to get the job done. [^5] Indeed, the farm provided a fertile environment for any number of lessons, perhaps none of which was more pervasive than that one can reap only what he has sown. The young Hinckleys saw this lesson played out season after season as they plowed and planted in the spring, tended the crops through the summer, and experienced the reward of harvest in the fall.

If the children felt they had a lot of chores, the extra work Ada shouldered because of the lack of conveniences on the farm was enormous. But she loved their rural home and didn't seem to mind the work that came with it. Though the house was hot in the summer, and the heat of the range transformed the kitchen into its own self-contained oven, she filled hundreds of Mason quart jars with fruit and vegetables. Her sun-kissed strawberry jam was a family favorite. When Ada and Bryant invited city friends for a country breakfast, she served large bowls of fruit and cream, hot rolls, bacon and liver, and fried chicken or ham.

It was a landmark day when electrical power came to the farm. The advent of electric lights and a small stove with three coil units for cooking was like heaven for Ada. Getting water into the home proved more challenging, but Bryant eventually solved that problem as well.

As remarkable as were electricity and running water, however, there was no more dramatic sign of progress in the Hinckley home than the summer day in 1916 when Bryant drove up in a black Model T Ford with a shiny brass radiator. When the children saw his prize, their eyes grew wide with wonder. Although the Model T was a tremendous step forward in transportation, it was also a crude and temperamental machine. It took two men to put the car's top up and down, and the windshield was positioned such that if it rained, the water seeped into the electrical coil and made it nearly impossible to start the engine, which was an adventure in the best of circumstances. Because the auto had no self-starter, Bryant often called on the boys to turn the crank on the front of the grill—a dangerous task if not executed carefully. They learned the hard way that if they didn't retard the spark and keep their thumbs cocked back in an unnatural way, the crank could kick and break a thumb or a hand. Some days, after the boys had tugged and tugged at the crank without success, they finally resorted to coasting the unreliable machine down the hill to get it started. Because the car had no battery, electricity came from the magneto, the output of which was determined by the speed of the engine. If the engine slowed down, the lights became a pale, nearly useless yellow. A driver heading down the road at night had to keep the engine running at a steady clip. From his experience behind the wheel of a Model T, Gordon later drew an analogy: "Industry, enthusiasm, and hard work lead to enlightened progress. You have to stay on your feet and keep moving if you are going to have light in your life." [^6]

Though everyone in the family loved farm life, they also enjoyed returning to their home downtown each fall. After a summer away, the children were anxious to visit favorite haunts and be reunited with neighborhood friends. An arc light on a nearby street was a neighborhood gathering point, and at night, as if by predetermined signal, the boys gathered to play kick the can or marbles, which they kept at until their knuckles were raw. In the winter they went sledding, skated on the Liberty Park pond, and played fox and geese in the snow until their hands were so chapped they bled. Their toes got so cold inside their rubber galoshes that when they got home the boys danced around the house to keep from crying.

Winter in downtown Salt Lake City called for special preparations. Because the streets weren't plowed, the Hinckleys put the Model T on blocks in the barn behind the house for the season. A man on horseback pulling a small, V-shaped plow cleared the long sidewalks on two sides of the Hinckleys' corner lot. Decades later, Gordon could still conjure up the distinctive sound of the milkman's cart creaking in the ice as he made his daily delivery. Fresh air was believed to be important to good health, so Ada insisted that the children sleep with their windows open, even in the dead of winter. By morning the rooms were frigid. Ironically, the air was pungent with smoke from coal or wood furnaces.

One advantage of returning to the city was that Bryant was closer to work. Until 1910, he directed affairs at the LDS Business College. That year, when the Church built the Deseret Gymnasium as a community recreation center, he was appointed general manager of the enterprise and charged with day-to-day operations. One notice announcing his appointment declared that "no better selection could have been made for this important office." [^7] The Church spent nearly $200,000 building the gymnasium, which was one of the finest in the country.

The Deseret Gym proved to be an important community facility. An athletic club, it also became a social center. Basketball games for the University of Utah, which had no arena or fieldhouse, were played there. Students at the LDS Business College used it as their gym, and the local Boy Scouts established headquarters there. Alice Merrill Horne and other prominent artists transformed the board room into an art gallery on occasion, and men came from all over the city to play handball and basketball, take part in calisthenics, and swim. On Saturdays, Gordon and Sherman made their way to the gym to swim, exercise, and pitch baskets.

Bryant was an able businessman who kept the gym operating during even difficult financial years. His experience teaching business at BY Academy and running the LDS Business College proved invaluable. It also came in handy in the management of his personal affairs, for he gradually accumulated a respectable portfolio of real-estate holdings. In addition to his rural properties, he purchased several homes within his stake boundaries, a small farm in Millard County, and another in the western part of the Salt Lake Valley. Bryant was meticulous about taking care of what he owned, and his sons could often be found doing odd jobs at the various property sites.

Other values were also inherent in the Hinckley family culture. As a former English teacher, Ada was well-read and a purist as far as grammar was concerned. She would not tolerate sloppy language, and her children learned to speak with precision and care. To say nothin', or use slang of any kind, was almost unforgivable.

Ada had been an exceptional student, and she expected the same of her children. For years Gordon treasured a small Webster's Handy Dictionary that carried the inscription, "Ada Bitner Reward for Excellence, 1889." Books and education were important to Bryant as well, and he had converted one of the large rooms in their home to a library that could be closed off for studying. Its bookshelves were filled with more than a thousand volumes—a complete set of Shakespeare, numerous titles by or about Abraham Lincoln, the fifty-volume Harvard Classics (which contained everything from the writings of Aristotle to George Washington's Farewell Address), and The World's Best Histories. In the center of the room stood a large, solid oak table with comfortable chairs and a set of encyclopedias, atlases, dictionaries, and other reference works. Statuettes of Joseph Smith and Abraham Lincoln graced the room with a certain dignity. No one was forced to study or read, and the children didn't spend hours poring over the pages of their parents' books, but the library was inviting. Over time, Gordon developed a familiarity with good books and came to appreciate what his parents valued—literature and history, learning and education. Years later he concurred with Emerson, who, when asked which of all the books he had read had most affected his life, said that he could no more remember the books he had read than the meals he had eaten, but that they had made him. [^8] The children were all influenced to one degree or another by their parents' love of literature and, indeed, most things artistic. Each learned to recite some of Bryant and Ada's favorite poems and passages from the classics.

Ironically, for all the emphasis among the Hinckleys on literature and learning, as a young boy Gordon did not like school. At age six, when he should have started first grade, he hid from his parents on the first day of school. Because he was a small child with delicate health, Bryant and Ada decided he might do better the following year attending with Sherman.

When the first day of school arrived a year later, Gordon ran laps around the house in an attempt to avoid his mother, but Ada prevailed. Both boys entered first grade in the Hamilton School. It wasn't long before Gordon joined his age group in the second grade. Even so, when school broke for the summer recess at year's end, he could be heard chanting with his friends, "No more pencils, no more books, no more teachers' cross-eyed looks."

Weather permitting, all students assembled in front of the three-story school building each morning, pledged allegiance to the flag, and then marched into their classrooms. Boys and girls were expected to dress neatly, with shirts, ties, short trousers, and black, knee-length stockings in order for the boys. Their cotton socks tended to wear out quickly, so the boys were taught to darn—it was unthinkable to go to school with a sock that needed mending.

Despite the best efforts of parents and siblings, Gordon remained unenthusiastic about formal education throughout grade school. He was used to running barefoot all summer, and the confinement of the classroom, not to mention the formality of shirt and tie and a stiff pair of shoes, was something he resisted strenuously.

Though Gordon's early academic record was unimpressive, certain standards of behavior and achievement were nonetheless modeled and expected in the Hinckley home. Neither Bryant nor Ada was a strict disciplinarian; Bryant never raised a hand to his children. "By some quiet magic," Gordon later said, " father] was able to discipline his family without the use of any instrument of punishment, though on occasion may have deserved it." [^9] When the children misbehaved, both parents had a way of communicating disappointment and letting them know that more was expected of them. If the children didn't respond after Ada had asked them to do a certain chore, for example, she took care of the task herself, no matter how tired she was. Most of the time, that was more painful to the children than a lecture or spanking would have been.

There were, of course, times when only a lecture would do. One day Gordon, seven or eight years old, was engaged in serious conversation with friends on the front porch when he made disparaging remarks about a black family walking down the street. Ada, who overheard her eldest and was horrified by his slur, promptly marched him and his friends into the living room and gave them all a good talking-to about respect and kindness.

Though Gordon and Sherman were good friends and would have defended each other against any outside threat or insult, their closeness in age created a certain amount of rivalry that sparked occasional fights. As the stronger of the two, Sherman had the advantage physically, but his older brother was scrappy and persistent. None of their skirmishes were ever won easily. Gordon later said, "I did all right. My head was bloodied, but unbowed." Tired of such exchanges between his sons, Bryant finally brought boxing gloves home and told the two to resolve their differences once and for all. "We did, and we've been friends ever since," Gordon said. [^10]

Indeed, Gordon had a feisty streak. As he prepared to enter the seventh grade, he and his friends looked forward to being the first class to occupy the new Roosevelt Junior High School. But when they reported to school, they learned that the building was already overcrowded and their class was being moved back to the elementary school for one more year. Gordon and his friends had already spent six years at Hamilton, and they felt they deserved something better than a sentence to another year with the lower grades. The following day they went "on strike" and played "hooky." When they returned to school the next day, the principal, Harold J. Stearns (whose demeanor, Gordon insisted, matched his name), greeted them at the front door and announced that they would be readmitted only after they supplied a letter of explanation from their parents. Ada was not pleased when she learned what had transpired, and her note to the principal contained a rebuke that stung her eldest son: "Dear Mr. Stearns, Please excuse Gordon's absence yesterday. His action was simply an impulse to follow the crowd." He later explained why his mother's response had cut so deeply: "It wasn't an impulse to follow the crowd. I was one of the instigators. But to have Mother classify me as one to do something just to follow the crowd cut me, and I made up my mind then and there that I would never do anything just to follow the crowd." [^11]

On another occasion, after a particularly rough day at school, Gordon returned home, threw his books on the table as he walked through the kitchen, and let out an expletive. Ada, shocked at his language, explained that under no circumstances would those words ever come out of his mouth again and led Gordon to the bathroom, where she generously coated a clean washcloth with soap and rubbed it around his tongue and teeth. He sputtered and fumed and felt like swearing again, but resisted the urge. [^12]

The Hinckleys lived in the Liberty Stake, and their home ward, the First Ward, was the center of their universe. It was not only an important spiritual center but a social one as well. Large and diverse, it was filled with strong families with youth of all ages. More than a thousand ward members fell under the care of Bishop John C. Duncan, who shepherded the congregation for a quarter of a century. Despite the unwieldy size of his ward family, he was not just their bishop but their friend and adviser as well. Bishop Duncan was present when Gordon and his brothers and sisters were given names and blessings. He later interviewed Gordon and found him worthy to be ordained a deacon, called him to his first Church assignment as a member of the deacons quorum presidency, recommended him to receive the Melchizedek Priesthood, and confirmed his worthiness to serve a mission. Gordon loved and respected his bishop, a man who was a central figure during his youth. [^13]

It was to Bishop Duncan's home across the street that the Hinckleys made their annual, year-end pilgrimage for tithing settlement. A full year's tithing for Gordon might have been only twenty-five or thirty cents, but he was taught to pay it nonetheless. [^14]

The ward meetinghouse itself was busy nearly every night of the week with dances, plays, speech contests, and other MIA programs, and from his earliest days Gordon participated in all that was offered that pertained to him. He was five years old when his father wrote to Ada, who was visiting on the West Coast at the time: "The little boys and Sherman] have been to Primary today and this evening Gordon has been asking some very wise questions." [^15]

At home, Bryant and Ada found ways to keep gospel prin-ciples in front of their children. Before bedtime Ada often gathered her children around the stove and read to them about Nephi, Lehi, and other Book of Mormon heroes from Mother Stories from the Book of Mormon by William Albert Morton, first published about 1911. Though it wasn't until later that Gordon began to read directly from the scriptures, his interest in scriptural characters and stories was first kindled during those sessions with his mother.

In 1915, when President Joseph F. Smith counseled LDS families to gather at least once a week for home night, Ada and Bryant responded, "The President of the Church has asked us to hold home night. So we're going to have home night." This pronouncement was greeted with moans from children who weren't anxious to be corralled into another meeting, but from that time forward Monday evenings were reserved for family. Bryant or Ada would give a lesson and then urge their children to perform—something that elicited smirks, guffaws, and sometimes out-and-out laughter. The children weren't natural performers, and asking one of them to sing in front of the others was, as Gordon said later, "like asking ice cream to stay hard on the kitchen stove. It took us a long time to reach the point where we could sing together without giggling. It must have been disgusting to my parents the way we giggled." [^16]

But Bryant and Ada persisted. The family had regular family prayer and often listened to faith-promoting incidents from Bryant's seemingly endless reservoir of stories. Though some family home evenings were less tolerable than others, the net effect was positive. Those simple gatherings created strong bonds between parents and children, brothers and sisters—a critical element in the unification of their blended family.

Through these and other experiences, Gordon began to learn for himself that there was a lot to the Church that his parents believed in so deeply. By the time he was baptized by his father on April 28, 1919, he wanted to be a member of the organization. "We went to Church, but not under compulsion," he reflected years later. "Our parents somehow let us know what was expected of us, and we followed their lead without much argument." [^17] On several occasions Bryant took Gordon to general conference in the Tabernacle. He heard President Heber J. Grant speak of the "Little White Slave," a warning against the addictive influence of cigarettes, and bear eloquent testimony of the Word of Wisdom as a divine law. The message so impressed Gordon that he silently resolved never to smoke. [^18]

On another visit to the Tabernacle, when he was about fifteen, he sat high in the balcony and listened as President Grant related his experience of reading the Book of Mormon as a boy. He spoke of the influence Nephi had had on him, and then in stirring fashion quoted familiar words: "I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them" (1 Nephi 3:7). President Grant's words bore into Gordon's soul, and at that moment he resolved that he would try to do whatever the Lord asked him to do. [^19]

But one experience in particular had a profound effect on young Gordon. Not long after he was ordained a deacon, he attended his first stake priesthood meeting with his father. An awkward, freckle-faced boy in knee pants, more prone to laugh than to be serious, he felt a little out of place as he found a seat on the back row of the Tenth Ward chapel while Bryant (who was serving in the stake presidency) took his place on the stand. To open the meeting, the three or four hundred men present stood and sang William W. Phelps's triumphant anthem celebrating the life of Joseph Smith: "Praise to the man who communed with Jehovah! / Jesus anointed that Prophet and Seer. / Blessed to open the last dispensation, / Kings shall extol him, and nations revere." [^20] Gordon was unprepared for what he experienced: "Something happened within me as I heard those men of faith sing. It touched my heart. It gave me a feeling that was difficult to describe. I felt a great moving power, both emotional and spiritual. I had never had it previously in terms of any Church experience. There came into my heart a conviction that the man of whom they sang was really a prophet of God. I knew then, by the power of the Holy Ghost, that Joseph Smith was indeed a prophet of God." [^21]

Gordon had often heard his father speak with respect, almost reverence, about the Presidents of the Church, most of whom he had known personally. Bryant regarded the Prophet Joseph Smith as the most significant man besides the Savior ever to have lived, and he felt a personal link with Brigham Young, upon whose knee he had sat as a boy. These and the other Presidents of the Church were Bryant Hinckley's heroes. And they became Gordon's.

Bryant also spoke often of his father and other forebears who, he taught his children, deserved their esteem and respect. It meant something to be a Hinckley, and the children knew what was expected of them. Though Bryant rarely lectured his children, he often repeated favorite sayings that communicated his expectations: "Try to live up to the high-water mark of your possibilities." "Be somebody. Stand up for something." "So live that men by your good deeds may know your ancestors," he encouraged, explaining that a person best honored his parents by making honorable the name he bore. [^22]

The Hinckleys enjoyed a sense of well-being and stability in their home. Many decades later Gordon recalled: "We didn't openly speak about love for one another very much in those days. We didn't have to. We felt that security, that peace, that quiet strength which comes to families who pray together, work together, and help one another." [^23] The children had the assurance that their parents loved them, believed in them, and regarded them as assets rather than liabilities.

The children also felt secure about their parents' relationship. Bryant cherished his beloved Ada. When Ruth was a year old, he insisted that his wife go to California for some needed rest. His letters to her revealed how lonely he was: "It will be several days before we can in any way become reconciled to your absence. . . . But there is a comfort in the thought that you will get a long deserved rest." Always cautious about spending money, he nonetheless reassured his wife, "Spend whatever money is necessary for your comfort—we will be none the poorer for this," and concluded with a reassurance of his love: "At the evening of the first day, accept my constant and unfailing love for you. . . . It is hard to be without you but it is happy to think of you." [^24]

Bryant and Ada's inherently positive outlook permeated the family atmosphere. Ada believed, and often stated, that a happy attitude and smiling countenance could boost one over almost any misfortune and that every individual was responsible for his own happiness. The children frequently heard their parents say, "Cynics do not contribute; skeptics do not create; doubters do not achieve." Despite the normal frustrations associated with rearing a large family—and Bryant and Ada had their share—the combination of optimism and personal responsibility that they exemplified created an emotionally healthy and stable home.

It helped that they both had a sense of humor that allowed them to laugh at themselves and at everyday annoyances. A good pun or joke was to be admired—and outdone. Bryant liked to tell the children that any of their faults or weaknesses—hay fever, allergies, poor eyesight—came from their mother's side, and that their desirable qualities were Hinckley traits. He enjoyed reciting the story of how Willard Done, a former president of the LDS University, had introduced him at a banquet by saying that he was not a very handsome man, but then adding, "His face grows on you, so don't be discouraged." When Bryant came to the pulpit, he replied that he was grateful for many things, one of them being the fact that Done's face had never grown on him. [^25] Gordon picked up his father's wry wit and quick sense of humor—which attributes his sister Ramona claimed helped him maneuver his way out of every predicament he ever got himself into.

The Hinckleys made the most of happy occasions. Christmas, for example, was a gala affair. Spicy aromas filled the home as Ada made fruitcakes, plum puddings, and pounds of fondant. As Gordon and Sherman got older, they created elaborate decorations—a make-believe fireplace of red brick paper in the dining room, a village on the library table with a mirror as a lake and strands of sparkling lights. In anticipation of Santa, the younger children hung their Christmas stockings and the older children left a plate of goodies on the dining-room table. Early Christmas morning, the children tiptoed downstairs to the library, claimed their gifts, and ran upstairs to show their parents. Each girl usually got a special doll with at least one beautiful dress Ada had made. There were rarely fragile or expensive toys, but Gordon and Sherman were thrilled one year with a Flexible Flyer, then the Cadillac of sleds. Bryant liked to buy two or three new games each Christmas, and on holidays the family gathered around the large dining-room table and played one game after another.

There were other family celebrations. They often vacationed close to home, but one memorable excursion took them to Yellowstone National Park. Driving from Salt Lake City in the Model T over gravel roads was an adventure. They traveled long days, camped beside the road, cooked meals over an open bonfire, and got plenty of exercise pushing the car up steep hills. But once there, they enjoyed themselves immensely. Gordon and Sherman slept in the seats of the car, and one night a bear got close enough to lick Sherman's forehead. When Bryant, who was in a nearby tent, heard the animal scratching the car fenders, he lit a fire and scared the furry intruder away.

For all the happy times, however, there were periods of suffering and heartache as well. In 1918 an influenza epidemic killed more than twenty-five million people worldwide—more than half a million in the United States alone, or nearly ten times more Americans than died in World War I. While faithful Latter-day Saints were gathered for October general conference, the first signs of the outbreak in Salt Lake City were diagnosed; and within four weeks 1,500 cases and 117 deaths had been documented. A Deseret News headline from that month read: "Many towns are closed by order of health board; Theaters, churches and all public gatherings under ban for present; Spanish influenza rapidly spreading." [^26] Utah was eventually besieged with the virus, which killed about 4 percent of the Utahns afflicted between 1918 and 1919. The winter of 1918 saw many families hit with the dreaded disease from which the weak never recovered. [^27]

It wasn't long after a friend of Gordon's came home from school deathly ill that Gordon, Ruth, Venice, and Bryant contracted the vicious strain of influenza. Ada, who was carrying her fifth child, nursed them back to health. The children moved into the front bedroom, where they were confined for several weeks as they tried to overcome the illness that sapped every ounce of strength from them. Ada was relieved when Gordon pulled through, for he was still a skinny boy susceptible to illness.

As unpleasant as some of his health challenges were, no experience during Gordon's first ten years was more traumatic than receiving the news that arrived in late November 1918. A letter from Elder B. H. Roberts, a member of the First Council of the Seventy stationed in Europe as chaplain of the 145th Field Artillery, brought word that Bryant's eldest son, Stanford, who had enlisted in the army during World War I, had died of pneumonia in a hospital in Bordeaux, France. His death had come less than a month before the Armistice, and he was buried in an American military cemetery in Suresnes overlooking Paris. It was the first time Gordon and Sherman had seen their father cry, and they too wept.

Bryant and Ada were consoled by the fact that Elder Roberts had comforted their critically ill son during his last hours and had been at his side when he died. When the official letter from the War Department arrived some time later, it had with it the telltale Gold Star awarded every family who lost a loved one in World War I. Gold Stars hung in windows throughout the country and even in their own neighborhood, but the keepsake didn't lessen the pain or sense of loss. Sherman later referred to his eldest brother's death as one of the "first sad days of our existence." [^28] It was a traumatic time that left a permanent mark on eight-year-old Gordon. The experience was something he would not forget.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Interview with Ramona Hinckley Sullivan, 5 June 1989.
[^2] Salt Lake Tribune, 27 June 1923, p. 1.
[^3] See Deseret News, 21 May 1927; also Salt Lake Tribune, 21 May 1927.
[^4] See Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History, pp. 432-33. Bryant S. Hinckley was set apart as president of the Liberty Stake by President Rudger Clawson of the Quorum of the Twelve on Thursday, May 18, 1925.
[^5] Alonzo A. Hinckley to Bryant S. Hinckley, 27 December 1932.
[^6] Bryant S. Hinckley, "The Essentials of a Sound Religion," Liahona: The Elders' Journal, vol. 34, no. 3 (14 July 1936), p. 1055.
[^7] "Hinckley Family Herald," 25 December 1939, p. 1, privately published and issued newspaper.
[^8] Who Built America? Working People & the Nation's Economy, Politics, Culture & Society (New York: Pantheon Books, 1992), p. 317.
[^9] See Who Built America? p. 319.
[^10] Interview with GBH, 16 November 1994.
[^11] "Autobiography of Bryant Stringham Hinckley," p. 35.
[^12] See Catalogue of the University of Utah (Salt Lake City: University of Utah, 1928), p. 44.
[^13] "Gordon B. Hinckley: Man of Integrity, 15th President of the Church," transcript of video production, 1995.
[^14] Interview with GBH, 16 November 1994.
[^15] Interview with GBH, 16 November 1994.
[^16] Adapted from "'God Hath Not Given Us the Spirit of Fear,'" Ensign, October 1984, pp. 4-5; originally delivered 5 November 1983 at University of Utah Institute.
[^17] Wendell J. Ashton, "Gordon B. Hinckley of the Quorum of the Twelve," Improvement Era, December 1961, pp. 980-82.
[^18] See Ada B. Hinckley, "The Gold Star Pilgrimage," Improvement Era, December 1930, pp. 73-75.
[^19] Ada B. Hinckley to Bryant S. Hinckley, 19 July 1930.
[^20] Ada Bitner Hinckley Journal, 12 August 1930.
[^21] Ada B. Hinckley to Bryant S. Hinckley, 1 August 1930.
[^22] Ada B. Hinckley to Bryant S. Hinckley, 4 August 1930.
[^23] "Remembrances of Ruth Hinckley Willes," unpublished notes in possession of family, 1940.
[^24] Bryant S. Hinckley to Children, 4 November 1930.
[^25] "Story of Ada Bitner Hinckley," p. 75.
[^26] "Some Lessons I Learned As a Boy," p. 54.
[^27] Gordon B. Hinckley, The Wondrous Power of a Mother (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989), p. 1.
[^28] GBH to Bryant S. Hinckley, 25 December 1933.
