Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Four

A Boy Becomes a Young Man

Life was good for a teenage boy living in Salt Lake City in the 1920s. Though Gordon had chores and other responsibilities, both on the farm and in the big house downtown, pressures were few and opportunities plentiful.

He may have balked at going to first grade, and he had been less than enthusiastic about most of grade school and junior high, but when Gordon entered LDS High School, his attitude about education changed dramatically. There was great morale and rapport among the student body—a "tremendous spirit," as he called it—and once he began to identify his interests and talents, learning took on new appeal.

Even as a teenager Gordon had an apparent flair for language. His appetite for literature developed naturally, and it was not uncommon to find him at the large table in the library, digesting another book. Not all of his natural talents were cerebral, however, for he also had excellent mechanical instincts. He loved to tinker with almost anything. When the gramophone broke, he could always get it playing again. Asa Kienke, his high school shop teacher, instilled in him a love for sharp tools and sweet-smelling wood. When Gordon was twelve, Bryant gave him and Sherman a set of tools, and together the boys built and carved a variety of creations: doll furniture for their sisters, household items for Ada, and other "inventions." Gordon took a drafting class in junior high and found that he enjoyed sketching cars and houses, which he drew to scale with every detail in place. He worked for hours on the Model T, taking it out for road tests and then tinkering some more.

As with most teenagers, what went on outside the home became increasingly important to Gordon. The Liberty Stake First Ward provided a gathering place for neighborhood youth. Roadshows, plays, speech contests, dances, and an almost endless array of other activities provided them with opportunities to spend time together while also staying involved in the Church. The ward was the place to be.

Across the street from the Hinckleys lived the family of Georgetta and LeRoy Pay, whose daughter Marjorie first caught Gordon's eye when, as a girl in pigtails, she gave a reading at a ward social. He noticed her dark, naturally curly hair and big brown eyes, but he also observed how talented she was in front of an audience. Gordon's sister Ramona later said: "Marge was polished and impressive, even as a young girl, in giving readings and performances in our ward. All the other kids would just stand up and mumble through something, but Marjorie was downright professional." [^1]

Many families in the ward were large and struggled to make ends meet. But most were honest, God-fearing people who owned their homes and were trying to rear responsible children. Outside distractions were few, though Gordon was fascinated when the family acquired its first crystal-set radio with earphones. The twelve-year-old enjoyed listening to the KZN Deseret News radio station, the forerunner of KSL.

Other things also captured the attention of a teenage boy. When President Warren G. Harding visited Salt Lake City in June 1923, the city turned out en masse to honor the chief executive. With hundreds of other children and youth, Gordon and his siblings lined the streets of Salt Lake City to wave flags as the president's motorcade drove by. For his part, the president was impressed with what he found in Utah: "I have found a new slogan in your wonderful country, which I am delighted to adopt, namely, the one which refers to 'Utah's best crop.' I do not know when I have seen so many happy, smiling, sturdy children in so short a period of travel. A thousand delights have come to us in getting more intimately acquainted with your wonderful country . . . but I love, above all else, the boyhood and girlhood of marvelous Utah." [^2]

Perhaps no event in the 1920s was more exciting for a teenage boy, however, than Charles Lindbergh's solo New-York-to-Paris nonstop flight in his single-engine plane, The Spirit of St. Louis. Newsboys ran through the streets shouting "Extra!" as they peddled special editions of the paper. Lindbergh instantly became a hero larger than life, someone who had taken on the impossible and succeeded. Just a month from turning seventeen, Gordon was caught up in the exhilaration of Lindbergh's triumph and stirred by the realization that nothing in this day and age was impossible. The world was waiting to be conquered. [^3]

There was always an awareness in the Hinckley home of what was going on in the world around them, but the Church came first. Ada served in various auxiliary presidencies on both ward and stake levels, and Bryant served as second counselor in the stake presidency from 1907 to 1919 and then as first counselor until 1925. That year he was named president of the Liberty Stake—the largest stake in the Church, with some fifteen thousand members living within its boundaries. He would serve in this capacity until 1936. [^4]

By virtue of the fact that he led the largest stake in the Church, and one that was located only a few blocks from Church headquarters, Bryant Hinckley's influence extended beyond the boundaries of his stake. He was a prolific author and an eloquent speaker who had the reputation of giving the best two-and-a-half-minute talks in the Church; he even spoke in general conference on occasion. Bryant felt passionately about the sacrifices and contributions of his forebears, and he wrote widely on Restoration and pioneer themes and published numerous ar-ticles about Church leaders. At one time he undertook a series of short biographies of members of the Quorum of the Twelve, published in the Improvement Era. For many years it was more common than not to see his byline in the Era, the Instructor, and the Millennial Star. In several books, hundreds of pamphlets, talks, and articles, and dozens of lesson manuals for Sunday School, MIA, and priesthood courses of study, he bore testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Bryant's name became a household word in Salt Lake City, where he regularly spoke to a wide listening audience on a Church radio series broadcast over KSL. His brother Alonzo, who was later called to the Quorum of the Twelve, wrote from the West Coast while serving as a mission president: "I receive many high compliments that I do not earn at all and they should in all righteousness be sent to you. I am often given credit for having delivered the series of sermons over the radio so I shine largely by borrowed light but I try faithfully to accord the glory and honor to whom it belongs." [^5]

Bryant's files bulged with letters as his voice and pen became well-known and highly respected. When he spoke, he painted with broad and often poetic strokes a vision of what could be. Part of his appeal was no doubt his practical approach to the gospel: "What Is Religion?" he posed in one article. "We like to think of religion in terms of fine living, not as doctrine in cold storage. Religion can have very little significance when removed from life. In other words, a man's religion isn't worth much and it will never save him, if it does not carry over into the details of his daily life." [^6]

Bryant's themes were not lost on Gordon, who absorbed what his father had to say. Though Bryant sermonized from the pulpit, there was very little preaching around the house. But he was a storyteller and an avid reader of biography and history, and he had a knack for extracting inspiring examples from the lives of those he studied and referring to them when occasion warranted. His subjects ranged from faithful forebears and Church members to heroes and heroines through the ages whose lives were worthy of emulation. Abraham Lincoln was a hero to him, as were George Washington and others of the Founding Fathers whose personal sacrifice had brought forth a land where people were free to embrace their own convictions. Bryant believed that one should expect the best in others, that there was decency and goodness in the common man and nobility in the working class. He explained to his posterity on one occasion: "There is no royalty like the royalty of high endeavor. We do not belong to a family of geniuses. We cannot depend upon our good looks or our native brilliance of mind to carry us forward. Each of us must pay the price of hard work if we achieve. We belong to the working class—a distinction. Only workers are found among the chosen people. Honesty, industry, and common sense make a good combination." [^7]

If it was somehow noble to be among the working class, in the late twenties and early thirties it was also tremendously challenging. Though Herbert Hoover told the American people, as he accepted the Republican nomination for president in 1928, that "we in America today are nearer to the final triumph over poverty than ever before in the history of any land," [^8] in reality the society built upon the veneer of post-World War I prosperity was on the verge of economic collapse. On October 24, 1929, the stock market crashed, and by year's end some fourteen billion dollars of personal wealth had vanished.

Though a relative few were directly affected by the crash itself, a severe and sustained economic slump followed the Wall Street catastrophe. By December 1929 the number of unemployed workers in the United States leaped from half a million to more than four million, and by the spring of 1933 nearly one of every three wage earners was out of work, or nearly fifteen million people. Soup kitchens, bread lines, and Hoovervilles where the homeless lived in makeshift quarters sprang up in big cities around the country; so many men sold apples on street corners that the Bureau of the Census classified them as employed. As weeks and then months rolled by without much improvement, and it became clear that the economic situation was more than a temporary downturn, the emotional and social climate suffered as well. [^9]

Conditions in Salt Lake City were no different. The Depres-sion affected everybody, and its impact was quickly felt. As a stake president, Bryant Hinckley faced the challenge of not only caring for his own family but helping those within his stewardship as well, for the crisis cut a wide swath through the spiritual, temporal, and emotional well-being of his people. Men with good jobs suddenly found themselves out of work. Blue- and white-collar workers alike went from odd job to odd job. One family in the neighborhood lost their home because they could no longer meet the payment of eight dollars a month. Decades later, Gordon recalled: "Those were tough, tough, tough days. No one who didn't go through them knows how difficult they were." [^10]

Somehow the Deseret Gym stayed open, though not without a struggle. For an extended period Bryant received only a portion of his $3,000 annual salary, dividing up the remainder among employees who needed it to live on. [^11] He and Ada repaired, mended, refurbished, or simply went without. But there was always food on the table, and the family's clothing was clean and pressed, if not always fashionable. Somehow Bryant managed to pay the taxes on the property he had accumulated.

Gordon graduated from LDS High School in 1928 and enrolled in the University of Utah that fall, just a year before the onset of the Depression. His good friend, and the smallest young man in his graduating class, G. Homer Durham, wrote in his yearbook: "I'll grow one of these days. Remember, you were my size in the eighth grade." Though Gordon was never overpowering in size, there were other ways in which he comfortably exerted himself. His intellect and mental acumen were keen, and, as he intended to prepare himself to earn a respectable living, education loomed large in his future. He expected to work, and work hard—but he wanted to labor at something he enjoyed and through which he could make a contribution. He had once entertained thoughts of being an architect, but as college approached he decided to pursue a different course.

When he went to register at the University of Utah, he found to his chagrin that all sections of freshman English were filled. Then the English department added another section to accommodate the latecomers and brought in three older professors, each an accomplished educator, to rotate teaching the class. Gordon was a beneficiary of this change, for from George Marshall, regarded as the most competent grammarian in the state, he learned the intricacies of grammar. Marshall was a stickler, and Gordon took naturally to his tutoring, as it proved an extension of his mother's insistence that her children speak with precision.

Louis Zucker was another of Gordon's instructors. A bright man from the East, he was ruthless in his critiques of writing, but his classes were stimulating and motivating. Gordon progressed noticeably under his tutelage, and in return Zucker took an interest in him. Other courses were equally compelling and rigorous: classes in Milton and Longfellow, Emerson and Carlyle, Shakespeare, and other European literature from Chaucer to modern writers. He also pursued a minor in Latin and Greek and read the Iliad and the Odyssey as well as some of the New Testament in Greek. He took courses in classical languages, anthropology, economics, sociology, and geology. His was a liberal arts education that provided a well-rounded background.

During these days of the Depression it was not easy to stay in school. Tuition for the School of Arts and Sciences was nineteen dollars a quarter, [^12] a sum that was hard to come by. A bowl of boiled wheat with figs, topped with sugar and cream, could be had for a dime at the campus cafeteria, and that dish was a staple for Gordon. Textbooks were expensive, and when possible he did without, though he purchased his Shakespeare text and hung on to it throughout his life. He worked his way through college, paying all of his own tuition and fees, by handling routine maintenance at the Deseret Gym.

During his four years of study, he acquired an enviable familiarity with the great writers of English literature, and he could converse intelligently about them and quote familiar passages at will. As he progressed in his undergraduate studies, Gordon decided he would work toward studying journalism in graduate school, and he began to save money for that purpose.

Few people came through the Depression unscathed. It was a dark era, and many people became pessimistic and cynical as they struggled to survive. Traditional standards and values were questioned by even the faithful, and the political and social air reeked with insecurity and doubt. For many, life was a grim exercise in endurance.

As Gordon worked his way through the university and made the transition from dependence upon his parents to personal responsibility, he, like many of his peers, began to question assumptions about life, the world, and even the Church. His concerns were compounded by the cynicism of the times. "Only those who lived through that era could really ever understand the depth of the economic catastrophe that hit the nation," he later explained. "It was a time of terrible discouragement, and it was felt strongly on campus. I felt some of it myself. I began to question some things, including perhaps in a slight measure the faith of my parents. That is not unusual for university students, but the atmosphere was particularly acute at that time." [^13]

Fortunately, he was able to discuss some of his concerns with his father, and together they explored the questions he raised: the fallibility of the Brethren, why difficult things happen to people who are living the gospel, why God allows some of His children to suffer, and so on. The environment of faith that permeated Gordon's home was vital during this period of searching, as he later explained: "My father and mother were absolutely solid in their faith. They didn't try to push the gospel down my throat or compel me to participate, but they didn't back away from expressing their feelings either. My father was wise and judicious and was not dogmatic. He had taught university students and appreciated young people along with their points of view and difficulties. He had a tolerant, understanding attitude and was willing to talk about anything I had on my mind." [^14]

Underneath Gordon's questions and critical attitude lay a thread of faith that had been long in the weaving. Little by little, despite his questions and doubts, he realized that he had a testimony he could not deny. And though he began to understand that there wasn't always a clear-cut or easy answer for every difficult question, he also found that his faith in God transcended his doubts. Since that evening many years earlier when he had attended his first stake priesthood meeting, he had known that Joseph Smith was a prophet: "The testimony which had come to me as a boy remained with me and became as a bulwark to which I could cling during those very difficult years," he said. [^15]

Gordon subsequently reflected on the key elements that pulled him through that confusing era: "There was for me an underlying foundation of love that came from great parents and a good family, a wonderful bishop, devoted and faithful teachers, and the scriptures to read and ponder. Although in my youth I had trouble understanding many things, there was in my heart something of a love for God and his great work that carried me above any doubts and fears. I loved the Lord and I loved good and honorable friends. From such love I drew great strength." [^16]

As he was searching for truth, Gordon became well versed in the gospel, and his talent as a communicator gained him a reputation as an excellent speaker. On one occasion U.S. Senator Reed Smoot was scheduled to speak at sacrament meeting in the First Ward. When an unexpected problem took the senator away, Bishop Duncan improvised by asking Gordon and his home teaching companion, Bob Sonntag—both of whom were just twenty years old—to fill in. Gordon had to take his watering turn at the farm that afternoon but made it back to the meetinghouse in time to be on the stand with his friend as an overflow crowd gathered, expecting to hear a message from Senator Smoot. Although the audience members were no doubt initially disappointed to find the senator replaced by two young men, they apparently were not unhappy with the outcome. Said Bob Sonntag, "When Gordy Hinckley finished speaking, people had forgotten all about Senator Smoot's absence. The boy really stirred them." [^17]

As troubling as his young adult years had been, there were other challenges that taxed Gordon's faith and tested his emotional stamina even further. One day Sherman was working alongside his father in the orchard when Bryant suddenly broke down and began to cry. Sherman, who wasn't quite sixteen, was unnerved. He had never seen such an outburst from his father, who was nearly always the picture of deportment and good cheer. "Your mother has cancer," Bryant finally admitted. A small lump in Ada's left breast had been diagnosed as malignant; her physician subsequently performed a radical mastectomy and pronounced her chances for survival good. For a couple of years, she got along well; though the threat of cancer lurked in the perimeter, there was reason to believe that she had beaten the disease. But it was not to be. In March 1930 Ada accompanied Bryant on a trip to the East Coast, and by the time they returned her left arm was swollen and she was in considerable pain. The doctor's diagnosis was grim: the cancer had returned.

Ada immediately began taking radium treatments, which made her violently ill. In the evenings she and Bryant would sit on a bench outside the farmhouse, and Gordon couldn't bear to watch them together. Even worse, the fear of what lay ahead was suffocating. On the one hand, he tried desperately to exercise faith in the Lord and to plead for his mother's healing; on the other, it was hard not to fear the worst. For the Hinckleys, summer and fall that year were clouded with anxiety and apprehension.

Despite Ada's rapidly declining health and the unspoken reality that she probably had but a short time to live, she insisted on accompanying her daughter-in-law Beulah on a Gold Star Pilgrimage—an all-expenses-paid expedition for the mothers and widows of servicemen who had lost their lives in World War I—to Europe to visit Stanford's grave in July. Bryant was apprehensive about letting his wife go without him, but Ada insisted; she and Beulah joined thirteen other women from Utah on the trip. [^18]

Frail health notwithstanding, Ada enjoyed the experience immensely. Her letters home assured Bryant that her sense of humor and optimistic spirit hadn't been undermined by the disease that ravaged her body. From the train en route to New York City, she described the first leg of the journey: "Most of the women are much older than I, the eldest being 77, and some have never ridden on a train before. . . . I have laughed myself sick over their experiences. . . . woman didn't know how to turn off her light. She pushed every hole, screw, and button but the right one and finally left the light burning all night. . . . Then her daughters had insisted on her getting a new Spirella corset. . . . This new corset reaches from her armpits down below her thighs. She went through all kinds of contortions trying to get it off and finally gave up and slept in it all night. So with the light and the corset, she feels a wreck this morning. I laughed myself sick while she was telling it. . . . But they are all wonderful women, all battle-scarred, but cheerful and philosophical and are good sports." [^19]

The group sailed on the S.S. George Washington from Hoboken, New Jersey, and Ada took in everything her stamina would allow. She befriended missionaries on board, made new friends, and once in Europe made copious notes about what she saw—Versailles with its beautiful gardens, the Louvre and Notre Dame, and other exotic historical sites. The sweetest experiences, however, were her visits to the American Military Cemetery at Suresnes outside of Paris, where Stanford was buried. The cemetery was situated on a serene and gentle slope near the Seine on Mount Valerian, a famous French shrine. On the day of her last visit there she recorded in her journal: "Visited for the last time Suresnes cemetery. Came away with the satisfied feeling that the American dead could not be better cared for, and more beautiful memorial could not be built. The government is sparing no effort in an attempt to compensate for the terrible but seemingly unavoidable loss of life in the world war." [^20]

The trip would have been better only if Bryant had been with her, and she repeatedly lamented that she longed to have him there. In one letter she yearned, "How I wish and wish you were with me," and two days later from Paris she wrote, "We are in one of the best hotels in Paris and are being treated royally, but every time I go anyplace I wish you were with me." [^21]

It wasn't until she had been gone nearly two weeks that Ada mentioned her health: "I'm feeling pretty well. . . . Don't forget to pray for me. I need faith and prayer more than anything else in the world. I haven't told a soul, not even Beulah, that I'm not well. I don't want any of them to know. I will get along better if they don't know, but I have to appeal to the Lord often. After all He is the only one who can help me and I'm sure He will not forsake me at this time." [^22]

But when Ada stepped off the train in Salt Lake City in late August, one look told Bryant that his wife's condition had deteriorated. Ruth later recorded her memories of that time: "Immediately after return she started going downhill fast. She suffered such excruciating pain constantly that it was almost too pitiful to bear. But I have never witnessed such an uncomplaining little soldier. I had graduated from high school and in the fall offered to stay home and care for her, but she would have none of it." [^23] Despite her mother's protests, Ruth opted to attend the university only half days and did her best to keep up the large house and care for Ada in the afternoons.

Bryant, who was desperate to find something that would cure his wife or at least delay her decline, learned of two noted physicians in Los Angeles who had developed a possible cancer cure. In early October, he sent Ada and her sister Mary to California so Ada could receive the Coffey-Humber treatment. Although the potent drugs eased her pain, they did nothing to halt the progression of the disease. In early November, Mary sent word that Bryant should come to California immediately, and he left on the next train. Perhaps in an effort to prepare his children for what appeared imminent, he wrote home after arriving: "Mama seems a little weary, otherwise not much change this morning. We are hoping for an improvement but are reconciled to what ever may come. Thus far we have done all that we could do and we seem powerless. She is in the hands of the Lord. He can spare her life and raise her and if it is his will, she will live. If not, all will be well. There is a very tranquil and sweet influence here. . . . Mama is just as calm and patient as an angel can be. Go about and do your work and do what is right and all will be well with us." [^24]

To the end, Ada demonstrated the kind of faith that had characterized her life. She wanted to live but did not fear what lay beyond the veil. She was concerned for her children but was thankful that, thus far, they had been true to the gospel. Said her sister Ardella: "I did not think such courage possible. She looked out on eternity with trust and perfect faith. He who had taught her how to live surely taught her how to die." [^25]

On a beautiful Sunday morning, November 9, 1930, Ada Bitner Hinckley passed away. For Gordon and his brothers and sisters, time seemed to stop. Gordon had never felt such emptiness or hurt. He and his siblings went to the train depot to greet their father as he arrived home from California, but it seemed unbelievable—inconceivable—that the hearse parked near the station was waiting to take their mother's body to the mortuary. Gordon said later, "My brokenhearted father . . . stepped off the train and greeted his grief-stricken children. We walked solemnly down the station platform to the baggage car, where the casket was unloaded and taken by the mortician. We came to know even more we had] about the tenderness of our father's heart. . . . I also came to know something of death—the absolute devastation of children losing their mother—but also of peace without pain, and the certainty that death cannot be the end of the soul." [^26]

It was a somber, gray day, Thursday, the thirteenth of November, when Ada was laid to rest. Gordon said later: "We put on a front of bravery and fought back the tears. But inside, the wounds were deep and painful." [^27] For Bryant it was beyond comprehension to be living through this nightmare again. For his children the experience was devastating: some of them had now lost two mothers. Gordon was twenty years old; his youngest sister, Sylvia, ten. Regardless of age, they mourned the loss of the woman who had made their home such a place of warmth, good cheer, and security.

With Ada's death, Bryant once again faced the ominous responsibility of rearing a large family alone and of coping with the pain of separation from a woman he loved and cherished—this time after twenty-one years together. For Gordon, the first few months after his mother's death crept by in slow motion. Adjusting to her loss was more painful than he would have ever imagined. All the world looked gray, and it was hard to conceive of ever feeling carefree again. As Ada's oldest child, he had enjoyed a close, trusting relationship with his mother. She had nursed him through one childhood illness after another, and in many ways, he had become a reflection of her—a bright, artistic young man with a love for learning and a natural tendency to be both faithful and full of faith. He wished now that he had felt less awkward about telling his mother how much he loved her, yet such open expressions hadn't been their family's way. Now he and the rest of the family bore their grief in silence.

Ada's death punctuated the already gloomy era. Coping with the Depression was challenge enough—to somehow put on a happy face and salvage the upcoming Christmas seemed impossible. Three years later, on another Christmas, Gordon wrote his father and reflected on that holiday season: "I remember well that first Christmas without mother. I was as tall as you then, and we were both awkward in wrapping and setting out presents, weren't we? You smiled a Merry Christmas; we all tried to. But I thought I saw a tear behind that smile." [^28] Ruth was sixteen at the time, and she later confessed, "It was very difficult that year for anyone to take away the heartache." [^29]

As hard as it was to adjust to life without their sweetheart and mother, the Hinckleys pressed forward, taking one day at a time. For as long as he could remember, Gordon had heard his father say that things might not always go the way you wished, but the challenge was to move forward and never look back. "Never looking back" was a Hinckley family trait. With his mother's absence, however, Gordon occasionally found himself reflecting on the tremendous wealth of the home in which he had been nurtured—a wealth measured not in dollars but in love, support, and caring. "There was a residual that remained with us that gave us strength and guidance and discipline," he said later. "From Mother I learned so many things, including respect for womanhood, together with an appreciation for the tremendous strength which she carried within her, including a bright and happy zest for life." [^30]

As his mother's oldest child, Gordon felt responsible to help his brother and sisters adjust to their new circumstances, and he became a surrogate parent of sorts. For example, he set aside money from his graduate school savings to buy Ramona a dress for an important high school event. And when daily household chores went undone, he outlined a work schedule for his younger siblings and saw to it that the cleaning woman knew what tasks needed to be completed. [^31]

Perhaps Gordon assumed that life would go on as usual, with him shouldering some of the burden at home and helping shepherd his younger brothers and sisters along. So he wasn't prepared for the day, early in 1932, when Bryant called his children together and announced that he was going to marry again. His intended was May Green, the office manager at the Salt Lake Clinic. May was a woman of great capacity, a hard worker with an infectious sense of humor. But as far as Gordon was concerned, her virtues were irrelevant. He was determined to preserve his mother's memory and upset that his father was prepared to replace her.

When Bryant announced his intentions to his children, the resulting silence was deafening. He was so nervous that he shook visibly at the encounter. "In our wildest dreams," Ramona said, "I don't think we imagined Father would remarry. We just couldn't imagine him with anyone but Mother." [^32] A couple of nights later Bryant returned home late to find Gordon in the library studying for finals. Gordon was obviously still troubled, for when Bryant tried to initiate a conversation he made a remark that stirred up the issue again. Their discussion was becoming emotional when Bryant finally asked his son, "Do you want me to grow old alone? Do you want your sisters to feel responsible for taking care of me when I get to be an old man?" He reassured Gordon that he loved Ada dearly and that his feelings for her would never fade. But he also acknowledged how lonely his existence would be if he were forced to live the rest of his life in solitude. Father and son talked into the night, and Gordon's heart softened as he saw in a new light how devastating his mother's death had been for his father.

On February 22, 1932, Bryant married May, who, as a young woman, had been promised in her patriarchal blessing that she would marry and be a mother to many children. At first there were tensions and awkward moments between the children and their new stepmother. May didn't do things the way Ada had, and it was difficult for the children to see their father show affection to anyone other than their mother. But in time Aunt May—as the children called her—won a place in their hearts. From the outset she made it clear that she had no intention of trying to replace Ada, and that she wanted only to make her own place.

May was sensitive to the fact that her husband had been happily married twice before and that Christine's and Ada's children needed the assurance that their mothers had not been forgotten. For Christmas 1933 she gathered family photos and pasted into a scrapbook those of Bryant and the home where he was born. Then she arranged photos of each of the thirteen children and, for those who were married, of their spouses and children. Finally, she asked each child to write a letter to Bryant, to be added to the scrapbook. May completed the gift with a poem of her own composing:

It mars not the passing of present hours The recollection of fragrant flowers. So with the sentiment of companions dear, Who may have gone, but yet are near, I, too, add my sentiment of you, Expressing the love of the other two You're a sweetheart, a lover true. A kind and dutiful husband, too. From the bottom of our hearts, we say: We love you—Christine, Ada, and May. May Christmas 1933

In time, Gordon and his brothers and sisters grew to love the woman who so eagerly loved them. "We were not little children, but she took hold of family, not in any officious way," Gordon later said. "I don't know that it was easy for her to step into our family, but she did it well. We all respected her. We all loved her." [^33]

The younger girls in particular became attached to their stepmother, but May found ways to nurture the older children as well. "I remember a time when I was terribly discouraged, and I was brooding," Gordon reflected later. "I was sitting the library] reading, but not reading, just sympathizing with myself. She came in, and in a quiet, very understanding way talked to me. I don't know what the adversity was, but it didn't look to be much of an adversity after she had finished talking with me.

"She could pour oil on troubled waters," he continued. "There are little differences that occur in every family, in the very nature of family life, and she knew how to subdue those feelings. We're a strong-willed, outspoken family. I never heard her, in all my experience, give an unkind retort to anything that was said." [^34]

Despite the emotional interruptions occasioned by his mother's death and his father's subsequent remarriage, Gordon pressed toward graduation. In June 1932 he was awarded a bachelor of arts degree, with a major in English and a minor in ancient languages, from the University of Utah. Bryant was proud of his son's persistence, but Gordon couldn't help but imagine how delighted his mother would have been. He hoped she somehow knew. His graduation was an important milestone, even in an era when prospects for the future looked dim. Unemployment was still roughly 30 percent nationwide and higher than that in Utah.

Determined to further advance his education and to better prepare himself for his life's work, Gordon intended to enroll at the Columbia University School of Journalism in New York City, then considered perhaps the finest journalism school in the country. Years later he counseled: "Whatever you choose to do, train for it. Qualify yourselves. Take advantage of the experience and learning of those who have gone before you in whatever field you choose. Education is a shortcut to proficiency. It makes it possible to leapfrog over the mistakes of the past." [^35]

As it turned out, however, Gordon's preparation was to be more expansive and far different from what he had envisioned. On a Sunday afternoon not long before his twenty-third birthday, Gordon was invited to Bishop Duncan's home. The bishop got right to the point: Had he thought of serving a mission? He was shocked. In those days of depression, missionary service was the exception rather than the rule. The distressing financial picture had made the burden of supporting a missionary virtually impossible for most families; indeed, few missionaries were even being called. Nevertheless, as soon as his bishop raised the subject, he knew what his answer must be: he told Bishop Duncan he would go.

The reality of financing the mission loomed, however. Bryant assured his son they would find a way, and Sherman volunteered to help. Gordon planned to devote the modest savings he had accumulated for graduate school. Unfortunately, not long after he committed to go, the bank where he had established his savings account failed and he lost everything. But some time later the family discovered that for years Ada had nurtured a small savings account with the coins she received in change when buying groceries and had earmarked the fund for her sons' missionary service. Gordon was overwhelmed with his mother's years of quiet sacrifice and prescient foresight. Even after her death she continued to support and sustain him. More important was his mother's example of consecration, and he considered sacred the money he received from her savings.

In those days missionaries were asked where they would like to serve. French was the international diplomatic language, and with his interest in journalism in mind and some self-interest motivating his recommendation, Gordon suggested France. But it was not to be. When his call arrived, he learned that he was needed on the other side of the English Channel, in the heart of one of the most literary regions of the world. Elder Gordon B. Hinckley had been called to serve in the European Mission, headquartered in London, England.

Many years later a mature Gordon said: "Every child, with few possible exceptions, is the product of a home, be it good, bad, or indifferent. As children grow through the years, their lives, in large measure, become an extension and a reflection of family teaching." [^36] He himself was the product of a home filled with love and based on a carefully defined set of values and a general sense of well-being and optimism. Though as a boy and young man he had faced illness, disappointment, doubt, and heartache, he had also developed a reservoir of faith and a sense of family heritage that together formed a steady anchor. As his father later said to his posterity: "Remember you are not ordinary people. Whenever your names are mentioned I want to hear something good about you. Inheritance can't make you great, but it can always be a source of inspiration and encouragement." [^37]

It was a theme that was not lost on Gordon, who from the time of his youth had felt a responsibility and desire to live up to his heritage and to bring honor to his parents' name. Many years later, after he had become a father, grandfather, and great-grandfather himself, he reflected on his beginnings: "I have experienced my share of disappointments, of failures, of difficulties. But on balance, life has been very good. I have tried to live it with enthusiasm and appreciation. I have known much of happiness, oh, so very much. The root of it all, I believe, was planted in my childhood and nurtured in the home. . . . I cannot be grateful enough." [^38]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Ashton, "Gordon B. Hinckley of the Quorum of the Twelve," p. 906.
[^2] Interview with Marjorie P. Hinckley (hereinafter referred to as MPH in interviews and letters), 20 October 1994.
[^3] Quoted in Packer, "President Gordon B. Hinckley: First Counselor," p. 7.
[^4] See Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star, 13 July 1933.
[^5] See "Record of Missionary," Gordon B. Hinckley, LDS Church Archives.
[^6] Interview with GBH, 16 November 1994.
[^7] See James B. Allen, Ronald K. Esplin, and David J. Whittaker, Men with a Mission: The Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in the British Isles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992), pp. 28-36.
[^8] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "Taking the Gospel to Britain: A Declaration of Vision, Faith, Courage, and Truth," Ensign, July 1987, p. 7; also "A Declaration to the World," BYU Studies, Winter 1987, pp. 9-10; "Gordon B. Hinckley: Man of Integrity," video.
[^9] See Millennial Star, 26 October 1933.
[^10] GBH to Marjorie Pay, 30 January 1934.
[^11] Gordon B. Hinckley, "A Missionary Holiday," Millennial Star, 27 July 1933.
[^12] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Discover Yourself," Millennial Star, 14 September 1933.
[^13] GBH to Marjorie Pay, undated.
[^14] See "Elders' Labor Record of Liverpool Conference of the British Mission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," Gordon B. Hinckley, LDS Church Archives.
[^15] Thomas Gray, "Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard."
[^16] Interview with Robert Pickles, 28 January 1995.
[^17] Interview with Robert Pickles, 28 January 1995.
[^18] GBH to Marjorie Pay, 1 February 1934.
[^19] Millennial Star, 8 March 1934.
[^20] See "Elders' Labor Record of Liverpool Conference."
[^21] See GBH to Arthur C. Porter, 24 March 1938.
[^22] See Jeffrey R. Holland, "Stalwart and Brave He Stands," Ensign, June 1995, p. 8.
[^23] Interview with GBH, 7 December 1994.
[^24] British Mission History, May 1935, LDS Church Archives; also Millennial Star, 28 February 1935; 7 April 1935.
[^25] Millennial Star, 21 December 1933.
[^26] From "Andrea del Sarto"; as quoted in Gordon B. Hinckley, "The Sunday School as a Missionary," Ensign, August 1971, p. 30.
[^27] "Gordon B. Hinckley: Man of Integrity," video; see also "'If Ye Be Willing and Obedient,'" p. 125; Interview with GBH, 7 December 1994.
[^28] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "Reverence and Morality," Ensign, May 1987, p. 45.
[^29] See The Wondrous Power of a Mother, pp. 1-2.
[^30] GBH to Ruth Hinckley, 3 February 1934.
[^31] GBH to Ruth Hinckley, 9 November 1934.
[^32] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "Live the Gospel," Ensign, November 1984, p. 86.
[^33] Gordon B. Hinckley, "'Whosoever Will Save His Life,'" Ensign, August 1982, p. 5.
[^34] GBH to Bryant S. Hinckley, 25 December 1933.
[^35] GBH to Ruth Hinckley, 9 November 1934.
[^36] Millennial Star, 27 June 1935.
[^37] G. Homer Durham, address to Windsor Club, 27 December 1984.
[^38] Gordon B. Hinckley, "The Question of a Mission," Ensign, May 1986, p. 40.
