Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Five

A Mission and Beyond

The news that Gordon Hinckley had been called to the British Isles created quite a stir around the First Ward. Serving a mission was not even a topic of discussion in most LDS households. Missions cost money, and most families were doing well just to keep a roof over their heads. Few young men and women were both willing and able to accept a mission call. Gordon Hinckley was one of just 525 missionaries who would be sent to the thirty-one operating missions that year. To complicate matters, living in England was inordinately expensive, costing what would have been the equivalent of roughly $500 a month in 1990 dollars. [^1]

As of late Gordon and Marjorie Pay, the girl across the street, whom he had begun to court, had become increasingly interested in each other. She wanted him to serve a mission, so when the call was announced she was thrilled. But as the day neared for his entrance into the mission home, she began to sense how much she would miss this young man who had become her best friend and confidant. She would be nearly twenty-four years of age when he returned. Would she still be single? And how would he feel about her? There was no way of knowing what the days ahead would bring. She was certain of one thing, though: It would be hard to have him gone, but it was right for him to go.

On Sunday, June 11, 1933, a farewell testimonial was held in the First Ward for the departing Elder Hinckley, who then reported to the Mission Home, just north of the Beehive House on State Street in Salt Lake City. During his week there, he was set apart as a full-time missionary by Elder George Albert Smith, and he went through the Salt Lake Temple for the first time. He and his missionary colleagues also received instruction from various General Authorities, among them Elder David O. McKay, who asked each elder and sister to write an essay on what it meant to be a missionary. Elder Hinckley complied, and a couple of days later he was summoned to Elder McKay's office. When he presented himself before the apostle, he found his essay lying on the desk. Elder McKay complimented Gordon on both the style and the content of his writing and added that it was the best he had seen. He wondered if Gordon would mind if he quoted from it. Gordon was both surprised and pleased.

But as Elder Hinckley prepared to board the train at the Union Pacific Depot in Salt Lake City a few days later, he was less confident and even apprehensive about what lay ahead. His father, who must have anticipated his son's concerns, handed him a card on which he had written five words, the words of the Lord to Jairus when the ruler received news of his daughter's death: "Be not afraid, only believe" (Mark 5:36). Then with a quick but warm good-bye to family and friends, including Marjorie—who had come to see off her best friend with the understanding that there was no understanding between them—he was gone. "As anxious as I was for him to serve a mission," Marjorie said later, "I will never forget the feeling of emptiness and loneliness I felt when that train pulled out of the station." [^2]

Gordon and his traveling companions purchased coach seats on a train headed east to Chicago, where the 1933 World's Fair was under way. Bryant had obtained permission for his son to spend one night with an aunt living there and to accompany her to the fair, so he separated himself from the other missionaries, promising to meet them in New York City the next day.

In the meantime, he was fascinated with both Chicago, the largest city he had ever seen, and the Chicago World's Fair, which despite being held during the Depression drew more than thirty-eight million people with its upbeat theme, "A Century of Progress." The fair intrigued Elder Hinckley, who was taken with the exposition's futuristic aspects and the imaginative creations on display. He also enjoyed the Church's exhibit. The Windy City lived up to its name, though; while there he got a cinder in his eye that caused so much swelling he could barely see. The ailment was still causing him difficulty when he caught the train to New York City and with his two traveling companions—Elder Hoggan and Sister Cullimore—boarded the SS Manhattan for the weeklong ocean crossing to England.

It was all a little overwhelming for Elder Hinckley, who celebrated his twenty-third birthday on the high seas. How quickly life could change! Just weeks earlier he had been focused on the Columbia School of Journalism; now here he was in the middle of the Atlantic on his way to a foreign country. There would be no language barrier, but he imagined that dealing with the British would be far different from anything he had experienced in the Liberty Stake. For a young man who thought of himself as backward, a self-impression that stemmed from his inherent shyness, the prospects of what lay ahead were intimidating. He couldn't quite imagine approaching a stranger and striking up a conversation about the gospel.

While on board ship, Elder Hinckley pulled out the patriarchal blessing he had received at age eleven from patriarch Thomas E. Callister. He couldn't remember having read it since the day the patriarch had come to the Hinckley home and pronounced blessings upon him and several of his brothers and sisters, but now he was interested in reviewing those promises made a dozen years earlier. "Thou shalt grow to the full stature of manhood and shall become a mighty and valiant leader in the midst of Israel," the patriarch had promised. "The Holy Priest-hood shall be thine to enjoy and thou shalt minister in the midst of Israel as only those can who are called of God. Thou shalt ever be a messenger of peace; the nations of the earth shall hear thy voice and be brought to a knowledge of the truth by the wonderful testimony which thou shalt bear." [^3] Perhaps, he thought, this mission to England would fulfill at least one part of his blessing—that he would bear testimony to the nations (England and the United States being a plurality) of the earth.

After nearly a week at sea, the SS Manhattan docked at midnight in a port at Cobh, near Cork, Ireland. As Elder Hinckley looked down from the ship's deck, he heard an Irish tenor singing a penetrating rendition of "Danny Boy," and it would forever after be one of his favorite songs. The stop in Ireland was brief, however, with the ship then sailing on to Plymouth, England, where it docked on Tuesday, June 27, 1933. [^4] When no one was there to meet them, Elder Hinckley and his two traveling companions took the boat train from Plymouth to London, arriving at Paddington Station around midnight. Again, no one met them, and they found themselves alone in the middle of the night in one of the world's largest cities. With only their resourcefulness to sustain them, they secured rooms at the nearby railway hotel and stayed overnight. The next morning, with the mission address in hand—33 Tavistock Square, London WC1—they headed out. Later in his mission, after Elder Hinckley had lived in London for nearly nineteen months, he couldn't imagine how they had found their way around the intimidating English metropolis that first day alone.

Despite their inhospitable introduction to England and its capital city, the trio arrived at the mission home unscathed. Elder Hinckley had been called to serve in the European Mission, then under the direction of President John A. Widtsoe, but President Widtsoe was traveling on the Continent and he had asked British Mission President James H. Douglas to put the new elder to work. The five-foot-ten missionary who arrived in England weighing a scant 143 pounds had a brief interview with President Douglas and then headed to the Euston train station, having been assigned to labor in the Liverpool Conference, headquartered in Preston, Lancashire, some two hundred miles north. The two companions with whom he had traveled to England stayed behind in London. [^5]

Elder Hinckley was on his own, and as he boarded the train for Preston and then watched from the window as London slowly faded from view, he felt terribly alone. Everything was new and unfamiliar. His brief reception at the mission home had not been encouraging or warm. It was hard not to wonder what he had gotten himself into.

Elder Hinckley had been in England less than forty-eight hours when, holding an old, grained-leather satchel in one hand and a briefcase in the other, he stepped onto the flagstone platform of Preston Station in the late afternoon of June 29 and spotted a young American waiting for him. Elder Kent S. Bramwell, a bright and enthusiastic district president from Ogden, Utah, vigorously shook his hand and then led the way to their "digs" at 15 Wadham Road.

Elder Bramwell had no intention of breaking his new companion in gradually, and as they walked home he announced that they were set to hold a street meeting that night at the marketplace in the public square. The thought of preaching to uninterested passersby was daunting, and Elder Hinckley responded immediately, "You've got the wrong man to go with you." But Elder Bramwell was undeterred, and a few hours later the two missionaries walked to the market and began to sing. Gradually a crowd gathered, and both missionaries taught and bore testimony. "I was terrified," Elder Hinckley later admitted. "I stepped up onto that little stand, looked at that crowd of people, and wondered what I was doing there. They were dreadfully poor and looked to have absolutely no interest in religion." [^6]

The worldwide depression had hit Lancashire with terrible force. Men who wore no shirts because they couldn't afford them improvised by wearing small dickeys beneath any old jacket they could get their hands on. Their dress and grooming reflected the times in which they lived, and the crowd looked menacing that first night as Gordon peered into their faces. Though all spoke the same language, Gordon was a Westerner from the United States and the people of Preston spoke in a thick Lancashire brogue. In time, as he saw beneath the surface of poverty and came to understand the goodness of the English people, he learned to focus on their similarities rather than their differences. But his missionary initiation was intimidating.

In the providence of the Lord, Gordon had been sent to the area where Heber C. Kimball and his associates of the Twelve had baptized thousands of new members nearly a century earlier. That first night in the town square—or flag market, as the local people called it—Gordon had his introduction to a place laden with history. In Preston Elder Kimball and Brigham Young had first preached the doctrines of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ in the British Isles. Every President of the Church from Brigham Young to Heber J. Grant had labored in England.

In time, Gordon became intimately acquainted with the city that had proved so fertile a field for proselytizing in the nineteenth century. He and his companion often walked the street where Elder Kimball and his colleagues had, their first day in Preston, come upon a large flag bearing the gilded motto "Truth Will Prevail," which they took as a sign that the Lord had them in his keeping. Elder Hinckley visited the lodging house on Saint Wilfred Street where Heber C. Kimball had had a terrifying experience with evil spirits, and passed frequently by the musty, old Vauxhall Chapel where by invitation the early missionaries had preached to a packed house the day after they arrived in Preston. The River Ribble with its tram bridge, where Elder Kimball performed the first baptisms in the area, the Cock Pit and Temperance Hall, and the obelisk in the marketplace all became familiar landmarks. Preston was rich in Church history, and Gordon reveled in the sense of time and place the area gave him. [^7]

Nonetheless, the social and religious climate Gordon Hinckley found in Preston differed significantly from that which he had known at home. Homes were smaller than in Salt Lake City, and most were warmed by little fireplaces, sometimes four or five to a house. A common joke among missionaries was that they got warm on one side, then turned and got warm on the other. Many people were on the dole, and even those who weren't didn't have much in the way of temporal goods. The Britishers Elder Hinckley came to know, however, were a high-principled lot, a strong-minded, plainspoken, and straight-forward people who knew how to use the King's English properly and who were, by and large, honest men and women.

Religion was a difficult subject to address, however. Many refused to back away from a fundamental question: If there were a God, why would he permit so much suffering? Despite being among the proverbial salt of the earth, the residents of Preston were largely uninterested in and even prejudiced against what they considered to be an upstart American religion. To complicate matters, not long before Elder Hinckley's arrival two missionaries had violated mission rules and been sent home. Their indiscretions had been noised about, giving ammunition to those who claimed that Mormons could not be trusted. It had been little more than a decade since the movie Trapped by the Mormons, inspired by Winnifred Graham's inflammatory book of the same title, had inspired widespread anti-Mormon rhetoric throughout the British Isles. Sentiment against the Church, initiated to some degree by the clergy and fostered by the English press, had infected the whole of Britain.

To make matters worse, Elder Hinckley was not well. The lush hillsides and meadows of Lancashire were a more vibrant shade of green than he had ever seen in Utah. Allergic to the grass pollen abundant in the area, Gordon was miserable from the moment he stepped off the train. "In England the grass pollinates and turns to seed in late June and early July, which is exactly when I arrived in Preston," he later remembered. "The day I arrived there I started crying"—tears of hay fever, not homesickness, though his stamina, energy, and frame of mind were at an all-time low. Gordon's outlook might have been brighter had his friend Homer Durham, who was also serving in the Liverpool Conference when he arrived, remained there. But on July 12 Homer was transferred to the British Mission office in London to act as president of the mission YMMIA.

After he had taken as much as he felt he could, Elder Hinckley wrote his father that he wasn't getting anywhere with missionary work, and that he couldn't see the point in wasting his time and his father's money. Responding as both father and stake president, Bryant Hinckley sent a reply that was brief and to the point: "Dear Gordon, I have your recent letter. I have only one suggestion: forget yourself and go to work."

Earlier that day he and his companion had studied the promise recorded in the Gospels: "For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel's, the same shall save it" (Mark 8:35). That scripture, combined with his father's counsel, seared his soul. With the letter in hand, he went into his upstairs bedroom at 15 Wadham Road and got on his knees. As he poured out his heart to the Lord, he promised that he would try to forget himself and lose himself in the Lord's service. Many years later he indicated the significance of that series of events: "That July day in 1933 was my day of decision. A new light came into my life and a new joy into my heart. The fog of England seemed to lift, and I saw the sunlight. Everything good that has happened to me since then I can trace back to the decision I made that day in Preston." [^8]

The experience proved pivotal, for it was the beginning of a rich and wonderful, though difficult, mission. The routine of studying the gospel and bearing testimony on a regular basis, combined with the personal sacrifice inherent in missionary service, enhanced his convictions in a remarkable way. As time passed, he came to better appreciate what the Brethren who had proselytized there a century earlier had accomplished—under much more difficult circumstances than he now faced. Their mission and sense of vision evoked within him a respect that bordered on awe. Despite their extreme poverty, they had come to England and converted a large congregation of Saints who subsequently infused the blood of Britain into the weakened body of the Church. As Gordon contemplated the faith and courage of Elder Heber C. Kimball and his Brethren, his own faith and spiritual stamina increased.

It was an interesting transition for a young man from Utah to adjust to Church units that were small and sparsely staffed. The branch in Preston met in a shabby, rented hall at 96 Friargate, one flight up from a storefront. The drab brown wallpaper designed in artificial wood grain made the room feel dark. Hanging at the front of the room were dust-covered pictures of the Prophet Joseph Smith and the Savior. Two unshaded bulbs, their cords wound around nails to hold them in place, provided light. The floor was uneven, and chairs were scattered about the room. The branch president tried to keep the few local members active and involved, but with only a small number to draw from, their meetings left something to be desired.

Changing the complexion of the branch was not easy, as the missionary harvest wasn't particularly fruitful. In fall meetings of the Liverpool Conference, held October 1, 1933, in Preston's Prince's Theater (ironically, the purveyor of many anti-Mormon movies), the statistical report recorded by Elder Hinckley indicated that the district included nine branches with a total membership of 765. Since the last conference, held six months earlier, the four missionaries of the district had distributed 13,030 tracts but only nineteen copies of the Book of Mormon. There was no mention of baptisms. [^9]

For the most part, the Church throughout England was composed of small, struggling branches. Local leadership was weak, and missionaries often presided over branches and districts. In a descriptive essay that he enclosed in a letter to Marjorie, Elder Hinckley lamented the spiritual malaise of the people: "Old Preston . . . how intimately I learned to know you ere I left you. Cobbled Fishergate lined with shops where the elite buy; Church street whose beginning is marked by the high steeple of the old grey parish church; . . . the old-world flavor of market day when anything from a second hand book on etiquette to a dented teething ring for the baby can be bought; the lazy Ribble that creeps along its tortuous bed to the sea; the flag market where we held our open-air meetings on the same spot from which Brigham Young and other early Saints first expounded the doctrines in England. . . . When will you put away that unwarranted pride, look at yourself for what you are, and accept a word of light that a couple of young fellows are feebly preaching?" [^10]

Missionary work had benefits beyond conversions, however. Gordon's testimony and understanding of the gospel grew steadily as he and his companion studied together each morning. Favorite texts were the Book of Mormon and the Gospel of John.

In the mission field Elder Hinckley's literary gifts flourished. He had been in England just a month when his first article in the Millennial Star was published. "A Missionary Holiday" recounted the experience he and other missionaries had on July 4 when they visited the beautiful Lake District north of Preston and slept out on a grassy meadow that rose from Lake Windermere and Lake Grasmere. "What a picture! A smooth, glistening pearl set in the quiet of rolling green and wooded hills, the sun of a new day streaking across the waters," he wrote by way of description. [^11] In the September 14, 1933, issue of the Star, his article expounding on the virtues of the MIA also revealed his phi-losophy about the effect of the gospel in a person's life: "'Mormonism' is a religion of refinement. It reasons that every man has within him God-possibilities, that salvation is essentially development. It argues that every man is potentially a great man. And through an inspired system, it offers the most extensive facilities in all the world for every man to discover himself and his possibilities, to so live that he can stand on the summit of his life and look back upon a trail of accomplishment and not a slough of wasted energies. Very few at most, and perhaps none of us will ever carve immortal names in the roll call of the great of the earth. Maybe none of us will achieve outside the narrow pale of our immediate surroundings. But this much is certain: happy will be the man or woman who has tapped some hidden resource and given it voice. To such a character will come the sweet satisfying feeling of strengthening powers, of having done something that has made life a little nobler. God has generously blessed us all with talent. . . . Catch the silent thrill of growth!" [^12]

Even Gordon's letters showed his journalistic prowess. His were not typical recitations of the week's events. In one letter to Marjorie he included a short essay that described an experience he had on a bus:

"You're a lot of infamous rats," were the final words of that fat, neatly dressed office manager as he moved toward the door of the bus, throwing the torn bits of my card out of the window without ever reading it.

At the next stop three or four dirty, raggedly clothed colliers boarded the bus. One of these men sat beside me. His red lips and the white of his eyes stood ghostly against the sooty background of his face. His clothing smelled of the damp, gritty dust of the mines. His back and shoulders were muscularly round and broad, his chest hollow. He seemed to whisper as he breathed.

Since small boyhood—all day in the mines, at night recuperating for another day in the mines. What did the heavens, the flowers, the gods mean to such a man? Edwin Markham's words came to my mind:

"Is this the thing the Lord God made and gave

To have dominion over sea and land;

To trace the stars and search the heavens for power;

To feel the passion of eternity?"

I made a try at conversation. "Been a hard day today?"

He turned quickly as if surprised to think that anyone should pay any attention to him. "Yes, we have to do our bit."

We chatted a little about his work. Then I introduced myself and handed him a tract.

"Ta," he said. "I can't read, but our Annie reads to us. Ta." The bus stopped. He nodded good-night, his tea bucket ringing as it hit the door frame. I heard his clogs clattering across the wet cobbles.

For the next five miles I was alone in the bus save for the conductor who was counting his tickets. Rain was beating against the window, and quietly I thought of two men I had met that day. [^13]

After having such experiences for four months in Preston, Elder Hinckley was transferred to Nelson, a mill town in Lancashire some thirty miles away. There he saw the ravages of the Depression at its worst. [^14] His experience there gave him a great appreciation for "the short and simple annals of the poor," as Thomas Gray described them. [^15] the people of Nelson worked hard yet had little.

In Nelson, Elder Hinckley and his companion boarded in a home at 10 Wickworth Street owned by Mr. and Mrs. Ayrton. Though not members of the Church, they were generous people who treated their tenants graciously. The missionaries soon met Robert Pickles, a young man just two years Elder Hinckley's senior whose grandmother had been one of the first individuals baptized in their village. The branch there had an average attendance of twenty or so at Sunday meetings. When Bob first met Elder Hinckley after his transfer to Nelson, he wasn't sure what to make of him: "At first he seemed so serious in nature. But I soon found out that behind his seriousness there was joviality and a good sense of humor." [^16] On occasion Elder Hinckley and Bob tracted together, and in those and other experiences the Englishman came to appreciate Elder Hinckley's strengths: "His feelings about the gospel were strong, and he made an impression on me because he had a positive approach to things. Even when there weren't many who wanted to listen to the missionaries, he stayed positive." [^17]

Conversions were hard to come by. Elder Hinckley identified at least one reason in a letter to Marjorie: "In walking down the streets of Nelson, England the other day it was interesting to note that with but one exception, every individual walked out into the street to avoid crossing under a ladder that reached up over the walk. . . . Our landlady studiously sets the poker against the grate so that its point is directed up the chimney. She actually believes that this makes the fire draw better. . . . A girl's portrait fell from the mantel the other morning while our landlady was dusting; this was incontrovertible proof that bad news was forthcoming concerning the girl. . . . Is it any wonder that people in Twentieth Century England ignorantly hang on to the notion that Mormons are harem keepers and that Salt Lake City is a walled fortress, a trading metropolis dealing in white slaves?" [^18]

After three months in Nelson—November 1933 through January 1934—Elder Hinckley was called back to Preston. But his return to the city he had come to love for its rich tradition was short-lived, for on March 3, 1934, he was transferred to London to work in the European Mission office as assistant to Elder Joseph F. Merrill of the Twelve, who now presided over all the missions in Europe. [^19] During eight months in the Liverpool Conference, Gordon had distributed 8,785 tracts and pamphlets, spent more than 400 hours with members, attended 191 meetings, had 200 gospel conversations, confirmed one person, and baptized no one. [^20]

When Elder Hinckley received the letter of transfer, he couldn't have been more surprised. He had worked hard in Lancashire, and had earned the respect of members and missionaries for his optimistic nature and ability to teach the gospel with conviction, but there was nothing about his record that would have attracted the attention of the mission office.

London immediately captivated Gordon, who quickly fell in love with this jewel of the far-flung British empire. Perhaps at that time the world's greatest metropolis and capital city, it was a tremendous center for art, music, drama, and commerce. Looking out of a third-floor window at the European Mission office at 5 Gordon Square, Elder Hinckley could see black taxicabs weaving in and out of traffic, little horns mounted on the outside. Bobbies with nightsticks walked the streets. Red mailboxes on street corners symbolized a postal system whose efficiency was unrivaled anywhere in the world. London was intoxicating. The pace, the cosmopolitan nature of the population, the sophisticated culture—it was invigorating for a young man from Salt Lake City. He came to believe that no one could "live in London for long without developing a love for the place." [^21] And working side by side with an apostle was a rare privilege for a young missionary; Gordon had never supposed such an opportunity would come to him.

Elder Merrill was a pragmatic, down-to-earth leader, a scientist who, before his call as a General Authority, had been dean of the school of engineering at the University of Utah. Though stern and somewhat somber, he was friendly in a professorial sort of way. Each morning he studied with his young assistant and the two others in the office staff, and they enjoyed stimulating gospel discussions.

Under Elder Merrill's direction fell administrative responsibility for the missions of Europe. In general, the Church was plodding along there and converts were hard to come by. Though Elder Hinckley didn't accompany President Merrill on trips to the Continent, they talked at length each time he returned. And through their many conversations Gordon developed a picture of the Church there as well as in the British Isles.

The European Mission office and the British Mission office were housed in the same building, so missionaries from both offices often worked together. Thus Gordon was reunited with Homer Durham, and the two ate together in the scullery in the basement. There they experimented with unique dishes and enforced an ingenious system for getting money to launder the white linen tablecloth: anyone who soiled the cloth had to cover the stain with coins. Those who served in the European Mission office with Elder and Sister Merrill (including Elder Hinckley; Richard S. Bennett, the associate editor of the Millennial Star; Howard Cullimore, the mission secretary; and Lucille Culli-more, Howard's wife) worked in the office during the day and did missionary work at night. Each Sunday they participated in the Southwest London Branch and then held street meetings.

Unless it was raining torrents, two missionaries each from the European and British Mission offices caught the bus from Oxford Street to Hyde Park, where they held a street meeting alongside other preachers and the vendors who had gathered there. After singing and offering prayer, they preached to the unruly crowd from their portable podiums. Occasionally the men and women in attendance were sincerely interested in religion, but more often the street meetings drew an experienced lot of hecklers who relished any opportunity to try to distract and humiliate the young missionaries. It was sport for them, an opportunity for fun. And as long as they didn't physically touch the speakers—which was cause for arrest—they could do anything they wished. Gordon came to particularly enjoy the most experienced hecklers, who held a cane by the end and waved it as close to a missionary's nose as possible without actually touching his face. At the same time they taunted the Americans with shouts of "Aye, lad. Get out of here. Go home, Yank." Elder Hinckley was intrigued with one heckler who always seemed to know when they were there. He enjoyed sparring with the detractor and his cohorts.

Many Sunday afternoons the missionaries repeated the experience at Regents Park. The exercise probably did more for the missionaries than for the masses, for if a missionary was timid, as Elder Hinckley was at the outset, he got over his fear quickly. Street meetings taught the elders to speak with confidence amid confusion and to maintain presence even before a hostile audience. Elder Wendell J. Ashton, who was transferred to the British Mission office in the spring of 1935 to serve as associate editor of the Millennial Star and as Gordon's companion, said: "We didn't baptize many people in London in those days, but Elder Hinckley was a knockout in those street meetings on Hyde Park corner. We learned to speak quickly on our feet, and Elder Hinckley was the best of the bunch. He gained tremendous firsthand experience defending the Church and speaking up courageously for its truths." [^22]

Gordon had other opportunities to hone his speaking skills. When he was called to teach Primary in the Southwest London Branch, President Merrill told him, "Do it, Brother Hinckley. If you can learn to hold the interest of children, you'll never have difficulty holding the interest of adults." [^23] On another occasion he accepted the assignment to teach a group of unruly teenagers who had scared off several instructors. Gordon determined to work on their behavior, and in time the class became one of his joys. He savored the challenge of getting through to uninterested students.

Elder Hinckley's principal teaching responsibility, of course, was missionary related. Elder Merrill was unsatisfied with what few materials existed to help missionaries proselytize. When his assistant demonstrated excellent communication skills in his assignment to oversee the mission's publicity, Elder Merrill asked him to prepare several filmstrips using black-and-white slides as teaching aids. One filmstrip portrayed the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, another highlighted important events from Church history, and a third presented a favorable image of Salt Lake City. Each proved useful in helping missionaries gain entrance to homes and then dispel some of the distasteful rumors that had persisted for years in England about the Mormons.

Elder Hinckley also continued to write, and many of his essays were published in the Millennial Star. His range of interest was broad, his ability to express himself enviable. But he may have had his most far-reaching influence as a writer when, in February 1935, the London Monthly Pictorial magazine published his article "The Early History of the Latter-day Saints." This seemed to represent a significant shift in the attitude of the London press toward the Church. [^24]

Gordon's personal literary efforts may have increased his appreciation for the exposure he received in England to some of the world's finest literature. He had a profound respect for those who thought deeply and expressed themselves eloquently, and England was home to some of the most enduring essayists, poets, and novelists of all time. Consequently he spent what little free time he had feasting on English literature and culture. He and Elder Ashton often spent their preparation days visiting historic sites and attending cultural events. In an article for the Millennial Star, Gordon elaborated on his feelings about good books: "It is both relaxing and invigorating to occasionally set aside the worries of life, seek the company of a friendly book and mingle with the great of the earth, counsel with the wise of all time, look into the unlived days with prophets. Youth will delight in the heroic figures of Homer; or more modern, will thrill to the silent courage of Florence Nightingale on the battlefield. . . . The power of Cicero's oratory may awaken new ambitions in middle age, or the absurdity of Don Quixote riding mightily against a windmill may make your own pretentiousness seem ridiculous; if you think the world is against you, get the satisfaction of walking the streets of Athens with Diogenes, lantern in hand in broad daylight in search of an honest man. . . . From the reading of 'good books' there comes a richness of life that can be obtained in no other way. It is not enough to read newspapers. . . . But to become acquainted with real nobility as it walks the pages of history and science and literature is to strengthen character and develop life in its finer meanings." [^25]

Quotations from the literature Gordon had studied became more meaningful as he lived in the land of their origin and came to appreciate how nicely some concepts meshed with the gospel. When facing certain challenges, for example, he thought of Robert Browning's statement: "A man's reach should exceed his grasp." [^26] If there was any endeavor to which such a motto applied, Gordon thought, it had to be missionary service. Each day new challenges required him to reach further than he had before, to tackle something more complicated than he felt he had the talent or experience to handle.

One morning during their study session, President Merrill showed Elder Hinckley several London newspapers containing reviews on a newly published book claiming to be a history of the Mormons. The book, however, was less than flattering. "Elder Hinckley," President Merrill instructed, "I want you to go down to the publisher and protest the publication of this book." Gordon's immediate reaction was one of fear: "Why are you sending me? I am just a boy, and you're a distinguished man. Why don't you go yourself?" He kept his thoughts to himself, however, and agreed to go.

Although his exterior appeared calm, Gordon's stomach churned. The assignment was more than a little frightening. But he went to his room and knelt in prayer, wondering if this was how Moses felt when the Lord told him to go and see Pharaoh. Believing the Lord would help him, he caught the underground to Fleet Street and the offices of Skeffington and Son, Ltd., of England, publisher of the offending book.

With the boldness of a young missionary, Gordon presented his card to the receptionist and asked to see Mr. Skeffington. She disappeared into an inner office, then returned to tell him that the publisher was too busy to give him an audience. Elder Hinckley announced that he was there representing the Mormon church, that he had come five thousand miles, and that he would be happy to wait. During the next hour the receptionist darted back and forth to Mr. Skeffington's office. Finally she indicated that Gordon could have a few minutes with the publisher.

At that, Elder Hinckley walked into a large office and introduced himself to the man, who was puffing on a long cigar. With a look of disdain that clearly communicated, "You're bothering me," Mr. Skeffington asked what he could do for the young American. Gordon produced the book reviews that had run in the newspapers and began to talk. At first the publisher was defensive, but as Elder Hinckley reasoned with him and explained the problems with the book just published, Mr. Skeffington suddenly softened. "I am sure that a high-principled man such as yourself would not wish to do injury to a people who have already suffered so much for their religion," Elder Hinckley concluded. At that, the publisher made a remarkable concession and agreed to recall the books from the bookstores and add to each copy a disclaimer stating that the text should not be construed as a history of the Mormon people, who had a respected and courageous history, but should be regarded as fiction without any basis in fact. Elder Hinckley realized that this was an extraordinary decision for a businessman who had much to lose and nothing to gain financially for his effort.

Mr. Skeffington was true to his word. He recalled the books, and when they were returned to bookstore shelves the promised disclaimer had been added. From that time forward until he passed away, the publisher stayed in touch with Gordon by sending him an annual Christmas card. "It was a tremendous lesson to me," Elder Hinckley later said. "I came to know that if we put our faith in the Lord and go forward in trust, he will open the way. We need have no fear about defending that in which we believe. I've never forgotten it. That experience left a mark upon my life." [^27]

Not everything worked out as well. There were disappointments along with the triumphs. In London, meetings were held in a rented town hall in Battersea. The congregation sat on folding chairs on a hardwood floor, and the racket from the shuffle of chairs was annoying. Even worse was the noisy socializing of the members before, after, and sometimes during meetings. One Sunday, Elder Hinckley and his companion invited an investigator family to church, and the mother and children came. Unfortunately, when they arrived, the hall was filled with the sound of members chatting and visiting. After taking in the scene before them, the mother and children quietly moved toward a row of chairs, knelt for a moment in prayer, and then sat quietly amidst the surrounding commotion. At the meeting's close they left as unobtrusively as they had come, and when the elders later stopped by their home, they spoke openly about their disappointment at the lack of reverence. Elder Hinckley was embarrassed. [^28]

There were other discouraging experiences—times when it seemed no one was interested in hearing the gospel message, periods when opposition became intense, days when it would have been easier just to have gone home. At times, particularly when things seemed unusually gloomy, Elder Hinckley felt the comforting and encouraging influence of his mother. On those occasions he felt that she was nearby, doing her part to comfort and sustain him. "I tried then, as I have tried since, to so conduct my life and perform my duty as to bring honor to her name," he said. "The thought of living beneath my mother's expectations has been painful, and has afforded a discipline that otherwise might have been lacking." Even in death, Ada's influence on her son was profound. [^29]

It had been difficult to shake the melancholy that settled in after his mother's passing. But gradually Gordon's natural optimism poked holes through the unhealthy cloud. Now he sought to keep her memory alive in the hearts of his brothers and sisters and to help them feel hopeful about the future. On Ruth's nineteenth birthday he wrote his sister: "You are a daughter of our Mother. No pen can write her virtues, but it is for us to feel her power in the destinies of our own lives. We have an example. We can match it." [^30] In another letter home Gordon summarized, "Ramona and Sylvia seem to be doing well at school. If we can keep them at that, and keep me at this, and keep all of you as well and happy as you now are—the world will continue to be full of sunshine and the honey that makes life tasty." [^31]

Elder Hinckley's pattern was to expect the best and then work to make it happen. He focused on what could be done, rather than what couldn't, looked for solutions to problems rather than resigned himself to them, and learned to be happy even when things weren't going well. His was an attitude of abundance rather than scarcity, and he often reflected on the spirit of gladness his mother had cultivated in their home. To reinforce his optimism, he and his companion shook hands each morning and said to each other, "Life is good." And truly, in contrast to his experience those first weeks in Preston, Gordon was finding that life in the service of the Lord was rewarding and sustaining in a way he had never before experienced. [^32] For the rest of his life he would both preach and practice the value of positive attitude. "Generally speaking, the most miserable people I know are those who are obsessed with themselves; the happiest people I know are those who lose themselves in the service of others," he said on many occasions. "There is nothing that dulls a personality so much as a negative outlook." [^33]

Gordon also felt support from home, particularly from his father and brother, whose financial aid made it possible for him to stay in the field, and from Aunt May, who was a source of encouragement and strength. In a letter to his father that first Christmas away, he wrote: "Dear Dad. This is the first time in all my life that I have not been home for Christmas. While sitting before a boarding house fire and watching the flames go up the chimney, pictures pass by in memories of other Christmas days. There is the morning when, pajama-clad, we hurried downstairs long before the rooster in the back yard was awake. Such excitement—bulging socks, games, horns, a bright sweater, candy and nuts and fruit. Then we ran back upstairs blowing harmonicas to show all those wonderful things to you and mother. You were tired out but you played with us, and kissed us before sending us back to bed before daylight. During the day you pulled us up and down the street on our new sled, and we knew you were the biggest, strongest man in all the world. . . . Last night I missed the thrill of expecting Santa Claus. You have not come around this morning. I miss you. with distance between us, I begin to see in your life the spirit of Christmas beyond the magic of Santa Claus. . . . There is a deep and silent expression of the virtues of Him whose birth we honor on this day. God bless you, dad, and keep you ever wonderful to me." [^34]

As absorbed as he had become in his mission, it was nonetheless natural for Gordon occasionally to look ahead to the day when he would return home. With about seven months remaining, he mentioned to Ruth, "Life goes on—we grow older. . . . And my mission draws nearer its close, which means I must work harder in the remaining months than I have in those that have gone before." [^35] It wasn't as though he was anxious to leave England. In just eighteen months his opportunities, challenges, and encounters there transcended anything he had previously experienced. There were so many things that were more easily learned in the mission field, so many concepts that seemed clearer.

As Elder Hinckley's two years drew to a close, President Merrill asked if he would consider staying six more months. Gordon was more than willing—if his father and Sherman agreed to continue their support. But a few days later President Merrill approached him again, this time to ask if he would instead be willing to leave for home immediately. He had received a letter from the First Presidency with a discouraging response to his concerns about the lack of materials available to help missionaries in their proselytizing. "I haven't been able to help the First Presidency understand our concerns," President Merrill explained. "I want you to go home, meet with the First Presidency in person, and explain our needs to them. Perhaps you can describe our situation in a way I can't seem to put across in a letter." The thought of meeting with the First Presidency and counseling with them about anything seemed presumptuous to Elder Hinckley, but he accepted the assignment from his leader and began preparing to leave England. Gordon, Homer Durham, and Heber Boden, mission secretary in the British office, were all being released at the same time, and they wished to tour Europe briefly before sailing for the United States, as it was customary for missionaries to do in that era. President Merrill agreed that it wouldn't hurt to delay Gordon's presentation to the First Presidency another two weeks.

One of Elder Hinckley's last assignments in the mission field was to speak at the first annual British Mission MIA conference, planned by Elder Durham and held in the rug-weaving city of Kidderminster in the English Midlands. Elder Hinckley's message, "A Challenge to the Youth of Britain," was powerfully delivered, according to Elder Ashton. He concluded his address with words designed to move the youth to action: "Was there ever a time in this country when we needed to listen more keenly for the words the Master uttered on the shores of Galilee that early morning—'Feed my sheep'? . . . What a delightful world this would be if . . . burning in each young heart there was an individual, soul-satisfying testimony that God lives and that Jesus Christ is His Son, the Redeemer of the world! Out of our love for Britain, may we take hold of the challenge to prepare ourselves for wonderful opportunities. . . . May we grasp the torch, become 'yeomen of England,' go forth with courage and determination like the 2,000 stripling warriors of Helaman to build Zion today." [^36] Elder Durham reported that Gordon's address received more coverage in the Kidderminster Times than any other speech given. [^37]

Back at their small hotel room that evening, Elders Hinckley and Durham and others basking in the glow of the conference vowed to preserve the association they had enjoyed in England by forming a club, the Windsor Club, when they returned home. With that, it was time for Elder Hinckley to leave the British Isles.

Gordon's mission had been a rich experience, beginning with his labors in Preston and concluding in London, a world capital that he would ever after refer to as "my town." It was difficult to articulate how these two years in England had affected him, other than that they had literally changed his life. He knew that what he had learned, spiritually and otherwise, could not have been duplicated in any other setting—certainly not in the classrooms and ivy-covered passageways of Columbia University. The harvest of baptisms had been sparse for him as well as his associates, but he was unconcerned about his tally of converts, for he was a different person than he had been just twenty-four months before when he had written his father that he might as well come home. "What a blessing it became," he later said, "to set aside my own selfish interests to the greater interests of the work of the Lord." [^38]

How Elder Hinckley admired the faithful British Saints for their strength in the face of opposition and their unflinching loyalty to the gospel! From the lush beauty of rural England, with its green hills and meadowlands, to the cultural and historical treasures of London, Britain had stamped its imprint upon his soul. Years later he reflected: "I feel thankful for . . . the call by the Prophet Joseph Smith to those early missionaries to go to Britain in declaration of a great millennial vision, in expression of a tremendous faith, in demonstration of personal courage, with a statement of everlasting truth. I am profoundly grateful that while laboring on the ground which they hallowed by their efforts, there came into my heart a great consuming love for this work of God and for His Beloved Son, the Redeemer of the world, in whose name we all serve." [^39]

On June 20, 1935, Elder Wendell J. Ashton recorded in his journal, "In the morning the elders of the office trooped en masse to the railway station to bid farewell to three departing missionaries: Elder Gordon B. Hinckley, G. Homer Durham, and Heber I. Boden. Not all eyes were dry." [^40] With a hundred dollars each in their pockets, the three missionaries left the Liverpool Street Station en route to the Channel ferry and Rotterdam, the first stop on their European adventure. The Channel crossing was made interesting by a group of fifteen American coeds who became violently ill during the rough voyage. "They were the sickest bunch of girls you ever saw," Gordon remembered, "hanging over the rails in a pathetic fashion. When we first started out they looked right sharp and pretty, but by the time we docked they were a stringy-haired, sad-looking lot." [^41] Gordon himself spent some miserable days while touring the Continent. Homer Durham noted his friend's condition the night they traveled from Rotterdam to Berlin: "Then occurred the most magnificent case of hay fever on the part of G.B.H. I ever expect to witness: fluid apparently flowing from eyes, nose, and epidermis of the face." [^42]

His bout with hay fever notwithstanding, Elder Hinckley was fascinated with what he saw on the Continent. Throughout Europe he and his friends took in the sights by day and traveled by train at night, attempting to sleep on hard seats in the third-class coaches. Their trip was marred, however, by the threat of war that hung in the air. For some time Winston Churchill had been barnstorming England, warning its people about Adolf Hitler. Many Britishers had accused Churchill of warmongering and failed to take his admonitions seriously. Elder Hinckley had found his petitions difficult to dismiss, however, and from what he could see, it looked as though Hitler was scheming to change the face of Europe forever. Germany appeared ripe for his spellbinding oratory, in which he hypnotized his countrymen with promises of glory, power, and vengeance over injustices imposed by the Treaty of Versailles. The trains in Germany were filled with Nazi troops, and Gordon was fascinated with their appearance and demeanor. They were spit and polish, their uniforms pressed and immaculate, their manner efficient and precise as they goose-stepped in unison and on command thrust their fists into the air in salute.

In Munich the threesome witnessed a company of Hitler Youth marching through the streets. Homer recorded: "It was somewhat frightening, yet stirring, to see a big troop of young men—older Scout age perhaps—march by in brown shirts, swastikas on the arms, and a motto here and there visible—Blut und Ehre and Honor]. They all but goose-stepped, marching in precision, arms swinging." [^43] "It was incredible to contemplate," Gordon said, "that a people would take fourteen- and fifteen-year-old boys, put them in battalions, and raise up a generation of soldiers. If I hadn't seen it with my own eyes, I would not have been able to fathom the insanity of it all." [^44]

The missionaries arrived in Nuremberg just three days after Hitler had staged a huge stadium rally that electrified the city. Nazi banners and flags still flew from poles around the arena. In Dresden, as they visited a memorial to an earlier war, an elderly woman approached the monument. Poorly dressed, her face wrinkled with age, she laid a bouquet of flowers at the Unknown Soldier memorial and then knelt to pray. When she arose Gordon could see that her eyes were filled with tears; at the same time, from a nearby street, the sound of drums and marching youth filled the air. "History is going to repeat itself," Gordon said to himself. "In a coming day, men and women will kneel at this monument and mourn the loss of the youths marching just a block away." [^45] He left Germany with the impression that they were "sitting on a front row in the bleachers of history." [^46]

All was not gloom and doom, however, for everywhere they went, the missionaries took in Europe's marvelous historical and cultural sites. In Paris they visited the Louvre and purchased inexpensive seats for a performance of the Paris Opera. Homer seemed to know where every treaty of importance had been signed, and they visited one monument and museum after another with him as their guide. But the trip's highlight for Gordon took place on a beautiful hill overlooking Paris at the American Military Cemetery in Suresnes. Homer recorded the experience: "Stretching to the gates were 1541 graves marked with white marble crosses. . . . Then GBH led us to row 11, #5, and said, 'Brethren, there's my oldest brother.' We read: 'Stanford Hinckley, Utah, October 19, 1918.' After a few moments' silence, Brother GBH spoke again—'Brethren, this grave has probably never been dedicated.' It has been now. We stood in silence while our companion, in power, prayed that this might be a hallowed spot until the day looked forward to." [^47] The peace there was a poignant contrast for Gordon, as he reviewed in his mind images of the German war machine he had seen just days before, then thought of his brother whom he had lost to war, and of his mother, who had made her last pilgrimage to this hallowed place.

After tromping around Europe for two weeks, the missionaries made their way to Le Havre, France, where they boarded the SS Manhattan, the same ship Elder Hinckley had taken coming over, on the Fourth of July. It was a festive beginning for the final leg of their trip home. A band played patriotic songs, and the Stars and Stripes waved in the breeze. After all he had witnessed, Gordon felt a surge of pride in and gratitude for his American citizenship. He loved England and the British. But how wonderful it was to be going home!

Seven days later, on July 11, the ship docked at New York City. After his tour of Europe, Gordon's clothes were unpressed and limp. He wanted to look decent upon his arrival, because his sister Christine was planning to meet him when he came down the gangplank, but his suit was beyond immediate repair. Then he remembered the blue, double-breasted, worsted-wool suit he had purchased on Regent's Street in London. He retrieved the handsome but wrinkled apparel from his trunk. Though it was unbearably hot for New York's humid July weather, Gordon decided it looked better than anything else he had.

When the ship docked and his sister was nowhere to be found, Gordon hurried off the vessel to find a tailor's shop near the wharf where he could quickly get his suit pressed. He ducked into the first such place of business, where the cigar-smoking proprietor directed him to a back room to undress. When the tailor came to get the heavy, wool suit from Gordon and saw him standing there in what appeared to be another layer of long cotton underwear, he pulled the cigar out of his mouth just long enough to exclaim, "My hell, man, where did you just blow in from? The Arctic?" Gordon didn't even try to explain.

Before leaving New York City, Gordon took the bus to 116th Street and walked across the campus of Columbia University, just to see what he had missed and to inquire about applying for admission. The missionaries then went to Washington, D.C., and from there took the train north to Rochester, New York, and the nearby Hill Cumorah. President Heber J. Grant had arrived there to unveil and dedicate the heroic-sized, antique bronze statue of Moroni that now stood sentry atop the storied hill. Nearly two thousand guests gathered to hear President David O. McKay, second counselor in the First Presidency, deliver the dedicatory address and President Grant the dedicatory prayer. Gordon and his companions witnessed the ceremony and attended the accompanying pageant, now in its second year. It was a stirring conclusion to their two years as ambassadors of the Lord. [^48]

From upstate New York the young men took the train to Detroit, where Gordon picked up a new four-door Plymouth sedan—at a cost of $741, a tidy sum during the Depression—for his father. It was a practice then permitted for missionaries. Homer also took delivery of a car for his father, and they began the long drive home. Their route took them through Illinois, where they stopped at Carthage to visit the jail where assassins' bullets had ended the lives of Joseph and Hyrum, and walked the dusty streets of Nauvoo. From there they followed as much as possible the trail of the vanguard company of pioneers. It was an opportunity Gordon relished, as he had no way of knowing if he would ever have occasion to pass that way again.

During the sixteen-hundred-mile drive from Michigan's motor capital to Salt Lake City, he had time to reflect on his experiences of the past two years and to turn his attention to what lay ahead. It occurred to Gordon that at least one promise of his patriarchal blessing had been realized. He had been told that he would raise his voice in testimony in the nations of the earth. During recent days he had borne testimony in London, Berlin, Paris, and Washington, D.C.—four great world capitals. "Well, that part of my blessing is fulfilled," he commented to himself.

But new adventures, he realized, now awaited him—not the least of which was a reunion with Marjorie. For two years their letters had sailed between Utah and England. Often Gordon's read like a journal; occasionally he had openly expressed his love for her. As much as she had meant to him when he was home, she had come to mean more during their separation. In return, Marjorie's letters were full of news, encouragement, and humor. As much as she had dared, she had let Gordon know that he was rarely out of her thoughts. Now he knew the days of simple dating were behind them, that important decisions weren't far away. During his absence, Marjorie had refused to "put all of her eggs in one basket" and had dated other young men. But no one measured up to Gordon. Both were nervous but eager to see each other again.

Elder Hinckley described the last few miles of the long journey home: "In the middle of a July night, after being absent for more than two years, we drove down through Parley's Canyon in the Wasatch Mountains. As we reached the mouth of the canyon there suddenly appeared before us an unforgettable picture. For 30 miles lights twinkled in the valley below. After two years away, it was a great sight. We were home." [^49] The Hinckleys were ecstatic when Gordon walked through the front door, and they gave him a hero's welcome. He was simply relieved to be home. After two years in England and another month on the road, he was down to 126 pounds. He knew one thing for sure—he had no desire ever to travel again. So when Bryant and Aunt May decided to take the family to Yellowstone in the new car, Gordon was true to his word and stayed behind while the family vacationed.

What he was interested in was a little time to do with as he pleased—most notably, to spend time with Marjorie and to take care of the assignment President Merrill had given him before he had left London. As promised, a few days later he went to Church headquarters and introduced himself to Joseph Anderson, secretary to the First Presidency. They set an appointment, and at 8:00 on the morning of Tuesday, August 20, the twenty-five-year-old returned missionary presented himself before President Heber J. Grant and his counselors, Presidents J. Reuben Clark Jr. and David O. McKay.

It might have been an intimidating experience, but Gordon was still filled with the confidence of a missionary. "Nobody scared me in those days," he remembered. "I could have marched in to see the queen just as easily." [^50] When he was ushered into the stately council room the First Presidency had met in for decades, however, and shook hands with each member of the Presidency, he was suddenly overcome by the circumstances in which he found himself. President Grant took the lead, handing Gordon his card, which bore on one side his signature in the beautiful handwriting for which he had become known, and on the reverse the statement of Ralph Waldo Emerson that he had adopted as his personal motto: "That which we persist in doing becomes easier to do, not that the nature of the thing has changed but that our power to do has increased." President Grant then said: "Brother Hinckley, we'll give you fifteen minutes to tell us what Elder Merrill wants us to hear."

Gordon rehearsed the concerns he and President Merrill had discussed before he left England—that what few materials missionaries had to help them in their work were inadequate and unattractive. After Gordon had taken his fifteen minutes, the Presidency began to ask questions. One led to another, and it was an hour and fifteen minutes before the recently released missionary emerged from the room.

President Heber J. Grant noted afterward in his journal: "At 9:30 met Gordon B. Hinckley . . . who has been on a mission in Great Britain, and made suggestions regarding getting articles in the British Press. He was very successful while laboring in the British Mission in getting a great deal of fine matter in the London and other papers and magazines." [^51] President Grant was apparently impressed with the young returned missionary. The next day he noted in a letter to a friend that Gordon had "made a most excellent record" while in England. [^52]

From Gordon's viewpoint, he had been graciously received and was relieved to have completed President Merrill's assignment. In his mind, his mission was now truly over, and it was time to move ahead and plan for the future. Though the economy was showing only the most preliminary signs of improvement, he wasn't overly concerned. With a graduate degree in journalism from Columbia, which he now intended to pursue, he felt he could provide for a family as well as follow a profession that would stimulate and intrigue him.

But once again his life failed to follow the course he had outlined. Two days after his meeting with the First Presidency, Gordon received a telephone call from President McKay: "Brother Hinckley, we discussed in the meeting of the Presi-dency and the Twelve yesterday what we talked about during your interview with us. And we have organized a committee consisting of six members of the Twelve, with Elder Stephen L Richards as chairman, to address the needs you outlined. We would like to invite you to come and work with that committee."

Gordon hadn't realized that his meeting two days earlier would turn out to be a job interview. Though he felt torn between pursuing his chosen career and responding to the First Presidency, Gordon took President McKay's invitation as a command and accepted the position. The job as executive secretary of the newly formed Church Radio, Publicity, and Mission Literature Committee (so named because it was to include every form of media the Church employed) was initially to be part-time and pay $65 a month.

Worried about supporting himself—and anyone else, should the need arise—he welcomed a call from Elder John A. Widtsoe, the Church's Commissioner of Education, who hired him to teach a seminary class at South High School for $35 a month. One hundred dollars a month was enough for the time being. So once again Gordon Hinckley put his Columbia brochures back in a drawer and detoured from his planned course. It was a direction that would change his life forever.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] GBH to Joseph F. Merrill, 29 November 1935.
[^2] GBH to Joseph F. Merrill, 20 November 1935.
[^3] GBH to Joseph F. Merrill, 11 December 1935.
[^4] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Financial and Work Report for Stephen L Richards, 1 January 1936 to 1 July 1936," Radio, Publicity, and Mission Literature Committee Executive Secretary Files, LDS Church Archives.
[^5] See GBH to Joseph F. Merrill, 20 May 1936.
[^6] Church News, 24 January 1942.
[^7] Church News, 24 January 1942.
[^8] GBH to Mr. Price, 6 August 1941.
[^9] GBH to J. F. Merrill, 31 March 1936.
[^10] LeGrand Richards to Radio, Publicity, and Mission Literature Committee, 5 August 1936.
[^11] GBH to LeGrand Richards, 11 August 1936.
[^12] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "Comments from Missionaries Who Are Using Our 15 Minute Programs in New England," unpublished document, circa 1939, M259, R129c, LDS Church Archives.
[^13] "Financial and Work Report."
[^14] J. F. Merrill to GBH, 8 May 1936.
[^15] See "Financial and Work Report."
[^16] See Heber Grant Wolsey, "The History of Radio Station KSL from 1922 to Television," Ph.D. dissertation, Michigan State University, 1967, p. 175.
[^17] Deseret News, 25 July 1936.
[^18] Deseret News, 13 November 1937.
[^19] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "A Story," unpublished manuscript, 3 January 1938, LDS Church Archives.
[^20] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "Twenty-Five Years of Radio Ministry," Church News, 26 April 1947, p. 5.
[^21] See G. William Richards, "Report on Golden Gate International Exposition"; "Calamis Article for September," 1 September 1940; Elder G. William Richards to GBH, 19 June 1940; 12 August 1940; 26 August 1940; Radio, Publicity, and Mission Literature Committee Executive Secretary Files.
[^22] G. William Richards to First Presidency, 27 September 1940.
[^23] B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1965), vol. 3, plate following p. 362.
[^24] GBH to G. L. Price, 20 May 1940.
[^25] Interview with GBH, 4 January 1995.
[^26] Mr. Price to GBH, 26 October 1939.
[^27] GBH to Mr. Price, 27 March 1941.
[^28] Mr. Price to GBH, 11 July 1941.
[^29] Mr. Price to GBH, 19 December 1941.
[^30] GBH to Mr. Price, 4 October 1941.
[^31] GBH to G. L. Price, 26 April 1939.
[^32] GBH to G. L. Price, 30 March 1940.
[^33] GBH to Joel Ricks, 24 June 1937.
[^34] GBH to Mr. Price, 5 June 1942.
[^35] Interview with Ramona Hinckley Sullivan, 5 June 1989.
[^36] Gordon B. Hinckley, "The Faith of the Pioneers," Ensign, July 1984, p. 3.
[^37] Gordon B. Hinckley, "A City Set Upon a Hill," Ensign, November 1974, p. 99.
[^38] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^39] GBH to G. Homer Durham, 27 March 1939.
[^40] GBH to G. Homer Durham, 27 March 1939.
[^41] Interview with GBH, 4 January 1995.
[^42] GBH to Frank Harris, 23 January 1936.
[^43] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^44] Interview with GBH, 4 January 1995.
[^45] 45. The Wondrous Power of a Mother, p. 8.
[^46] 46. Interview with GBH, 7 December 1994.
[^47] 47. G. Homer Durham Journal, 2 July 1935.
[^48] 48. See "Utah Mormons Dedicate Shaft in New York," Carthage Republican, 31 July 1935.
[^49] 49. "Pioneer Frontiers," Deseret News, 25 July 1936.
[^50] 50. Interview with GBH, 7 December 1994.
[^51] 51. Heber J. Grant Journal, 20 August 1935.
[^52] 52. Heber J. Grant to Sister Rees, 21 August 1935
