Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Six

Getting Started: The Challenges Begin

The prospect of working at Church headquarters aroused an abundance of emotions within the young returned missionary. Gordon was apprehensive yet excited about the challenge to create something where nothing currently existed. His father had enjoyed a warm relationship with many of the Brethren, and he himself had had a taste of working for and with a General Authority during his time in the European Mission office under Elder Merrill, who had been a stickler for competence, propriety, and follow-through. But it was another matter entirely to sit on a committee with half the members of the Twelve and to be charged with developing materials for missionaries Churchwide. The challenge was one of immense proportions. With characteristic aplomb, however, Gordon dived headlong into his new assignment.

Several who learned of his appointment to work on a committee chaired by Elder Stephen L Richards pulled Gordon aside and offered a gentle warning: "You'll never be able to work for him—nobody can. He's too exacting, too demanding." The grandson of Willard Richards, Elder Richards had a law degree from the University of Chicago. Before his call to the Quorum of the Twelve, he had distinguished himself as an attorney and was regarded as a man of pronounced ability and impeccable judgment. Gordon could only imagine what it would be like to take direction from a man who apparently inspired both apprehension and admiration among co-workers.

Even had he wanted to, there wasn't anyone with whom Gordon could talk about the position in which he found himself, for he quickly learned that he was an oddity. The Depression had placed a strain on Church resources, and in 1935 the number of employees working at headquarters could be counted on two hands. Joseph Anderson and Bertha Irvine provided secretarial help to the First Presidency, along with two financial secretaries. Harold Reynolds served as mission secretary and transportation agent. Three women served as secretaries to the Twelve, the First Council of the Seventy had a secretary, and there was one switchboard operator. So hiring a "civilian"—and a young one at that—to work with the Brethren and giving him open-door access to almost any office in the building was without precedent.

It was a new experience for the General Authorities as well, who weren't accustomed to rolling out the carpet for newcomers. On Gordon's first day, Elder Richards told him he could use the empty office adjoining his. Gordon quickly found that Elder Richards meant literally what he said—the office was not merely unoccupied but completely empty. He had not been provided so much as a chair, table, lamp, or trash can. Undaunted, though puzzled at the reception, he called a missionary friend whose father owned an office supply store and with his help located an old warped table with a short leg. He hauled the table to his new office, situated a block of wood under the damaged leg, and brought his old typewriter from home. When he asked the man who parceled out supplies for a ream of paper, the employee responded with astonishment, "Do you realize how much paper is in one ream?" "Yes, five hundred sheets," Gordon replied. "What in the world are you going to do with five hundred sheets of paper?" the secretary asked, apparently having never entertained such a request. "I am going to write on it one sheet at a time," Gordon answered. He got the ream of paper.

Before 1935 the Church's public relations efforts (with the exception of Tabernacle Choir events) had been unorganized, haphazard, and largely ineffective. Other than a few tracts, no materials existed to help missionaries in their proselytizing. A few mission presidents, desperate for resources, had developed slide lectures and pamphlets to use in their own areas. But essentially nothing had been created for use on a Churchwide basis.

Elder Richards chaired the Radio, Publicity, and Mission Literature Committee, which included Elders Melvin J. Ballard, John A. Widtsoe, Charles A. Callis, Alonzo A. Hinckley (Gordon's uncle), and Albert E. Bowen. Though Gordon worked under the direction of the full committee, it was he who was expected to shoulder the day-to-day workload.

The committee's beginnings were without fanfare. Elder Richards assigned Gordon to recommend where they should begin, and he went to work, focusing initially on scripts that could be written and produced as slide presentations to help missionaries in their proselytizing. When Gordon drafted a text for a proposed slide lecture, Elder Richards called the committee together and Gordon presented the material, often reading it aloud to the group. If changes were suggested, he made modifications and subsequently coordinated the production of slides, script, and music or audio track. One project led to another. Committee meetings provided an opportunity to present new ideas and discuss potential scripts, as well as to talk openly about the various challenges missionaries faced, appropriate ways to deal with critics of the Church, and the kinds of teaching aids that would be most useful to missionaries. Gordon soaked in the discussions. Such association with members of the Twelve, in a forum where they freely discussed issues and challenges related to teaching the gospel worldwide, was the beginning of a most unusual education in Church administration and leadership.

Slowly but steadily the first materials initiated at Church headquarters—slide presentations, pamphlets, brochures, and audio presentations on subjects ranging from latter-day prophets and temples to pioneers and the Book of Mormon—began to appear. Inherent within Gordon's pioneering effort was the need to learn quickly and to commit as few errors as possible. He alluded to that challenge in a letter to President Joseph F. Merrill, who kept tabs on his former assistant and protÃ©gÃ©: "I know, Pres. Merrill, that you have wondered why you are not getting this material more quickly. I have just come from a long talk with Brother Richards. Brother Richards kept the 'Pioneer Trails' manuscript to go over it carefully. This morning he congratulated me on the language, but expressed himself as feeling that instead of trying to tell a story . . . I simply delineate the facts for the elders to use as best they can. . . . I am having to change some of my ideas of writing, but with the help of the Lord we shall finally get something of the first order." [^1]

From the outset Gordon had to first identify which subjects and projects to tackle, then determine how to execute each one in such a manner that it would be effective regardless of culture or setting. To President Merrill he described the essence of the challenge: "Here is the difficulty: This committee wants these lectures to be suitable for the missions throughout the Church. prepared one lecture] from the viewpoint we had discussed in London, and its sequence is perhaps not the best for conditions in America. It is this difference of viewpoints that I am trying to reconcile. . . . Of course, there will have to be a lot of rough edges rubbed off in getting this work under way. I only regret that it takes so long." [^2]

In the main, however, Gordon was energized by the challenging nature of the work. Again to President Merrill, after explaining the complications on just one project, he concluded almost by way of postscript: "There is a terrific lot of work ahead, but I am not afraid of it." [^3] Indeed, he found there was much more to producing filmstrips and other materials for missionaries than he had first imagined. He was responsible for not only conceptualizing and writing scripts but arranging for their production and distribution as well, and an infinite number of details had to be coordinated with mission presidents, scholars who reviewed his writing for accuracy, radio station managers who were reluctant to air Church-related programming, and companies whose services Gordon contracted.

There were, for example, exasperating problems to resolve in those days preceding color photography. Unable to find a dependable color-reproduction process, Gordon hired workers to hand tint each frame of each copy of the filmstrip—a tedious process that created a terrific bottleneck in providing enough slides for distribution. At the same time he repeatedly consulted with experts in Hollywood and Europe, looking for new films and processes. In a memo to Elder Richards, he reported, "At the present time six artists are coloring film. . . . But at best the work is slow and tedious. They are paid 5 cents per frame. This is the most expensive item in the process, but I do not think these people are over-paid, one girl having recently discontinued because of eye strain." [^4]

After being disappointed by several companies who did not deliver what they promised, Gordon was elated when representatives of Technicolor in California demonstrated a new film that appeared to have the qualities he desired. He was hopeful that the days of hand coloring individual slides would soon end. [^5]

Through it all he learned by trial and error. Localisms that kept a brochure or filmstrip from being applicable everywhere in the world must be avoided; critical review from scholars could prevent unforeseen problems later on; materials must have a practical application.

Early projects produced by the Radio, Publicity, and Mission Literature Committee included "Down Pioneer Trails," a slide lecture Gordon wrote and produced in 1935 that pictured and described significant locations along the pioneer trail, and "Forgotten Empires" and "Before Columbus," film lectures on the colonization of the American continent that concluded with an introduction to Moroni and a testimony of the Book of Mormon.

"Historic Highlights of Mormonism," a slide presentation released in 1942 and the first produced in Technicolor, focused on significant people, events, and places associated with the Restoration and the pioneers' journey west. The Sacred Grove and Kirtland Temple, the Susquehanna River, Chimney Rock and South Pass—these and sixty other places of consequence were identified and their significance placed in context. To prepare for this project, Gordon retraced the pioneer trail. Near Scottsbluff, Nebraska, he had an experience that reinforced his admiration for those who had endured the travail of pioneer life. He wrote afterward:

Of the thousands of Mormon emigrants who were buried along the trail . . . the graves of only a few have been found and marked. Among the better known of these is the grave of Rebecca Winters. . . .

I wanted to include this in the series of photographs along the trail, but had been unable to find anyone who knew exactly how to get there. . . . I arrived in Scottsbluff between six and seven in the morning, but could find no one on the streets who knew anything of the grave.

The ticket agent in the Burlington station informed me that the grave was a timing station, listed as "Winters" on the time-table, and said that it was about three miles back down the line. He didn't know how to direct me to it, other than by walking the ties.

Finally the section boss arrived. . . . I followed his directions, and after slogging through the mud of a wet field with a dog yipping at my heels, I climbed the fence to get to the railroad right-of-way. Down the track a short distance I could see the white posts and iron rails that enclosed the sacred spot for which I was looking.

Within the enclosure was a little monument and the rusting wagon tire which still plainly bore the inscription, "Rebecca Winters, Aged 50 Years." It had been hastily chiseled while a company of Latter-day Saints sorrowfully paused to bury a Pioneer mother. [^6]

The experience affected him profoundly, as he acknowledged: "It seemed a lonely place that summer morning. This sacred spot, kept green and lovely by those who appreciated its significance, was a token of the faith of men and women who sacrificed their all to reach and build Zion." [^7]

His week on the trail also provided insights into the manner in which the pioneer story must be told. "As I stood on these historic spots pictures of dusty wagon trains, of weary handcart pioneers, of graves dug in the prairie while the wolves stood by, of old men dropping from exhaustion and young men winking at bonnetted girls, of a hundred voices singing 'Come, Come, Ye Saints' and Pitts brass band playing music for a dance—these and a thousand other pictures passed before my mind's eye," he wrote later. "There's a story in every mile of that trail, and as I stood there over the graves of men and women who had walked a thousand miles over all kinds of ground, I felt that their story is deserving of a better telling than we are giving it. . . . The job now before us is to make the drama as vital as the real thing was." [^8] With each new historical discovery or insight, Gordon's admiration and respect for the men and women of earlier generations increased.

The theme and scope of a seemingly endless number of filmstrips, brochures, small books, recordings, radio programs, and presentations under Gordon's direction ran the gamut from doctrinal treatises to more general articles inviting a return to values or providing an accurate glimpse of the Church and its people. Each was conceived as a tool that would enable missionaries to better teach and represent the message of the restored gospel. The new materials were greeted enthusiastically by mission presidents and missionaries, the most frequent complaint being that more materials were needed faster. Elder Joseph F. Merrill's memo to Gordon of March 18, 1936, was not unusual: "We do think it is only right that the European missions shall be considered first . . . because all the missions on the American continent have the use to a great extent of the radio, of the publicity of the weekly hook-up that the choir has given."

Gordon's response was sympathetic but realistic: "Let me assure you that the European missions will be supplied first. However, all the States' mission presidents will be in this week, and in spite of the fact that they have the radio and other means they are anxious for these films and will make their demands known." [^9]

A letter from President LeGrand Richards of the Southern States Mission, in which he requested additional copies of five films, was just one example that proved Gordon right: "You may feel that our wants are excessive, but our missionaries are having so much success . . . in getting into homes and opening doors for preaching the Gospel, that it seems a shame not to be able to supply their needs. Kindly do all you can for us to enable us to supply the missionaries with the necessary films at the earliest possible date." [^10]

Gordon's reply was encouraging: "It is delightful to note the manner in which you have taken hold of this project, and are using it to good advantage. While it may take some little while, we shall have films . . . as per your order. Everything is going at top speed, but the demand is so great that it has simply been impossible to keep pace. If you can be patient just a little longer, we shall do our best." [^11]

Demand exceeded supply at least in part because missionaries found the new materials to be highly effective. The experiences of missionaries in New England illustrated the value of one twenty-four-part series of fifteen-minute recordings that local radio stations had agreed to air as programming. One missionary reported that a station manager who had previewed the recordings was "very much impressed. He was set against long, call-to-repentance type of programs but thought that short preachments would fit into his program very well. So beginning August 18, we will be on the air." [^12]

There were numerous other success stories, as indicated in a report from Gordon to Elder Richards: "The California Mission has found slide lectures] of such value that during the past few months they have purchased twenty , the South-ern States now have 20, the East Central 15, the Northern 13, and the Central 14, and are generous in their praise concerning them." [^13]

President Merrill praised three filmstrips that centered proselytizing on the Book of Mormon: "Our presidents have found that these illustrated lectures are our most fruitful means of making new contacts so we call them 'contact' lectures. They are not sermons and a lot of people will come to the lectures that would not come to a preaching meeting. But the lectures arouse their interest and then many of them, we find, want to know something about our religion." Elder Merrill, whose inspiration to have his young missionary meet with the First Presidency had resulted in these and many other projects, added: "Again may I say that we are extremely grateful for the devoted, able service you have rendered us in this cause." [^14]

Gordon's "part-time" job was rewarding but all-consuming. He prepared the agendas for committee meetings, organized public relations events, conceived the ideas for and directed all production of projects, and pecked out hundreds of proposals, scripts, talks, and pamphlets on the old typewriter atop the rickety, warped desk in his office. Elder Widtsoe had dubbed Gordon "the Slave," and the nickname stuck. When yet another assignment came before the group, Elder Widtsoe would typically say, with some humor, "Let the Slave do it," and as far as Gordon could tell, the designation was on target. (Gordon jokingly referred to himself as the Slave for years, and his workhorse tendencies did little to dispel the notion.) Though he felt confident that the Brethren appreciated his efforts, their praise did not translate monetarily. For the first six months of 1936, he earned all of $450. [^15]

The scope of Gordon's responsibilities went beyond the conceptualization and production of new public relations and missionary materials. On November 16, 1924, KSL had inaugurated a series of LDS programs aired on Sunday evenings under a variety of titles but typically referred to as the "Church Hour." [^16] These programs now fell under the direction of the committee, and for nearly a quarter of a century Gordon planned, organized, and often wrote scripts for the weekly broadcasts, in which Church members from various walks of life were invited to speak on gospel themes.

On occasion he took part in the series himself. Back just a year from the mission field, he delivered a moving address, "Pioneer Frontiers," on the July 19, 1936, KSL program. His message revealed spiritual maturity, a gift for language, and respect for those who had laid the foundation of this dispensation: "I am of the second generation from those people of the plains. None of my age has felt the choking dust of the prairies as ox-drawn wagons in a long convoy lifted it from deep ruts to be caught by hot winds and thrown against sunburned faces. None of my friends has bowed to the tug of a handcart when splintering wheels commenced to squeak and mountain blizzards hedged in men and women with hunger and death. None of my generation has met the lash of bitter persecution that was raised against a handful of pilgrims. Those were the trying experiences of our pioneer forebears who long since earned their title to true greatness and passed on to another glory. In the words of Carlyle, they made a 'nook of God's creation more fruitful, better, worthy of God.'" He concluded with his testimony of the gospel kingdom: "I know of but one way to rid the earth of strife and contention. That is to change men's lives, to lift them to a higher plane of thought and endeavor. . . . Mormonism is a world religion with a world vision." [^17]

Sixteen months later he again took to the airwaves, this time to deliver the last address in a series entitled "An Open Forum of Gospel Discussion." In doing so, he addressed a theme about which he felt passionately and to which he would return again and again throughout his life: "Mormonism has a world vision. The gospel of Jesus Christ is for everyone, and to the Church has come a divine commission to preach the glad tidings. . . . Once weak and oppressed, Zion is today strong. Strong because of its teachings; strong because of its organization; strong because of its people." [^18]

In the process of arranging, producing, and often writing and participating in these radio broadcasts, Gordon became acquainted with individuals whose expertise represented a broad spectrum of interests. In turn, the name of Gordon Hinckley, like his father's before him, became familiar to those who regularly tuned to KSL. In January 1938, on a weekly KSL series, Gordon was introduced as a "prominent young Salt Lake City journalist." His name was mentioned periodically in the press as he spoke at various Church- and Utah-oriented events. Though he had assumed that his career in journalism had been permanently tabled when his plans to attend Columbia were derailed by the First Presidency's invitation to work for the Church, he now found himself at the hub of the Church's newly formed media wheel. [^19]

Gordon seemed instinctively to understand the potential influence of electronic media, and he eagerly embraced the power of radio to take the Church's message to a larger audience more quickly than any other medium. [^20] But radio broadcasts, brochures, filmstrips, and the like composed but one facet of the committee's activities. There were other opportunities to introduce the gospel to large numbers of people. In the late 1930s, for example, the committee decided to create an exhibit for the 1939 World's Fair at Treasure Island, near San Francisco. Predictably, the Slave was assigned to work out an idea to recommend to the committee. Gordon was suddenly grateful that his father had arranged for his brief Chicago stopover to see the World's Fair en route to England, for at least he understood something of the scope this exhibit must have. The Church's display must be highly creative, or it would pale next to the others. What ensued was a project of immense proportions that proved to be one of the fair's more distinctive exhibits.

Sensitive to the fact that much of the public had a distorted image of the Church, Gordon suggested that the exhibit capitalize on the fame of the Tabernacle Choir by creating a replica of Temple Square, including a domed-roof Tabernacle complete with organ and seating for fifty people. A high wall on one side of the building was decorated with four large photo murals, one of which provided a backdrop of the temple, helping create the illusion of actually being on Temple Square. Gordon worked on the project for months, calling on the talents of artists, photographers, builders, and other artisans who lent their professional skills to the complicated undertaking.

The effort and anxiety were well worth it, however. Few displays were more popular at the Golden Gate International Exposition than the Church's exhibit, which drew more than 1,400 persons on the opening day alone and some 320,000 over the thirteen months of the fair's operation (February 18 to December 2, 1939, and May 18 to September 29, 1940). Elder G. William Richards, a missionary serving in the area, played the organ while a slide presentation guided the exhibit guests on a tour of Temple Square and reviewed events from Church history as well as basic gospel principles. At the conclusion, missionaries from the local mission sang a verse of "Come, Come, Ye Saints" or another favorite hymn. The program was repeated forty times a day.

The location of the exhibit in the Homes and Gardens Building proved fortuitous. Amid the glamour of commercialism, the Tabernacle offered opportunity for quiet repose. It was not unusual for visitors to stay for several performances. Fair officials frequently dropped in to rest and hear the program. One woman told missionaries she had heard about the exhibit in Switzerland from another world traveler who had been to the fair. Missionaries stationed at the exhibit contacted more people in one week than they would have met in two months of tracting. [^21]

As the exposition drew to a close, one missionary summarized the effects of the exhibit in a report to the First Presidency: "This has been missionary work on a grand scale, for we have received an average of 700 people a day in our little Tabernacle, where we have proclaimed in humility and sincerity the Restoration of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. We have appreciated the excellent supervision of Elders Stephen L Richards and Gordon B. Hinckley of the Church Radio Committee." [^22]

With its success at the exposition, the committee eagerly accepted the opportunity to participate in another West Coast celebration nearly ten years later. Because of its unique tie to the event, the Church was invited to join in commemorating the centennial of the discovery of gold in California. Henry Bigler, a member of the Mormon Battalion who subsequently went to work for John Sutter on the American River at Coloma, California, provided the first documented evidence of gold in his journal under the date of January 24, 1848: "This day some kind of mettle was found in the tail race that looks like goald." [^23]

Once again Gordon was assigned to determine what the Church's participation might be, and he recommended that they re-create the cabin in which members of the Mormon Battalion had lived in Coloma. He supervised construction of the cabin and created a presentation explaining the Church's connection to the celebration. Again public response was overwhelming. Tens of thousands of guests visited the Bigler cabin and at the same time were introduced to the gospel. (Nearly five decades later the exhibit still stood in the Gold Discovery Stake Park.)

In the late thirties another unique opportunity presented itself to the committee. A Hollywood radio promotion company, Mertens and Price Radio Feature Service, approached the Church about developing and sponsoring a series of thirty-nine half-hour radio programs. Entitled the "Fulness of Times" series, it would present dramatized episodes from Church history. Gordon subsequently supervised what proved to be a massive, trend-setting project that significantly advanced the quality and scope of Church-related programming. "What we want," he explained to G. L. Price, one of the radio company's executives, "is the story of the Church told in an engaging way that will catch the interest of our listeners and make them sit up, take notice and realize that . . . there is something challenging and fine in Mormonism." [^24]

Chase Varney, a Hollywood writer, wrote the first thirteen scripts. Gordon traveled to the West Coast to represent the Church's point of view in the production of each episode. There was, for example, one cast member who stubbornly insisted on pronouncing Moroni as Moro-knee and Nephi as Naph-ee. "He was obstinate about his pronunciation," Gordon remembered, "but I was more obstinate." [^25] Though the quality of music used in the programming was never up to his expectations, the actors were first-class and carried off the productions professionally.

Differences aside, Gordon was comfortable interacting with his nonmember counterparts, as indicated in a letter he received from G. L. Price: "I especially glad . . . that you are a member of the script committee. We both feel that while you have all of the spiritual qualifications for an Elder, and your absolute loyalty to the Church cannot be questioned, you also have a breadth of vision, and a tolerance for the Gentile point of view, which will make you a particularly valuable co-worker for Chase and me." [^26]

When circumstances developed making it impossible for Mr. Varney to continue scripting the series, and with air time scheduled and deadlines to meet, Gordon was asked to fill in temporarily and write a couple of scripts. His writing was so compelling that the producers requested that he continue. In turn, Gordon invited stiff critical review of his scripts. "Let me say again," he wrote Mertens and Price, "that while extensive editings or rewritings may entail more time in getting approval, we want you to suggest the things—all the things—that will make for an outstanding result." [^27]

The results were apparently worth the effort. On occasion Mr. Price acknowledged how the programming affected him personally: "There are no reservations in my endorsement of the show we made this afternoon. . . . It made me cry, and when a show can do that to me, it must be good. Driving back to the office I had that sensation which comes only a few times in a lifetime of spiritual cleansing. . . . Again, I say you ARE a people chosen of God—perhaps you'll make a Christian of me yet." [^28] After reviewing yet another script, he wrote to Gordon: "It gives me great and genuine pleasure to tell you how much I've enjoyed your script of 'The Dawning of a Brighter Day.' I say 'your' script advisedly, for I am sure I detect in it a lot of Mr. Gordon B. Hinckley. It is beautifully written, it hangs together, it tells a splendid story of a Great Church." [^29]

Good scripts did not come easily. Though his writing was praised by all who reviewed it as both articulate and poignant, Gordon agonized over the process, sometimes torturous, of putting words on paper. And that was after he had spent hours in the Church historical library searching journals and diaries for stories that could be retold effectively over the air.

Providentially, history fascinated Gordon, and he enjoyed the excuse to absorb himself in research. If these scripts had been all he was responsible for, the project would have been more delight than pressure. But they represented only a portion of the load he was carrying. He was still essentially a one-man office, expected to carry out all the assignments of the committee. The pressure to complete the "Fulness of Times" historical series, and after that to write thirty-nine additional episodes on the Book of Mormon, was intense. Deadlines loomed constantly. The workload and inherent strain had its effect: "I'm losing weight, hair and my good disposition trying to meet half a dozen deadlines, among which I rank the 'Fulness of Times' as the most important," he wrote G. L. Price. "Writing does not come easy for me. It's slow, hard labor and because I have so many other things demanding attention, I do not get things out as rapidly as I should." [^30] He brought in Frank Wise, a skilled photographer with an excellent eye, to help with graphics, and he later benefitted also from the assistance of Joseph J. Cannon, former president of the British Mission and an experienced newspaperman and publisher. But even then, more of the workload fell to Gordon than to anyone else.

Despite the pressure of more to be done than time in which to do it, Gordon had a temperament that was in some respects well suited to the challenge. After a meeting with one of the "Fulness of Times" producers, he fired off a letter that revealed something about his personal style and how he managed his workload: "I too enjoyed the brief visit with you the other day. If I seemed unduly restrained I am sorry. I am one of these fellows who is by nature slow to warm up, even in the presence of old friends. Then too, I knew you were busy and since I had no particular news I did not feel justified in just talking and taking up your time. I sometimes get a little out of patience with people who come in, sit down, and while away the time when there is a stack of work staring me in the face. This has made me a bit sensitive about occupying other people's time when I know they are busy. Please do not think my attitude was a conscious coldness." [^31]

Gordon's work bore fruit. Broadcast over as many as four hundred stations at one point, the "Fulness of Times" presented for the first time an accurate glimpse of significant events in the Church's history. The series, which ran for nearly five years and attracted a wide listening audience, was not without opposition, however, as he documented: "In one city in the East where 'Fulness of Times' episodes] were running the local ministerial society pressured the station into giving them control over all religious programs. Result: the station was compelled to drop the 'Fulness of Times.' It was in Toronto, Canada . . . that the ministers threatened the station which was running the series with a boycott of its advertisers if the programs were allowed to continue. Shades of Missouri and Nauvoo! The old spirit that tarred and feathered Joseph in Ohio; that issued the Extermination Order in Missouri; that desecrated the Temple at Nauvoo; that killed missionaries in the South and jailed them in Germany, Switzerland and Scandinavia still burns more intensely than is often apparent. On the other hand the reception given the series has been surprisingly fine. They have been run on a large number of stations in the United States—many of them small, it is true, but nonetheless effective—and they have been heard from South Africa to Sweden and from New Zealand to Canada on the portable machines which our missionaries have." [^32]

Gordon produced other radio programs that also found an appreciative audience. The series "A New Witness for Christ" dramatized passages from the Book of Mormon. Aired over the Church Hour, the program made that book of scripture come to life. As Gordon explained to an associate: "I have always thought that we will do our best work when we get people interested in the Book of Mormon to the point where they will read it. It is then that the Spirit can bear witness of its divinity." [^33]

Another series, "The Church's Attitude," was designed to address the Church's response to modern-day problems. "I believe that with the right participants, some good problems, and put over in such a fashion that it has spice and spontaneity," Gordon wrote to a colleague, "it can be an effective program—much more so than a series of sermons. But it will take a lot of thoughtful, prayerful, careful consideration." He continued, lamenting the press of time under which he constantly labored: "I had hoped that once we got the Fulness of Times out of the way and the film on which we are now completing production, together with one or two other worrisome jobs that are now winding up, that there would be something of a respite and I could sorta loaf along. But whenever I get to a spot like that, something else bobs up to smash the picture. But, life's like that—and it wouldn't be very interesting if it were not." [^34]

Another project was conceived when Gordon obtained permission from motion picture director Cecil B. DeMille to use approximately seventy-five frames from his black-and-white film The King of Kings as the basis for a Church filmstrip with the same title. Preferring a colorized version, he hired workers to hand tint the frames. His sister Ramona worked on this as well as other projects. "I never worked so hard in my life," she claimed. "Gord wanted things done just right, and I didn't want to let him down." [^35]

Gordon's numerous and varied writing and producing assignments formed the foundation of an extraordinary education—self-directed though it was—in Church history. His father was well versed in history and had demonstrated respect for leaders present and past, and now Gordon's own testimony of and reverence for the past began to mature. He repeatedly found himself reconstructing in his mind scenes that had played out in earlier generations: long trains of wagons crossing inhospitable prairies; men, women, and children suffering with fever, black canker, and the plague; a grave-marked trail leading up the Platte and Sweetwater Rivers and over South Pass; weary immigrants pushing handcarts through snowstorms and riverbeds; and broken wagon wheels and handcart remains dotting the western landscape. The more he studied and wrote, the more real these images became to him. His earnest interest in the history of the Church evolved into a profound and penetrating respect, as he realized how connected he was to those who had grubbed sagebrush and buried loved ones in shallow graves as they nurtured the gospel kingdom.

Decades later Gordon articulated the practical philosophy that governed his veneration of the past: "It is good to look to the past to gain appreciation for the present and perspective for the future. It is good to look upon the virtues of those who have gone before, to gain strength for whatever lies ahead. It is good to reflect upon the work of those who labored so hard and gained so little in this world, but out of whose dreams and early plans, so well nurtured, has come a great harvest of which we are the beneficiaries. Their tremendous example can become a compelling motivation for us all, for each of us is a pioneer in his own life, often in his own family, and many of us pioneer daily in trying to establish a gospel foothold in distant parts of the world." [^36] The experiences of Joseph Smith and other early Saints had become real to him, and he was determined that the sacrifices of the past would not be for naught: "Thanks be to those who remained true while walking through those testing fires. What a price; what a terrible price they paid, of which we are the beneficiaries. We had better never forget it." [^37]

As he pored over journals and diaries and then condensed his findings into useful forms of media, he began not only to understand but to feel the Saints' fervor and vision of a spiritual kingdom that would ultimately extend far beyond their own small, bedraggled group. And his vision of what could be—and would—motivated him far more than pressing deadlines.

This sense of vision was also nurtured by the privilege of working intimately with the Brethren and observing them as they evaluated problems, made decisions, and handled delicate situations. Gordon's was an unparalleled opportunity for a man of his age and experience. And because members of the committee quickly came to trust his instincts, motives, and judgment, they talked openly with him, answered his questions, and took him into their confidence.

With an ever-present gleam in his eye, Elder John A. Widtsoe frequently reminded Gordon that his door was always open. Gordon prized moments of one-on-one discussion with this man of great intellect, whom he found to be not only brilliant but also down-to-earth and personable. Elder Stephen L Richards, with whom he interacted almost daily, became the young writer's mentor. Although Gordon came to understand the early warnings about how exacting President Richards was and how difficult he could be to work for, the two of them got along famously. Elder Richards was demanding and deliberate, and those who worked with him learned to plan carefully and execute with precision. But by nature Gordon was meticulous and painstaking in his recommendations and preparations. As good as one filmstrip or slide presentation might be, he found ways to make the next one better—an approach that resonated with Elder Richards's methods. And though there were moments when Gordon wondered if he could measure up to Elder Richards's standards, his hard work and optimistic nature carried him through discouraging times. In the process he came to appreciate the fruits of rigorous preparation and attention to detail, and he developed tremendous respect and esteem for his leader. Indeed, other than his father, perhaps no individual had more influence on the young Gordon Hinckley than did Stephen L Richards.

From her vantage point, Marjorie, with whom Gordon now spent as much time as possible and in whom he confided many of his experiences, could see that Elder Richards and her beau were soul mates: "They were both quick. Elder Richards was smart, Gordon was smart. And they worked well together because of their intellect. Gordon learned a lot from him, particularly about how to deal with people. He learned that you don't quarrel with people, you compose your differences." [^38]

It was an education that even the finest university couldn't have provided, though occasionally Gordon felt a touch of melancholy that his plans for advanced education appeared to have been permanently derailed. As Homer Durham neared completion of his doctorate, Gordon extended congratulations to his longtime friend: "By this late hour you are in the midst of the Herculean task of culling, scrapping, welding, pasting, clipping, annotating, arranging, assembling, getting weak-eyed over thousands of notes and paragraphs which will some day be the Durham dissertation. My good fellow, my heart envies you your progress along the ladder which leads a man to the roof of achievement. Would that I too were on a rung of the same stature. With all my heart I congratulate on the splendid job you've done. Let me wring your hand in advance with a sincere compliment for the determination and faith that made of G. Homer, returned missionary . . . Doctor of Philosophy who has kept the faith." [^39]

He didn't regret his decision to accept the position the First Presidency had offered him, but there were times when Gordon wondered (and even worried about) what kind of future he could expect to have working for the Church. Again, in response to Homer, he acknowledged: "Your compliments on the radio programs are appreciated. We are now working on a continuation of the series. Much to do. The work of this committee with a long name is growing larger and more complicated and more interesting. . . . adio, films, and literature of various kinds also serve to keep me praying, humble, busy, and at work for long hours . . . well as] pounding late many an evening to meet deadlines which seem to spin round as fast as my well-oiled light meter. All of which has served to make me a little more dependent upon glasses . . . a little more round-shouldered, a little more settled, and a little more full of wonder as to what this all leads to." [^40]

Though it was impossible for Gordon to divine what the future might hold, one immediate and even remarkable consequence of his employment was the opportunity to be tutored in matters of the kingdom by the Lord's schoolmasters. In the process, Gordon gained a unique view of the men called to serve as General Authorities. He later said: "I got along wonderfully well with those great men, who were very kind to me. But I learned that they were human. They had weaknesses and problems, but that didn't bother me. In fact, it enhanced my estimation of them because I saw rising above their mortality an element of the divine, or at the very least an element of consecration to a tremendous cause that came first in their lives. I saw the inspiration that was at work in their lives. I had no doubt concerning their prophetic callings or of the fact that the Lord spoke and acted through them. I saw their human side, their foibles—and they all had a few. But I also saw the great overriding strength of their faith and love for the Lord, and their absolute loyalty to the work and to the trust that was placed in them." [^41]

Gordon's outlook was a mirror image of his father's, for Bryant had always nurtured a profound respect for Church leaders. And they, in turn, appreciated and admired his contributions to the kingdom. Late 1935 brought him yet another opportunity to serve when he was called to preside over the Northern States Mission, headquartered in Chicago. He and May left to assume their new responsibilities in the Midwest in January 1936, leaving Gordon to care for both the home downtown and the East Millcreek farm. Bryant's departure affected Gordon more than he might have supposed. In a letter to a friend he admitted, "Since my folks left I've had to chase a lot of things at fast speed, now having the responsibility of a house and farm, but no wife." [^42]

As if that weren't enough, he was also teaching an afternoon seminary class at South High School. It was challenging to hold the attention of teenagers at the close of a long day in school, but he thoroughly enjoyed shepherding his class through the scriptures. Marjorie said: "He packed them in, after school no less. Those kids stayed because he was a gifted teacher. He could hold their attention, and he also became their friend." [^43]

When Gordon was offered a job as a full-time seminary teacher, he was tempted to accept. But learning of the offer, Elder Richards countered, "No, we want you to work full time for us." Gordon accepted Elder Richards's invitation: "I decided I'd rather work for the apostles than teach seminary. I made the right choice, though it was a challenge to do everything they expected me to do." [^44]

It was a pressure-filled but exciting time for Gordon. Decisions that had lifelong ramifications seemed to lurk around each corner. Though his "career," as it were, had taken an entirely unexpected course, he was having experiences he would scarcely have dreamed of even a year or two earlier, and getting a bird's-eye view of the Church and world in the process. And while he was being tutored by the Brethren and growing daily in his understanding of the fundamental tasks required to operate the growing Church, he was progressing on another important front as well.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^2] See "Mary Goble Pay: Death Strikes the Handcart Company," in A Believing People: Literature of the Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1979), p. 111.
[^3] A Believing People, p. 106; also "Life of Mary Goble Pay: June 2, 1843-September 25, 1913," from "A Pioneer Story," 1856, p. 3, LDS Church Archives.
[^4] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1856-86), 4:113.
[^5] A Believing People, p. 107.
[^6] See "Georgetta Paxman Pay Life Story," unpublished manuscript in possession of family, p. 12.
[^7] "Georgetta Paxman Pay Life Story," p. 22.
[^8] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^9] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^10] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^11] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^12] "Phillip LeRoy Pay Life Story," unpublished manuscript in possession of family, p. 36.
[^13] "An Evening with Marjorie P. Hinckley and Her Daughters," 1996 Women's Conference at BYU, fireside, 2 May 1996.
[^14] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^15] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^16] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^17] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^18] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^19] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^20] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^21] In The Wondrous Power of a Mother, p. 15.
[^22] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^23] Gordon B. Hinckley, "This I Believe," BYU Devotional Address, 1 March 1992; see also Interview with GBH, 4 January 1995.
[^24] See Salt Lake Tribune, 17 November 1937.
[^25] See Instructor, June 1943, contents page.
[^26] Interview with GBH, 1 February 1995.
[^27] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^28] GBH to G. Homer Durham, 27 March 1939.
[^29] Interview with GBH, 1 February 1995.
[^30] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^31] "Hinckley Family Herald," 25 December 1939.
[^32] Interview with MPH, 16 March 1995.
[^33] Interview with MPH, 16 March 1995.
[^34] "English-Born Leader Guides Destiny of 102,000 Children," Church News, 4 April 1964.
[^35] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^36] GBH to Mr. Price, 20 August 1941.
[^37] GBH to Mr. Price, 22 September 1941.
[^38] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^39] GBH to G. Homer Durham, 27 March 1939.
[^40] GBH to G. Homer Durham, 27 March 1939.
[^41] Interview with GBH, 4 January 1995.
[^42] GBH to Frank Harris, 23 January 1936.
[^43] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^44] Interview with GBH, 4 January 1995.
