Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Seven

Marjorie and the Art of Home Building

During the time since Gordon's return from England, he and Marjorie had become nearly inseparable. Any other romantic interests had long since faded as it became clear that theirs was to be a long-term relationship. But it was still "the bottom of the Depression," as Gordon referred to it then and ever after, salaries were meager, almost no job was regarded as steady, and they like most young couples were cautious about marriage. "In those days," Marjorie explained later, "you didn't get married unless you had a job and could provide. But there was no question about whether or not we would get married. It was just a matter of when." [^1]

For all their reservations about the financial ramifications of marriage, they had no qualms about compatibility. Gordon and Marjorie were attracted to each other's sense of humor, love for the gospel, innate optimism, and love of life. Through the years Marjorie would often say that the only way to get through life was to laugh your way through it, and even as a young woman she had a buoyant, cheerful disposition that was like an elixir to Gordon. It resonated with his native tendency to see the positive and to believe there was a solution to anything. She had a light heart without being light-minded. In turn, Gordon's dry wit delighted Marjorie, who loved the fact that although her beau was practical, self-disciplined, and serious about the things that mattered to him, he didn't take himself very seriously and was often the first to poke fun at his own quirks. They enjoyed bantering back and forth. Marjorie had no difficulty holding her own with him, but she always made him feel that he was equal to any challenge. Throughout their lives, in diverse settings and circumstances, she would tell others, "Gordon is amazing. There isn't anything he can't do. Not anything!"

They shared other things as well. Like Gordon, Marjorie had roots in the gospel that went back several generations. She too was indebted to forebears who had accepted the gospel and laid the groundwork for the comforts she enjoyed and the beliefs she had herself embraced.

In 1855, missionaries taught the gospel to twelve-year-old Mary Goble and her family in Brighton, Sussex, England, and Mary's mother, also named Mary, was eager to join the Saints in Utah. The following spring, on May 19, 1856, she and her husband, William (Bill), and their six children—Mary, Edwin, Caroline, Harriet, James, and Fanny—boarded the ship Horizon in Liverpool and set sail for America.

After six weeks at sea, they landed at Boston and made their way by steam train to Iowa City, where they were outfitted for the trek across the plains. Bill purchased two yoke of oxen, though he knew nothing about driving a team. But that concern paled when compared with other challenges that quickly arose. Before the family even left Iowa City, tragedy struck. Fanny, who had contracted measles on board ship and subsequently been exposed to damp weather, died just four days before her second birthday. The family laid her to rest on what still felt like foreign soil. Realizing they would probably never return, they visited her grave one last time the morning they began their journey west. Mary wrote simply, "We felt very bad to leave our little sister there." [^2]

The season was late when the pioneer company led by Dan Jones (and later John Alexander Hunt) set out, and they didn't reach Council Bluffs until late September. They hoped to reach Utah before winter, but the company was not far from Council Bluffs when it became apparent that if anything the season was changing earlier than usual. Young Mary later told of their resultant travail, including the birth of an infant sister named Edith who lived just six weeks before dying of lack of nourishment. With no choice but to bury their child in a shallow grave on the prairie, the Gobles swallowed their grief and pressed forward.

Bill Goble was the camp hunter, and he provided his fellow Saints with food. When the wagon train came upon the Martin handcart company, Bill was assigned to stay with the handcart pioneers in case his help was needed. The family's willingness to remain behind exacted a terrible personal price. Mary wrote: "When we arrived at Devil's Gate it was bitter cold. We left lots of our things there. . . . My brother James ate a hearty supper and was as well as he ever was when he went to bed. In the morning he was dead. My feet were frozen also my brother Edwin and my sister Caroline had their feet frozen." [^3]

Devil's Gate was aptly named. There pioneers of the Martin handcart company and the Hunt-Hodgett wagon trains were trapped together as unrelenting waves of snow made travel impossible. With the death tally increasing daily, it began to look as though everyone would perish on the high plains of Wyoming. What the Gobles and their companions didn't know was that word of their plight had reached Brigham Young. On Sunday morning, October 5, 1856, the prophet delivered the opening address of general conference in the Bowery on Temple Square: "Many of our brethren and sisters are on the Plains with hand-carts . . . and they must be brought here. . . . I will tell you all that your faith, religion, and profession of religion, will never save one soul of you in the celestial kingdom of our God, unless you carry out just such principles as I am now teaching you. Go and bring in those people now on the Plains." [^4]

When a scout from the rescue party reached the handcart companies stalled near South Pass, Wyoming, those who were physically able sang songs and even danced. But as they crossed the final mountain before entering the valley, Mary's mother died. Wrote Mary: "We arrived in Salt Lake City nine o'clock at night the 11th of December 1856. Three out of four that were living were frozen. My mother was dead in the wagon. . . . Early the next morning Bro. Brigham Young and a doctor came. . . . When Young] saw our condition—our feet frozen and our mother dead—tears rolled down his cheeks. The doctor amputated my toes using a saw and a butcher knife. Brigham Young promised me I would not have to have any more of my feet cut off. The sisters were dressing mother for the last time. Oh how did we stand it?" [^5] Mary's family subsequently moved to Nephi, Utah.

A young man by the name of Richard Pay had also emigrated from England and endured adversity while crossing the plains. The daughter he and his wife were blessed with in Iowa died at Chimney Rock, and then Richard's wife passed away at Fort Bridger. He arrived in Salt Lake City alone, and the following spring he tied all his belongings into a handkerchief and walked to Nephi, Utah, where he later met and married Mary Goble.

In time, Richard and Mary Pay were blessed with thirteen children, their youngest, a son named Phillip LeRoy, arriving on November 14, 1885. As the last born, Roy had plenty of attention from older brothers and sisters, but his first experience with grief came early. He was just seven when his father returned from a trip to the temple one evening complaining of pain in his abdomen. Mary immediately summoned the doctor, but he arrived too late. Richard died from appendicitis on April 18, 1893, at the age of seventy-one.

Roy was crushed by the loss of his father, and Mary was forced to activate her skills as a nurse to provide for her family. Though there was never any extra money, she was able to supply the necessities for her children. As a teenager, Roy worked summers on a farm in nearby Eureka, where he learned firsthand about the law of the harvest and came to appreciate the fruits of obedience and faith. Roy was later hired to run the candy store in Nephi, during which time he first met Georgetta Paxman, a petite young woman with thick, shiny, dark hair and beautiful, deep-set, hazel eyes. [^6] Over time their friendship grew, and they both sensed that theirs might be a permanent relationship. First, however, Roy would serve in the Southern States Mission.

While Roy was in the mission field, Georgetta moved with her sister, Frances, and her mother to Salt Lake City, where she and Frances continued their education. A good student, Georgetta graduated with a two-year normal degree from the University of Utah in the spring of 1908. Despite her social opportunities, however, she couldn't seem to dismiss thoughts about her modestly handsome boyfriend from Nephi. When Roy returned home from his mission in May of that year, what had been a teenage romance blossomed into much more, and on September 7, 1910, they were married in the Salt Lake Temple. Their first child, a daughter they named Marjorie, was born fourteen months later, on November 23, 1911, in Nephi. Three years later the family moved to Salt Lake City.

For nearly five years Marjorie was an only child. Then, on July 18, 1916, Roy and Georgetta were blessed with a son, Harold George. Their happiness was short-lived, however. Just a few days after Christmas that year, they awakened to find Harold suffering from convulsions. After watching their son suffer for several hours, Roy and Georgetta knelt in prayer to plead with the Lord for his life but ended their petition with "thy will, not mine, be done"—the hardest words either had ever uttered. A few minutes later, Harold died. [^7]

A second son, Douglas LeRoy, was born on August 24, 1918, and only then did Marjorie know what it was like to have a sibling in the home. In time, she and Douglas were joined by four sisters—Helen, Evelyn, Dorene, and Joanne—and the five girls developed a strong bond that provided them with great support and camaraderie through the years ahead.

After Evelyn's arrival, the Pays determined to build a home large enough to accommodate their growing family in the ward they had come to love since moving to Salt Lake City—the large Liberty Stake First Ward. They secured a lot next door to Bishop John C. Duncan and across the street from Bryant and Ada Hinckley.

Those were happy years. The children found many friends in the neighborhood, and the family was thoroughly involved in the ward. Georgetta taught the Beehive girls, and Roy was president of the YMMIA. "Even before we were old enough to go to Mutual," Marjorie remembered, "we were caught up in everything our father did. We would stay up until he got home from activities and make him tell us everything that had happened. Church was fun, and we loved everything about it." [^8] Later, as a Beehive girl, Marjorie was even more enthusiastic. All major activities in the neighborhood, it seemed, centered on the First Ward MIA, and Marjorie thought it phenomenal luck that her father was involved with the program.

Georgetta and Roy were warm, generous people who opened their home in a comfortable way that drew friends and family to them. On Sunday evenings Marjorie and her friends came home after sacrament meeting for waffles—a weekly ritual so sacred that when the waffle iron quit working, Marjorie's friends pooled their money to buy the Pays another one.

Both parents had a light touch when it came to discipline. Roy's sternest form of reproof was looking up from his paper when the children were misbehaving and saying firmly, "That will do, children." Georgetta had her own way of dealing with her children. "I don't ever remember Mother telling me I was naughty," Marjorie reflected years later. "When I was misbehaving, she would say, 'This must be Sally from the mountains in my kitchen. My little girl would never act this way.' And I would reform." [^9]

In general, Marjorie was happy and good-natured. She did well in school, was eager to experience new things, and, like her parents, was unfailingly optimistic. Said Marjorie of her growing-up years: "My parents created an environment of contentment and peace. Even during the Depression we didn't feel deprived or worried about what was going to happen to us. Somehow, Mother always managed to have a dollar in her purse, and that gave us a sense of security. We didn't have a lot of money, but we made a lot of fun." [^10]

There were a few modest pleasures. On Christmas morning Roy was the first to turn on the tree lights and see if Santa had come. "Well, someone has been in here and messed things up a bit," he would announce to the children. There was always a family game or two and perhaps a new jigsaw puzzle under the tree. Each summer the family went to Black Rock Beach on the shore of the Great Salt Lake so that everyone could bob in the salty water and roast hot dogs around a roaring bonfire that night. The year of the stock market crash, Roy somehow found a way to present his family with a radio for Christmas; thereafter on Sunday evenings they gathered around the marvelous device to listen to Jack Benny and others.

Georgetta loved good music, recited many poems from memory, and encouraged her children to read well and speak clearly. As a young girl, Marjorie took elocution lessons and learned to be confident in front of an audience.

From her father, she learned to be generous and flexible. Regardless of how depleted their pantry was, Roy couldn't turn anyone away hungry, and friends and relatives knew they were always welcome. It wasn't uncommon for Marjorie to come home at night and find a note pinned to the lamp explaining that someone was sleeping in her bed. Nonetheless, although there was affection in the Pay home, there weren't many open displays. "Hugging and kissing would have embarrassed us," Marjorie said, "but there was a lot of love in our home that was undeniable. It was wonderful, and it gave me a feeling of being worth something." [^11]

Roy often told his family that he might not leave them much of a temporal inheritance, but that they would never lack for something of greater worth—his love and his assurance that God lives. When he was more than eighty years old he summarized his life's experience: "We haven't had a surplus of money, but we haven't starved to death either. What we have is far greater than any money we could have stacked up anywhere. . . . I don't know if there could be two people in the world who have been happier than mother and I. . . . We have a family we are proud of. . . . If we had this life to live over we couldn't ask for anything better than what we have had. If we could just all live so that in that Celestial Kingdom of Heaven we could be together it will be a marvelous, marvelous thing." [^12]

Within this environment of faith, love, and optimism, Marjorie Pay grew and developed her own view of the world. In the main, her outlook on life was uncomplicated, perhaps even a little naive. Reared in the relatively protected environment of Salt Lake City, she knew little of the world. When she was sixteen, her parents allowed her to accompany a girlfriend on a week's tour to San Francisco. It was an adventure that exceeded her most glamorous expectations. When she saw the Pacific Ocean for the first time, Marjorie felt she had seen it all. But when their tour guide took them to an oceanside restaurant fabled for its seafood and announced that this was an excellent place to order a fish cocktail, Marjorie and her friend looked at each other and said, almost in unison, "Cocktail! We'll just sit on the bus."

From an early age, Marjorie accepted the faith of her parents, something she attributed in part to them. "My parents' love for the gospel was contagious," she said, "and mother taught us early to love Jesus Christ. We prayed about and over everything, even not burning the soup. I grew up believing my prayers would be answered, and that if I prayed for something it would happen." Hanging in the bedroom where she and her sisters slept was a large picture of the Savior. "Every morning when I woke up," she said, "the first thing I saw was the beautiful face of Jesus Christ. I was grown and long gone from home before I realized what an impact that had on me." [^13]

Marjorie found it easy to believe the teachings of the gospel. "I think I was born with a testimony," she explained. "I never remember not having one." She was about seventeen when she decided to put that knowledge to the test. Her approach was straightforward and spiritually confident: "There was a time when I wanted to be sure my testimony was really mine, and that I wasn't leaning on anyone else's. So I took that problem to the Lord and got it solved. I have a lot of faith, and I can thank my parents for that. I somehow knew the Lord wouldn't let me down. And he didn't." [^14]

Like her mother, Marjorie didn't lack for friends. She too was petite, energetic, and full of fun and life. The youth in the neighborhood didn't all attend the same high school—some, including Gordon, went to the LDS High School, which required extra tuition; others, Marjorie among them, went to East High School, the nearby public facility. But the teenagers in the Liberty Stake First Ward mingled frequently at dances, Mutual activities, and firesides. Because they attended different high schools, Gordon and Marjorie didn't cross paths socially except at church—and even then, Marjorie wasn't terribly aware of him at first. "Of course," she admitted, "it wasn't until I was a senior in high school that I realized there were two genders and began to look around. I didn't really see Gordon until then." [^15]

When Marjorie was a senior, Gordon invited her to the Gold and Green Ball. "If you got a date to the Gold and Green Ball, you were set for the next year of your life," she remembered. "It was wonderful." By this time Gordon was a university man, and it was heavenly to walk into the dance on his arm. Their first date was the beginning of a friendship that eventually evolved into courtship. Early on, Marjorie told her mother that this was a young man who was going somewhere. "He was different from anyone else," she explained. "Everything he did, he did with a flair unique to him. And he had wonderful integrity. I never had to worry a minute about anything he told me." [^16] Even as she watched him struggle with his feelings about the gospel during his university years, she remained unworried: "Gordon always had a testimony. But he was very bright, and he had questions about everything. Everybody has to come to their convictions on their own, and so did he." [^17]

Marjorie graduated from East High School in June 1929. The day she went to register at the University of Utah, she returned home to find that the company where her father worked had folded. Without hesitating, she immediately found full-time work as secretary to the local manager of the Owens Illinois Glass Company, but the opportunity for formal education never presented itself again. Meanwhile, as Gordon approached his graduation from the University of Utah and looked toward doing graduate work back East, he found himself beginning to at least consider future possibilities with Marjorie. Gradually they reserved their attention almost solely for each other.

It wasn't long after Gordon received his bachelor of arts degree, however, that he left for his mission to England. Though Marjorie refused to go into hibernation during his absence, she missed him terribly. Through his letters she shared his experiences vicariously, and though separated by an ocean, she could see that he was changing. "Before he went on his mission," she said, "Gordon was still trying to sort through some of the elements of the gospel. But once he returned, there was no turning back with him in terms of what he felt was important. The gospel had become number one in his life." [^18] Now that he was home and absorbed in his work for the Church, Marjorie saw the proverbial writing on the wall: "As we got closer to marriage, I felt completely confident that Gordon loved me. But I also knew somehow that I would never come first with him. I knew I was going to be second in his life and that the Lord was going to be first. And that was okay." [^19]

Such a realization might well have discouraged some other brides-to-be, but Marjorie was unruffled. "It seemed to me that if you understood the gospel and the purpose of our being here, you would want a husband who put the Lord first. I felt secure knowing he was that kind of man," she explained. She also wondered—though she kept such thoughts to herself—if Gordon's opportunity to work with the General Authorities and to shoulder heavy responsibility at such an early age might not be an omen of things to come: "I knew that Gordon was extraordinary, and I took it for granted that he would do extraordinary things," she reflected years later. [^20] Indeed, she had been prepared throughout her childhood to live—and live happily—with a man whose commitment to the Lord would dominate their life together. "Mother taught us by example that the most wonderful thing in the world was to have a husband who loves the Lord. It did not occur to me that there was any other way to live." [^21]

As well suited as they were to each other, Gordon and Marjorie experienced some moments of tension in their long courtship—a result, at least partially, of their self-imposed wait. In their mid-twenties, they were getting "old" by the day's standards. Many of their friends had already settled down, including Homer Durham, who in June 1936 married Eudora Widtsoe, a daughter of Elder John A. and Leah Dunford Widtsoe. But for the time being there were practical reasons for them to hold off on marriage. Among other considerations, Marjorie's salary continued to help provide her family with a steady income.

Finally the day of their wedding approached. But Gordon in particular was anxious about the economic realities of marriage. On the eve of their wedding he called Marjorie and asked her to meet him at Keeley's Cafe on Main Street. As they sat at the lunch counter he explained their problem: He had totaled up his assets, and they were less than $150. More alarming, he earned only $185 a month.

Marjorie, whose basic philosophy was that things always worked out somehow, was not concerned. A hundred and fifty dollars sounded like a fortune to her, and she replied with characteristic optimism that she had hoped for a husband and now she found out she was getting $150 too. "This will work out wonderfully," she told him. "If you've got $150, we're set." [^22]

Finally, Gordon Bitner Hinckley and Marjorie Pay were married by Elder Stephen L Richards in the Salt Lake Temple on April 29, 1937. The ceremony was beautiful in its simplicity and powerful in its promise. Gordon later said of that day, "Marjorie had grown into a wonderful young woman, and I had the good sense to marry her. The wondrous aura of young womanhood was upon her. She was beautiful, and I was bewitched." [^23]

With Bryant and May in Chicago, where he was serving as president of the Northern States Mission, and because there was little money to spend on traditional wedding fanfare, the newlyweds dispensed with a reception. After the temple ceremony, they headed for the solitude and privacy of southern Utah's beautiful state parks, traveling as far as Fillmore the first night. They then ventured on to Zion's National Park and other scenic areas before returning home.

The year 1937 was a momentous time to begin life together, a year of highs and lows, good news and bad. In 1937 Walt Disney released his first full-length animated feature, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs; John Steinbeck published Of Mice and Men; and the Golden Gate Bridge spanning the entrance to San Francisco Bay opened. Unfortunately, the good news was tucked in between waves of bad. Amelia Earhart disappeared during a flight over the mid-Pacific; the German dirigible Hindenburg exploded in Lakehurst, New Jersey; and Hitler and Mussolini continued to solidify their alliance.

Though the world was poised on the cusp of a new era that would see the end of the Depression but the beginning of what would escalate into the most devastating war in modern times, Gordon and Marjorie's life together was, at the outset, uncomplicated. After their honeymoon to southern Utah, they moved into Bryant and May's farm home in East Millcreek, the cottage where Gordon had spent his boyhood summers. But although the home had provided Bryant's family with many delightful vacations, critical improvements were needed to transform it into a suitable year-round dwelling. It had, for instance, no kitchen cupboards or bedroom closets. More serious, there was no furnace, and heat was essential if they were to live there during the winter.

Gordon immediately ordered a furnace and began to study the complicated installation instructions. With no money to pay a serviceman to install the device, he would have to do it himself. The furnace was delivered the first of September, and he immediately set out to lay a brick flue and install the new hardware. Had he been able to afford to hire the work done, he would not have done so, as there was in his mind a certain illogic to hiring a professional when his personal motto was, "You're just as capable as the next man and probably a darn sight better." With the furnace installed and functioning, Gordon built cupboards and added other amenities. In time, the newlyweds turned the farmhouse into a cozy, comfortable home.

The farmhouse wasn't the only project that demanded Gordon's time and attention. Upon returning home from his mission, he had been called as first the assistant superintendent and later the superintendent of the Liberty Stake Sunday School, which office he held until his marriage. On November 17, 1937—at the age of twenty-seven and after being married just seven months—Gordon was called to serve as a member of the Deseret Sunday School Union General Board. [^24] The general board was a large, energetic body of accomplished men and women—among them Tabernacle organist Alexander Schreiner, noted scientist Carl F. Eyring, and Adam S. Bennion and Mark E. Petersen, who were later called to the Quorum of the Twelve. As a junior member, Gordon slowly learned the range of his responsibilities. Board members wrote lesson manuals (one of Gordon's, Leaders of the Scriptures, which he co-authored with Marion Gibb Merkley, was published for more than twenty years in various forms, under different titles, and in numerous languages), conducted Sunday School conventions in stakes throughout the Church, published the Instructor, served on various committees, and generally took an active role in overseeing the Church's vast Sunday School program. For Gordon, the privilege of associating with fellow board members, many of them seasoned leaders whose lives had been filled with a diverse array of service, was an unexpected bonus. [^25]

He and Wendell Ashton, who was called to the board not long after he was, were noticeably younger than many of their colleagues. One weekend they arrived early for a stake Sunday School conference they were to conduct and went to introduce themselves and make preparations. When the stake presidency spotted them walking the halls, they assumed the two unfamiliar young men were traveling with the board members and asked, "Where are the brethren from Salt Lake City?" The stake presidency were shocked when Gordon and Wendell explained that they were the brethren.

Gordon's experience on the board broadened his youthful point of view. Other than his mission in England, this was his first exposure to the Church outside of Utah, and the view was eye-opening: "It gave me the insight that there was great strength in the stakes of Zion away from Salt Lake City. I began to see that the Church wasn't just a provincial, Utah-based organization," he later said. "There was strength, there was faith and testimony, there was power away from Church headquarters." [^26]

While he continued to learn more about the administration of the Church, Gordon was also finding there was plenty to keep him occupied at home as he and Marjorie adjusted to living with each other. And there were adjustments. Shortly after they had announced their engagement, Emma Marr Petersen, Mark E. Petersen's wife, had warned Marjorie that the first ten years of marriage would be the hardest. Her comment both puzzled and shocked Marjorie, who later admitted: "I was just sure the first ten years would be bliss. But during our first year together I discovered she was dead right! There were a lot of adjustments. Of course, they weren't the kind of thing you ran home to mother about. But I cried into my pillow now and again. The problems were almost always related to learning to live on someone else's schedule and to do things someone else's way. We loved each other, there was no doubt about that. But we also had to get used to each other. I think every couple has to get used to each other." [^27]

Despite such adjustments, both Gordon and Marjorie were so busy living that they had little time to philosophize about how things should be. She was still working as a secretary, and he juggled his time between Church headquarters and his assignments on the Sunday School General Board. There was an unspoken understanding about how their family would operate, a natural division of responsibilities that neither questioned or resented. Gordon would earn the living, and Marjorie would take the lead in managing the household and rearing the children. Her mother had always referred to her years with young children at home as "golden years," and Marjorie felt she would do her most important work as a mother.

In the late summer of 1938 the Hinckleys received news they had been anxious to hear: come spring, they would be parents. Not long before the life-changing event, Gordon acknowledged some of his insecurities in a letter to Homer Durham: "Marge and I have sorta shut ourselves out of the social circle these days, spending much time in spring housecleaning, planting carrots and peas, and other things which leave no time for parties, shows, or the like—all in contemplation of our firstborn within the next fortnight. Things are going nicely, but I have a case of jitters. You of course understand." [^28] On March 31, 1939, nine months of anticipation were rewarded with the birth of their first child, a daughter, whom they named Kathleen.

The event transcended anything either had imagined. "It was scary to think about being responsible for another human being, but wonderful in the way it made me feel," Gordon said. [^29] For Marjorie, the experience was one of "sheer excitement." "I didn't know enough to worry about what might happen," she admitted. "I didn't know that people sometimes have problems with their children. So having one of my own was even better than anything I had imagined." [^30]

That Christmas in the family newsletter, Gordon summarized life as he saw it: "This is the farm hand speaking. . . . Cheerio!—and a Merry Christmas! We three go in our usual way—Marjorie P., Kathleen, and Gordon B. We go a-diggin' in the dirt on Saturday afternoons, a-scurryin' off to Church on Sunday nights and mornings, a-pilin' in the wash on Mondays, a-hoppin' to Sunday School Board meetings on Tuesdays, a-tremblin' to Radio Committee meetings on Wednesdays, a-racin' to spend all we earn on Thursdays, and a-hopin' Saturday afternoons will come on Fridays. They're great weeks we live—that are piling into rich years. The car we drive is beginning to look like the same Plymouth mentioned in the history of America—1620. The house in which we live is the same one in which we grew up. . . . And the job we do is the same one we've been doing for the last four years. But we have one thing new—She's the sweetest little gal that ever swished an eyelash." [^31]

Gordon and Marjorie found that the addition of a child to the family called for adjustments to their previously well-ordered life. Though the three of them fit nicely in the one-bedroom farm home, it was apparent that they would soon need to seek larger, more permanent quarters. When in the fall of 1940 the Hinckleys learned that they were again expecting, Gordon realized he must find a solution to the problem. Furthermore, in April 1939 his father and Aunt May had returned from the mission field and were anxious to move back into the country cottage.

Bryant Hinckley offered his son a building lot on his East Millcreek property. Gordon was grateful for the ground, which was down the lane and through the orchard from the farm home. Though it had been used as a dumping ground for years, and garbage and morning-glory vines covered mounds of half-buried debris from one end of the lot to the next, Gordon owned it free and clear. And it was in an area that felt like home.

Early in his university training, Gordon had flirted with the notion of becoming an architect. Like his grandfather before him, he was a natural mechanic and could draw blueprints for and build almost anything. With these fundamental skills, he set out to build his own home. It wouldn't be his home unless he had his hand in it from the beginning, nor could he afford to hire the job out anyway. So with a few drafting tools left over from a junior high school course, he drew up a floor plan, made a scale model out of cardboard, and went to work on the home Marjorie would ever after refer to as "the house that Jack built."

Indeed, when Gordon and Marjorie's children would later tell friends that their father had built their home, few took them literally. From the outset of the project, however, Gordon's vision of the finished product guided every decision. He knew how he wanted things done, and he hired out those jobs that required specialty skills or that were so large he couldn't complete them fast enough working alone.

On Thanksgiving Day of 1940, Gordon and a friend, Rush Christensen, began digging footings on the project that would consume Gordon's holidays, early mornings, evenings, Saturdays, and days off for many months. In addition to acting as the general contractor, he wired and plumbed the home and did some of the finish carpentry. He hired out the bricklaying and Sheetrocking, a technique coming into vogue. The days flew by, and though the plumbing and electricity were installed and working by the end of April, the house still wasn't habitable by May 2, 1941, the day Richard Gordon Hinckley was born. Marjorie was so elated with the arrival of their first son, however, that the condition of their living quarters caused her little concern. "I was so thrilled to have a girl and a boy. It made me feel complete," she explained. "I knew that if I was unfortunate enough not to have any more children, at least I had one of each." [^32] She was worried when Dick came down with a jaundice-like condition that kept him in the hospital longer than usual, enough so that she stayed with her in-laws and later with her parents while she and Dick gained strength.

Meanwhile Gordon worked night and day to finish the home. Every spare moment found him in work clothes and tool belt overseeing subcontractors, completing the carpentry, attending to a myriad of construction details, and finally painting. The project was tiring, physically and mentally. There would be many times throughout his life when Gordon would feel exhausted, but whenever he would begin to complain about how weary he felt, he would catch himself and proclaim to his wife, "But I'm not as tired as I was the day I moved you into our new house." [^33]

Their new dwelling became much more than a place to hang their hats. Not only did their East Millcreek home stand as a monument to Gordon's tenacity and skill, but it provided the backdrop for years of family memories. Compared with the tiny farm home, the two-bedroom, 1200-square-foot house with its large yard seemed palatial.

With Gordon's family settled in a home of their own, Bryant and May returned to the farm home in East Millcreek. Their years presiding over the Northern States Mission had been fulfilling ones for them both. Largely due to Bryant's efforts, the Chicago Stake was organized and the Carthage Jail restored during his time there. Soon after their return, May Hinckley was called by the First Presidency to serve as the third general president of the Primary, and she was overwhelmed by the assignment. In issuing the call, President Grant said simply, "May, we're going to give you 102,000 children," further fulfilling the promise in her patriarchal blessing that she would be a "mother to many children." [^34] Under May's direction, the Primary simplified its program, which proved essential during World War II, and introduced its seal and colors—the primary colors of red, yellow, and blue.

Marjorie had always felt a little intimidated by her in-laws, and these high-profile assignments did nothing to alleviate her apprehensions. Bryant Hinckley had been her stake president as well as a popular figure in the community. But both he and May made an effort to build rapport with their daughter-in-law. Their proximity to each other now made frequent association convenient and increasingly comfortable. Bryant broke the ice with Marjorie when he called one evening to see if she would accompany him to a university lecture. "From that time on it was wonderful," Marjorie remembered. "I hadn't really known if I was accepted by him before then. But he was a wonderful man who had absolute integrity. And he was a wonderful speaker. I told Gordon many times, 'If you keep trying you'll be as good a speaker as your father.' He gave the best two-and-a-half-minute talks I ever heard. And he treated me wonderfully." [^35]

Marjorie felt less confident about her relationship with her mother-in-law. Though Aunt May was always cordial and friendly, her strong personality made Marjorie uncomfortable. But after Dick was born, the two women grew to better understand each other. It was Aunt May who insisted that Marjorie and Dick stay with them downtown after the baby's birth, and in time Marjorie came to enjoy a cherished bond with her. Although she had at first been apprehensive about living too close to her in-laws, she came to love having Gordon's parents nearby.

The Hinckleys were one of many young couples in the area trying to establish themselves. The rural community of East Millcreek was quickly transforming itself into a suburban neighborhood. With urban development came the challenges of managing growth, and as a new homeowner Gordon was interested in having a voice in civic decisions. For a time he served as a director of the East Millcreek Irrigation Company and as president of the East Millcreek Betterment League, a volunteer chamber of commerce that looked for ways to improve living conditions in the rapidly expanding community. The latter position was time-consuming, and he found it increasingly difficult to manage everything for which he was responsible. On one occasion he described the balancing act: "I am terribly busy with a large number of things in the office, and my time away from the office is crowded with a thousand and one things—president of the civil league of the community in which I live, . . . writing a course of study for one of the auxiliary organizations of the Church, wading through some difficulties in which some property in which I am interested is involved, trying now to get my house completed and the lawn ready for planting when I have reached a point where I have to do the job myself, trying to find a few minutes to take my wife and kids for a ride and panting hard to keep up with the rising cost of keeping alive." [^36] In another letter a month later, he wrote, "I don't know of a time in my life when I have had more pressing and important work than I have on my hands right now. I work here all day long and go home and pound a typewriter far into the night." [^37]

While Gordon was focused on matters close to home, the war in Europe was having a serious effect on the number of missionaries serving worldwide. On August 24, 1939, the First Presidency directed all missionaries in Germany to move to neutral countries and subsequently to return home. Just eight days later, on September 1, the German army invaded Poland. Britain and France declared war on Germany two days after that, and World War II had begun. Though it would be another year before President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed the Selective Service Act, inaugurating the first peacetime military draft in U.S. history, increasing numbers of young LDS men were already enlisting.

Concerned about the unique needs of Church members serving in the armed forces, Gordon had them in mind when he prepared in 1943 A Brief Statement of Principles of the Gospel. The small but dense book, 370 pages in length, included selected hymns, instructions on how to perform various priesthood ordinances and conduct funerals, and a letter from the First Presidency with sensitive words of counsel and consolation.

Indeed, a dark cloud hung over much of humanity as the war escalated and one nation after another was pulled into hostilities that now extended to the Pacific. As late as 1940 the war overseas still seemed a world away for many Americans, some of whom had not felt the impact directly. But on Sunday morning, December 7, 1941, America's remaining complacency was shattered when Japanese planes bombed the U.S. fleet at Pearl Harbor. The "day that would live in infamy" united the American people in a zeal that would sustain them during their country's involvement in a long, bloody war.

In a matter of hours, life changed for almost every American. The home of the Stars and Stripes had been thrust into the bloodiest, most intense part of the war, and the effort of almost every able-bodied person was required, in one way or another, to support the war effort. A combination of fear and patriotic fervor swept through the country. There was nothing to insulate the Hinckleys from the effects of war, which extended into the suburb of East Millcreek and reached their tentacles around the young family.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] GBH to G. L. Price, 31 December 1941.
[^2] Interview with GBH, 4 January 1995.
[^3] GBH to G. L. Price, 21 May 1942.
[^4] GBH to G. L. Price, 25 June 1942.
[^5] See Stephen E. Ambrose, "World War II Remembered," The World Almanac and Book of Facts 1995 (Mahwah, N.J.: Funk and Wagnalls, 1994), p. 37.
[^6] See Henry Swan, "What Business Must Do Now," address delivered to Utah Manufacturer's Association, Salt Lake City, 5 February 1943.
[^7] "Take Not the Name of God in Vain," p. 46.
[^8] See LaRene Gaunt Interview with GBH, 13 October 1993.
[^9] See Robert G. Athearn, "Railroad Renaissance in the Rockies," Utah Historical Quarterly, January 1957, pp. 18-19.
[^10] Interview with GBH, 4 January 1995.
[^11] MPH to GBH, undated.
[^12] MPH to Family, 26 January 1945.
[^13] MPH to Mama and Papa and All My Little Sisters, 7 February 1945.
[^14] See MPH to Family, 19 January 1945.
[^15] Interview with GBH, 4 January 1995.
[^16] Interview with GBH, 4 January 1995.
[^17] MPH to Family, 29 May 1945.
[^18] See MPH to GBH, 26 August 1945.
[^19] See MPH to Family, undated.
[^20] MPH to GBH, Sunday evening, undated.
[^21] See Interview with GBH, 4 January 1995.
[^22] As cited in L. Brent Goates to GBH, 17 November 1982.
[^23] See Ashton, "Gordon B. Hinckley of the Quorum of the Twelve," p. 978.
[^24] Gordon B. Hinckley, What of the Mormons? (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1947), p. 1.
[^25] See, for example, 1947 Church News articles under dates October 18, 25; November 1, 8, 15, 22, 29; December 6, 13, 20, 27.
[^26] Look, 19 June 1951, pp. 5-6.
[^27] See, for example, "Twenty-Five Years of Radio Ministry," pp. 4-5.
[^28] Interview with MPH, 16 March 1995.
[^29] Interview with GBH, 1 February 1995.
[^30] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^31] "Hinckley Family Herald," 25 December 1939.
[^32] Interview with MPH, 16 March 1995.
[^33] Interview with MPH, 16 March 1995.
[^34] "English-Born Leader Guides Destiny of 102,000 Children," Church News, 4 April 1964.
[^35] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^36] GBH to Mr. Price, 20 August 1941.
[^37] GBH to Mr. Price, 22 September 1941.
