Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Eight

World War II and Its Aftermath

On New Year's Eve of 1941 Gordon wrote a friend: "Here we are at the end of another year and the beginning of a new one. No year in my life has gone by so rapidly. . . . the New Year opens with foreboding for all of us. It goes without saying that we shall all see great changes in our lives. There is only one course to take, and I believe our nation is doing its best in following it. Values will shift, but the eternal verities will remain. To them we must cling." [^1]

In minutes, the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor had radically changed the face of American politics and swept away any remaining resistance to U.S. involvement in the global conflict. With America's subsequent declaration of war against the Land of the Rising Sun and Germany's against the United States, most Americans found themselves in one way or another looking for ways to support the huge war machine.

Not only were individual citizens profoundly affected, but organizations also adapted in the face of shifting priorities. To accommodate the circumstances of its members, the Church made adjustments in operations. On January 17, 1942, the First Presidency instructed all general boards and auxiliary organizations to discontinue holding conferences and other stake meetings to help members meet wartime restrictions on travel as well as to reduce personal expenses in light of increased war-related taxes. The Relief Society's conference scheduled for April to commemorate its centennial anniversary was canceled, and the annual April general conference was closed to all but General Authorities and presidencies of the 141 stakes then in existence. On April 5, 1942, the First Presidency closed the Tabernacle for the duration of the war. During that time conference sessions were held in the Assembly Hall on Temple Square and in the solemn assembly room on the fifth floor of the Salt Lake Temple.

The missionary program, however, may have taken the hardest hit. Missionaries in many countries were evacuated, some missions were closed down entirely, and the call of new missionaries all but ceased. On March 23, 1942, the First Presidency announced that for the duration of World War II only older men who had been ordained high priests and seventies would be called on full-time missions. With missionary work grinding to a standstill, Gordon's job providing effective proselytizing materials became less pressing. Realizing that his workload would be diminished for the duration of the war, and feeling a responsibility to assist somehow with the war effort, he joined a friend in responding to a newspaper notice recruiting potential naval officer candidates. He was discouraged when his friend was accepted into the program but he was not, his history of allergies and hay fever disqualifying him. "I was depressed over the rejection," he admitted later. "The war was on, and everybody was doing something to help. I felt that I should participate in some way." [^2]

With the escalation of the war, it was hard for Gordon to imagine that the draft would pass him by, allergies or not. For a man with a wife and two young children, the prospects of landing squarely in the middle of the infantry seemed more threatening than did enlisting as an officer-in-training.

"With the army engulfing men by the millions, I may be bathing in a canvas tub before long," he wrote an associate in late May of 1942. "I seriously expect that perhaps by fall those in my class will be moved either into the ranks or to the assembly line." He continued, acknowledging the strain he was still under at Church headquarters: "The more I labor over writing—radio scripts and all this other stuff I have to deal with—the more I feel I was never made for such work. Maybe I feel especially that way now, with a warm spring outside and a faint odor of flowers from the garden below, while beside me on the desk is a ponderous manuscript on which I am doing some editorial work. I suppose all of us are kids who hanker after a fishin' pole and bare feet when the lazy May days come round." [^3]

A month later he revealed more of his concerns to his friend G. L. Price, with whom he had worked closely on the "Fulness of Times" series, about the prospects of going to war and the introspection that possibility had motivated:

I've just turned 33—a wife and two children, it's true—but young enough to be inducted and with enough practice and a lot of inoculations and anti-fear toxins have the makings of a soldier, though probably a very poor one.

. . . I have had considerable experience in plumbing, steam-fitting, electrical work, and water filtration and chlorination. That was all years ago, but I understand they are every man who has had background experience in these lines. So if you bump into me sometime with grease on my face and a lunch bucket in my hand, don't be surprised. I wouldn't care to go back to twisting dies and tugging on stillson wrenches, but it does run a little more to my tastes than bayonet technic.

Often these days I find myself feeling that I ought to pitch in to do something to promote our war effort. I could be hardened up—though I'm disgracefully soft and short-winded now—and could make some worthwhile contribution. And I sometimes get awfully weary of swivel chair and desk work, and long for a siege of overalls and tools. . . .

However, in spite of all these day-dreamings I come back to the reality that what the world needs today more than anything else is spiritual stabilization; and the eternal truth that I have tried to put into some of these scripts that men and nations can find peace only in the gospel of Christ. To win the war we need math and chemistry, bones and sinew, but to win the peace we need "a broken heart and a contrite spirit." We need the equality of the Atlantic Charter, but we more urgently need the equality that comes from a knowledge that we are all sons and daughters of God in a very literal sense and are therefore brothers and sisters. There is no gainsaying we need the bravery of Bataan, but we need also the courage of righteous conviction. Perhaps if I can use what strength and ability I have to promote these things I shall have made some small contribution to the world's good. [^4]

As Americans embraced the war effort, the nation became united in an unprecedented way. Whereas there had been an almost universal sense of isolation during the Depression, the war created an intense sense of belonging and commitment to the notion that society's needs came before those of the individual. Families dug up lawns to plant victory gardens; men and women, boys and girls scoured attics and basements in a perpetual scavenger hunt for reusable metal and rubber; everyone learned to do without gas, sugar, nylon, and other scarce commodities; and American industry hummed into high gear and learned to mass-produce airplanes, ships, and other tools of war. [^5]

If the military didn't deem him worthy of joining its ranks, Gordon decided, he would look for a job integral to the war effort. As it happened, Salt Lake City had been identified by the War Manpower Commission as a city where there was a critical need for more laborers. (According to the April 1940 census, 149,000 people were employed in the state of Utah; by late 1942 at least 65,000 additional workers had jobs.) [^6] So finding such work shouldn't be difficult.

He was still stinging from the Navy's rejection when, feeling he must somehow become involved in the war effort, he got an introduction to a manager at the Denver and Rio Grande Railroad. In a stroke of fortuitous timing, he inquired about a job the very day an opening for an assistant stationmaster in its Salt Lake City yard became available. Though he had no experience in the transportation industry, he applied for and landed the job as assistant superintendent of the Salt Lake City Union Depot and Railroad Company, owned and operated jointly by the D&RG and Western Pacific Railroads. The year was 1943.

He had spent more than seven years in a pressure-packed job at Church headquarters, but Gordon now faced what he called the "fearsome" responsibility of keeping rail traffic moving through Salt Lake City during a time when trains were cycling in and out of the train yard like streetcars. Although he didn't know much about the railroad business, he wasn't afraid of hard work, and he attacked his responsibilities with energy, common sense, and a resolve to learn everything he could as quickly as possible. The first lesson of the rail yard was simple but imperative: Keep the trains moving, on schedule, and out of each other's way.

Though Gordon now went to work just a few blocks from Church headquarters, life at the D&RG yard seemed a galaxy away. Activity at the yard was frenzied and fast-paced, there was little room for error, and the environment was uncivilized. The contrast between his work at the Church, where even the slightest off-color remark would have been unthinkable, and his post at the railroad was vivid and startling at times. Among other irritations, many of the men he worked with had made profanity an art form. One day he handed written instructions to a switchman who, upon reading the directions, flew into a tantrum. The scene that followed disgusted Gordon: "He was a fifty-year-old man, but he acted like a spoiled child. He threw his cap on the ground and jumped on it and let forth such a string of expletives as to seem to cause the air to turn blue around him. Every third or fourth word was the name of Deity spoken in vain. I thought, how childish can a grown man be? The very idea of a man acting and speaking like that was totally repugnant. I could never again give him my full respect." [^7]

As though the strain of coping with a new job and other consequences of war weren't enough, the era brought other worries and even heartaches. One day in April 1943 Gordon admitted Aunt May to the hospital for treatment of acute arthritis. On the drive there she seemed in unusually low spirits and admitted that she didn't want to go to the hospital. "I've known enough of medicine that I know that's where people go to die," she lamented. [^8] May's condition hadn't seemed serious, but she contracted pneumonia in the hospital and, on May 2, one day after her sixty-second birthday, passed away. Aunt May had long since won not only her stepson's affection and admiration but his gratitude for the compassion and sense of hope she had brought into their home after his mother's death. Her death filled him with a deep sense of loss and melancholy.

At the same time, the outlook internationally was discouraging. The Germans in Europe and the Japanese in the Pacific seemed to hold the upper hand, though U.S. citizens supporting the war at home and abroad were mobilizing as never before. Meanwhile, the railroad was under pressure to operate faster, smarter, and more efficiently. The wartime economy notwithstanding, the remarkable growth of the railroad created constant demand for more and better-trained supervisors and stationmasters. [^9] Accordingly, Gordon was one of those invited to attend a school sponsored by the railroad for up-and-coming management in Denver in the summer of 1944.

Though the railroad industry was a new arena for him, some of his native abilities were crucial in overseeing the D&RG yard. He was resourceful and productive, a born administrator who improved efficiency and got things done with a minimum of motion. Eager to grasp the intricacies of his new position, he asked more questions during the supervisors' seminar in Denver than all the other participants combined. "Because I hadn't grown up in the railroad business, there was much I didn't know," he said. "I was anxious to learn, and those fellows didn't scare me. I figured I had worked for better men than they would ever be, and it didn't bother me in the least to speak up." [^10]

D&RG officials took note of the assistant supervisor from Salt Lake City, and two weeks later he received a call from railroad headquarters. Would he consider accepting a job as assistant manager of mail, baggage, and express for the entire D&RG system? The promotion would bring an increase in salary and opportunity but would require him to move his family to Denver. He realized that the "decision" essentially lay outside his control, for the railroad expected him to make the move. Marjorie was willing. She felt confident that they wouldn't be gone forever, so the thought of being separated from family and friends was bearable—though she was once again expecting a child, their third, due in February 1945. She saw the opportunity to live somewhere other than Utah's capital as an adventure, however. Both she and Gordon regretted leaving their comfortable new home behind, but they knew they would have no difficulty renting it during those days of acute housing shortage. Kathy and Dick were young, so moving wouldn't be hard on them. After weighing the important factors, the Hinckleys concluded there was nothing to do but relocate in Colorado.

Gordon left almost immediately for Denver to assume his new responsibilities and look for housing, and Marjorie remained behind to find a renter for their home. Housing was at a premium in Denver—even converted garages and attics were renting for top dollar—and he found it more difficult than he had expected to locate something suitable. As the weeks rolled by, Marjorie became increasingly anxious. She was eager to join her husband in Denver before her pregnancy became so advanced that it was not feasible to make the move, and she did not want to have her baby alone.

While he waited for something to open up, Gordon lived in a small hotel and worked nearly around the clock. With severe labor shortages caused by the huge number of men recruited for military service, those left behind had to pick up the slack. There was no such thing as a forty-hour work week. After putting in a long day at the railroad yard, he rode trains at night to learn the ropes. Many a night found him riding out to Grand Junction, Colorado, and back in baggage cars filled not only with luggage but with coffins and other vivid reminders of war. The setting provided many hours to contemplate the horrors of such conflict, and often his mind wandered back to the day he had learned of Stanford's death, then raced forward to consider families who were receiving similar telegrams now. What an indictment on men's inability to live in peace one with another!

Gordon and Marjorie disliked their separation from each other, which stretched to nearly six months. She began one letter to her husband: "This is a terrible life. I've been away from you enough during the last year to last me for the duration of this existence and I hope Heaven is a small place or travel is by instant atomic force." [^11] Gordon alleviated the situation somewhat by using his Pullman pass to make the twelve-hour trip home on weekends, catching a train west as early Friday as he could get away and returning on a late-night express Sunday evening. The pattern wasn't convenient, but it made the separation more tolerable. By year's end, Gordon had finally located a small home in downtown Denver, and in January 1945 he moved his family to Colorado's capital city.

Marjorie was relieved to have their family living under the same roof again, though the transition to life in Denver was difficult for a young woman who had never spent more than a few days away from Salt Lake City and her extended family. "The first three days lasted for about six weeks apiece, but this week has been a little better," she wrote her parents shortly after her arrival. "Of all the mumps and measles I have had, homesickness is the worst. If you've never had it, you don't know what you've missed. . . . I'd just get my mind off it and Gordon would say, 'So you're homesick, are you?' and then he would shake with laughter while I ran for a handkerchief. . . . However, I'm doing much better now. I can listen to the radio announcers say 'This is KVOD Denver' without even batting an eye." [^12] Marjorie's mood gradually improved. Not quite two weeks later she noted in a letter home, "Not doing so bad this week." [^13]

Her frame of mind wasn't improved by the fact that Dick was sick with the croup and rheumatic fever almost from the moment she and the children arrived. But the neighborhood was filled with couples whose children provided playmates for Kathy, and young mothers befriended Marjorie and even brought remedies for Dick's maladies. [^14] Letters from home and occasional visits from family and friends kept her going. When two members of the Sunday School General Board visited Denver on assignment, Gordon and Marjorie relished a day of reunion with their old friends.

The general board had declined to release Gordon when he left for Colorado, extending instead a leave of absence, and almost immediately he had an opportunity to practice what he had been preaching when he was called to teach Sunday School in Denver. It was the only time during their lives that any of the children would remember sitting with their father during sacrament meeting.

Though their move to Denver hadn't taken them even into a new time zone, life couldn't have been more different for the Hinckleys in the Mile-High City. The Church was small, and they found themselves living in a totally non-LDS environment. Most of their neighbors—as well as Gordon's colleagues at the railroad—knew very little about the Church. Many who had heard about the Mormons had impressions that were biased or based on inaccuracy. Daily interaction with those who did not understand the Church and its members interested Gordon, who for ten years had searched for better ways to introduce the gospel to this very group. As he interacted with his peers and new friends, he found himself making mental notes and jotting down ideas for later use. And at Elder Richards's request, he occasionally caught the train to Salt Lake for a long weekend to keep a few missionary-related projects going.

Gordon assumed that after the war he would return to his behind-the-scenes public relations work at the Church. But for now, he was doing his part to keep the railroad running. Several major railroads crossed the United States—the Northern Pacific and Southern Pacific, the Great Northern, the Union Pacific, the Santa Fe, and the Denver and Rio Grande in conjunction with the Rock Island and the Missouri Pacific on the east, and the Western Pacific on the west. Denver was a crucial hub, and the train yard bustled with activity night and day. It was not uncommon for every track in the station to be filled and other trains down the line waiting for the signal to pull in and unload. "At all cost," Gordon explained, "we had to keep the line clear and the rail traffic moving, because if anything caused traffic to stop, problems rippled throughout the entire system." [^15]

One day there was a wreck on the line in a canyon some distance from Denver. Gordon was sent to troubleshoot, with instructions to resolve the problem quickly. He found five cars tipped over and the line blocked. There was only one solution, and he immediately ordered three loaded freight cars dumped into the Colorado River. That bold decision cleared the line and opened it to traffic backed up for miles. The incident impressed itself upon his mind. "I learned the importance of keeping the traffic moving, of doing whatever is necessary to keep the line open," he said. [^16] The principle had many applications that embedded themselves in his subconscious.

Not every milestone in the Mile-High City was work-related. On February 8, 1945, Gordon and Marjorie welcomed the third addition to their family—Virginia, who would be called Ginny by family and friends. Kathy was nearly six, Dick almost four—both old enough to be excited about the tiny, red-headed sister who came to their home. Gordon and Marjorie were thrilled. Their infant daughter was healthy in every respect, Marjorie recovered quickly, and the miracle of birth continued to be an awe-inspiring experience for the young parents.

Marjorie's joy was obvious in a letter to her parents a few weeks later: "You mentioned Virginia's brown hair . . . there is nothing brown about it. It gets redder every day, and lighter. The new hair is coming in like a crop of spring carrots. And now I know love is blind because I've never cared for that brand of red hair, but on her—well it looks just as beautiful as if it were coal black or honey blond." [^17]

Virginia's birth came at a momentous time in world history, occurring as it did on the brink of several landmark international events. Three months later, on May 7, the Germans surrendered, and the following day the welcome news was announced on what became the official VE Day. The exhilaration of victory in Europe was tempered by word of the death of President Heber J. Grant on May 14 at the age of eighty-eight. Though President Grant had been frail since suffering a stroke several years earlier, Gordon had hoped to see him again. He had tender feelings for the prophet whose compelling testimony had stirred him as a boy sitting in the Tabernacle balcony, who had received his report as a young returned missionary, and who subsequently had brought him to work for the Church. President Grant had been President of the Church since Gordon was eight, and he couldn't remember any other prophet. He wished he were in Salt Lake City where he could pay his respects to a leader who had influenced him profoundly.

Less than three months later circumstances developed that brought Gordon and Marjorie home for good. When Japan ignored an ultimatum from President Harry S. Truman, Winston Churchill, and Joseph Stalin to surrender or suffer "complete and utter destruction," the United States dropped an atomic bomb on Hiroshima the morning of August 6 and another on Nagasaki three days later. Japan subsequently surrendered, and for some 140,000,000 Americans, there could have been no sweeter news. The war was over, the troops would start coming home, and civilians who had taken jobs dependent on the wartime economy—Gordon among them—could return to normalcy. The owners of the home the Hinckleys were renting in Denver announced their intention to return immediately, so without delay Gordon submitted his resignation. By the last weekend in August, Marjorie and the children had moved back to Salt Lake City, leaving him behind to ease the transition for his replacement at the railroad. [^18]

Gordon had left his employment at the Church without the promise of a job at war's end, but he presumed that something would be available. During the summer of 1945 Presiding Bishop LeGrand Richards had written him with the offer of employment in the Presiding Bishop's office, but Gordon had felt too committed to the railroad to consider it seriously. [^19] And throughout the war he and Elder Stephen L Richards had stayed in close contact. As soon as Elder Richards learned that he was free to come home, he offered him his old job back. But the Denver and Rio Grande liked what they saw in the manager from Utah, and they countered by offering a promotion with a salary greater than he could ever expect to make working for the Church.

The offer was tempting. His young family was growing, and no one knew quite what to expect of the postwar economy. With Marjorie already back in Utah, Gordon wrote her about the duel between his current and former employers. She responded by return mail: "I will be glad when we are together, as this setup just does not suit me at all. Grumble, grumble. . . . I miss you and long for you." From that point, however, her reply was practical, accommodating, and to the point: "As for the job you had just better make up your mind to do the one which you enjoy the most, as you will spend quite a bit of your life working at it. As for me, I can make myself reasonably happy wherever you are, and as for the children, it is a question either way and is something we can not possibly foretell, no matter how we speculate and wonder and worry." She concluded with her only stipulation: "Let's hurry and take up life together again. I like it better that way." [^20]

The railroad had been good to Gordon and appeared to offer the best potential for advancement as well as the greater challenge to his capitalistic instincts. But his heart was back at 47 East South Temple, and he felt that he belonged there—if, that is, he could modify his old job. He told Elder Richards that he would come back if he could "bake a cake without having to do the dishes all the time." When Elder Richards assured him that he could hire some help, Gordon informed railroad officials that he was returning to Salt Lake City. "Don't make a decision yet," they urged. "Take a ninety-day leave of absence, and then decide. We'll hold the position for you until then." [^21] Gordon agreed and left for Utah.

The Hinckleys were thrilled to return to their home in East Millcreek with the large yard and hollow out back. And when Gordon walked back into Church headquarters, it felt as though he had never left. It was so good to return to an environment more suited to his nature, and to concentrate on issues he felt passionate about. After thirty days, he called D&RG officials and explained that he would not be coming back. Still the railroad didn't give up; in the spring of 1947 they approached him with an even better offer. Elder Harold B. Lee noted in his journal: "Gordon B. Hinckley came to discuss with me the offer of the D&RG Railway Company at Denver, to become a department head at $510 per month." [^22] Despite what would have been a generous raise, Gordon found this decision relatively easy to make. He explained to a friend: "This is the Lord's work. I feel I will make my best contribution in life by continuing to do my humble part to further the cause." [^23]

Though the Denver experience had been a positive diversion, it was wonderful to be back among friends and family. In particular, the Hinckleys were anxious to spend time with Bryant. Thirteen months after Aunt May's death in May 1943, he had married Lois Anderson, a principal in the Salt Lake City school system, and they were now living in the East Millcreek farm home. Shortly after his father's fourth marriage Gordon had left for Denver, and there had been little time for him and Marjorie to become acquainted with Bryant's new wife. Now Kathy and Dick resumed their visits to Papa Hinckley, and Dick was old enough to be enthralled with his grandfather, whose stories about Indians, cowboys, and growing up at Cove Fort fascinated him. Papa Hinckley was larger than life.

The General Authorities and employees at Church headquarters seemed genuinely pleased to have Gordon back. His reputation as "the Slave" was intact, and as conditions around the world slowly began to return to normal, his talents were again sorely needed. Elder Ezra Taft Benson of the Quorum of the Twelve left for Europe in February 1946 to administer to both the physical and spiritual needs of the Saints there and to pave the way for missionaries to return to the Continent. Most European countries were just beginning to sort through the rubble in the aftermath of the war, and it would be some time before missions there were fully operational, but the number of missionaries serving in other areas of the world began to increase almost immediately.

Resuming his duties with the Radio, Publicity, and Mission Literature Committee, Gordon again began writing and producing scripts, filmstrips, and other missionary and public relations materials. As before, his writing style was clear, to the point, and unencumbered by literary excesses: every word meant something, one concept built upon another, and the writing never drew attention to itself but simply advanced the message.

His experience in Colorado had persuaded him that many people still had a distorted view of Mormons and what they believed, and it had given him a different perspective about how to introduce the gospel more effectively to nonmembers. These insights proved invaluable when President George Albert Smith asked him to write a book to be used in connection with the centennial of the pioneers' entrance into the Salt Lake Valley. The President described the need for a straightforward description of the gospel that a member could comfortably place in an investigator's hand. The result was a 230-page book organized in two sections, the latter of which outlined the history of the Church from the Restoration to the present and was later reprinted as a separate volume titled Truth Restored.

"Here is a question which has been earnestly asked for more than a century," Gordon wrote by way of beginning. "Over the years numerous answers have been given to it. The books alone which have been written around this query fill many feet of library shelf. It has been the theme of countless magazine articles, newspaper stories, pamphlets, and sermons. In the early days of Mormonism these writings and discourses were motivated largely by a spirit of blind prejudice, for the question was most often asked in an atmosphere of ignorance and bigotry. Fortunately, that has changed. An honest question deserves an honest answer. What of the Mormons? Who are they? What do they believe? What is their program? What is their organization? What is their history?" [^24] For decades Truth Restored served as a standard reference text for hundreds of thousands of missionaries.

Gordon was comfortable handling this and countless other projects in relative anonymity, but gradually he was gaining stature and even some prominence in the LDS community, particularly in the Intermountain West, where his radio broadcasts and occasional mentions in the press brought him and his family public attention.

The nature of Gordon's work, like that of his father's, served to refine and hone his skills as a communicator. During the late forties, he contributed frequently to the Church News "Salt of the Earth" series, in which he heralded the contributions of ordinary men and women whose quiet goodness might otherwise have gone unnoticed. [^25] As he wrote an increasing number of magazine articles and newspaper columns, turned out more slide presentations, and delivered one radio address after another, his own influence began to extend far beyond what he might have anticipated.

In the late forties Elder Henry D. Moyle of the Twelve approached Gordon about completing a biography of Elder Moyle's father, James H. Moyle. Author John Henry Evans had only begun the project prior to his death in 1947. Gordon agreed to the enormous undertaking and attempted to squeeze in his writing around his full-time job and Church assignments. A noisy family at home didn't help matters, as he tried to shoehorn the project into rare undisturbed moments. As the deadline loomed, Marjorie sensed her husband's predicament and took the children to a cabin in a nearby canyon for several days so that Gordon could have peace and quiet for his thinking and writing. The arrangement worked out nicely for everyone—the children filled their time hiking to nearby lakes, reading books, and enjoying a leisurely break from city life, and Gordon worked from dawn until dusk on the project that weighed on him.

Though the obligation to the Moyle family added pressure that he didn't particularly need or relish, Gordon was well suited to writing biography, combining as it did his love of history with heartfelt admiration for a life well lived. Later that year James Henry Moyle: The Story of a Distinguished American and an Honored Churchman was published.

Some of Gordon's writing enjoyed exposure beyond the LDS audience. In the spring of 1951, Look magazine invited him to respond to an article published in its April 24, 1951, issue entitled "The Mormons: We Are a Peculiar People," written by Lewis W. Gillenson. He was unflinching in his review of Gillenson's interpretation of the Church: " article] is a disappointment after reading some of his other writings on the Protestant churches in America. . . . In general . . . it is a caricature of the Mormon people," Gordon began, identifying specific reasons for his uncomplimentary appraisal: "His lead heading reads: 'Joseph Smith's "chosen people" revel in their singularity as they prepare for the gathering of Israel in the desert.' What does he mean by this? Would he have us believe that the Mormons are a long-haired, fanatical sect, who spend their days aloof from the world, preparing some kind of asylum in the desert for scattered Israel? . . . Mr. Gillenson infers that Joseph Smith's followers were a credulous lot—'frontier disciples,' men of 'heady hopes' and 'simplicity.' The fact is that most of the early converts to Mormonism were from the New England States. They were at least as well educated as any class in the country, and as cultured." Gordon concluded, "It is unfortunate that in reviewing the history of a people who have accomplished so much in the face of staggering odds, Mr. Gillenson relied so heavily on evidently untrustworthy sources. In so doing, he has drawn the kind of picture in which the reader has difficulty in distinguishing fact from fiction." [^26]

In general, as the Look article seemed to imply, the visibility of the Church was increasing. In 1947, one hundred years after the first company of pioneers had arrived in the Salt Lake Valley, Church membership reached one million. In October 1949, at least partly as a result of Gordon's encouragement and efforts, general conference was first telecast over KSL television. For years before that, he had arranged for the private wire hookups that transmitted general priesthood meeting to congregations around the world, and he continued to be involved in other radio programming as well. [^27]

As missionary work surged forward, Gordon wished he had time to implement every idea and seize every opportunity that presented itself. There were times, however, when he felt stretched to the limit. Complicating his schedule, he and Marjorie had still been getting settled upon their return from Colorado when, on April 20, 1946, he was sustained as second counselor to Lamont B. Gundersen in the East Millcreek Stake presidency. The call had come as a surprise. Elder Stephen L Richards later told Gordon that his appointment had been discussed by the Twelve in their temple meeting, and they had determined that in this case the call to the stake presidency should supersede his general board call. Gordon was pleased at the prospects of laboring among his own friends and neighbors, and thus began an extended period of Church service in East Millcreek. After serving for two and a half years as second counselor to President Gundersen, he was called on November 14, 1948, as first counselor, replacing Ralph S. Barney, who was released due to ill health.

The challenge of helping oversee the East Millcreek Stake, situated in one of the most rapidly growing areas in all of Utah, was invigorating. In addition, as he filled various priesthood assignments, Gordon became acquainted with priesthood leaders in nearby stakes, further increasing his circle of friends. For example, he worked with a young attorney serving as a counselor in the Cottonwood Stake presidency, James E. Faust, and with Thomas S. Monson, who was serving as a counselor in the Temple View Stake.

Gordon's activities formed an interesting juxtaposition: By day he devised ways to introduce the gospel to nonmembers, and in the evenings he sought solutions for integrating a large concentration of Saints into the programs of the Church. At the same time, he and Marjorie were attempting to rear little Saints of their own.

Life in the Hinckley home was rarely monotonous, often lighthearted, and almost always noisy. On October 30, 1947, Marjorie and Gordon were blessed with their fourth child and second son, Clark Bryant. Now the mother of two boys and two girls, Marjorie couldn't imagine being any happier with her lot in life. The demands of rearing young children seemed to energize rather than discourage her. Though she was often left to manage her brood alone while Gordon attended to his responsibilities in the stake presidency, she had always taken it for granted that he would have demanding Church responsibilities. She was comfortable with his stewardship and happy about hers.

None of the children questioned who was ultimately in charge at home, however, though Gordon was seldom involved in settling disputes or managing the numerous tasks that went hand in hand with taking care of children. Neither he nor Marjorie was heavy-handed either in disciplining or in setting rigid rules. Marjorie's parents had been gentle in their approach to child rearing, and her grandmother's statement, "You don't teach a child not to hit by hitting," filtered often through her subconscious. Gordon liked to say that his father never laid a hand on him except to bless him, and he intended to follow suit. Nor were the couple terribly demanding of each other. "Gordon always let me do my own thing," Marjorie explained. "He never insisted that I do anything his way, or any way, for that matter. From the very beginning he gave me space and let me fly." [^28]

Despite the normal confusion associated with running a household and rearing children, an aura of well-being per-meated the Hinckley home. As Gordon had in previous decades, his children loved where they lived. Their property could no longer be considered rural, but there was still plenty of room to run and play. With Papa Hinckley and Aunt Lois just up the hollow, there was constant foot traffic from one house to the other—including Gordon, who shoveled the snow, kept everything in working order at his father's home, and in general tried to make life for Bryant and Lois pleasant and worry free.

Life at Church headquarters, however, was not tranquil. Gordon had his hands full with the constant and never-ending challenge of helping steer the Church into more professional and productive public relations and communications. Wonderful opportunities loomed on the horizon. With the trauma of World War II behind them, young men who had given several years to their country were eager to put down roots, as were the young women who had remained behind. In contrast to the decade just ended, the fifties began with a feeling of goodwill. Americans in general trusted their leaders to tell them the truth, to make wise decisions, and to keep the country out of war.

That is why the crisis that struck at 4:00 A.M. on June 25, 1950, hit like a thunderbolt. When North Korean soldiers stormed across the 38th parallel into South Korea, few Americans realized how profoundly this incident halfway around the world would affect them. But by November, when U.S. aircraft were attacked by North Korean MIGs, the country found itself squarely in the middle of another international conflict. Then, as the April 1951 general conference approached, President George Albert Smith left the hospital after an extended illness. His counselors, J. Reuben Clark Jr. and David O. McKay, visited him for the last time on April 2. Two days later, after having served as President of the Church just under six years, he was gone. Both the Korean conflict and the prophet's death would have a profound and direct influence on Gordon's life

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Conference Report, April 1951, pp. 150-51.
[^2] See James B. Allen and Glen M. Leonard, The Story of the Latter-day Saints, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992), pp. 567-68.
[^3] Gordon B. Hinckley, "The Healing Power of Christ," Ensign, November 1988, p. 54.
[^4] See "Mission Literature Survey of Foreign Missions and Languages, 1946-1956," LDS Church Archives.
[^5] Joseph C. Goulden, Korea: The Untold Story (New York: Times Books, 1982), p. 3.
[^6] See Stephen L Richards and Robert W. Barker, "General Memorandum Regarding Missionary System, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and Selective Service," LDS Church Archives.
[^7] See W. Glenn Harmon to Stephen L Richards, 10 May 1951.
[^8] GBH memo, undated (circa 1951), Executive Secretary General Files, 1940-1962, LDS Church Archives.
[^9] See Interview with GBH, 4 January 1995.
[^10] See GBH memo regarding Preston, Idaho, draft board situation, undated.
[^11] See, for example, Gordon B. Hinckley, "Memorandum of Meeting Between President Stephen L Richards and General J. Wallace West and Colonel Oscar Gray, December 20, 1951," LDS Church Archives; also Arthur V. Watkins to Stephen L Richards, 2 April 1951.
[^12] See GBH memo, "Number of Missionaries in the Field as of December 31," undated; also 1993-94 Church Almanac (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1992), p. 400.
[^13] See First Presidency to Presidents of Stakes and Bishops of Wards, 10 July 1953; also Salt Lake Tribune, 15 July 1953, p. 15.
[^14] See Report of President Stephen L Richards, Conference with General James A. May, Selective Service Agent of State of Nevada, 25 September 1953; Missionary Department Executive Secretary Files, LDS Church Archives.
[^15] Ned L. Mangelson memorandum, 27 April 1995.
[^16] Interview with GBH, 4 January 1995; see also Interview with MPH, 16 March 1995.
[^17] See Congressional Record, House of Representatives, 28 June 1955.
[^18] See First Presidency to Presidents of Stakes and Bishops of Wards, 1 September 1955; also Church News, 17 September 1955, p. 13.
[^19] Interview with GBH, 4 January 1995; see also Gordon B. Hinckley, "President Stephen L Richards: 1879-1959," Improvement Era, June 1959, p. 488.
[^20] See Interview with GBH, 4 January 1995.
[^21] Stephen L Richards to GBH, 22 December 1953.
[^22] See Allen and Leonard, Story of the Latter-day Saints, pp. 567-68; also 1993-94 Church Almanac, p. 400.
[^23] See Our Glorious Century (Pleasantville, N.Y.: Reader's Digest Association, 1994), p. 266.
[^24] See "President Stephen L Richards: 1879-1959," pp. 488-89; also 1995-96 Church Almanac (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1994), pp. 383, 418-20.
[^25] Interview with GBH, 4 January 1995.
[^26] See S. Dilworth Young, "Gordon B. Hinckley-An Impression," Relief Society Magazine, vol. 45 (1958), pp. 358-59.
[^27] Introduction by William E. Berrett to Gordon B. Hinckley, "Building an Eternal Home," address delivered at BYU, 4 November 1959.
[^28] See GBH to Stephen L Richards, 25 June 1951.
