Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Nine

On the Firing Line

With the passing of President George Albert Smith just two days before the April 1951 general conference began, David O. McKay was sustained as President of the Church in a solemn assembly held Monday, April 9. His ordination was in keeping with the established pattern of succession, but a ripple of surprise swept through the Tabernacle when the vigorous new prophet, whose stature and shock of wavy white hair accentuated his commanding presence, broke with recent tradition and named Stephen L Richards and J. Reuben Clark Jr. as his first and second counselors respectively. For eighteen years President Clark had served as first counselor in the First Presidency; during much of that time he had carried the major load. [^1]

Gordon witnessed the proceedings of the solemn assembly in the Tabernacle and, like others, was caught off guard by what took place. But he eagerly sustained President McKay, whom he saw as a leader of magnificent proportions. He wondered, however, how President Richards's new assignment might affect their working relationship, and assumed that he might now have less interaction with his trusted friend.

The new First Presidency assumed leadership of a rapidly expanding Church. With 1.1 million members living in 42 missions and 191 stakes, the pace was quickening, and all who worked in and around Church headquarters sensed that the kingdom was poised to move forward in an unprecedented way.

Not long after the reorganization of the First Presidency, President Richards called Gordon to his office. There was nothing unusual about the request, as the two had conferred regularly for more than fifteen years. But Gordon was unprepared for what then unfolded. "President McKay has given me responsibility for the missionary program of the Church," President Richards began, "and I need you to help me." Gordon quickly learned that his "help" was to be on much more than a casual basis, for President Richards named him executive secretary of the General Missionary Committee and charged him with overseeing the day-to-day operations of the Missionary Department. It was a large and unwieldy responsibility. In the past, the various phases of the missionary program had been divided among four different committees at Church headquarters; now all were consolidated under one. [^2]

Gordon was willing to serve wherever and however the Brethren saw fit, and he was pleased to continue his close association with President Richards, who was like a father to him. But as President Richards outlined the challenges that lay before them—including the intensified military conscription fueled by the Korean War, with its consequent effects on the missionary program—Gordon responded, "President Richards, you don't want me in this position; you want a lawyer." The reaction was firm: "I am a lawyer. I don't want to litigate this. I want to compose it." [^3]

Though Gordon may have wondered why President Richards had placed such a burdensome responsibility on his shoulders, he was a logical choice for the job. Perhaps no other non-General Authority had enjoyed his unique schooling and preparation regarding the Church's mandate to acquaint the people of the world with the gospel. This new assignment gave him stewardship over the full range of missionary-related issues.

To the Missionary Department fell responsibility for essentially everything relating to missionary work: translation of all missionary materials, including the scriptures, into an increasing number of languages; the call and training of missionaries and mission presidents; the preparation and distribution of mission literature and other teaching materials; the continued development of media tools, radio broadcasts, and public relations efforts; and the obligation to respond to the never-ending problems of several thousand missionaries serving throughout the world. [^4]

Had this been an era of tranquillity, the workload and pressure associated with supervising the missionary program would have been challenge enough. But the Korean War complicated matters and altered the missionary landscape drastically. Almost everyone forced to deal with what seemed a meaningless conflict was finding it to be an exercise in frustration. Dean Acheson, President Harry S. Truman's Secretary of State, put the situation in context: "If the best minds in the world had set out to find us the worst possible location in the world to fight this damnable war, politically and militarily, the unanimous choice would have been Korea." [^5] It was a war that no one wanted, in a desolate, harsh land about which most Americans knew little or nothing. Korea, known anciently as Chosun, or Land of the Morning Calm, was anything but that.

Certainly this "police action" was wreaking unprecedented havoc with the missionary program. In short, the government wanted to draft the same young LDS men who wished to serve missions. After the enactment of the Selective Service Act of 1948, the Church and national Selective Service agents had presumably reached a working agreement whereby the missionary program and the draft could coexist amicably. On January 30, 1951, the First Presidency released a letter that provided priesthood leaders with strict instructions regarding which young men were eligible for missionary service. In general, those who were draft-liable were not to be called on missions. In a lengthy statement drafted by then-Elder Stephen L Richards, the Church reaffirmed its long-standing policy of supporting government in its military activity. "No exemption is being asked for the Church membership in general," the document clarified. "The missionaries concerned make up only a minor part of the Church and have an exact counterpart in ordained ministers or missionaries of other sects. The general membership of the Church is available for military duty and will perform it with distinction, as in the past." [^6]

These conciliatory efforts notwithstanding, the conflict intensified as the military's need for soldiers increased. The law providing for the drafting of young men allowed for certain exemptions as well, one of which was a ministerial, or 4-D, classification. The Church's official position—and Gordon's primary point of advocacy—was that a missionary devoting his full time to religious service legitimately merited classification as a minister, which temporary classification only postponed rather than exempted his military service. But some draft boards did not agree. With Gordon's new assignment came responsibility for sorting through the bureaucratic chaos and representing the Church in the conflict between draft boards and missionaries.

Though Church leaders had reached what they thought to be consensus with the Selective Service, they found themselves facing uncooperative and even hostile draft boards around the country. Some local boards categorically refused to grant any ministerial classifications to missionaries, regardless of their draft status. Other boards ordered young men in their jurisdiction to leave the mission field and return home to report for active duty. [^7] Ironically, draft boards in Utah and Idaho were among the most uncooperative. "I am happy to say that in the majority of draft boards outside the state of Utah we have had the fullest cooperation and good will," Gordon recorded. "In fact, many of the draft boards have urged that the Church continue calling missionaries and they would be glad to defer any number which the Church asks. . . . They could see the advantage of the fine training program of the Church." [^8]

In any case, the uncertainty was unnerving to anyone with a vested interest in missionary work—particularly potential missionaries and their parents and leaders. No young man knew what his future would be or what he could plan for. Complicating matters, the Korean War was not a popular conflict in the United States, and the patriotic enthusiasm for enlisting that had prevailed during World War II had long since dissipated.

Despite everything at stake, and though the heavy workload and complex nature of the problem were overwhelming, it was not Gordon's nature to dwell on the dark side of things. He at times was worried and perplexed, but he was rarely gloomy. Neither was he inclined to surrender without a fight to mounting pressure and interference from the government, though unraveling the Selective Service's bureaucracy was a mind-boggling assignment. There were local draft boards and appeals boards at both state and federal levels. A young man who was drafted could appeal that decision to the state appeals board. The federal appeals board would hear a case only when there was a split decision by the state appeals board, or on appeal from General Lewis B. Hershey, national director of the Selective Service.

Gordon had learned to keep his head down and stay out of the cross fire, but that approach was becoming increasingly difficult to follow as several events thrust him into the eye of the swirling controversy. A young man from Idaho was ordered by his draft board to leave the mission field and report for active duty. His case was appealed—and lost—at both the state and federal appeals boards. President McKay, President Richards, and Gordon subsequently met with the young man's parents and stake president to examine their options. After a lengthy discussion, during which they considered the precedent-setting nature of the case, President McKay suggested that perhaps the Church should devote its resources to reversing the decision. When asked for his counsel, President Richards offered a different view of the matter: "President McKay, we could fight this all the way to the Supreme Court if we chose to, but we do not appear to have a strong case. What if we lose? Would the entire missionary program be jeopardized? This young man has served for seventeen months, and though I know it is a disappointment to him and his parents, perhaps it is better for him to accept his induction order than for the Church to risk the possibility of losing the missionary program." [^9]

President McKay concurred, but other disappointments followed. The draft board in a small Idaho town, for example, ordered every young man then serving a mission to report on the courthouse steps one week hence for preinduction physical examinations. President Richards and Gordon drove to Idaho to represent the missionaries before the draft board. "Stephen L Richards, who was about as persuasive a man as I've ever known, talked with that draft board, most of whom were members of the Church," Gordon remembered. "All he got out of them was a deferment on the reporting date. They were unwilling to grant any 4-D classifications." Both President Richards and Gordon left the meeting disheartened about the situation. [^10]

With such decisions being made in a state heavily populated by members of the Church, where a sympathetic attitude toward missionaries might have been expected, it was clear that the Church would never make substantive headway by dealing exclusively with local boards. So President Richards and Gordon traveled to Washington, D.C., for a meeting with General Hershey that had been arranged by Senator Wallace Bennett and his assistant, Robert W. Barker. Their purpose was to clarify the intent of the missionary program and to reassure the general that the Church did not expect its young men to be excluded from military service, but simply to have their induction delayed long enough for them to serve missions.

General Hershey, reluctant to interfere with any church's program for carrying on its ministry, was sympathetic to the Church's cause. Later, on a visit to Utah, he invited Gordon to present the Church's case before the state's Selective Service boards, which he did. [^11]

Between February 1951 and July 1953, the Church refrained from extending mission calls to young men who were eligible for military service. By that time, the Church's missionary force had plunged from 4,849 in 1951 to 2,189 in 1953; only 872 missionaries were set apart in 1952. New measures were called for. [^12] With General Hershey's support, and after winning a number of federal appeals, Gordon worked with the Selective Service to achieve what appeared to be a reasonable compromise: a quota that allowed a restricted number of missionaries to serve at any given time. Beginning in July 1953, each ward and branch in the United States could call one young man to serve a mission that year and perhaps two the following year.

A First Presidency letter of July 10, 1953, outlined the quota's objective: "This change will not supply us with the corps of missionaries we have had in past years, but it should help to alleviate the serious impairment of the work that we are suffering by reason of the very limited force now in the field." The letter also provided instructions for implementing the quota: "Bishops and stake presidents will please see that their recommendations are spread over a period of months in such a manner as to avoid, insofar as possible, an exceptional demand on the pool of any one draft board at a particular time. We are appreciative of the fact that this program will impose on our bishops and stake presidents the burden of selecting and recommending one or two men. . . . However, the responsibility of recommending missionaries has always involved discriminative selection." [^13]

The quota was not an ideal solution, but it was preferable to having the missionary program shut down altogether. Yet even with this tentative truce between the Church and the Selective Service, problems remained. The quota system was by nature divisive, and it created strain in wards where the parents of sons drafted into military service sometimes resented those whose sons managed to avoid or postpone induction by serving missions. While one boy went off to war, another was called on a mission—both out of the same ward, the same neighborhood, the same priests quorum. Gordon heard from and counseled with many of those families.

Some local and state draft boards refused to allow the Church even its quota of one boy per ward per annum. President Richards's meeting with General James A. May, head of Selective Service for Nevada, was representative of others. General May admitted being offended that he had not been consulted about the quota agreement and warned that he had no intention of adopting it: "I hope you won't start any appeals in this state because if you do you will have these boards bristling." President Richards responded that the Church hoped to work things out without the necessity of appeal but that it would always appeal "the fact that our missionaries are ministers of religion. If anyone questions that, we will take it to the last resort for decision." [^14]

At times the conflict was for Gordon intensely personal. One young man living in Ogden, Utah, filed a suit against the Selective Service on the grounds that he was being inducted into the armed forces because another young man in his neighborhood, who he believed should have been drafted in his place, was serving a mission because of a 4-D classification. When President McKay was named a codefendant in the suit, Gordon was assigned to take his place throughout the lengthy proceedings. Among other things, he represented President McKay and the Church in a grueling deposition during which the government subpoenaed all of the existing missionary files. "How many trucks do you want to send?" Gordon asked when he heard their request and envisioned the enormous quantity of pertinent records. Fortunately, the war ended before the case went to trial.

n n n n n

As far as Gordon's job description was concerned, his responsibilities as executive secretary of the Missionary Department were administrative in nature—but he found that he couldn't separate his day-to-day work from his personal interest in the missionaries themselves. Ned L. Mangelson was called in 1953 to serve in the Swiss-Austrian Mission. A promised deferment had not come by the time he entered the mission home in September. When his father spoke with the chairman of the local draft board, he was told that the board had no intention of issuing the deferment. The Mangelsons met with Gordon about the situation and outlined a strategy, but the deferment had not come by the time Elder Mangelson completed his stay at the mission home. "Brother Hinckley admonished me to have faith, to proceed to New York for embarkation, and that the release by the draft board would be waiting for me there," Ned recorded. "When I arrived at Hotel Wellington in New York City the release from the draft board had arrived by mail, which was an answer to prayer. Brother Gordon B. Hinckley was a great help to us in that crisis situation when he taught me to have faith that the Lord would open the way." [^15]

Such incidents were common, for there were many days when, after doing everything humanly possible, Gordon could only exercise faith that the Lord would soften hearts and intervene as necessary. Certainly General Hershey had come to recognize the legitimacy of ministerial status for full-time missionaries. When the general retired, Gordon wrote to express his appreciation for the professional, objective way he had conducted affairs regarding the Church. The general replied that he wished all his interactions with religious groups had been as cooperative.

The signing of the peace accord ending the Korean War on July 27, 1953, reduced the urgent need for soldiers, but the draft remained intact, and for several years thereafter Gordon wrestled almost daily with conflicts between missionaries and local draft boards. He was constantly on the phone, trying on one hand to educate local draft boards about the merits of the missionary program, and on the other to calm tense missionaries and their parents.

"Gordon walked the floor a lot during those years," Marjorie said. "The pressure was very hard on him." Even Gordon, ever optimistic, conceded that it was a "terrible time. I have seen other terrible times, but those may have been the worst. Every day was a battleground. The very survival of the missionary program of the Church was at stake, and every day brought a new fight. I would never wish to go through the experiences of those years again." [^16] Even years later, mention of the Korean War, the name of General Hershey, or anything else associated with the ongoing crisis evoked a flood of unsettling memories in Gordon's three oldest children, who had witnessed the pressure their father was under. It was one of the rare times his stress showed at home.

Finally, on June 28, 1955, a resolution on the floor of Congress declared that LDS missionaries were to be regarded legally as ordained ministers of the Church and therefore subject to ministerial deferment. [^17] In some respects, the action was too little too late, for by this time the pressing need for servicemen had diminished to the extent that the quota was no longer needed anyway. Indeed, just two months later, in a letter to local priesthood leaders dated September 1, 1955, the First Presidency announced that the quota had been abolished and the limitations on mission calls lifted. [^18]

It was hard to imagine that a war in a country half a world away had caused Gordon such grief, inspired so many sleepless nights, and led to such an endless round of meetings, negotiations, telephone calls, and deliberations. One positive outgrowth was that he continued to benefit from close association with President Richards, whose mentoring was providential. Gordon said: "To the credit of this wise and inspired man, situations that appeared impossible to handle were resolved in such a way that young men of the Church could honor their military obligations and serve missions." [^19] On a personal basis, Gordon learned firsthand how to deal with bureaucracy, and he came to understand the effect of decisions from the Church's highest councils. "President Richards was thoughtful, deliberate, careful, and wise," he explained. "He never rushed into action but looked cautiously before he proceeded. I learned that you best proceed carefully in this work, because whatever decision you make has far-reaching ramifications and affects the lives of many people." [^20]

In return, President Richards had high regard for his young associate. Following the end of the Korean War, he expressed his gratitude in a holiday greeting: "I cannot tell you how deeply I appreciate your association and help. I do not see how I could carry forward my assignment without the efficient service you so willingly give. I am sure the Lord will bless you for it, for you are a great contributor to his holy cause." [^21]

For all of the agony associated with keeping the missionary program functional, the results were worth the effort. The number of full-time missionaries in the field gradually rose to more than six thousand by the end of the 1950s, and during that decade more people—nearly half a million—were baptized than during the Church's first ninety years, from 1830 to 1920. [^22]

In the United States the fifties were a decade of religious resurgence. It was acceptable, even fashionable, to profess a belief in God. In 1954 Congress added the words "under God" to the Pledge of Allegiance. Opinion polls showed that 95 percent of all Americans considered themselves religiously inclined, and half of the adult population regularly attended some kind of worship service. [^23]

Such trends and attitudes were reflected in the number of individuals being drawn into the gospel net. During the eight years (1951-59) that the Missionary Department fell under President Richards's—and Gordon's—direction, missionary work moved forward on an unprecedented scale: the 7,740 missionaries who were sent into the field, together with 28,281 men and women serving as stake missionaries, baptized more than 185,000 converts. And as the program grew, certain procedural changes were inevitable. On March 25, 1953, for example, the First Presidency announced that returning missionaries would no longer report directly to General Authorities but, rather, to their stake presidency and high council. [^24]

Such increases in conversions were, at least to some extent, a direct outgrowth of the intensified pace of the Missionary Department. Selective Service-related challenges and issues were only a part of what Gordon dealt with daily. As the department grew in scope and size, others would be brought in to assist—among them Boyd K. Packer, who would subsequently be called to the Quorum of the Twelve, D. Arthur Haycock, who would serve as personal secretary to five Presidents of the Church, and James M. Paramore, who would later be called as a General Authority. But for the time being, though he relied on the assistance of two secretaries, Gordon was, in effect, the Missionary Department. Consequently his phone rang at all hours of the day and night, at work and at home: "I would get to work first thing in the morning, and before I could get my hat off the phone would be ringing," he explained. "All day long, and half the night, my phone rang with calls from all over the world. When missionaries were physically sick, homesick, seasick, or lovesick, I got the call." [^25]

If a missionary was injured or became seriously ill and needed hospitalization or treatment of some kind; when regulations governing passports or visas in a country changed; when a stake president or bishop needed counsel about a potential missionary's situation; if a translator trying to get the right shade of meaning in a translation of missionary materials needed clarification; or when a General Authority wished for someone to assist him in training local priesthood leaders on implementing member missionary work—in response to these and many other issues, Gordon's phone rang at what had become a vital nerve center of the Church. [^26]

Each day he moved quickly through the mound of details that fell to him. He had the capacity to absorb large amounts of information and make decisions without belaboring the point or second-guessing himself afterward. He knew every mission president in the world and had helped train them before they entered the field. And for each, he was the first-line contact at Church headquarters: He was the Slave, the crank behind the wheel, as he described his role. At a later date his contribution was put in context when he was introduced to the BYU student body before an address in November 1959: "Sometimes we do not fully appreciate the man behind the scenes who sits quietly at his desk in the capacity of a secretary to a great committee, but it is in that capacity that Gordon B. Hinckley has made his weight felt around the world." [^27]

As early as 1951, and prior to his appointment as executive secretary of the General Missionary Committee, Gordon had recommended to President Richards that the Missionary Department adopt a uniform curriculum for missionaries so that translators could provide study aids in various languages and the same manuals could be made available to all. [^28] Three or four missions had developed plans of their own. These were all reviewed and developed into a "Systematic Program for Teaching the Gospel," the first standard approach to proselytizing ever implemented Churchwide. Though use of the plan was at first optional, by 1961 the First Presidency determined that a uniform teaching plan would be part of the mandatory curriculum for training missionaries in the mission home in Salt Lake City. [^29]

After nearly two decades of full-time focus on missionary work and public relations, Gordon was constantly evaluating ways to present the gospel message more effectively. When a report confirmed his suspicion that bureaus of information at Nauvoo and Carthage weren't being utilized fully, he sent a memo to President Richards outlining his concerns: "We spend thousands of dollars on construction, appoint a director, and then give him neither direction nor facilities," he reported. "In my judgment we simply are not getting from these places the missionary possibilities that might be realized. . . . It is as important to have expert direction in telling our story as to have an architect in planning the building." For emphasis he added, "At the moment my feelings on this matter are somewhat strong . . . because I have before me the copy of a pamphlet for distribution. . . . It was written by a man who will do an excellent job of directing of our bureaus]. . . . But, according to his own story to me, his English teacher passed him only because the coach needed him on the varsity football team." [^30]

As Gordon trained local leaders, mission presidents, and occasionally prospective missionaries in the finer points of missionary work, he typically emphasized that investigators should be truly converted before they were baptized. And he pushed local leaders to intensify their member missionary work.

As he immersed himself in helping missionaries teach the gospel, Gordon found that his own testimony of the Book of Mormon as a key to conversion increased dramatically. The pressure to provide additional translations of the Book of Mormon steadily increased as citizens of non-English-speaking lands joined the Church and the need for new language versions of the Book of Mormon became apparent. During the 1950s new, revised, or updated translations of the Book of Mormon were published in German (1955 and 1959), Norwegian (1959), Portuguese (1951, 1952, and 1958), Spanish (1950 and 1952), Swedish (1959), French (1952 and 1959), Japanese (1957), and Finnish (1952). Gordon spent many hours working with translators who understood the terminology and nuances unique to the Church to produce precise foreign-language editions of the scriptures. All other missionary-related materials had to be translated as well, and supervision for the Liahona, the Church's official Spanish-language periodical, also fell on his desk.

During this period he found himself often coordinating the printing of various editions of the Book of Mormon, as well as other missionary materials, with Thomas S. Monson, who oversaw Church printing as part of his responsibilities at the Deseret News Press. The latter described their interaction: "We had in our catalog of mission literature well over one hundred items, and Brother Hinckley had the immense task of keeping a sufficient supply on hand of all of those items. We would plan what to print, how many to print, and when to reorder. The biggest job was placing orders for the Book of Mormon. Every time it was printed, regardless of the language, we would plan together how it should be handled." [^31]

During this era, perhaps no one in the Church was more familiar with the missionary program and its various intricacies of operation than was Gordon B. Hinckley. Elder Bruce R. McConkie, who had been called to the First Council of the Seventy in October 1946, officially recognized that fact by presenting Gordon with a medal inscribed "Mr. Missionary." Gordon later reflected: "We did all we reasonably could to take the gospel throughout the world. We worked long and we worked hard, and we tried to use to advantage the tools and opportunities available to us. Compared with what would follow, our efforts were rather quiet and simple. But we did all we knew to do." [^32]

In 1961, on the ten-year anniversary of President McKay's becoming President of the Church, Gordon paid tribute to the venerable Church leader for the tremendous growth of missionary work without so much as hinting at his own participation: "Never has the work of teaching the gospel moved so splendidly forward as it is moving today. . . . uring the ten years that President McKay has stood as President of the Church, more than 24,000 full-time missionaries have gone into the field, notwithstanding the fact that many of our young men were prohibited from going because of military problems beyond their control. During this same period more than 261,000 converts have been baptized. . . . I can think of no more fitting memorial to the marvelous work of our great missionary President than the fact that in these last ten years more than a quarter of a million people have entered the waters of baptism." [^33]

Many times in subsequent years and decades, Gordon would summarize his feelings about missionary work. "I wish to invite members of the Church to consider anew the great mandate given by the Lord to all who desire to be known as his disciples," he said on one occasion representative of many others. "It is a mandate we cannot dodge, and one from which we cannot shrink. That mandate is to teach the gospel to the nations and peoples of the earth. . . . Truly we are engaged in a marvelous work and a wonder. . . . The progress of the Church in our day is truly astounding. The God of heaven has brought to pass this latter-day miracle, and what we have seen is but a foretaste of greater things yet to come." [^34]

This intense emphasis on missionary work spilled over into Gordon's home life. The children listened to an endless recitation of stories about missionaries who had been magnified in their labors, as well as something about the challenges missionaries faced. The family became used to phone calls at all hours of the day and night. After hearing for months about missionaries "in the field," Dick—who was used to running at will through the fields that bordered their property—asked what seemed to him a logical question: Why did the missionaries always stay out "in the field"? Why didn't they ever come inside?

Inevitably some challenges arose among the large corps of missionaries serving worldwide, and when those problems surfaced they became Gordon's as well. He had reasonable latitude in dealing with circumstances that came up and could take action personally in situations for which there was a clear-cut precedent. If there was no established criterion, he sought President Richards's counsel.

As he worked through the myriad of details, questions, requests, and predicaments that found their way to his desk, Gordon came to love the workers as well as the work, and he took a personal interest in the well-being of missionaries and mission presidents. When one young elder suffering a serious illness was forced to leave the mission field to undergo surgery in a Salt Lake City hospital, the Church secured a room nearby in which he and his mother could stay while he convalesced. Unfortunately, the room became almost unbearable during a particularly hot summer. When Gordon realized how unpleasant conditions were for the two, he loaned them the electric fan from his own office.

Faced with making decisions regarding the misconduct of missionaries, Gordon leaned when possible toward the side of compassion. When a rebuke or discipline was necessary, he seemed able to communicate that his first interest was the welfare and future of the wrongdoer, and that any action taken was based on love.

One day Gordon was present when a prominent member of the Church whose missionary-age son had been denied a call—a denial based on a moral issue—protested the decision to President Richards. After the father concluded his lengthy and demanding argument, President Richards responded: "I have some responsibility for the affairs of this Church. If you were seated where I sit, knowing the circumstances I know, you would feel exactly as I do. In your position as a member of this Church, as one who holds the priesthood, you too have a responsibility for its growth and program, and for its discipline. My heart goes out to you, for I know that what you say comes of love for your son. However, I am asking you, as a man with a responsibility for the progress of the Church, to look at the larger affairs of the kingdom. Then you make the decision in that light." After a long period of silence, the father agreed that his son should not serve. [^35]

Such experiences with President Richards and other members of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve provided Gordon with unusual exposure to those serving in the Church's highest councils. Repeatedly he observed their approach to delicate issues, participated in discussions where decisions with far-reaching implications were made, and was schooled in matters of Church government and administration. The Brethren in turn developed a high degree of confidence and trust in his judgment, ability, and integrity—which placed him in a position to accept an increasing range and degree of responsibility.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Interview with Virginia Hinckley Pearce, 12 October 1994.
[^2] Interview with Kathleen Hinckley Barnes, 17 October 1994.
[^3] Interview with GBH, 1 February 1995.
[^4] Interview with Clark Bryant Hinckley, 17 November 1994.
[^5] Interview with Richard Gordon Hinckley, 21 October 1994.
[^6] Interview with Richard Gordon Hinckley, 21 October 1994.
[^7] Interview with Kathleen Hinckley Barnes, 17 October 1994.
[^8] GBH to David J. Gourley, 31 July 1952.
[^9] Interview with Jane Hinckley Dudley, 9 November 1994.
[^10] Interview with Clark Bryant Hinckley, 11 April 1996.
[^11] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Cornerstones of a Happy Home," transcript of satellite fireside address, 29 January 1984, p. 5.
[^12] Interview with Clark Bryant Hinckley, 11 April 1996.
[^13] Interview with Virginia Hinckley Pearce, 12 October 1994.
[^14] Interview with Richard Gordon Hinckley, 21 October 1994.
[^15] Interview with Kathleen Hinckley Barnes, 17 October 1994.
[^16] See "'Behold Your Little Ones,'" p. 19.
[^17] Interview with Virginia Hinckley Pearce, 12 October 1994.
[^18] Interview with Richard Gordon Hinckley, 21 October 1994.
[^19] Interview with Virginia Hinckley Pearce, 12 October 1994.
[^20] Gordon B. Hinckley, address delivered at Churchwide youth fireside, 5 December 1982.
[^21] Interview with Richard Gordon Hinckley, 21 October 1994.
[^22] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^23] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Except the Lord Build the House . . . ," Ensign, June 1971, p. 72.
[^24] Interview with Virginia Hinckley Pearce, 12 October 1994.
[^25] Interview with Clark Bryant Hinckley, 17 November 1994.
[^26] Interview with Virginia Hinckley Pearce, 12 October 1994.
[^27] Interview with Kathleen Hinckley Barnes, 17 October 1994.
[^28] Interview with Jane Hinckley Dudley, 9 November 1994.
[^29] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^30] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^31] Interview with Kathleen Hinckley Barnes, 17 October 1994.
[^32] Interview with Kathleen Hinckley Barnes, 17 October 1994.
[^33] Interview with Jane Hinckley Dudley, 9 November 1994.
[^34] "An Evening with Marjorie Hinckley."
[^35] See "'Behold Your Little Ones,'" p. 18.
