Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Ten

Life With Father

As Gordon's responsibilities at Church headquarters expanded, his family grew as well. When he and Marjorie learned that a fifth child was on the way, they were elated. Their youngest, Clark, was six years old and had started school. Virginia was nine, Dick nearly thirteen, and Kathy would soon turn fifteen. For everyone from eldest to youngest, the birth of Gordon and Marjorie's third daughter, Jane, on February 27, 1954, was cause for celebration.

Life was lively for the seven Hinckleys. Gordon was constantly juggling his workload at the office, assignments in the stake presidency, and projects around the house or yard that begged to be finished. With two teenagers, two grade-schoolers, an infant, and a home to manage, Marjorie had her hands full. And at the Hinckley home, every season seemed to have a life of its own.

It was hard to tell who looked forward most to summers—Gordon, who felt almost claustrophobic during winter months that confined him indoors; Marjorie, who loved the sound of the screen door slamming shut as children ran in from the backyard; or the children, who relished their freedom to run at will around the thirty or so adjoining acres that belonged to the extended Hinckley family. Marjorie savored the days she had her five to herself, and she went to great lengths to keep summers unstructured so her young ones would have time to lie in the gully and listen to the birds sing if they wanted to. She wept each fall when it was time to send her brood back to school; even when school was in session she looked forward to the moment each day when her children burst through the door and started scrounging for an afternoon snack. One day when Dick had to stay after school for some grade-school discipline, Marjorie marched over to his classroom and announced to his startled teacher, "You can do anything you want with this boy all day long, but after 3 P.M. he's mine."

As much as Gordon loved East Millcreek, where he had enjoyed the carefree days of boyhood and was now rearing his own family, and as protective as he was of the property he had groomed and the home he had built with his own hands, his threat to move the family closer to town was as predictable as the changing seasons. He blustered routinely about the distance of his commute, as though his daily eleven-mile drive were an unbearable burden. But each spring as he smelled the cherry blossoms and began to dig in the soil, and as Marjorie delighted in the huge, double-petaled lilacs that bloomed on their property, they would say, "How could we bear to leave all of this behind?"

For the children, "all of this" was sheer heaven. With the orchards and pasture and huge backyard bordering a hollow filled with trails and hiding places, they believed they lived in the best place on earth. The hollow Gordon had played in as a boy was equally enticing to Dick and Clark, who made forts in the lush undergrowth and slept overnight in the orchards to "guard" the fruit from would-be raiders. The girls went from house to house on their bikes or had "picnics" on the swing at Papa Hinckley's. Most evenings they all played until past dusk, and there was never a shortage of things for the children to do at home to keep them both entertained and occupied.

From the outset, Gordon had designed their home in such a way that it could be added upon as family needs changed. He still handled repairs and remodeling personally; consequently, he was often in the middle of one project or another. What time he could find between work and Church obligations found him elbow-deep in some task: throwing up a wall, tearing down another, adding a bathroom, and so on. For years the dining-room table was covered with rolls of blueprints.

The construction chaos unnerved Marjorie at times, for it was nearly impossible to renovate in one part of the house without creating confusion elsewhere. But because Gordon's improvements always made the home better, and because the physical labor was therapeutic for him (when pressure at the office was greatest, he would come home, change into a pair of work trousers and a worn white shirt, put on his nail apron, and begin to hammer), she indulged his projects.

As the boys got a little older, they were expected to work alongside their father, and if they weren't up by seven or eight o'clock, Gordon would come looking for them: "What are you doing still in bed? The day is half gone." Nonetheless, Dick relished Saturdays with his father, and together they repaired, remodeled, planted, and planned. Gordon got everything done he could that day, knowing he would be able to sneak in only a few hours here and there during the week. Even still, hiring a repairman or builder was not an option. He knew how he wanted things done, and though he was frugal and resourceful, the more compelling issue was one of competence. One simply did not hire done what one could do as well—or better—oneself.

"It didn't matter whether or not Dad had ever done something before," Ginny later explained. "If he decided something needed to be done, he saw it through. I don't think it ever occurred to him that he couldn't do something, and I can't think of one thing he tackled that he did not pull off." [^1]

Time was the limiting factor, not skill—Gordon was resourceful and could build or repair almost anything. Whether it was the gearbox of the old Thor washing machine, a lawn-mower engine, or the car, he could solve the problem, and usually without buying replacement parts. When a repair was needed, he headed for the basement or shed and tinkered until he had fashioned a fix out of something left over from another project or reworked the device so that it bypassed the defective part. Kathy was stunned when she heard someone at a friend's home casually mention that she needed to pick up the toaster at a repair shop. "I couldn't believe it," Kathy said. "I didn't know you could take appliances somewhere to be fixed. I thought that's what fathers did—fix everything." [^2]

The house was perhaps the most visible monument to Gordon's mechanical skill, long-range vision, ingenuity, and knack for creative problem solving. When he built the home, he left studs out of certain sections in the walls, assuming that as he remodeled and expanded the house he would run hallways or add doors where needed. For several years the family room boasted a hidden record player that appeared when a door was opened in a false beam. A skilled plumber, he had a furnace for melting lead to make hot lead joints in cast-iron drainpipe. Over time, he converted the original patio into a family room and the master bedroom into a kitchen, divided the garage into two bedrooms, made an entryway of the dining room, and converted a storage room into a bath, among other things. Only the original bathroom escaped Gordon's hammer and saw. Though his family chided him at times about the recurring construction upheaval, Gordon had only one motive with his constant renovation: "I felt the pressure of a growing family, and I knew the home could be made more convenient and more interesting. I did what I did because I hoped to make things better." [^3]

Like the house, the yard was the product and imagination of its creator, who, according to the master plan filed in his head, envisioned what his acreage would look like when it reached maturity. Clark explained that from the outset his father "had a vision and a plan for the future. He was always thinking not only about how to improve conditions, but how to make them better years down the road." [^4] For example, the original landscaping plan called for a row of fast-growing Chinese elm trees along the south lot line planted alternately with slower growing but more appealing hardwoods. The strategy was simple: once the hardwoods reached maturity, the elms would be removed, leaving a row of beautiful shade trees. Unfortunately the scheme had one flaw: the hearty elms grew so rapidly that they became a nemesis that nearly overtook the large backyard. The elms produced millions of seed pods that had to be swept continually from the asphalt driveway; worse, an alarming number of seeds took root, sprouting hundreds of tiny trees in every corner of the lot. During one summer alone, when Clark was assigned to uproot any elm not planted by design, he disposed of at least two hundred trees.

As the children grew older and one by one began to move away, maintenance of the imposing yard became increasingly difficult. In time it seemed clear that, as with the house, the sheer immensity of the master plan defied its ever being completed.

The family grew used to the continual efforts toward an end that, while never completely realized, was an invigorating goal nonetheless. Though modest even by the standards of the day, their two-bedroom, one-bath expandable wonder (which eventually boasted four bedrooms and two baths) became a source of cautious pride to the children. As Dick said many years later: "I felt as though we were part of the landed gentry. It wasn't that we had much money. But Dad took great pride in making our home as fine a place as it could be. I couldn't imagine that there was anywhere I would rather live." [^5]

From the time his children were small, meetings took Gordon out of the home many nights of the week and virtually every Sunday. Only Kathy could remember—and vaguely at that—a time when he wasn't "President Hinckley." At times the boys wished their dad had more leisure time to spend with them. "We had our time together, it just wasn't hunting or boating," said Dick. "It was pounding nails and sawing. Once in a while I felt a little sorry for myself. As I got older I realized we really had spent a lot of time together." [^6]

In the summertime Gordon and Dick, and later Clark, handled the irrigation turn that came early each Monday and Wednesday morning, without which it would have been impossible to maintain the large property. Dick frequently slept outside those nights so he could turn the water on at 4:00 A.M. By the time the water made it down the ditch and onto their property a half hour later, Gordon was up, and together he and his son spent the next two hours nursing water down rows that funneled the precious liquid into every corner of the yard.

In the natural course of daily life there were other occasions when the family had uninterrupted time together. Dinner each evening was sacrosanct; everyone was expected to be home. The conversation around the table typically revolved around practical matters: "Who needs the car tomorrow?" "How did you do on your test?" "The water comes at 4:00 in the morning, so we had better get to bed early."

On Sundays, Gordon was busy with stake business during the morning and evening, but the afternoon was family time. Typically he came home from meetings and loaded up everyone for a round of visiting with family and friends. It was a rare Sunday that they didn't stop for a bowl of ice cream at Papa Hinckley's, and everyone, including children, sat in the living room and talked. The children loved these Sunday excursions that made them feel part of their parents' world.

On Sunday afternoon, time seemed to stand still—a welcome change of pace for everyone. For into the remaining six days Gordon squeezed an unbelievable amount of work, Church service, and household chores. Efficiency and punctuality were Hinckley trademarks—hence his impatience with anything that infringed on his time, such as crowds and lines. On Memorial Day the family began their annual pilgrimage to decorate Grandma Bitner's and Aunt May's graves well before 7:00 A.M. to "beat the crowds." (As adults the children were shocked to find that they could drive right to their grandmother's grave at noon without getting caught in traffic.) By Gordon's definition, half a dozen cars in a given place at any time constituted a crowd.

Each summer the family did go to the drive-in movie at least once, but they literally never saw the end of a show. Before the feature was over, Gordon would head for the exit rather than risk getting penned in by a line of traffic. If a wedding reception started at 6:00 P.M., he and Marjorie arrived at 5:30 to avoid the crowd. If he scheduled a meeting to begin on the hour, those attending learned to be in their seats ten minutes early, as he was just as likely to begin then as not. On weekdays, he went to work early and was typically at his desk before 7:00 A.M., but he left the office in time to make the commute home before traffic became heavy around 5:00. On many days, he changed into his work clothes and put in an hour on his latest project before changing back into white shirt and tie and heading for the stake center.

"Dad has always been able to squeeze more into twenty-four hours than anyone I have ever known," Kathy said. "He has never had patience with a lack of discipline, and has even less patience with those who waste time, particularly his." [^7] From Gordon's point of view, there was good reason for such a pre-occupation with time. In his experience, those who were disciplined, had a vision of what they wanted to accomplish, and worked hard usually succeeded. "There is nothing you can't do if you want to do it and are willing to work hard enough," he repeatedly told his children. "You are as bright and capable as anybody, and if you want to do something, then do it." Though he didn't necessarily see his sons and daughters as unusually gifted or talented, he wanted them to catch the vision of their own potential.

He also told Marjorie that he hoped their children would marry in the temple, get a good education, and see the world and meet its people. He wanted them to see beyond the life they were experiencing in East Millcreek and to catch a sense of the adventure and potential that awaited them. Books and education were means to that end. Both Gordon and Marjorie were readers, and they made good literature a family staple. Like his mother before him, Gordon loved words, and the dinner table at which he presided often provided the forum for a grammar lesson as he corrected the children in the way they used language, structured sentences, and pronounced words.

In addition, the children were expected to take their schoolwork seriously and to do their best. Gordon apparently kept abreast of their progress, as indicated in a letter he sent to the elementary school principal commending one of Dick's teachers: "I was unable to get to any of the P.T.A. meetings, but saw Naylor's] exceptionally good work reflected in my own boy and others of his students. Certainly one of the standards by which a teacher can be judged is the motivation which he gives his pupils, and in the case of Mr. Naylor, I have seen exceptional motivation." [^8]

Neither Gordon nor Marjorie lacked for motivation, for there was never a shortage of obligations to manage. While Gordon juggled the time pressures of service in the stake presidency with increasing demands at work, Marjorie managed the home and handled challenging assignments of her own. In time, she would serve as president of the ward Relief Society, YWMIA, and Primary, chair the community cancer drive, and take on many other projects that benefited from her enthusiasm and ability to rally others to a cause. For years she taught cultural refinement lessons in Relief Society, and she earned the reputation of being an outstanding instructor. The family became used to seeing books scattered around the house as she prepared for her next lesson.

Marjorie was a unique blend of support and independence, a woman whose warmth and genuine friendliness drew people to her. With her there was no pretense, no maneuvering for power or position, no putting on airs. And she had the ability to make those with whom she interacted feel accepted and good about themselves. As Jane later explained: "Each of us has always loved being with Mother. It is impossible to spend time with her and not leave feeling as though you're the greatest person on earth. She makes everyone feel that way." [^9]

Gordon's full schedule and time demands required that his wife be accommodating and flexible. But though inherently optimistic and even-tempered, she was also fiercely independent and inclined to speak her mind and to draw the line when she saw fit. If she felt strongly about something, she let Gordon know about it. And typically he responded. Just as he didn't keep a thumb on his children, neither did he try to control his wife. He wasn't interested in monitoring a woman whom he knew to be entirely capable of managing their home and taking the lead in rearing five energetic children.

"Mother's independence is an interesting thing," Clark maintained years later. "She has always been supportive of Dad, but she is also the only person who can make him back down. If she told him, 'You are not going to tear up the kitchen this week, and that is final,' he didn't touch the kitchen. And he has always loved that side of her." [^10] Gordon later told a Churchwide audience: "Unfortunately, some women want to remake their husbands after their own designs. Some husbands regard it as their prerogative to compel their wives to fit their standard of what they think to be the ideal. It never works." [^11]

What did work for the Hinckleys was mutual respect and cooperation. Whereas the amount of time Gordon spent at home decreased over the years, Marjorie was almost always there. Together they created an atmosphere of stability and love in their family, as much by how they interacted with each other as by what they expressed verbally. Because Gordon and Marjorie were content with their lives, the children had a sense that everything else was fine as well.

Which is not to say that there was never discord at home. The Hinckleys experienced the predictable irritations and annoyances that are part of typical family life. But, in general, things fell into a fairly standard routine. Family and friends knew not to call late because lights were out by 10:00. Throughout his life Gordon would claim, "If you go to bed at 10:00 and get up by 6:00 A.M., things will work out for you." And there were other formulas that he not only preached but practiced. "Get on your knees and ask for help, and then get up and go to work, and you'll be able to find your way through almost any situation" was just one rule of thumb he repeatedly emphasized with his children.

One issue over which the children prayed each summer was that nothing would come up to postpone or, worse, cancel their annual family vacation, which Gordon always promised they would take "when things got finished at the office." Marjorie and the children were never quite sure what day that would prove to be, so when he announced that tomorrow was the day, there was a flurry of activity as everyone pitched in to pack, fill the canvas water bag that hung from the car bumper, and select books to read en route. The day of the trip they arose at 4:00 A.M. but never got away until an hour later—with Gordon grumbling about the late start. The children were almost always fussing at each other before they reached the city limits, at which point he would pull the car over and announce impatiently, "We are going home right now if you can't get along with each other." Said Clark, "We weren't mean to each other, we were just normal. We squabbled a lot." [^12] Once the vacation was really under way, everyone had a wonderful time.

Vacations took them throughout the scenic West—to Bryce Canyon, where Gordon, Kathy, and Dick hiked to the bottom of the magnificent canyon and crawled back up to the top; to Moab and Monument Valley, where Dick got carsick from the washboardlike roads and proclaimed that "when Heavenly Father created the earth, he forgot to finish this part"; and to Yellowstone National Park, where they held their noses as they tiptoed around the lava pots. By the time the children were grown they had seen, according to Marjorie, "every square inch" of Utah and had learned to love their home state, from its magnificent red sandstone formations to the peaks of the Wasatch Mountains. They also traveled to many places outside Utah.

Marjorie read to the family as they drove, and together they explored the world of literature and became absorbed in the stories that she made come to life. When she finished reading Where the Red Fern Grows, everyone in the car was crying. The tender last chapter coincided with their arrival at their destination, an aunt's home in Nevada. Gordon drove around the block several times so they could compose themselves before knocking on the door.

He believed vacations were wonderful educational opportunities, so he stopped at nearly every roadside historical marker and rehearsed the history memorialized by the monument. He seemed to know the dates and details about every place of historical interest. When possible, Gordon stopped at Cove Fort or Fillmore, where he repeated the stories about Ira Hinckley and other forebears.

Neither Gordon nor Marjorie was inclined to impose on the children a lengthy list of rigid rules and regulations. He insisted that he did enough preaching elsewhere—he had no desire to come home and do more. Discipline was handled much the same way. They both believed that harsh corrective measures only created resentment. "Mother and Dad taught us that there was a difference between principles and rules," Ginny explained. "There are never enough rules to tell you what to do in every situation. But they did put a few principles in place. We felt free to make decisions because we knew the fundamental principles against which everything could be measured." [^13]

The Hinckleys communicated those principles—being responsible, working hard, doing what you say you'll do, getting an education, being disciplined, finishing what you start, keeping the commandments, and so forth—to their offspring through example, the ultimate textbook. Dick recalled a crucial period in his own life: "When I was going through some years of questioning and doubts as a teenager, Dad was like an anchor. I don't recall discussing many of my concerns with him. But in my heart I knew he knew the gospel was true, and that was terribly important to me. I knew he was a believer—not because he talked overtly or often about his feelings, but I just sensed that he knew. God was real and personal to him. Joseph Smith's experiences were real to him. There was no question in my mind that he had any doubt of their authenticity. Mother and Dad taught us more by example than by preaching. We observed them adhering to principles, and then we followed." [^14]

After Kathy was married, an experience clarified what she had learned growing up in her parents' home. She attended a conference where her father was speaking, and at the conclusion of his talk he bore his testimony. "I think for the first time in my life I really heard him and realized he had a testimony that was profound and solid and secure," she said. "I had always known it without really realizing it. It wasn't that Dad was running around the house bearing his testimony. But we knew it was there. We knew it because of his commitment and dedication to the Church, and because of the way he prioritized his life. The gospel was his number-one priority. By his actions he essentially told us over and over, 'If you center your life on the gospel, you'll be okay.'" [^15] Many times in later years Gordon would tell parents, "Your example will do more than anything else in impressing upon children's] minds a pattern of life." [^16]

Gordon used stories to convey his admiration for people and character traits. As the family sat around the dinner table or worked in the yard, he told stories—about Ira Hinckley building Cove Fort, about his own boyhood or mission, about a neighbor or friend he admired, about pioneers who exhibited faith and fortitude. "We got a clear idea of what Dad appreciated by the way he spoke about others," Ginny said. "He used phrases like, 'He is a person of ability,' or 'He is a person of capacity.' He was very open about the strengths he saw operating in other people's lives, and over time we got a sense of what he valued. He valued integrity, goodness, competence, and people who do what they say they'll do." [^17]

Conversely, he also occasionally referred to circumstances where bad choices had caused people trouble. "I don't know if Dad told those stories purposely to plant in our minds the fact that it's no fun to be in trouble," Dick reflected, "or whether he was just talking about what he observed from day to day. But there was never any doubt where our parents' loyalties lay in terms of the Church. They weren't pious. We didn't sit around the dinner table discussing gospel topics. But they were always totally immersed in the gospel. There was never a discussion about whether we were going to church. It was just the way we lived." [^18]

There was, of course, normal jockeying between parents and children, and there were plenty of times when Gordon's children stretched his patience, though he wasn't inclined to explode or lose his temper. When the inevitable challenges of child rearing arose—traffic tickets, minor accidents, lateness coming home, and the like—Gordon had his own way of coping: he got his clippers and went outside and pruned trees. The exercise was good therapy.

Though specific curfews were rarely imposed, Gordon and Marjorie expected their teenagers to come home at a reasonable hour, the definition of which at times varied between parent and child and from event to event. Gordon would routinely ask a son or daughter when he or she had come in the night before. "Oh, I don't know. It was about 11:30," would come the answer. "It was more like a quarter after twelve," Gordon would challenge. "We knew that Dad knew when we got in," Ginny said. "We knew that when he said a quarter after twelve he really knew it was a quarter to twelve. But he made his point: that coming in late wasn't okay. We pushed a little, and he pushed back a little. But nobody ever pushed very far." [^19]

Through it all, the Hinckley offspring came to understand that a certain standard was expected of them. With a code of conduct in place, Gordon and Marjorie didn't have to constantly look over their children's shoulders. They wanted their sons and daughters to establish the strength within themselves to make their own decisions and go forward. Several decades later Gordon told a Churchwide gathering of youth: "Never forget that you were chosen and brought to earth to live as a child of God for something of importance in his grand design. He expects marvelous things of you. He expects you to keep your lives clean from the sins of the world. You are the line through which will pass the qualities of your forebears to the posterity who will come after you. Did you ever see a chain with a weak link? Don't you become that weak link." [^20]

Family prayer was one of the basics that Gordon and Marjorie relied on to insulate their children against the world's ills. Years later Dick had vivid memories of the effect his father's prayers had on him: "I can't remember a day when we didn't have family prayer. When it was his turn, Dad prayed very sincerely but never with a theatrical or emotional air. We learned much about the depth of his faith by listening to him pray. He addressed God with great reverence, as he would perhaps a wise and revered teacher or mentor, and he referred to the Savior with deep feeling. As a child I knew they were real persons to him—that he loved and revered them, and that he felt deeply the Savior's suffering." [^21] Gordon prayed regularly for the children, for their teachers, and for those who were "downtrodden and oppressed" or "alone and afraid." Among other things, his prayers taught his family where they could always turn in times of need. One phrase he used frequently may not have had its full effect while the children were young, but it stayed with them as adults: "We pray that we may live without regret."

Said Marjorie: "I think family prayer had a great deal to do with the way our children responded to us. Even though Gordon didn't preach to them, they heard everything we wanted them to hear in family prayer." [^22] Some years later Gordon endorsed the importance of praying as a family: "I know of no single practice that will have a more salutary effect upon your lives than the practice of kneeling together as you begin and close each day. Somehow the little storms that seem to afflict every marriage are dissipated when, kneeling before the Lord, you thank him for one another . . . and then together invoke his blessings upon your lives, your home, your loved ones, and your dreams. . . . this practice] your children will know the security of a home wherein dwells the Spirit of the Lord." [^23]

There were other family characteristics that added to a feeling of security among the Hinckley offspring. Neither Gordon nor Marjorie promoted doing things for the sake of appearance. "It was always a surprise to have other people insinuate that we needed to be perfect," said Ginny. "Mother and Dad never made us feel that we had to look good for them." [^24] Gordon and Marjorie did, however, communicate their expectation that their children would act with integrity and contribute whenever they were called upon to do so. "Our parents had a way of making us feel that we were the best kids in town," Clark said. "They never led us to believe we were better than anyone else. But we thought they thought we were probably a little bit smarter, a little harder working than other kids." [^25] Gordon often told his children that he wasn't interested in having any geniuses in the family, that the penitentiary was full of geniuses who were too smart for their own good. "But Mother and Dad gave us the feeling that even if we weren't the most gifted children in town, we were immensely satisfying to them," Ginny added. [^26]

Somehow Gordon and Marjorie managed to monitor what went on in their children's lives while staying far enough in the background for them to learn to make their own decisions. As a senior in high school, Kathy learned that she was expected to purchase a pin to graduate from seminary. The pin cost $4.50, which seemed extravagant for something she would never wear again, so she and several friends elected not to purchase the jewelry. As graduation approached, however, everyone but Kathy responded to the seminary principal's urging to buy the pins, and she ultimately stood alone in her boycott. The situation was made more awkward when Gordon was invited to speak at the graduation banquet, and the principal feared embarrassment when everyone but Kathy received a pin. By now, however, the issue had become a matter of principle, and Kathy refused to change her position. One evening the phone rang. From her father's side of the conversation Kathy could tell that her principal was reciting the seminary-pin crisis. "Oh, really? Well, I guess that's her decision," Gordon said, ending the conversation. "That was the principal calling about the seminary pin," he reported to her. "I don't want to spend $4.50 on that pin," Kathy explained. "But it might be awkward for me to go to the banquet if I am the only one who won't receive one," she added. "Oh, well," her father responded, "you've heard everything I have to say."

Kathy did not purchase a pin, nor did she go to the banquet. "Neither Mother nor Dad ever said another word about it to me," she said. "I am sure they wondered why I couldn't just conform, but I had made a choice and they respected it. That incident was one of the things that taught me what was important to them—it was me, and not a seminary pin."

On another occasion Kathy's Sunday School teacher insisted that the entire class bear their testimonies the following Sunday during testimony meeting. Kathy was annoyed at the attempt to force something so personal on her, and she announced to her family that she had no intention of participating. Again, her parents declined to make an issue of the situation. "Mother and Dad operated on the principle that we were intelligent and could make our own decisions," she explained. "They didn't throw up fences, and so there was nothing to jump over. They let me test my wings and figure out things for myself, trusting that I would eventually come to the conclusions they hoped I would make in the first place." [^27]

Each of Kathy's brothers and sisters had similar experiences. Ginny's attendance at MIA was less than perfect during her senior year in high school. There weren't many other girls her age in the ward, and with her heavy load at school she sometimes stayed home to study. At one point, the YWMIA presidency called on Gordon and Marjorie to explain that because of Virginia's inconsistent attendance her sixth and final Individual Award—an annual recognition based heavily on attendance—was in jeopardy. Suffering from the hypersensitivity of adolescence, Ginny was sure that the leaders were less concerned about her well-being than about how it would look to have Gordon Hinckley's daughter not receive an award. After the leaders left, neither parent said anything about the conversation to their daughter.

As a junior high student Jane casually mentioned to her mother that a friend couldn't come over to study because she was grounded. "Grounded? What in the world is that?" Marjorie questioned. Jane explained that her friend had misbehaved and was for the time being allowed out of the house only to go to school. Seeing it as an arbitrary form of punishment, Marjorie was incredulous: "That is the most ridiculous thing I have ever heard!" [^28]

For Marjorie, there were certain kinds of things that didn't merit intervention, anxiety or, worse, punishment; most definitely they weren't worth creating conflict between parent and child. "I learned that I needed to trust my children," she said later, "so I tried to never say no if I could possibly say yes. When we were raising a family, it was a matter of getting through every day and having a little fun along the way. As I could see that I wasn't going to be able to make all of my children's decisions anyway, I tried not to worry about every little thing. I think that came from my parents, because they had absolute confidence in me and my siblings. As hard as it has been at times, Gordon and I tried to have the same confidence in our children." [^29]

One Sunday morning as the family was getting ready for church, Ginny complained to her mother, "Do I have to go to church today?" Without hesitating, Marjorie responded calmly, "No, you don't have to go if you don't want to." After a pause, she added, as though it were simply a logical arrangement: "But if you're going to stay home, would you get dinner on for us? It would be wonderful to come home from church and have dinner ready." Ginny agreed, and Marjorie left worrying that she should have handled the situation differently. The family returned home to find the meal prepared and Ginny waiting for everyone on the front lawn. "Virginia never stayed home again," Marjorie said. "She found it was better to just go with the family than to stay behind alone. In that situation, it helped to not make a federal case out of the issue." [^30]

There were instances when the teaching between parent and child was more direct. One day Kathy asked her father how it was that General Authorities could have different opinions about things, and yet Church members were supposed to follow the prophet. Gordon's answer was firm: "You keep your eye on the President of the Church, and you will never go wrong." On another occasion, Kathy and her father were walking downtown when they stopped to talk with a man he knew. Kathy found herself staring at the man, whose appearance disturbed her. As they walked on down the street she asked her father why the man looked as he did. "He has the look of a man who doesn't honor his priesthood," Gordon replied. It was a lesson Kathy never forgot. "Dad's statement had great impact on me," she said. "I drew the conclusion that one thing that made the world safe was a man who honored his priesthood." [^31]

Through such experiences Kathy, along with her brothers and sisters, came to trust her parents implicitly. "Even as a young girl I recognized in Dad what I considered unusual wisdom and judgment," she later reflected. "He always seemed to know and understand things beyond the obvious. He did not dictate to us, nor did he philosophize, but he asked us questions that inevitably led to a statement that was on target. He seemed to innately be able to see the big picture. I sensed that he always knew exactly what was and was not appropriate." [^32]

Gordon and Marjorie's reactions to seminary pins, awards, and the like were tempered by their unpretentious natures. "It helped," Jane said later, "that Mother and Dad could laugh at themselves and find humor in what happened. Somehow they avoided overreacting to all of our little daily crises." [^33] Marjorie admitted, "We tried not to take ourselves too seriously. We learned that you get in trouble when you do that." [^34] Indeed, both Gordon and Marjorie saw their own foibles and laughed at them openly. Humor became the trademark in a family where the ability to laugh at oneself was required for survival. Gordon loved to hear or tell a good story and would laugh so hard as he approached the punch line that he could hardly speak or breathe. Watching him react was almost more fun than the joke itself. Family gatherings became laugh-fests, and at times the hilarity got out of hand.

The Hinckley children often heard their mother say, "The only way to get through life is to laugh your way through it," and Marjorie Hinckley took that approach with her husband and family, refusing to take offense where none was intended and filtering daily events through an attitude of good humor. Though a "world-class worrier," as described by her children, she tried to laugh even when she wanted to cry. One day she took what she thought to be a delectable casserole out of the oven, only to have Dick ask innocently, "Mom, how come you baked the garbage?"

As parents, Gordon and Marjorie relied on their instincts, and though the result may not have been parental perfection, they nonetheless wove a strong, warm family fabric. He had never read a book on parenting, but Gordon later spoke to millions on the subject. His counsel always revolved around the basics, as in one address in which he identified four simple principles parents might consider in rearing their children: to love them, to teach them, to respect them, and to pray with and for them. [^35]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Ashton, "Gordon B. Hinckley of the Quorum of the Twelve," p. 978.
[^2] See Dale Z. Kirby, "The History of the Swiss Temple," July 1969, LDS Church Archives.
[^3] Interview with GBH, 1 February 1995.
[^4] MPH to Kathie, Dick, Gin, Clark, and Jane, 2 September 1955.
[^5] Interview with MPH, 16 March 1995.
[^6] Interview with GBH, 1 February 1995.
[^7] Interview with MPH, 16 March 1995.
[^8] Improvement Era, December 1955, p. 911.
[^9] Gordon B. Hinckley, Address to Norwegian and Danish Session, Dedication of Swiss Temple, 14 September 1955, LDS Church Archives.
[^10] In Conference Report, 6 April 1958, pp. 123-24.
[^11] GBH to Stephen L Richards, 17 September 1955.
[^12] See "David O. McKay," Improvement Era, December 1955, p. 911; also Kirby, "History of the Swiss Temple."
[^13] "Life with Father," compiled July 1980, unpublished manuscript in possession of family.
[^14] GBH to Stephen L Richards, 17 September 1955.
[^15] Interview with MPH, 16 March 1995.
[^16] In Conference Report, 6 April 1958, p. 124.
[^17] Report from GBH to President McKay, 29 November 1956, Executive Secretary General Files.
[^18] See Vincent dePaul Lupiano and Ken W. Sayers, It Was a Very Good Year: A Cultural History of the United States (Holbrook, Mass.: Adams Publishing, 1994), p. 377.
[^19] Gordon B. Hinckley, "The Wonder of Jesus," Improvement Era, June 1969, p. 74.
[^20] See Journal History, 28 October 1956.
[^21] Quoted at Alaska Anchorage missionary meeting, 18 June 1996.
[^22] See Conference Report, 6 April 1958, p. 124.
[^23] Interview with Clark Bryant Hinckley, 17 November 1994.
[^24] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Rise to a Larger Vision of the Work," Ensign, May 1990, p. 95.
[^25] "Tithing: An Opportunity to Prove Our Faithfulness," p. 41.
[^26] GBH to William Granger, Buy-Ryte Food Stores, 28 February 1958.
[^27] Interview with Clark Bryant Hinckley, 17 November 1994.
[^28] Interview with MPH, 16 March 1995.
[^29] "Gordon B. Hinckley: Man of Integrity," video.
[^30] Address delivered to Ira Nathaniel Hinckley family, 4 April 1955.
[^31] Interview with Kathleen Hinckley Barnes, 17 October 1994.
[^32] Interview with Kathleen Hinckley Barnes, 17 October 1994.
[^33] Interview with Jane Hinckley Dudley, 9 November 1994.
[^34] "An Evening with Marjorie Hinckley."
[^35] See "'Behold Your Little Ones,'" p. 18.
