Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Eleven

Temples to Dot the Earth

With the Korean War ended and the promise of a gradual return to more normal policies regarding the calling of missionaries, Gordon might have hoped for a respite from long days and relentless pressure. But it was not to be.

On August 5, 1953, President David O. McKay broke ground for and dedicated the site of a temple in Zollikofen, Switzerland. This occasion held great significance for members of the Church—both those in Europe, who would benefit directly by having a temple on the Continent, and the greater membership, who heralded this milestone as evidence that the Church was becoming an organization of international scope and import. Though Gordon didn't realize it at the time, the event would have a personal and penetrating influence on him as well.

One day in the fall of 1953 President McKay invited him to his office for a private interview, and there he outlined some of the unique challenges posed by the new European temple. "Brother Hinckley," he began, "as you know, we are building a temple in Switzerland, and it will be different from our other temples in that it must serve members who speak many languages. I want you to find a way to present the temple instruction in the various languages of Europe while using a minimum number of temple workers." President McKay indicated that President Joseph Fielding Smith of the Quorum of the Twelve and Elders Harold B. Lee and Richard L. Evans had been assigned to a committee overseeing the project, but that he would have responsibility for completing it in time for the dedication, scheduled just two years hence in the fall of 1955. And this assignment was to run concurrent with his responsibilities in the Missionary Department.

It was a charge of enormous significance. No superlative did justice to the assignment. For nearly two decades Gordon had led pioneering efforts in the Missionary Department and on the Radio, Publicity, and Mission Literature Committee, and he was well acquainted with the challenges involved in championing something that had never before been done. But the ramifications of this project were enormous, as they would extend far beyond the temple in Switzerland. This temple, which would be the ninth operating, would be but the first of many designed to serve a multilingual audience. The new commission placed upon him a responsibility laden with pressure and concerned with issues as sacred and sublime as any within the scope of the gospel.

A spacious and totally private place to work was needed. President McKay authorized use of the fifth floor of the Salt Lake Temple. This area included a smaller room where Gordon could study and ponder the direction this project should take. Known as the Talmage Room, as it was believed to be the room where Elder James E. Talmage had written Jesus the Christ, this sacred hideaway became a place of study, prayer, and refuge. Evenings, Saturdays, and some Sunday mornings found him poring over the language of the temple ceremony, sketching out ideas, and pleading with the Lord for guidance.

President Smith, Elder Lee, and Elder Evans were helpful and supportive, but in short order Gordon found himself working with President McKay, who often met with him on the fifth floor early on Sunday mornings. There the two shared ideas about how the wording and presentation should be adapted to fit the purposes the prophet had outlined. The pressure was intense. Only Marjorie knew the nature of her husband's project and the reason that he was suddenly gone from home even more than before.

After much study, reflection, and discussion with President McKay, Gordon made a recommendation: It appeared that the most effective way to conduct large numbers of temple patrons through the sacred service in a variety of languages and with a minimal number of temple workers was to put it on film. Such a conversion would allow temple sessions to accommodate more people in less time and space.

The challenge now was to produce a film that would not only safeguard the temple instruction but be a fitting representation of that sacred work. Gordon gathered a group of capable, creative, and temple-worthy colleagues to help develop and produce this first-of-a-kind effort: Frank Wise, an excellent cinematographer who had assisted with missionary filmstrips and other projects; Paul Evans and Joyce (Joe) Shaw from KSL; Joe Osmond, the Church's electrician; Winnifred Bowers, an expert with costumes; Harold I. Hansen from BYU, who directed the Hill Cumorah Pageant; and Bill Demos, a set design artist.

They set to work. The ornate, three-story room in which President Wilford Woodruff had dedicated the temple in the first of thirty-one sessions seemed ideal. Gordon and his associates began by converting the large area between the stands on the east and west ends into a makeshift movie set. They hung a huge, floor-to-ceiling scrim as a backdrop for the cameras, used heavy-duty pulleys to lift various props through the room's large windows, and installed a power line capable of handling the increased voltage requirements of lights and cameras. The temple elevators inside the back door made it possible to carry smaller materials directly to the fifth floor without attracting the attention of temple workers.

From dawn until dusk on Saturdays and holidays they worked, fitting the all-consuming temple assignment in and around their regular jobs. Countless decisions had to be made. Gordon consulted regularly with President McKay, and their ongoing Sunday-morning meetings moved the project forward.

After a year of long hours and unrelenting pressure, the English-language film was completed. And though the finished product was to be improved in later versions, President McKay was pleased with the pioneering effort. With the English film in place, the sacred service was now to be produced in French, German, Dutch, Finnish, Swedish, Danish, and Norwegian, and for each film different casts and new translations were required. During subsequent months translations were also provided in Spanish, Tongan, Tahitian, Samoan, and Maori. Not until much later would one film be adapted for use in multiple language versions. [^1]

When the production was finished, another sensitive problem arose. Where could the films be processed without risking disclosure of language regarded as sacred? After weighing various options, Gordon contacted an old friend, James B. Keysor, a member of the Church in California who used his Hollywood connections to arrange for a laboratory to process the film in such a way that only those authorized would ever see the frames.

Finally, the product was finished. But there was still much to do in preparation for the temple dedication, scheduled for September 11, 1955. Projection and sound equipment had to be installed in the temple, the audio and filmed segments synchronized, and any potential problems detected and corrected so that ordinance work could commence upon conclusion of the last dedicatory session. He therefore prepared to leave for Switzer-land in advance of the dedication to ensure that all would be ready when President McKay arrived. Much to his delight, Marjorie had been invited to go with him.

The prospects of traveling to Europe with her husband and spending a month there were thrilling for Marjorie, who had never been farther away from home than the West Coast. But as they prepared to leave, rather than enjoying the euphoria that might have preceded such a trip, Gordon was preoccupied with the logistics of safely transporting the temple materials to Switzerland.

Consequently, elaborate precautions were taken to protect the materials that portrayed the sacred ordinance. With the reels of 16mm film packed in two small suitcases, and the audio recordings placed in two small, barrel-like drums that Gordon carried with him, he and Marjorie left for Switzerland. What a miracle this was, he thought, allowing himself the luxury of reflection as they flew high above the Atlantic in a prop-driven DC-6. Though he did not enjoy travel for travel's sake, he was eager to return to Europe.

Around noon on a Saturday they arrived in Basel, where the first serious challenge arose. When the customs agent asked what the small drums contained, Gordon responded, "Church film and lectures." "I can't let the film through customs without approval from the federal film board," the agent responded, adding that the film reels must be transferred to Bern, where they would be considered by the film board on Monday. Gordon tried to gently persuade the agent to let him take the film on through, but then he relented, feeling it was better to avoid an argument than to attract undue attention to the precious baggage. Reluctantly, but not knowing what else to do, he placed the film reels in bond and arranged for them to be transferred by Swiss Customs to Bern, where he would pick them up Monday morning.

The next day, Gordon and President William F. Perschon of the Swiss-Austrian Mission fasted and pled with the Lord to keep the sacred films out of other hands. Early Monday morning they reported to customs in Bern, where Gordon was again asked to declare the contents of his luggage. "Church film and lectures," he responded a second time. The customs agent accepted the declaration and sent the men to the federal film board office, where an officer asked a series of questions. "What is this film?" "Church lecture and music," Gordon responded. "What is its purpose?" "It will be used in the new temple we are building in Zollikofen." "What is its title?" the agent inquired. "It does not have a title," Gordon answered. "How can all of that film have no title?" the agent asked. Gordon answered carefully, "This is just a lecture, and we don't title every lecture given in our church." President Perschon later recorded that as they were explaining the nature of the materials to the officer in charge, "a friendly understanding seemed to come over him, and to an unusual degree for a Swiss tax official, he cooperated." [^2] Finally the agent stamped the papers with the necessary seal and indicated the number of Swiss francs due. "I've never seen anyone reach for money faster than did President Perschon," Gordon remembered. "The duty was only twenty-seven dollars. We gathered up the reels of film, placed them back in the barrels, and took them to the temple. Nobody ever saw a frame or listened to a word of it." [^3]

With the temple films safely stored inside the temple, the Hinckleys settled in at the City Hotel in Bern. Marjorie could scarcely believe that she was actually in Switzerland. The wonder of it all was almost more than she could take in. During their brief stopover in England en route she had dashed off a postcard to the children: "I hardly saw a glimpse of the Atlantic because we were above the clouds, so I did not have to look down at the scary water. Everything is simply marvelous." [^4]

As thrilled as she was about her maiden journey overseas, however, Marjorie was also anxious about her first experience being away from the children for any length of time. Jane was still in a high chair, and Kathy was only sixteen. "When we arrived in Switzerland and I realized there was an ocean and a continent between the children and me," she later admitted, "I burst into tears. It was three days before I decided everything was going to be okay and I might as well enjoy the experience." [^5] She adapted quickly, and to stave off moments of homesickness she wrote the children almost daily with vivid descriptions of everything she and their father were experiencing.

There was much to write about, for both Gordon and Marjorie became immediately absorbed in the flurry of events unfolding in Zollikofen. He quickly realized there was more work for him to do than time in which to do it. Early each morning he and Marjorie took the tram out to the temple, both prepared for a long day's work. Marjorie helped do everything from ironing clothing to vacuuming.

In the meantime Gordon, Paul Evans, Joe Shaw, and Hans LÃ¼tscher, the newly appointed temple engineer, began installing the projectors and audio equipment, synchronizing the film and audio segments, and reviewing each language version of the film. The deadline loomed. He noted later, "We had so much work to be done, and we couldn't even think of letting down President McKay. So we worked our heads off, night and day we worked." [^6]

But the long hours and prededication frenzy were more than compensated for by the events that followed. Sunday morning, September 11, dawned bright and beautiful in Zollikofen. The temple grounds were glorious for the throng of members, missionaries, and curious townspeople who converged upon the area. When President and Sister McKay arrived, missionaries lined a pathway for them. The air was electric as President McKay entered the celestial room for the first of ten dedicatory sessions. Dressed in white, his wavy white hair accentuating his distinguished appearance, he looked like a prophet. For Marjorie it was an unforgettable moment: "President McKay was so beloved by the people. And he was such a handsome man who only became more so as he aged. When he entered the room that morning in Switzerland, it was as though Moses had arrived." [^7] The Tabernacle Choir was on hand for the dedication, and they were seated around the perimeter of the celestial room as well as in the main assembly room.

Afterward President McKay recorded: "When the time came to welcome the hundreds who crowded the rooms at the first session, it seemed proper to express also a welcome to an unseen, but seemingly real audience, among whom were possibly former presidents and apostles of the Church, probably headed by the Prophet Joseph Smith . . . also his nephew, President Joseph F. Smith, who prophesied forty-nine years ago in the city of Bern that 'temples would be built in divers countries of the world.' . . . We all agreed that the veil between those who participated in those exercises and loved ones who had gone before seemed very thin." [^8]

President McKay presided over two sessions on that and each succeeding day until Thursday, September 15. He invited Gordon to address the Norwegian and Danish session held on September 14. Speaking through a translator, he emphasized the importance of temple work by referring to an observation he had made at an earlier session: "The other morning . . . when the German Saints were coming in here, I saw a man come through the front door; his clothes were shoddy, but neat and clean. He looked the picture of poverty, but he was well scrubbed. I think he was from Austria. He carried in his hand an admittance card, and as he walked through the room downstairs to these rear doors there was a light in his eyes and a look in his face which were almost celestial. I thought, 'He won't look very much different when he walks into the Celestial Kingdom.' This was the fruition of all his dreams. This was the thing for which he had saved and prayed. And I said to myself, 'Certainly this is a foretaste of Heaven.'" [^9]

It was for Gordon as well, for the entire experience—beginning with the overwhelming assignment from President McKay and culminating with his recent around-the-clock effort prior to the dedication—had been as sweet and spiritually fulfilling as anything with which he had ever been involved. "As I saw those people gathered from ten nations to participate in the temple ordinances," he later reported, "as I saw elderly people from behind the Iron Curtain who had lost their families in the wars that had washed over them, and witnessed the expressions of joy and tears of gladness which came from their hearts as a result of the opportunities that had been given them; as I saw young husbands and wives with their families—their bright and beautiful children—and saw those families united in an eternal relationship, I knew with a certainty even beyond what I had known before that McKay] was inspired and directed of the Lord to bring these priceless blessings into the lives of those men and women of faith gathered from the nations of Europe." [^10]

It had been determined that temple work would not commence until Monday morning, September 19, but President McKay, concerned about members from nearby countries who had to return home immediately, asked Gordon if sessions could somehow begin without delay. He and those assisting him worked most of the night following the last dedicatory session on Thursday so that two companies of German-speaking Saints could be ushered through the temple the following day. When members from the French Mission asked for early sessions in French, their request was accommodated. Similar inquiries from the Swedish and Dutch Saints followed. The result was that temple work ran continuously from 7:00 A.M. Friday until 7:00 P.M. Saturday. Gordon and the others assigned to shepherd hundreds of Saints through the temple for the first time again worked through the night.

In a letter to President Richards, Gordon described those first two days of work in the Swiss Temple: "If response to your questions] appears to be a muddled statement it is because I have been up all night for the second night in a row. Thursday we worked until four in the morning to get things ready for the service. The first group went through at eight o'clock yesterday morning and the last group finished at six-thirty this morning with no let-up in between. I have had to handle all of the equipment used in the presentation since they have not had a local man who has been through the Temple. The local engineer went through yesterday, and I am hopeful now that he can get onto the mass of detail in a few days and that I can go home. President McKay witnessed the first German session yesterday and expressed satisfaction with the result. We have since had another German as well as French and Swedish sessions and they have gone remarkably well in consideration of the language problems and the fact that the people have had little background to prepare them for temple work. I am satisfied that it would have been extremely difficult to present the service in the six languages, and to do so effectively, without something of the program we are using." [^11] The following month at general conference President McKay acknowledged the "indefatigable efforts of Elder Gordon B. Hinckley," which made it possible for thousands of European Saints to go through the temple before returning home. [^12]

For Gordon, the time in Europe had been both enriching and exhausting, and the stress had taken its toll. He was tired, sick, and wheezing from asthma by the time President McKay left Switzerland. During a stopover in London, the prophet called him to see how he was faring and suggested that he take a few days of vacation before returning to Utah. Gordon accepted President McKay's invitation and accordingly changed his and Marjorie's tickets to travel home via Italy, Spain, and Portugal.

Though he was physically and emotionally depleted when he left Switzerland, Gordon was exuberant about all that had transpired. Had it not been for the help of dedicated colleagues who had worked tirelessly for months, and for divine guidance that had steered them through the arduous process of committing the temple service to film, he knew he could not have fulfilled President McKay's charge. For him, the experience was a vivid personal confirmation that out of the weak and simple, great things come to pass, and that the Lord directs and sustains those who serve him.

The brief vacation was a welcome break for both Hinckleys, as it was their first chance in months to enjoy time together without the press of other urgent obligations. Soon, however, they were on their way home. Gordon was anxious to get back to work, and though she had enjoyed the trip immensely, Marjorie had been away from the children as long as she could tolerate. They arrived home to find all well, though circumstances were different from the way they had left them. The children had determined early in their parents' absence that they could get along nicely on weekends without the services of the live-in housekeeper whom Marjorie had hired to take care of them for the month. "The children essentially fired the baby sitter," said Marjorie. "Their excuse was that they didn't like the way she was treating Jane, but I suspect they just didn't care for her rules." Gordon had reluctantly left the car keys for Kathy in case of "extreme emergency," so she had been able to run necessary errands. It had helped that their close family friend and next-door neighbor, Bessie Osguthorpe, seemed to be constantly at her kitchen window, from where she monitored the goings-on at the Hinckley home.

From eldest to youngest, the children were thrilled to have their mother and father home after an absence of nearly a month. Their parents' first trip abroad together had a lasting effect on them, however, as Dick explained: "If Mother had written home that it was raining all day and that travel was hard, we may have had an entirely different reaction to their experience. But she made everything seem so adventurous that we never saw the world quite the same again." As a group the children later reflected on this turning point: "We had always been a family to 'dream the impossible dream,' but now we knew that impossible dreams came true. Geography became a desirable subject. . . . Our opportunities were limitless if we just dreamed big and worked hard." [^13]

Back in Salt Lake City, Gordon began the tedious process of sorting through the mountain of work that had accumulated during his absence. He and President Richards had been in frequent contact during his extended stay in Switzerland, and where possible Gordon had offered help from a distance. "I hope that my prolonged stay is not adding materially to your heavy burdens, and that you will leave for me such items as can wait," he had urged in one letter to his superior. [^14] Now he refocused his attention on the Missionary Department and attended to other pressing concerns.

At President McKay's request, however, he also continued his involvement with temple work. Another temple—this one in Los Angeles—was scheduled to be dedicated in just a few months, and Gordon was uniquely trained to handle many assignments connected with preparing the sacred edifice for operation. He also served as a member of the dedication committee, and in so doing he had his first experience helping administer the array of details associated with such an event—arranging for tickets, ushers, choirs, interpreters, and so forth.

President McKay invited Gordon to attend the dedication. With the West Coast just a day's drive away, he and Marjorie determined that this was the perfect opportunity to take the children to see the ocean and experience California firsthand, as well as to participate in a temple dedication.

The children marveled as they crossed the Mojave Desert and were fascinated as they drove past the homes of movie stars in Beverly Hills. They also went to the ocean, though the Hinckley version of a trip to the beach was unorthodox. "When we went to the beach, we went to look, not to play in the sand," Marjorie explained. "Five minutes after we were there, Gordon said, 'Okay, you've seen the ocean. Let's go.'" [^15]

On March 11, 1956, six months to the day after he had dedicated the Swiss Temple, President McKay conducted the first of eight dedicatory sessions of the Los Angeles Temple, the first temple on the West Coast and only the third one outside Utah in the continental United States. As had been the case in Switzerland, the dedication was the setting for a marvelous spiritual outpouring. In Gordon's experience, nothing compared to the way he felt in the temple, especially as a temple was dedicated. With each new temple-related experience, he marveled at the singular opportunity that had been his to immerse himself in this sacred work.

Gordon welcomed these spiritually satisfying experiences, because many of his obligations in the Missionary Department remained demanding, complex, and administrative in nature. As the number of missionaries called to the field gradually increased following the end of the Korean War and the subsequent relaxing of Selective Service requirements, his range of responsibility within the Missionary Department expanded until he was either accountable for or directly involved with nearly every aspect of the work. On one occasion he described at least one benefit of his day-to-day labors: "I have been touched by the mission presidents with whom I have worked. As I have known their stories, the great sacrifices which they have made to go into the world, the devotion with which they labor, the manner in which they give of themselves, I have been humbled. I have been inspired by the missionaries with whom I have had association. I have seen them as they have gone out in all kinds of weather . . . doing their work and bearing testimony, often at great sacrifice, and bringing a marvelous harvest of souls into the kingdom of God." [^16]

Though Gordon still carried a full load of missionary-related responsibilities, it soon became clear that his involvement with temples would continue, as President McKay expected him to duplicate in temples under construction in New Zealand and London the role he had played in the opening of the Swiss and Los Angeles Temples. Accordingly, he returned to Switzerland in November 1956 to hand deliver new reels of film and to evaluate and address problems that had arisen since the temple's opening. He reported his findings in writing to President McKay: "We were able to take the Temple material through Customs without difficulty and without exposing it to anyone. . . . I went through session and I was pleased and gratified at the manner in which the session was conducted. It was inspirational and all who participated seemed to enjoy it. . . . I then went to work on the film that I took over and spent the next three or four days putting this together so that it would be ready for use. I instructed carefully the building engineer on details of how this should be done so that he should be able to take care of future shipments of film." [^17]

While in Bern, Gordon had an experience that provided stark contrast to the serenity of temple worship. One morning while standing in the train station, he witnessed the Swiss people's reaction to the Soviet Union's surprise invasion of Hungary, initiated to quash widespread demonstrations against Communist rule. [^18] That morning, as tanks rolled down the streets of Budapest and students were massacred by machine-gun fire, every church bell in Switzerland began to ring. "At the conclusion of that ringing every vehicle stopped—every car on the highway, every bus, every railroad train," Gordon described. "That great, cavernous station became deathly still. I looked out the door across the plaza. Men working on the hotel on the other side of the street stood on the scaffolding with bared heads. Every bicycle stopped, and every man and woman and child dismounted and stood, hatless and bowed. Then, after three minutes of reverent pause, trucks, great convoys of them, began to roll from Geneva, across Austria to the Hungarian border, laden with supplies—food, clothing, and medicine. The gates of Switzerland were thrown open to refugees. As I stood there that December morning, I could not help marveling at the miraculous contrast—the devilish oppressive power of those who were snuffing out the sparks of freedom on the streets of Budapest, in contrast with the spirit of the Christian people of Switzerland who bowed their heads in reverence and then rolled up their sleeves to provide succor and refuge." [^19]

Through his assignments at Church headquarters, Gordon was cultivating a broad world view of the growing Church. Through his calling in the stake presidency, he had opportunity to work at the grassroots level, where the broad policies and procedures actually touched the people. For more than ten years he had served as a counselor to President Lamont B. Gundersen in the East Millcreek Stake presidency. Because their stake was situated in one of the most rapidly growing areas of the valley, their presidency was constantly dealing with issues related to growth and change. During the years Gordon served in the stake presidency, at least fifteen new wards were created and the stake was twice divided to become four large stakes.

One such division occurred on October 28, 1956, when Elders Harold B. Lee and George Q. Morris divided the eleven-thousand-member East Millcreek Stake into three smaller stakes and called Gordon B. Hinckley to serve as president of the East Millcreek Stake. [^20] It was a call filled with historical implications, as he was the third generation of Hinckleys to be so called. His grandfather had presided over one of the twenty-five stakes then in the Church; his father had led what was then the Church's largest stake; now he assumed leadership of the 150th stake.

When Elder Lee presented Gordon Hinckley's name to the East Millcreek audience, a murmur of approval swept through the congregation. Later, in setting him apart as stake president, Elder Lee counseled him to "listen to the whisperings of the Spirit, even in the nighttime, and neglect not the impres-sions which come to you." [^21] Elder Lee's blessing had a profound effect on him, and many times throughout his life he reflected on the promises made by Elder Lee as he set him apart as stake president. [^22]

The East Millcreek Stake over which Gordon and his two counselors—H. Leroy Erickson and O. Layton Alldredge—presided had some four thousand members living in five wards. Though he had spent a decade in the stake presidency, he learned immediately how much more demanding the calling of stake president was. Stake members now looked to him for spiritual direction and counsel. Difficult issues—many of which involved members' eternal welfare—fell to him to decide. In addition, he was immediately confronted with an unusually burdensome physical facilities challenge.

The stake division had been effected in such a way that only one building, and an old one at that, lay within the new stake boundaries. People were moving into the area so rapidly that he was faced not only with building chapels to house five wards but also with planning and preparing for the inevitable new wards. If that weren't enough, every stake was required to have its own welfare farm; the one his stake owned jointly with the Canyon Rim Stake would not suffice. Further, his stake was one of those charged with raising funds to build a seminary facility at Olympus High School. It was clear from the outset that managing the temporal affairs of the stake would be both complex and worrisome.

Almost immediately he set out under procedures then in operation to build a stake center (the stake was obligated for half the cost), raise funds for a seminary building (area stakes were to raise 100 percent), and buy a stake farm (which also was to be funded 100 percent by stake members). The immediate financial commitment was staggering. As he and his counselors considered options, they worried about placing an additional monetary burden on young families. Just before the stake's division, they had built two new ward meetinghouses. Unfortunately, neither of those buildings now lay within their stake boundaries, but Gordon knew many members felt they had already contributed all they had to give.

One of President Hinckley's early decisions left an impression on his youngest son. "One of Dad's first official acts as stake president was to cancel our stake Lagoon day local amusement park] and invite members to take whatever money they would have spent there and put it into a new stake building fund," Clark remembered. [^23] Such contributions were a pittance when measured against the demand, however, and the financial pressures weighed heavily upon President Hinckley. But true to Elder Lee's promise, one night he had a sudden and clear impression: "It occurred to me that this wasn't my problem alone," he explained. "This was the Lord's church, and it was the Lord's problem. I knew at that moment that He would help me determine how we should proceed." After consulting with his counselors, Gordon called a stake priesthood meeting and there outlined the financial challenges ahead of them, introducing the subject for discussion by stating: "Brethren, this is not my stake. This is the Lord's stake, and it is your stake. All of you are stockholders in this organization, and tonight we wish to talk about our needs and how we can best meet them together." He then invited comments from anyone who desired to express himself.

Things did not begin well. After a few moments a man on the front row stood and said: "All I have heard since I moved into this stake is money, money, money. I am moving." A second man arose and expressed similar sentiments, asking President Hinckley when he was going to stop asking for money. Yet a third man complained about the financial drain the Church had been since he moved into the area. Gordon's mind raced. How would he salvage the meeting?

Finally a man who had been sitting quietly on an aisle seat toward the back stood slowly and began to speak: "Brethren, this is the Lord's work and, as President Hinckley has said, the Lord's stake. The Church has to have facilities if it is going to operate. As you know, I am a mail carrier, and I don't earn much money. But my wife and I have a small savings account, and I know she would support me in pledging what modest amount we have to these projects."

What then occurred was marvelous to behold. One by one, priesthood holders stood and offered their support. Some committed specific sums of money; others made suggestions about how funds could be raised. Many simply promised to do whatever was necessary to help meet the stake's obligations. It was a profoundly moving experience for Gordon, who learned a lesson that would guide him for the rest of his life: "This isn't your problem, it is the Lord's problem. And if you will listen to the whisperings of the Spirit, pay attention, and counsel with your brethren, He will tell you what to do and open the way."

With the stake's priesthood quorums behind him, President Hinckley and his associates went to work. In the following months they purchased ground for a new stake center, hired an architect and had a blueprint prepared and approved at Church headquarters, and began construction. They also purchased the Canyon Rim Stake's equity in the 250-acre welfare farm, and they helped the other stakes in the area raise funds to build the seminary. Members made personal donations, and priesthood quorums and ward auxiliaries collected dimes and dollars to purchase everything from Herefords for the farm to draperies for the stake center. "There may have been a few murmurings," President Hinckley acknowledged later, "but the faith of the people overrode all of these. They gave generously, notwithstanding the stresses of their own circumstances, and the Lord blessed them in a remarkable way." [^24]

President Hinckley had faith that if the people did their best, the Lord would ultimately provide. Such commitment was a hallmark of both his administrative style and his counseling. When a man whom he knew well came for a temple recommend interview and, during their conversation, acknowledged he was not paying his tithing because his debt load was too high, Gordon told him that he would not be able to pay his debts until he paid his tithing. The man continued in his established pattern for some time before he and his wife determined to heed their stake president's counsel. Later he reported to President Hinckley: "What you told me has proved to be true. I felt I could not pay my tithing because of my debts. I discovered that no matter how hard I tried, somehow I could not manage to reduce my debt. Finally my wife and I sat down together and talked about it and concluded we would try the promise of the Lord. We have done so. And somehow in a way we can't quite understand, the Lord has blessed us." [^25] Such experiences reinforced Gordon's faith.

President Hinckley found he couldn't separate the temporal and spiritual well-being of his people. He took a stand, for example, against area stores that opened on the Sabbath. To one local grocery store he wrote: "I am advised that all other grocery stores in the area will be closed. . . . We are urging our people to observe the Christian Sabbath. If the stores remain open, then inevitably many of our people are compelled to work. If you remain open then your competitors apparently will feel that they must remain open. We earnestly solicit your cooperation in this important matter." [^26]

As a stake president, he had substantial latitude and autonomy, and he directed the affairs of his stake as the Spirit prompted and as his judgment suggested. When unusual challenges or problems arose, he had the advantage of ready access to many General Authorities, who offered counsel and suggestions at his request. Further, through his assignments at Church headquarters, he had worked with countless mission and stake presidents and bishops, and in the process he had been exposed to various leadership styles. As he picked his way through the numerous issues that came before him, he drew liberally from a full reservoir of personal experience and observation.

Home was a refuge where Gordon was rejuvenated to handle the increasingly heavy load he carried, though his children weren't always aware of the obligations he was balancing. Said Clark: "Even when Dad was stake president and working in the Missionary Department and helping with the opening of new temples, I never got the sense that there was a great deal of pressure on him. He had a good sense of humor, and he would come home from the office and repeat jokes he had heard that made him laugh so hard he couldn't catch his breath." [^27] Marjorie agreed, adding, "Gordon's sense of humor got us through all of the crises in our lives." [^28]

Even with the heavy burdens of caring for the spiritual welfare of his people and managing the stake's burgeoning temporal affairs, Gordon held no more meetings than were absolutely essential. He became known for his efficiency, his capacity for work, his compassion, and his sense of humor. Don Sperry, stake clerk, attended many meetings conducted by President Hinckley. "He had a way of making you feel good," he said. "I never dreaded having to get up early Sunday morning for a meeting because I knew there was going to be some good activity, a lot of inspiration, and a lot of humor as well." [^29] Indeed, although Gordon took his responsibilities very seriously, he was the first to poke fun at himself when the opportunity arose.

President Hinckley's meetings began and ended on time. He expected stake leaders to be well prepared and to speak their mind. When sensitive issues arose, he seemed able to grasp the essence of the matter quickly. From there, it was a matter of combining earnest prayer with hard work. In fact, he often reacted to challenges with the statement, "I don't know how to get anything done except by working, so let's get going." Once a decision was made, he didn't look back. And when things were most discouraging he typically told his counselors, "Things will work out."

It was an ethic Gordon came by honestly. In a message at a family reunion in 1955, Bryant Hinckley announced that the Hinckley family had been admitted to the exclusive Society of Mayflower Descendants. He then briefly explained the significance of their heritage: "My kinspeople, I congratulate you on your ancestry. If the time ever comes that any of you think you are nobody, and can't amount to anything, remember that you have a noble heritage that comes down to you for 300 years. There were 102 people aboard the Mayflower when she left England on the 6th of September and she reached these shores on November 9. It was a perilous journey all the way. They landed on Plymouth Rock, December 21, 1620, and every day during the long bitter winter the graveyard grew larger and the colony grew smaller. When the Mayflower was ready to return in the spring, only 49 people had survived. No one went back. This spirit is born in you fellows—the spirit of never turning back." [^30]

Gordon's father had delivered such messages for as long as he could remember. Nonetheless, even Gordon didn't foresee events that would soon unfold, the nature of which would affect the course of his life dramatically, requiring him to make commitments from which he could never turn back.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Interview with GBH, 7 March 1995.
[^2] In Conference Report, 6 April 1958, pp. 124-25.
[^3] Deseret News, 7 April 1958.
[^4] GBH Journal, 10 April 1958.
[^5] Interview with Kathleen Hinckley Barnes, 17 October 1995.
[^6] Interview with Virginia Hinckley Pearce, 11 April 1996.
[^7] See LaMar S. Williams, "Gordon B. Hinckley: Assistant to the Twelve," Improvement Era, June 1958, p. 472.
[^8] Richard Gordon Hinckley, unpublished address, 11 May 1991.
[^9] See Delbert L. Stapley, in Conference Report, October 1958, p. 16.
[^10] Interview with MPH, 16 March 1995.
[^11] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "Building an Eternal Home," BYU Speeches of the Year 1959-1960, 4 November 1959; also Gordon B. Hinckley, "The Marriage That Endures," Ensign, May 1974, p. 24.
[^12] See Church News, 14 June 1958.
[^13] Harold B. Lee Journal, 17 August 1958, as recorded in L. Brent Goates to GBH, 17 November 1982; see also Journal History, 17 August 1958.
[^14] See "London's Mormon Temple," Time, 15 September 1958, p. 53.
[^15] See "Building an Eternal Home."
[^16] MPH to Kathleen Hinckley, 6 September 1958.
[^17] Gordon B. Hinckley, "The Consequences of Conversion," BYU Speeches of the Year, 1958-59, address given 28 January 1959.
[^18] Interview with GBH, 18 April 1995; also GBH Journal, 16 September 1958.
[^19] In Conference Report, October 1958, p. 14.
[^20] Interview with GBH, 1 February 1995.
[^21] Interview with Virginia Hinckley Pearce, 12 October 1994.
[^22] Interview with GBH, 1 February 1995.
[^23] "Building an Eternal Home."
[^24] Interview with Clark Bryant Hinckley, 17 November 1994.
[^25] "President Stephen L Richards: 1879-1959," p. 489.
[^26] Interview with GBH, 1 February 1995.
[^27] Interview with GBH, 18 April 1995.
[^28] Interview with MPH, 16 March 1995.
[^29] See "Officials Hail Work of Missionaries," Deseret News-Telegram, 5 April 1960.
[^30] "The Consequences of Conversion."
