Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Twelve

Assistant to the Twelve

The first week of April 1958 the weather turned cool. A spring storm brought steady rain, then snow, blanketing Temple Square in white. The previous general conference had been canceled due to a flu epidemic, so twelve months had passed since the Saints had last heard from their leaders in that setting. But as much as he looked forward to conference, Gordon was preoccupied. A recent stroke had confined his father, now nearly ninety-one, to the hospital, and the prognosis was not good.

Early Saturday evening the phone rang at the Hinckleys'. Dick answered and immediately recognized President McKay's voice, though the Church President did not identify himself. Dick ran outside and called his father to the phone, then heard him say, "Yes, sir. I'll be right there." After a quick shower and change of clothes, Gordon hurried downtown. En route he wondered if the President needed him to take care of something before tomorrow's sessions of conference. But when he walked into President McKay's office, he sensed that this was not a routine summons. After greeting him cordially, President McKay got right to the point: He wished for Gordon to accept a call to serve as an Assistant to the Twelve.

President McKay's words shocked Gordon. "It was a blow, a complete surprise," he admitted. "I had worked around the Church administration building for many years, and I knew these men who were called as General Authorities very well. I knew their strengths and their weaknesses. I knew they were mortal, but I also knew the great good in them. I knew they were special people, and to join their ranks was an almost unbelievable thing. It was overwhelming to have the President of the Church issue such a call." [^1]

The following day, April 6, 1958, President McKay stepped to the pulpit during the Sunday afternoon session and asked for the sustaining vote for the forty-seven-year-old stake president from East Millcreek, Utah. As Elder Hinckley approached the imposing pulpit that looked out over the audience, he caught his breath. From this vantage point the Tabernacle in which he had attended meetings since boyhood looked cavernous. A lifetime of memories surrounding that signal podium surged through his mind. As a boy, he had sat in the balcony and listened to President Heber J. Grant. As a young man, he had witnessed his mentors—men whose work made them more than men to him—deliver inspiring and at times profound addresses from this same pulpit. He simply could not comprehend the call that had come to him.

Elder Hinckley began his remarks with a touch of the self-deprecating humor for which he would become known in subsequent decades: "I am reminded of a statement made by my first missionary companion when I received a letter of transfer to the European Mission office. After I had read it, I turned it over to him. He read it, and then said: 'Well, you must have helped an old lady across the street in the preexistence. This has not come because of anything you've done here.'" After pausing to accommodate the laughter that rippled through the audience, Elder Hinckley continued, his remarks indicating something of the shock with which he was dealing: "I am overwhelmed with a sense of inadequacy. I feel shaken."

In a spirit of reflection, he then acknowledged those whose influence he had felt most deeply throughout his life: "I have been thinking about the road that led here. I know that I have not come that road alone. . . . We grow according to the help given us by those who teach us and lead us." Among others, Gordon singled out the Brethren with whom he had worked closely for more than two decades: "I do not know why under the blessing of Providence I have had the marvelous association which I have had with President Richards. . . . For almost a quarter of a century I have worked under his direction and have been tutored by him. I have partaken of his wisdom—his great wisdom—and his kindness and graciousness. I shall ever be in his debt, and I want him to know of my love and appreciation for him." Elder Hinckley reserved a special tribute for his father: "If I feel any selfish satisfaction in this honor, it is the satisfaction that comes from the realization that one of his sons has been found worthy of the confidence of the Brethren. And if I feel any regret, it is that, unless the Lord rules to the contrary, he will not know of this in mortality because of the condition in which he lies today. had recently suffered a stroke.] No son ever had a better father."

In conclusion, the new General Authority testified of the divinity of the work in which he had been engaged all his adult life: "I would like to bear testimony that I know that God lives, that Jesus is our Redeemer, the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh, the Savior of mankind who gave his life to atone for our sins; that Joseph Smith was indeed a prophet of God, the prophet of this dispensation; that the Lord's work is here and is real and under his direction; and that President David O. McKay stands . . . to lead the kingdom of God, as the stone which was cut out of the mountain without hands, which should roll forth and fill the earth. God help us, you and me, to live up to the testimonies which we carry in our hearts." [^2]

The next day's Deseret News described Elder Hinckley as "a man whose quiet and almost incredibly effective work behind the scenes of the Church administration is known to comparatively few," and added that "his faithful attention to details, as well as his ability to conceive and carry out big, imaginative plans, made him as a strong right arm to the brethren." [^3] Indeed, for the better part of twenty-three years, Gordon had devoted his energy and talent, in one capacity or another, to missionary work. He had survived one pressure-laden assignment after another, demonstrated his integrity and sense of propriety, and handled gracefully the stress of critical areas of responsibility. But in coming days it would become clear that everything he had done had merely laid the foundation for what was now just beginning.

Four days later, President McKay set Elder Hinckley apart as an Assistant to the Twelve. Among other things, the Church President blessed him with protection and guidance, sound judgment, and physical strength. He also referred to Elder Hinckley's prior service: "The Lord is pleased with your devotion in the past, with your willingness to lose yourself for the good of the work. You have demonstrated it, and the people appreciate your service, and the Lord accepts you." The prophet then gave Elder Hinckley his charge: "Go forth in the performance of this great labor under the inspiration and guidance of the Holy Spirit. You now are . . . representing our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. May your testimony of Him become real—more real than it has been in the past, though you have known clearly, as we note through your service, of the reality of the great saving work pertaining to humanity on this earth. The Lord bless you abundantly that you may feel in your very soul the responsibility which is yours to declare to an unbelieving world the necessity of their obeying the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ." Afterward Elder Hinckley said simply, "I feel inadequate, but I pledge you my best." [^4]

During the almost twenty-three years Gordon had worked at Church headquarters, he had developed a warm relationship with many General Authorities, particularly members of the Twelve and the First Presidency. To now be numbered among them seemed inconceivable. But as President Stephen L Richards told him, "You have been doing the work all of these years. You might just as well have the title."

In 1935, when Elder Hinckley had returned from his mission in the British Isles, there had been three quarters of a million Church members residing in 115 stakes. Now there were a million and a half members in 273 stakes, and he had witnessed that growth from the unique vantage point of headquarters. Once again, however, his life had taken a new and unplanned course. Though he had long immersed himself in "Church work," both professionally and ecclesiastically, it was sobering to realize that the course of the remainder of his life had effectively been taken out of his hands. For a brief time he felt almost as though he had been preempted. There would be no retirement, no opportunity to try his hand at business. Moments of relaxation would be scarce. He would travel extensively—something he endured rather than enjoyed. And his young family would have to adjust to his frequent absence. He wished he could talk through his feelings with his father, but Bryant's stroke had left him unable to communicate.

On the other hand, it was now Gordon's opportunity and responsibility to place his life in the hands of the Lord and to devote himself completely to His service. In practical terms, this new assignment felt in some respects like business as usual, for he had tried to follow that pattern throughout his adult life. And there were other matters that remained much the same. Elder Hinckley still made the same commute to the same building. Because he continued to serve as executive secretary of the Missionary Department, his office wasn't even changed. Neither were circumstances adjusted immediately in the East Millcreek Stake, where he continued to serve as stake president. He worked by day as a General Authority, held stake meetings on weekday evenings, and divided his time on weekends between his own stake and assignments to attend conferences in other areas. The first few times he participated in calling new stake presidents were a little unnerving, and he returned home feeling drained emotionally and spiritually. But he found the spiritual outpouring remarkable.

At home the family took Gordon's call in stride—largely because he and Marjorie were determined to maintain a semblance of normalcy—though the older children had strong reactions to the news. Kathy was a freshman at BYU when she received word of her father's new calling. "I didn't take Dad's call very seriously at first," she admitted latter. "It is not that we hadn't been taught to respect General Authorities. But we just couldn't imagine that they had called our father to be one. At home, he didn't make an issue of it." [^5] At thirteen, Virginia was at an age where her parents looked less than perfect to her: "I was aware of the human weaknesses my parents displayed, and so Dad's call came as a little crisis of faith for me. I thought, 'How could the Lord call somebody like my dad who's so average and sometimes lacking?' At the dinner table that first afternoon while we were getting over the shock of what had happened, I said, using an expression I had heard Dad use in referring to missionaries, 'Well, I guess the Lord is just going to have to work with what he's got.' Everyone laughed, but to me that was an expression of my faith. I really believed the Lord would have to turn him into something more than my father." [^6]

Some of Elder Hinckley's first responsibilities as a new General Authority put him on familiar ground. Shortly after the April general conference, he and Sister Hinckley left for New Zealand to participate in the dedication of the temple there. Once again, they traveled in advance of President McKay so that Gordon could finalize arrangements for the dedication and the beginning of ordinance work. In contrast to their trip to Switzerland three years earlier, however, Gordon and Marjorie were anxious about leaving the country for an extended time, for Bryant Hinckley's health was failing noticeably. Fearful that he might not see his father alive again, Gordon administered to him the day before he left. During the blessing he had the impression that his father would not pass away while he was on assignment, and that Bryant would even regain a measure of strength. [^7]

Marjorie was comfortable leaving the children at home, knowing that Bessie next door would keep an eye on things. "We all knew Bessie wouldn't go to bed until all of our lights were out," Dick said. "Many times when my parents were away I would think to myself, 'I'd better not be late getting home or Bessie will never get to sleep.' Once when I came in later than I should have, I turned off the headlights and the motor and coasted up the driveway. The next day Bessie said, 'You came in a little late last night.' I knew I had met my match." [^8]

Despite the reassurance of help at home, it was unnerving to begin a trip of such distance. International travel was still a little overwhelming to the Hinckleys, though they both loved the exposure to new lands and peoples. Certainly New Zealand was their most exotic destination yet, and as they mingled with Pakehas and Maoris, Tongans and Tahitians, and had their first glimpse of cultures they had previously only read about, they could scarcely believe what they were experiencing. President McKay's arrival was greeted with a glorious spectacle in which various groups of Polynesian Saints in native costume entertained, sang, and danced for nearly four hours. [^9] The pageantry was unlike anything the Hinckleys had ever seen.

This trip afforded them the privilege of staying with President and Sister McKay at the home of the temple president. It was Marjorie's first opportunity to associate with a Church President in an informal setting. "I got to see what President McKay was like, whether he liked cold pie or hot pie, so to speak," she said. "And it was wonderful. I would sit across the dining room table after we had eaten and just revel in the experience of being with a prophet. President McKay had an aura about him that was simply overpowering." [^10]

On April 20, 1958, President McKay dedicated the temple, located in Temple View some seventy-five miles south of Auckland. Elder Hinckley was inspired by members throughout the South Pacific, some of whom had made extraordinary sacrifices to attend. He took particular note of one man from the far side of Australia who had initially determined he could not afford to make the trip but then had had a change of heart. He had looked at his wife and children, realized that he couldn't afford not to go, and then sold all that he had to obtain the necessary funds. His story was representative of many others. [^11]

Elder Hinckley returned from New Zealand to find his father showing modest signs of improvement, though Bryant would never completely recover. In addition to family worries, the newest General Authority was feeling a certain degree of occupational pressure, perhaps much of it self-imposed. On June 5, as he gave BYU's baccalaureate address, he pleaded with the graduates to conform their lives to gospel standards. [^12] In and of itself, the assignment was not an extraordinary one, for he had delivered hundreds of addresses to audiences equally imposing. But now he was speaking as a General Authority. Perhaps he was just imagining it, but it seemed that audiences expected more of him, that his words were given added weight. The responsibility was fearsome at times, and he found himself wondering if he was measuring up.

Another source of pressure revolved around the East Millcreek Stake. Still serving as stake president, he struggled to keep the stake going while attending to a growing list of other obligations. After a couple of months of double duty, Elder Hinckley called to the attention of President Joseph Fielding Smith the fact that he was holding down two demanding jobs and doing justice to neither. "We'll take care of that one of these days," President Smith promised. Finally, on August 17, 1958, four and a half months after being sustained as a General Authority, Elder Hinckley was assigned to assist Elder Harold B. Lee in reorganizing the stake, which experience Elder Lee detailed in his journal: "We had an unusual experience in receiving direction for this reorganization. Gordon had been sentimentally inclined to name his first counselor as his successor. In the midst of our interview with him, President H. Leroy Erickson, I was impressed that he should be ordained as the stake patriarch. . . . Gordon said that last night . . . he suddenly had the same impression, but felt it was not his place to suggest it. We named the second counselor, O. Layton Alldredge, the stake president. . . . In his conference talk Brother Erickson said that after we told him of our decision to make him the patriarch, he went home and read his patriarchal blessing . . . and to his amazement, he found that this new calling would give him a fulfillment of one part of his blessing which he had heretofore overlooked." [^13]

With this change, Elder Hinckley felt better about leaving the country for another extended period, this time to England to participate in the dedication of the London Temple. How he and Marjorie had looked forward to this event!

Again, the Hinckleys traveled to England in advance of the official party so that he could coordinate final arrangements for an occasion that was to bring the largest group of General Authorities to England since 1840. The new temple, located twenty-five miles south of London on what was formerly an Elizabethan farm, generated a great deal of prededication attention. Nearly seventy-six thousand visitors sloshed through England's summer rains to tour the temple during its open house, at times jamming the road from London to the rural Surrey town of Lingfield with so many cars that the Automobile Association had to put up yellow signs marking the way. Time magazine predicted that the new temple was sure to draw many converts to Mormonism. [^14]

Elder Hinckley was at the temple site during much of the open house, and he enjoyed the opportunity to talk with nonmember visitors. One evening a young couple approached him outside on the temple steps and asked to know more about eternal marriage, a concept that had caught their attention during the tour. Elder Hinckley immediately responded, "Do you believe that life is eternal?" The woman replied that she did. "Do you believe that love is the finest expression of life?" Again, she responded in the affirmative. He then asked if the couple had been married by the vicar. When she said that they had, Elder Hinckley asked boldly, "Did you realize that when the vicar married you, he not only solemnized your marriage but decreed your separation as well?" An energetic discussion ensued, and though Elder Hinckley never knew whether the couple joined the Church, he was certain they were both surprised by and interested in the truths he shared. [^15]

Following the open house there were just three days in which to make final preparations for the dedication itself. As was typically the case, last-minute adjustments and details kept workers, among them both Hinckleys, busy up until the morning of the dedication. In a postcard home Marjorie hinted at just one unexpected challenge: "The fire department had to come and pump water out of the temple basement last night after a rain. Most of the men worked all night. I had hoped to go back to London this morning with dad but will have to stay and join the mop-up brigade." [^16] Indeed, a fierce lightning and rain storm, the likes of which Elder Hinckley had never seen, had created havoc. Late that night he, temple president Selvoy Boyer, and Elder ElRay L. Christiansen, all dressed in their pajamas, stood in waist-deep water bailing out a stairway area that led into the temple basement.

The momentary crisis was resolved, however, and the first of six dedicatory sessions commenced on Sunday morning, September 7, as scheduled. President McKay, who celebrated his eighty-fifth birthday on the second day of dedicatory services, read the dedicatory prayer at each of the six sessions. Elder Hinckley spoke at afternoon sessions on Sunday and Tuesday, on each occasion reflecting on the sacrifice and contribution of the early English Saints. All in all, the dedication was a spiritual feast framed within an atmosphere of celebration.

Before leaving England, Elder and Sister Hinckley made the two-hundred-mile drive north to Preston for Marjorie's first visit to her husband's initial area of labor as a missionary. She had heard so much about various landmarks that everything seemed familiar as they visited Vauxhall Chapel, 15 Wadham Road, and the River Ribble and walked across the old flagstone market where, more than twenty years earlier, a young and timid Elder Hinckley had first preached to unsympathetic crowds.

For Gordon, the memories were so tender that he walked along in silence, at a loss to express his feelings even to Marjorie. It was impossible for him to forget the scene that had greeted him more than two decades earlier—poor men whose worn coats and scarves were their only protection against the winter chill, and women who struggled to put something on the table from sparsely stocked pantries. They were rough people who had made sport of berating young Mormon elders. But it was here that he had faced a day of decision, here that his testimony had matured. "As I looked into the faces of the people of Lancashire, I could not help feeling sorry for them," he said after returning home. "I felt sorry for the fact that the majority of their forebears had rejected the gospel 121 years ago when the first missionaries came there. And frankly, I felt sorry that they had rejected us." [^17]

The Hinckleys returned home via Brussels, where they enjoyed half a day at the World's Fair, and Paris. What awaited them in France was much less pleasant than either England or Belgium had been. Elder Hinckley was assigned by President McKay to meet with a handful of missionaries who had been misled by a clever apostate. He was heartbroken by what he found, as he noted in his journal: "I talked to them at length and gave them my assurance that no good would come of their actions, and that the day would come when they would regret what they were doing. I bore them my testimony of the gospel and tried every way I knew to persuade them to reverse their course, but to no avail. At that point there was little for me to do but make sure they had a way to get home. We felt we owed that to their parents." [^18] His heart was heavy as he and Marjorie boarded the plane for home.

For the most part, however, Elder Hinckley's first months as a General Authority provided opportunities to observe the positive influence of the gospel in people's lives, and in his second general conference address he spoke of the divinity of the work he had witnessed from Europe to New Zealand. [^19] Despite his talent with language, however, he found preparing to speak at general conference to be one of the hardest things he had ever attempted, and he agonized over the process. (He would find through the years that it didn't get any easier with practice.)

Not all assignments were as taxing. Some—indeed many—brought sheer delight. Although Elder Hinckley was always exhausted afterward, getting out among the members at stake conferences was a spiritual high. Dedicating new buildings was also a highlight—a physical manifestation of the growth of the Church and the sacrifice of its people. He found few assignments more satisfying than the one to dedicate a new stake center in the East Millcreek Stake—the building for which he had initiated plans two years earlier. On May 17, 1959, he arrived at the stake center to find the parking lot filled with shiny automobiles. The experience illustrated a principle he never forgot. "Nobody ever missed what he gave for that building," he said, "and that has been my testimony to Saints all over this Church. You don't miss what you give to the Lord." [^20]

As the 1950s drew to a close, significant national and international developments foreshadowed the clamorous decade to follow. In 1959, Alaska and Hawaii were admitted to the union, NASA selected its first seven astronauts, the Soviet Union's Nikita Khrushchev made an unprecedented tour of the United States, and Fidel Castro overthrew Juan Batista to become Cuba's head. Closer to home, the decade's benedictory year found the Hinckley family undergoing dramatic growth pains as well. In May 1959, Kathleen announced her plans to marry Alan Barnes in November, and Dick graduated from Olympus High School. A candidate for the draft, he enlisted in the U.S. Army Reserve and was ordered to Fort Ord in northern California for basic training.

Realizing that the complexion of their home life would soon change forever, Gordon and Marjorie seized the opportunity to take their family on one last vacation together. They drove to San Francisco and during the several days prior to Dick's induction rode cable cars, walked along Fisherman's Wharf, took the Bay Cruise around Alcatraz, ate in Chinatown, and saw a stage version of My Fair Lady. A woman who had always relished having her children nearby, Marjorie did not find the transition easy. When they returned from California, having left Dick behind, she locked herself in the bathroom and cried.

Kathy's impending marriage prompted dramatic changes as well. All of her father's building, remodeling, and tinkering of the past paled in comparison with the major renovation he undertook when they decided to hold her wedding reception at home. Gordon's plan called for converting the master bedroom along the back of the house into a kitchen, turning the old kitchen into a bedroom, building a new master bedroom in the garage, cutting a front door into the dining room, which would then become the entrance hall, and converting the family room into a dining room. It was a bold and ambitious project, one that few men would have attempted at all, let alone just a few months before a wedding reception was scheduled to be held there. But Gordon was not to be deterred. Recalling her father's plans, Virginia explained: "It never occurred to Dad that he couldn't accomplish something. When it came to the wedding, he liked having a deadline. He was always changing something anyway, and a firm deadline gave him a concrete goal that dictated when the job had to be finished." [^21]

The massive remodeling was simply good sense as far as Gordon was concerned, for the changes would make the home more convenient for his family. Therefore, all summer and into the fall Marjorie and the children awoke early each morning to the noise of hammer and saw as he put in an hour's work before leaving for the office. Major jobs, such as plumbing the kitchen or moving the front door, were reserved for holidays and the occasional Saturday when he didn't have a conference assignment out of town.

The day before the wedding there was still wallpapering and painting to be done. "I've always been up against the gun," Gordon said later. "My whole life I've been right against deadlines. When I was in the university, I turned in papers the last day I could hand them in. I have lived with pressure." [^22] That evening Alan picked Kathy up from classes at the university, brought her home, changed into work clothes, and hung the wallpaper in the kitchen. "After all," Gordon told him without a hint of apology, "anyone who is marrying into this family needs to know how to work."

On the morning of November 13, 1959, Elder Hinckley performed the marriage of his eldest daughter. That night the reception was pleasant for guests and nothing short of miraculous as far as the family was concerned, as they had seen their modest home undergo a magnificent transformation.

With all the pressure to have the home ready for Kathy's reception, it was no wonder that Elder Hinckley almost overlooked an assignment to address the BYU student body just nine days before the wedding. The evening of November 3, he turned over his calendar to find a note he had scrawled on the next day's schedule—"BYU—10:00 A.M."—and immediately felt the anxiety of facing thousands of students without much time to prepare. He confessed his near faux pas as he began his remarks the following morning; then, perhaps preoccupied with Kathy's impending marriage, he spoke to the subject of building an eternal home. "The nation is no stronger than the homes of the people, and the Church is no stronger in its practical aspects and in the faith and devotion of its members than the homes of the people," he began. After a practical message on this most fundamental of topics, he concluded—again, almost certainly with his own daughter in mind: "In the philosophy of the Gospel, the girl you take to the temple is not a doll or a toy, she is not a chattel or a slave. She is a daughter of our Father in Heaven, and she is a companion and an equal, and without her you cannot achieve the highest degree of exaltation in our Father's kingdom. . . . The children who come to your home are likewise the children of our Father in Heaven, and he will hold you responsible for them. I believe that children should respect parents, but I believe also that parents should respect children." [^23]

On this subject Elder Hinckley knew whereof he spoke, for he and Marjorie both nurtured a healthy respect for their children. Both had long encouraged their children's unique personalities, and now that he was a General Authority, they were determined that his visible position would not undermine their children's ability to progress and develop normally. When his weekend conference assignments were nearby, Gordon occasionally took one of the children with him, and they relished the one-on-one time with their father. "Most of my experience related to Dad's call as a General Authority was positive," Clark reflected. "I did not grow up expecting him to be home a lot, so in that respect things didn't change much. And we each had opportunities to spend time with him in unusual settings—the kind of thing that our friends didn't get to do with their fathers. There were trade-offs, but we all felt lucky to be Hinckleys." [^24]

There were, of course, changes for everyone in the family, not the least for Elder Hinckley himself. Tuesday morning, May 19, 1959, he and others of the Missionary Department assembled at 7:30 in President Stephen L Richards's office for the weekly meeting in which missionary assignments were made. When President Richards was late arriving, they wondered if they should begin the meeting, but decided against doing so. Finally the phone rang, and the caller relayed sobering news: President Richards had been rushed to the hospital after suffering a heart attack. Less than an hour later, he was gone. The news stunned Elder Hinckley. He knew his mentor had had a heart condition, but there had been no warning that his passing was imminent.

Invited to speak at the funeral, he summarized his experience with President Richards: "It was a stimulating experience to work under him. . . . I have been the beneficiary of his great kindness. I have partaken of his unfailing courtesy. I have witnessed his unyielding loyalty to his honored leader and to his associates. I have marveled at his matchless wisdom, his incisive mind, his persuasive expression. His sense of justice was universal in its application. . . . His devotion to duty was undeviating. His love of God was the polar star of his life, and his desire to help his fellow men his chief ambition." [^25]

President Richards's death left a void in Gordon's life. Next to his father, this man had had greater influence on him than any other. And with his father's ability to communicate limited by poor health, he felt a surge of loneliness. "It was a traumatic thing," he remembered. "President Richards was a great and good, wise and wonderful man. He was thoroughly dedicated to the Church. And I knew immediately that his death would mean a change in how things operated for me." [^26]

On June 12, 1959, President McKay reorganized the First Presidency, naming J. Reuben Clark Jr. as first counselor and Henry D. Moyle as second. President Moyle now supervised the Missionary Department, so almost immediately he and Elder Hinckley began conferring regularly on the range of matters that appeared before them. When it came to assigning prospective missionaries to their field of labor, Elder Hinckley often took the related paperwork to President Moyle's home, where, in the comfort and privacy of his library, they were free from distraction and could pray about the assignments.

In short order, Elder Hinckley came to love President Moyle. Though his leadership style was much different from that of President Richards, Elder Hinckley admired his energy and the bold manner in which he operated. "President Moyle was remarkable in many ways," he later reflected. "He was less concerned about the handbook and rules than in finding what was best for the kingdom in a given situation. I marveled not only at his energy and vision, but at his spirit of consecration. When he was called as an Apostle he closed his law office, moved his own furniture to Church headquarters, and never looked or went back. I am sure he would have given everything he had to the Church." [^27]

One day in early 1960 President Moyle called Elder Hinckley to his office. Because the two met frequently, President Moyle's summons was not unusual. On this occasion, however, the item for discussion had broader ramifications than usual. Pointing to a large world map that lay on his desk, President Moyle explained that he would soon propose to the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve that they divide the world into areas, each to be supervised by a General Authority. "I have every area covered except one," he said, "and that is Asia. I can't bring myself to ask anyone to go to Asia." Elder Hinckley responded, "President Moyle, if you need somebody to supervise Asia, I would be happy to try." "You would? You would be willing to supervise an area halfway around the world?" President Moyle asked. With Elder Hinckley's simple "yes," the assignment was formalized.

Marjorie was not surprised that night when Gordon described the interchange in President Moyle's office. "Nobody else was jumping at the chance to take on an area so far from home where the Church was in its infancy, the languages were difficult, and there was a lot of work to be done," she said. "I immediately recognized that this would affect our routine, and that he would probably be traveling a great deal. Asia was huge, and he had tremendous territory to cover." [^28]

Other assignments also occupied Elder Hinckley's time and attention. In March 1960, he was asked to sit on the General Priesthood Committee, chaired by Elder Harold B. Lee, to study Church curriculum with the object of providing for better correlation of all programs and activities. And he continued to supervise the work of the Missionary Department. At a Sunday evening "missionary session" held in connection with the April 1960 general conference, he outlined a four-point approach for preparing missionaries and then observed, "It is the hardest, toughest and roughest work . . . it is discouraging work, but it is also the most fruitful, wonderful and glorious work in all the world." [^29] To the BYU student body he noted the substantial increase in conversions between 1954 and 1958 (during which time they more than doubled), and then bore testimony of the consequences of such a missionary harvest: "These converts are not peas in a pod, they are not automobiles on a production line; they are men and women, sons and daughters of our Father in Heaven, into whose hearts have come the truths of the restored gospel. . . . Nobody knows, nobody can predict the consequences of those conversions." [^30]

As immersed as he had been in missionary work, Elder Hinckley would soon observe its fruits in a new and poignant way. The assignment to oversee the work in Asia would be a consuming responsibility and opportunity—one in which he would sample anew the roughest and toughest yet most glorious work in all the world.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See The World Book (Chicago: Field Enterprises Educational Corporation, 1966), 1:735.
[^2] See "Elder Hinckley to Visit East Missions," Church News, 23 April 1960; also GBH Journal, 24-30 April 1960.
[^3] GBH Journal, 6 May 1960.
[^4] GBH to Henry D. Moyle, 6 May 1960.
[^5] GBH Journal, 13 May 1960.
[^6] GBH Journal, 14 May 1960.
[^7] GBH Journal, 15 May 1960.
[^8] See GBH Journal, 16 May 1960.
[^9] GBH Journal, 19 May 1960.
[^10] GBH Journal, 21 May 1960.
[^11] GBH Journal, 21 May 1960.
[^12] GBH Journal, 21 May 1960.
[^13] GBH Journal, 23 May 1960.
[^14] GBH Journal, 21 May 1960.
[^15] GBH Journal, 19 May 1960.
[^16] GBH Journal, 18 May 1960.
[^17] GBH Journal, 20 May 1960.
[^18] GBH Journal, 26 May 1960.
[^19] GBH Journal, 27 May 1960.
[^20] Interview with GBH, 11 July 1995.
[^21] Interview with GBH, 11 July 1995.
[^22] GBH Journal, 3 June 1960.
[^23] Interview with GBH, 18 April 1995.
[^24] Memo from Kenji Tanaka, 27 April 1995.
[^25] GBH Journal, 2 June 1960.
[^26] See memo from Yasuhiro Matsushita, 27 April 1995.
[^27] See "Ready to Harvest," p. 509.
[^28] See Interview with Spencer J. Palmer, 13 July 1995.
[^29] GBH Journal, 4 June 1960.
[^30] Interview with Han In Sang, 31 March 1995.
