Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Thirteen

West Meets East

What Elder Hinckley knew about Asia and its peoples didn't extend much beyond what he could read in an encyclopedia. He knew that it lay halfway around the world, that it covered an immense area (approximately 30 percent of the world's land mass), that it was home to some of the world's most densely populated cities and approximately half its population, and that the various languages spoken there bore no resemblance to English. [^1] He couldn't remember having ever associated closely with anyone of Oriental descent, and he had no particular feeling for the Asian peoples. If anything, the Selective Service red tape he had found so tedious and worrisome during the Korean War had left him with a certain uneasiness about, if not a distaste for, that part of the world.

Elder Hinckley did know that the Church was small and weak along the Pacific Rim. Although the gospel had been introduced by faithful LDS servicemen in Japan, Taiwan, Okinawa, and Korea, its administration in those countries was still largely dependent on the Americans (expatriates, servicemen, and missionaries) living there. Despite its overwhelming size, all of Asia was divided into just two missions—the Southern Far East and the Northern Far East—and the Church owned only two buildings in the Orient, a house being used as a mission home on Kowloon across from Hong Kong Island, and a small house on Hokkaido, the northernmost island of Japan. Tiny branches of Saints—a dozen here, twenty there—met in members' living rooms and rented halls scattered throughout the vast continent. There were no stakes.

Elder Hinckley's new assignment would be a pioneering effort in every sense of the word. He was to give direction to mission presidents, motivate missionaries, teach and tend to the needs of the Saints, and develop leaders throughout the immense and highly diverse region. But his first challenge was to become acquainted with the peoples over whom he now had stewardship. In the spring of 1960, therefore, he prepared to make his first trip to Asia for an extensive tour of both missions. [^2]

Travel to the Orient was still considered exotic, reserved largely for the professional and social elite. Though Elder Hinckley didn't relish the thought of traveling halfway around the world to half a dozen countries foreign to him in every respect, he recognized the opportunity as something rare. One evening he announced at the dinner table that he was going to Japan. There was no response. Once again he remarked, trying to sound casual, that he would soon be leaving for Japan. Again, no reaction. Finally, surprised that his news hadn't inspired some reply and perhaps even a little awe, he stated with emphasis, "I said, your fa-ther is go-ing to Ja-pan." At that Dick, who was home from basic training and would turn nineteen while his father was gone, looked up from his plate and asked, "Could you get the car radio fixed before you go?"

If Marjorie was concerned that her husband was leaving on a two-month-long overseas excursion, she didn't voice the sentiment. Both she and Gordon did everything they could to keep his send-off upbeat. But later, as his plane soared high above the Pacific, he felt both eager and apprehensive about what lay ahead. He couldn't visualize what awaited him.

Elder Hinckley first set foot on Asian soil in Tokyo, where he went through customs and immigration before pushing on to Hong Kong. There President Robert S. Taylor of the Southern Far East Mission and a small group of missionaries and Church members greeted him as he stepped out into the hot, steamy climate of Southeast Asia.

The next day, his introduction to the "Pearl of the Orient," as he would refer to Hong Kong ever after, began in earnest. What a fascinating city! The streets bulged with activity—bicycles, pedicabs, and small cars wove in and out as though each knew where the others would go in a traffic system that seemed to have neither rhyme nor reason. And he had never seen so many people, a seemingly never-ending stream emerging from countless alleyways, buildings, and streetside shops. It was a wonder that this mass of humanity moved itself about without constant injury! Buildings covered almost every square inch of ground, and the unfamiliar smells were pungent and spicy. He had been to London, Brussels, Paris, and Auckland, but he had never seen anything like this. Nor were the dominant sounds common or even pleasant to his ear. Cantonese, with its short syllables and staccato tones, sounded to him like a henhouse full of chickens.

But from his first day in Hong Kong, Elder Hinckley was captivated. The city's red buses and traffic roundabouts with vehicles moving on the left-hand side of the street gave the city a British ambience, though most of its residents were dark-haired and olive-skinned. There were obvious displays of wealth in the substantial business community, yet extreme cases of poverty—the worst he had ever seen—in other quarters of the city. The Star Ferry conveyed traffic back and forth between Hong Kong and Kowloon, part of the British Crown Colony on the coast of mainland China. And in the New Territories, a rural area near Kowloon leased by the British, men and women still used water buffalo for beasts of burden as they worked the rice fields.

Almost immediately Elder Hinckley determined that the missionaries must be the primary object of his attention. The more effective they were, the faster the gospel would move forward. On his second day in Hong Kong he met with the forty-five missionaries laboring there, and after interviewing each one he noted: "They are doing good work and appear to be happy. . . . I am confident that we would not go to any mission anywhere else in the world and find a better spirit among the missionaries." [^3]

Despite the positive attitudes he observed among both missionaries and local members, he also identified challenges to the work in Hong Kong, some of them formidable, which he outlined in a memo to President Moyle. The native Chinese were immature in their Church experience, he reported. Language texts were inadequate, and missionaries struggled to communicate. Cantonese was spoken in Hong Kong; Mandarin was the language of Taiwan. "Even the Chinese cannot understand the Chinese," Elder Hinckley wrote. The muggy climate was also a deterrent to energetic missionary work. "The hot, humid air is extremely enervating," he reported. "The missionaries do not go at the pace that they go in other parts of the world, and this is understandable. However they can do better than they are now doing, and . . . I can make some suggestions to help them in organizing their work and budgeting their time." [^4]

Each day Elder Hinckley uncovered more problems and challenges. Interested in locating a suitable building the Church could buy, he inspected a potential site. Undesirable by U.S. standards, it listed for $200,000, a staggering sum as far as he was concerned, though he would find that land was at a premium throughout Asia. He was also concerned with the teaching plan the missionaries were using. Long and involved, it did not allow them the flexibility they needed in a city where they taught everyone from Christian Protestants to Buddhists. Elder Hinckley believed he could rework the plan to be more effective, if he only had time to do so. He was busy from dawn to dusk visiting branches, inspecting property, and holding meetings and interviews with missionaries and members. He visited one-on-one with every young man and woman serving in the area so that he could assess their well-being, kneel with them in prayer, offer counsel and encouragement, and give blessings of healing or comfort as needed.

During meetings with small groups of members, Elder Hinckley came face-to-face with the challenges of training priesthood leaders whose language was totally foreign to him. As he sketched out details and information on a chalkboard, an interpreter followed behind, translating the words into Chinese characters. It was a tedious process, but the Church would never grow without leadership from local members who understood gospel principles as well as Church administration.

After eight days in Hong Kong, though he felt he hadn't begun to address the issues that begged for his attention there, Elder Hinckley flew to Manila, where his first order of business was to begin the process of obtaining official recognition for the Church in the Philippines. He found one small branch with forty-five members, most of them U.S. servicemen. There was only one known Filipino member of the Church.

Though he would have been hard-pressed to believe it just the day before, in the Philippines he encountered a culture, people, and land even more unusual than he had found in Hong Kong. The climate was even more sultry, and most of the people appeared to live in abject poverty. The wild traffic he had encountered in Hong Kong seemed tame compared to what he now experienced. "The roads here are narrow and the people drive like mad," he recorded. "Old trucks and old buses compete with horse-drawn carts for the highway. Caribou . . . pull farm carts with solid wooden wheels." [^5] Thousands of Jeepneys, a colorful and uniquely Filipino adaptation of Jeeps left over from World War II, were packed with people who either crammed themselves inside the elongated vehicles or hung from the sides and rear like cable car passengers in San Francisco. Outside of Manila, banana trees and coconut groves stretched before him, and as he drove through the countryside he imagined it to look like Hawaii before the early missionaries arrived there.

Elder Hinckley instantly liked these Filipino people, who were warm and friendly, even gregarious—more like those of the South Sea islands he had met in New Zealand than the reserved Chinese with whom he had spent the previous week. And despite their depressed living conditions, they seemed bright and capable. It became immediately apparent, however, that the government of the Philippines was mired in red tape, and Elder Hinckley's initial impression of the country was that it held little promise for missionary work. But after holding a small meeting in Baguio, north of Manila, he began to feel differently. "This evening we have had a testimony meeting that has been an inspiration," he noted in his journal. "We have listened to 30 of our members bear their testimonies. . . . Almost without exception they spoke of the great possibilities for doing missionary work here and made pleas that this land be opened for missionary work. As I listened to them I felt strongly that missionary work should be undertaken in this land." [^6]

With each day, Elder Hinckley felt increasingly optimistic about the potential in this third-world island republic. At a conference of the Luzon servicemen's group he discussed their obligation to lay a foundation for missionary work. "I expressed the view that missionary work will be done in the Philippines in the future and that it will be as fruitful as it has been in many other places in the world," he recorded afterward. [^7]

Throughout the Philippines Elder Hinckley traveled, speaking to servicemen's groups, interviewing members, and meeting with national officials to seek permission for missionaries to enter the country. On his fifth evening there he attended a dance festival and found himself seated next to the consul general of the United States, a man who had served in posts throughout Europe, was familiar with the Church, and asked how the missionaries in the Philippines were doing. When Elder Hinckley explained that he was currently seeking permission to allow proselytizing, the consul general expressed surprise that such authorization had not already been given and pledged his support. [^8] Elder Hinckley hadn't been enthusiastic about attending the festival, but now realized why he had.

With official recognition in the Philippines unresolved, he left for Taiwan, where the Church was small but organized. For nearly a week he toured the island with President Taylor, looking for property (the price of which continued to astound Elder Hinckley, who was beginning to realize that even modest meetinghouses that could double as missionary residences would cost the Church millions in the aggregate) and meeting each day with small groups of missionaries, members, and investigators. Only a few native Chinese were members of the Church, but they showed promise. "One sees now and again a man and a woman with real potential," he noted. "I am fully satisfied that we have local brethren and sisters here who can be trained quickly to positions of leadership if they are given the opportunity." [^9] The presence of American servicemen scattered throughout the island bolstered the work significantly, and in many cases, their assignments in these isolated areas produced additional benefits. After one testimony meeting with a group of military personnel, Elder Hinckley recorded: "We have some wonderful service people in this part of the world. Some of them had done nothing at home and had they not been in the service, it is likely that they never would have done anything in the Church. However in these remote areas they have sought association with Church people and have become active. It is an inspiring thing." [^10]

There were few days that Elder Hinckley didn't spend time with missionaries. In Taiwan he marveled that, though they had unique challenges learning Mandarin, they spoke more fluently after a few months than did most Americans who had lived abroad for years. "I know that it is done only because the Lord blesses them," he reflected. [^11] He also looked constantly for ways to buoy them up. Occasionally there were opportunities to counsel and help young men and women in difficult circumstances. In Taiwan one missionary confided an earlier misdeed that most likely would have precluded his serving a mission. After long discussion, during which Elder Hinckley felt impressed that the missionary was genuinely repentant and had served faithfully for many months, he counseled the young man to write his bishop and stake president, as well as the General Authority who had interviewed him for his mission. "I have told him that if he receives forgiveness from these men to whom he failed to tell the truth, he will be permitted to remain and complete his mission, and I have suggested to him that he prove his repentance by the manner of his work," he concluded. [^12]

Elder Hinckley focused much of his instruction to missionaries on gospel principles and ways to teach more effectively, but he was concerned also with practical matters. He was appalled, for example, at some of the missionaries' living conditions. "Their mothers would be shocked if they were to see the circumstances under which they live," he recorded in his journal. "I told them to put screens in the drains to keep the cockroaches and rats out . . . that] there was no consistency in brushing their teeth with boiled water and then leaving their toothbrushes out all night for the cockroaches to crawl over." [^13] Such challenges notwithstanding, the missionaries' affection for the Chinese was evident, leading him to conclude, "The work has a tremendous potential here." [^14]

Travel throughout Southeast Asia was often adventurous. The plane Elder Hinckley took from Taipei to Tainan was basically an old flying boxcar fitted with the most rudimentary of seats. Ground transportation wasn't much better. After touring one region of Taiwan he wrote, "We rode in a 1954 Plymouth painted red, yellow, and blue. The driver was a Taiwanese man . . . honked the horn constantly. I made a count while looking at my watch and discovered that he honked the horn at least every ten seconds during a trip of approximately 135 miles." [^15] Traffic may have been worse than usual during Elder Hinckley's visit, as Taipei was teeming with visitors on hand for Chiang Kai-shek's inauguration for his third term as president of the Republic of China.

Elder Hinckley was used to maintaining a rapid pace, but the unfamiliar surroundings, terrain, cuisine, jet lag, and climate were hard on him. He found himself awake before dawn morning after morning, though he had gone to bed exhausted after tramping from city to city in the sultry, steamy climate. "The heat takes the starch out of me," he admitted while in Taiwan. [^16] Though he had at first been concerned about a lackadaisical work ethic on the part of some missionaries, he began to appreciate the conditions under which they labored: "They are not doing nearly as much proselyting as they should, but I think they need more rest than they do in some missions. The hot humid air is hard on them. It is very tiring for me." [^17]

His tour of the Southern Far East Mission nearly complete, Elder Hinckley returned to Hong Kong to organize the voluminous notes he had made during his month-long visit and to investigate prospects for translating the Book of Mormon into Cantonese and Mandarin. It had been a difficult month, but he was already beginning to feel an affinity for the unique Oriental cultures. He didn't pretend to understand these people—but he liked them. He was drawn to the industry, tradition, and graciousness inherent within their cultures. And he felt great surges of compassion for those who lived in poverty. "There now comes to a close this interesting experience in China," he noted his last day in Hong Kong. "Between Hong Kong, the Philippines, and Taiwan, I have seen many interesting things. I have become attached to this area of the world." [^18]

From Hong Kong, Elder Hinckley flew to Tokyo, where he was greeted by President Paul C. Andrus of the Northern Far East Mission, as well as by cooler weather. But the difference in temperature wasn't the only notable distinction between the two missions. The tempo throughout Japan was markedly upbeat.

Tokyo fascinated Elder Hinckley. "Taxi cabs dart around like ants," he noted. "It is a harrowing experience to ride one." He marveled at the large crowds that milled about shopping districts where everything from exquisite rugs to parasols was for sale. The unique courtesies and characteristics of the Japanese culture also intrigued and impressed him, and he enjoyed one "first" after another—bowing as a form of greeting, removing his shoes in the entryways to buildings, sleeping on a thin mattress on the floor. One experience shocked him, though. In Tokyo he inspected a beautiful Japanese home on a piece of prime property on Yoyogi Street. The location was excellent, just a ten-minute walk from the beautiful park in which the Meiji Shrine, a revered Shinto memorial, was situated. But when Elder Hinckley heard the price, he was horrified: $682,000! "It is an excellent site but the price is terrible," he noted. [^19]

For days he agonized over whether or not to recommend to the First Presidency that the Church invest such a sum in one building. Yet he felt it imperative that they begin to acquire property in the Orient. Buildings not only housed branches—important in and of itself—but gave the Church increased visibility and helped members feel proud of the organization to which they belonged. The more he investigated Tokyo real estate, the more apparent it became that it would be impossible to find either an existing structure or property on which to build in a suitable area without paying a terrific price for it. In the strong economy the price of land was escalating, so there appeared to be no advantage in delaying purchase. But the burden of recommending what he knew his leaders would regard as an exorbitant asking price weighed heavily on Elder Hinckley. After petitioning the Lord for direction, he conferred by phone with President Moyle. The Church had never paid such a sum for a meetinghouse, he warned his younger colleague. "Well, if we are to get property in Japan," Elder Hinckley replied, "we'll pay that much for it. I have been to visit the resident manager of the National City Bank and had a good discussion about property values here, and this is what it will take." [^20] President Moyle promised to visit with President McKay and cable a response. The next day he wired Elder Hinckley with instructions to use his best judgment and, if he felt inspired, to make the purchase. The response was not what he had hoped for—he wanted clear-cut instructions from the First Presidency.

As he pondered the situation, he could almost hear the words of his mission president, Elder Joseph F. Merrill, ringing in his ears: "I will be more careful with the Church's money than I will with my own." He couldn't get out of his mind the fact that all such monies came from the tithes of the people, yet he also felt that the Church would grow in Japan and that it was time to face up to the price of real estate there. "It seemed unlikely that property would ever cost less, and this building was in an excellent location," Elder Hinckley explained. "After weighing all the facts, and praying earnestly about the matter, I had the strong impression that we should proceed and I committed the Church to purchase the land." [^21] With mission president Paul Andrus he then worked through complicated negotiations to complete the sale and participated in a formal signing ceremony customary among the Japanese. Afterward he noted in his journal, "Following conclusion of this procedure, I felt greatly relieved and had the feeling that we had done the right thing." [^22] When Elder Hinckley returned home, he found that some of his colleagues, unfamiliar with the unique challenges of the Asian real-estate market, were uneasy about his decision. But as it turned out, the site proved to be a fundamental building block of the Church in Japan. It was sold years later at more than thirty times the purchase price, becoming one of the best real-estate investments ever among many transactions Elder Hinckley made for the Church.

It was a significant step—purchasing one of the Church's first buildings in Asia—and Elder Hinckley marveled that he had been part of it. But then, each day, each country, was bringing him new experiences. On June 1, while he was still in Japan, he recorded in his journal, "This is the beginning of a new month. It is Brigham Young's birthday, and I cannot escape the thought that the Church is still pioneering. It will go on pioneering for a long time to come."

The tremendous pioneering effort needed throughout the Orient drove him to set a feverish pace. His day with the missionaries typically began around 7:30 A.M. and continued until late afternoon. Often they came fasting, and after Elder Hinckley gave several hours of instruction, he invited each to bear testimony. Then he interviewed them one by one.

In the evenings and on weekends he met with members. The branches and districts throughout Japan tended to be slightly larger than those he had found in Hong Kong, but the challenge of training a generation of Asian converts to become leaders was the same. In one meeting after another, Elder Hinckley took off his shoes, sat on the floor with the local brethren, and taught them. "I learned that there was one way to work with those people," he reflected later, "and that was to get down on the tatami mats with them, teach them the principles of the gospel, and let their hearts be opened to the meaning of this work." [^23]

From the outset, Elder Hinckley had an affinity for the Asians. He admired the integrity, resourcefulness, and work ethic of these determined people, and he was attracted to their manner, which though somewhat formal was gracious and accommodating. Though the Church was small and struggling, he saw potential in the modest core of members. Kenji Tanaka, who later became the first stake president in Asia, attended a priesthood meeting during Elder Hinckley's first trip to Japan. "Our expectations were so great," he remembered, "and Elder Hinckley's excitement could be seen in his sparkling eyes. His first word to us was Subarashii! The atmosphere of that meeting changed from stiff and formal to friendliness and closeness to him, and a warm feeling prevailed. During that meeting he told us, 'Those who gather together here today are holding the most important power, a far greater power than the Prime Minister of Japan, for the Japanese people.' He inspired us, he motivated us to aim high with strong and clear goals. He had a core of energy that was radiating and full of love." [^24]

Wherever he went, Elder Hinckley took particular note of the local youth in attendance. In Osaka he was impressed with a missionary from Tokyo who bore a strong testimony of the gospel. "If he keeps the faith, he will someday be a leader in Japan," Elder Hinckley wrote. "I feel much encouraged by some of the young people who have joined the Church here. They have great potential." [^25]

Yasuhiro Matsushita, who was later called as president of the Japan Kobe Mission, attended a district conference on the island of Hokkaido. Yasuhiro and his fiancÃ©e had recently announced their engagement and were to become only the fifth couple married as Church members in Hokkaido. When Elder Hinckley learned of their upcoming marriage, he held them up as examples to their peers. [^26]

One overwhelming aspect of supervising the work in Asia was negotiating the huge distances involved. After six weeks of nonstop travel, during which Elder Hinckley had traveled to a new city almost every day, he had done little more than visit major metropolitan centers. He felt he was leaving much undone in Japan when he flew on to Korea, where a crowd on the air terminal's observation deck greeted him with a large sign that proclaimed, "Welcome to Korea Elder Gordon B. Hinckley."

Korea shared similarities with other countries in Asia, but there were also noticeable differences. After thirty-six years of Japanese domination, followed by the bitter civil war that had ultimately involved the United States and other world powers, South Korea had one of the world's lowest gross national products, and its economy was severely depressed. The people were poor—financially and spiritually—and few had any confidence in their ability to lead out. Elder Hinckley was sobered by the living conditions of the Korean Saints, many of whom struggled to provide even the basic necessities. His heart went out to them.

In South Korea, Elder Hinckley found some 650 Church members divided among five small branches—four in the capital city of Seoul and one in Pusan, a port at the end of the Korean peninsula. Upon his arrival in Seoul, one of his first requests was to visit Sister Pak P'il-gun, the widow of Dr. Kim Ho Jik, who had played an instrumental role in opening the way for the missionaries in 1956 and had passed away the previous fall. [^27] After paying his respects to Sister Pak, Elder Hinckley instructed President Andrus to make sure that she was taken care of as far as housing and food were concerned. During subsequent years, each time he visited Korea, Elder Hinckley sought out Sister Pak to express his love and look after her welfare. [^28]

Despite Korea's economic blight, the Church was making some headway there. Few couples seemed interested in the Church, but the missionaries were having some success among the youth. "If we can get fine educated young people, the Church will grow and be secure in Korea," he noted. [^29] He made frequent reference in his journal to young members who demonstrated potential and noted things he could do personally to encourage them. During a district conference in Seoul he ordained a twenty-one-year-old man, Han In Sang, an elder. Said Brother Han of that experience: "My faith was small as a convert. But as he gave me the blessing, I knew the man who laid his hands upon my head was a man of God, and I made a commitment at that moment to never turn my back against the Church or against the man who was ordaining me. After that, each time I picked Elder Hinckley up at the airport when he arrived in Korea, I would shake his hand, look up at him, and say silently to myself, 'Elder Hinckley, Han In Sang still faithful.'" [^30]

From one intimate gathering to another, Elder Hinckley reassured the Korean Saints that they had the ability to lead the Church in their country and that the gospel had great potential among their people. From city to city he sounded what became a familiar theme: "You are just as capable as anybody in this world. You can carry the work of the Church forward as well as people can carry it anywhere." Elder Hinckley found the Koreans to be bright and able people who did not yetunderstand their potential. [^31] "From 1909 until the end of World War II we had been governed by someone else," Brother Han explained. "And then came the Korean War. We were confused about our own identity. But Elder Hinckley told us we were important and that we could be leaders. No one had ever said that to us before." [^32]

Rhee Ho Nam, who had joined the Church in 1954, was among the handful of Korean Saints who met with Elder Hinckley in this and many subsequent visits. "He always gave us encouragement," he reflected later. "We were living a difficult life, almost a hopeless life. We didn't have many expectations. But every time Elder Hinckley came, he met with us, gave us his personal attention, and left us with a feeling of new hope." During one of those early meetings, Brother Rhee remembered, a Korean brother asked Elder Hinckley if there would ever be a temple in Korea. "Back in those days we had less than a hundred members, and here my friend was asking about a temple. I was a little embarrassed for him, and I poked him and whispered that he shouldn't have asked that question. But Elder Hinckley just smiled and in a very encouraging tone promised us that if we stayed close to the Lord and were obedient to the Church there would one day be a temple in the Land of the Morning Calm. When he spoke to us it was as though something tangible happened. At that moment I thought that maybe such an impossible dream would actually come true one day. Very simply, Elder Hinckley is the father of the Church in Korea." [^33]

As he became acquainted with the few members of the Church in the country, Elder Hinckley often found himself almost overcome by emotion as he contemplated their stark circumstances. "I have shed so many tears in this land," he would say years later. "I first came to Korea in its days of poverty. I saw too many men, women, and children suffer." [^34]

From Korea, Elder Hinckley pushed on to Okinawa, where more than three hundred LDS servicemen were stationed and where the Church was beginning to grow among the native Japanese. There were, of course, also challenges with which to deal. When Elder Hinckley identified a potential site for the first chapel in Okinawa, local members tried to dissuade him. The land he selected housed the famous old Buddhist shrine Sogenji, which was considered a national treasure and was protected by city ordinance. Complicating matters, the city was attempting to develop a children's park there and had already prepared a blueprint. Brother Toma, who accompanied Elder Hinckley on his excursion to look at real estate, told his wife, Misao, he could not understand why Elder Hinckley insisted on purchasing land that appeared impossible to buy. Elder Hinckley counseled Brother Toma and others to be patient, to abide by the laws, and to make known their desire to purchase the land. The way would open, he promised, for the Church to acquire the property. Indeed, in time, and without explanation, the site became available for sale and the Church made the purchase. [^35]

Meetings in Okinawa with members and missionaries were fruitful and fulfilling. Kensei Nagamine, a convert who later served as a branch president, a district president, and the first stake president in Okinawa, described the district conference Elder Hinckley conducted: "It was so spiritual, and he left many blessings with us. He cried during the conference and expressed his love for us, the Okinawan Saints, and the servicemen. I had a strong impression that he was a kind father figure. He was so gentle and kind. I have never forgotten the warmth of his handshake." [^36]

Few days passed without tender experiences of one variety or another. But after two long months away from home and family, Elder Hinckley knew he must return to the United States, realizing he had scarcely begun his ministry among the Asian people. Before leaving, he visited Hiroshima, where just fifteen years earlier tens of thousands of Japanese had fallen to the atomic bomb. The Hiroshima Peace Park was to him a grim reminder of the tragic past. "One cannot walk through this park, even for only a few minutes as we did," he noted, "without sensing something of the tragedy that occurred here and of the tragedy that might destroy the world unless men learn to live together in peace." [^37]

It was remarkable for Elder Hinckley to contemplate that just a few years earlier the United States had been engaged in a bitter war with the Japanese. Now he had been asked to help bring the gospel of peace and love to this people. As he flew east over the Pacific en route home, he pondered the immense scope of the work that lay ahead of him and reflected on two hard months of effort that nonetheless seemed modest compared with the job at hand. But he had initiated his Asian ministry during this grueling tour that only twice had allowed him to sleep in the same bed two nights in a row. He summarized in his journal: "We have many problems in our missionary work in this part of the world, but I think they are essentially no different from those found in other areas. As a matter of fact, the missionaries generally are happier. This is difficult to understand in view of the circumstances under which they are living. . . . However, they are well and happy and devoted and it has been inspiring to see them at work." [^38]

It was wonderful, also, to return home. He had missed his family tremendously and had been separated from Marjorie far too long. It was a relief to see her and the children again.

Gordon and Marjorie's family was growing up, and each season seemed to bring something new and even life-changing. Such was the case as 1961 dawned, for in January the Hinckleys experienced two firsts: Dick left on his mission, and Kathy presented them with their first grandchild, a granddaughter named Heather.

As an administrator in the Missionary Department and now as a General Authority, Elder Hinckley had helped send thousands of missionaries into the field; he loved both the labor and the laborer. More times than he could recall, his heart had ached for missionaries in trouble; likewise, he had exulted over their growth and success. But none of his missionary-related experiences affected him quite like having his own son enter the field. Missionary work suddenly took on a very personal dimension.

Dick's departure for Germany was a historic family event. That day Elder Hinckley came home from the office early in the afternoon. After a family dinner and the customary round of group photos, Dick walked up to Papa Hinckley's to say good-bye. Bryant had not always been alert since his stroke nearly three years earlier, but that day he spoke clearly to his grandson. When Dick kissed him good-bye, both men began to cry, perhaps sensing they would not see each other again. At the airport, as Dick's DC-7 taxied toward the runway, Marjorie's eyes filled with tears, and Gordon felt a tug at his heart. "I have participated in sending about 25,000 missionaries into the field. This is the first of my own. I am proud and sad, and I think most parents feel the same under similar circumstances," he wrote that evening. [^39]

Three months later, Elder Hinckley embarked on his second extended tour of Asia. He was pleased to find the missionaries in better spirits than they had been the year before and living under much-improved conditions. After a meeting with the missionaries in Taiwan, he exulted in his journal: "I marvel at these young men and women. They are so devoted and energetic even in this land of great rain and hot, humid air. We had fasted for this meeting, and it was a marvelous spiritual experience. There is no group on earth like our missionaries." [^40] He was likewise encouraged by the caliber of recent converts, some of them university graduates who appeared to be fast learners and potential leaders.

But the trip's most memorable event occurred in the Philippines. In spite of red tape that still posed serious barriers to obtaining official recognition for the Church and visas for missionaries, Elder Hinckley arrived in Manila with authorization from the First Presidency to initiate missionary work there. Because the Church owned no buildings in the Philippines, he obtained permission from the American Embassy to hold a meeting on the beautifully manicured grounds of the American Military Cemetery on the outskirts of Manila—the place he regarded as the most hallowed spot in the Filipino capital city. On the morning of April 28, 1961, he arose early and went to the cemetery well in advance of the sunrise service. "This cemetery is the most beautiful place I have seen in the Philippines, also one of the most tragic," he noted in his journal. "Here are buried 17,168 war dead and on the walls are inscribed the names of an additional 36,230 who are missing. Here is told in beautiful stone and sweeping lawns the tragedy of World War II." [^41]

As he walked along the quiet memorial at the predawn hour, looking across the rolling lawns filled with white marble crosses and Stars of David arranged in perfectly symmetrical rows, he noticed the name of a boy who had grown up in his neighborhood, whose plane had last been seen spiraling toward the Pacific. Gordon thought of the young soldier's mother, who had grieved over the loss of her son, and there came into his mind the words: "Thou shalt live together in love, insomuch that thou shalt weep for the loss of them that die. . . . those that die in me shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them." [^42] He photographed the name engraved on the marble wall for the young man's mother.

By dawn a group of nearly one hundred Saints, most of them servicemen from Clark Air Force Base and the naval base at Subic Bay, had gathered in the early morning mist in front of the memorial's small chapel. At this hour, with the sun rising over the mountains and the sea to the east adorned by golden clouds that hung in the sky, the setting was spectacular. Seated in the small audience was Maxine Grimm, a Utah woman who had served with the Red Cross in World War II's Pacific campaign and who, with her American army officer husband, now lived in Manila. She had pleaded that missionaries be sent to the island nation, and her husband had initiated legal work to make it possible for them to enter. This morning Sister Grimm brought the portable organ she had carried throughout the Pacific so that the congregation could begin their meeting by singing songs of the Restoration.

From the moment Elder Hinckley convened the meeting, the Spirit descended in a powerful manner. Among those who spoke was David Lagman, the only known Filipino member of the Church and the first to be ordained an elder, who recited the story of his conversion. As a child he had found a Reader's Digest that contained an article relating the history of the Mormons. The word prophet, as used to describe Joseph Smith, had caught his attention. Years passed, during which the tragedies of Corregidor and Bataan occurred and his homeland endured enemy occupation. After the Philippines was liberated, he learned that an American officer for whom he worked at Clark Air Force Base was a Mormon, and he summoned the courage to ask the officer if a prophet really guided his church. When the officer bore his testimony to that fact, the young Filipino's heart was stirred, and he subsequently joined the Church.

Elder Hinckley concluded the meeting with brief remarks, during which he explained that the Philippines had been dedicated by President Joseph Fielding Smith on August 21, 1955, and that the purpose of this meeting was to inaugurate missionary work. "What we begin here will affect the lives of thousands and thousands of people in this island republic, and its effects will go from generation to generation for great and everlasting good," he promised those assembled. It was fitting, he added, that they were met in a place hallowed by the sacrifices of many who had died so that others would have the freedom to worship God as they chose.

After bearing his testimony, Elder Hinckley offered a prayer in which he invoked the blessings of the Lord upon missionary work throughout the Philippines and blessed the native people with receptive minds, understanding hearts, faith to receive the gospel message, and courage to live correct principles. The service was brief but beautiful and filled with power and emotion. He noted in his journal, simply, "It was an inspirational meeting, and one that I shall never forget." [^43]

As glorious as was the early-morning service, the glow of that event was soon replaced with frustration. Later that day Elder Hinckley learned that the commissioner of immigration had determined that Latter-day Saint missionaries should not be granted visas. Elder Hinckley immediately borrowed a typewriter from the hotel and drafted a response, afterward noting, "We must now pray and wait. However it is in the hands of the Lord. We shall do our best and await the outcome. If we cannot get what we need through one channel we shall try every other until we secure the proper entry documents. The foundation has been laid. I am confident that somehow it will go forward. This is the Lord's work and while it may be delayed, it will not be stopped." [^44]

Elder Hinckley's next destination was Japan, where he was encouraged to find an increased number of native brethren serving in branch presidencies. Again, however, some missionaries were discouraged and not working with the intensity he had hoped to find. After spending a day with elders in the Tokyo-Yokohama area, he noted: "Some missionaries are working very hard and accomplishing great results. Others are coasting." [^45] He wasn't one to coast, and he was unimpressed with those who did. After three days in Japan he recorded: "We have been on the go as fast as we could move with missionary meetings each morning and traveling to a different city at night. Thus far we are none the worse for wear." [^46]

From Japan, Elder Hinckley flew to Seoul, and he was pleased to find progress in Korea. The missionaries there were the most productive of any in the Far East, averaging fourteen baptisms each per year, and there was an impressive core of young adults joining the Church. He delighted in setting apart the first two native Koreans called as branch presidents.

The more he interacted with and served the Asian Saints, the more attached he became to them. Though he experienced only modest success learning a little Korean, Japanese, Mandarin, and Cantonese, he picked up enough words to make the people feel he was trying. And he conveyed his feelings in other ways. Said Han In Sang, "No other Church leaders visiting Korea wept as Elder Hinckley did. When he met with the members, he wept. When he met with the missionaries, he wept. And he remembered all of our names. When he came back the second time, he could remember who we were. He told us that he loved us, and that is what bonded us to him." [^47] Years later Elder Hinckley reflected, "One reason I loved those people so much was that they lived under such adverse conditions. I couldn't help but reach out to them in a spirit of love. And they reciprocated. If you love people, they'll love you also." [^48]

For all his optimism, he was learning that these lands posed unusual challenges and that life there could be volatile. Three LDS servicemen escorted him to Panmunjom in the Demilita-rized Zone, where the armistice ending the Korean War had been signed on July 27, 1953. Armed camps were poised on both sides of the DMZ, and the threat of open conflict was unnerving.

Eerie though it was, however, the DMZ proved peaceful compared to what Elder Hinckley experienced in Seoul three days later. At 4:30 A.M., he awakened to a loud crackling noise outside his hotel window. His first thought, "What a terrible time for a Chinese wedding!" quickly vanished when what he had assumed were firecrackers didn't stop. Without considering the ramifications, he poked his head out the window, only to find a sky filled with gray smoke. A deafening noise that sounded like thunder continued, and suddenly he realized that the hotel was caught in the crossfire of heavy artillery. In minutes President Andrus of the Northern Far East Mission, who was traveling with him, was at his door reporting that he had seen tracer bullets outside his window. In the confusion of hotel patrons running up and down the hallways, it took a few minutes before they learned that a revolution was under way. As Elder Hinckley quickly dressed, he rehearsed his options. If the North Koreans moved in, he could personally be in danger. He deliberated on what to wear and then selected his black rather than his brown shoes, believing them to be the more comfortable pair, and a wrinkled Dacron shirt over a freshly laundered broadcloth, as it would be easier to wash and hang-dry if necessary. Then there was nothing to do but wait.

At daybreak, he and President Andrus found that they were not permitted to leave the hotel: The military had rebelled against the government and a full-blown coup had taken place. Marines in battle dress filled the streets. Many windows of their hotel had been shattered, and the exterior walls were pitted from machine-gun fire. Throughout the day "condition green" was in effect, and no Americans were to be on the streets. Banks, airports, and seaports were closed and curfews imposed. Traffic essentially ceased in a city where thousands of taxis, bicycles, and pedestrians normally created ongoing street chaos. With time to do so, Elder Hinckley wrote a story about the situation and wired it to the Deseret News in Salt Lake City, who thereby received word of the coup even before the Associated Press.

Though he was comfortable, Elder Hinckley found it frustrating to be confined to the hotel. By evening things had quieted enough that he and President Andrus took a short walk and discovered that the Ministry of Home Affairs, just across the street, had been shelled. "The windows are shattered," he noted in his journal. "It is evident that the battle took place right by my window although I could not see it because of a low building which stands in the way." [^49] As night approached and the curfew went into effect, the city's deathly quiet was punctuated occasionally by the sound of shell fire. The following day tensions eased somewhat, and on the third day the airport opened and Elder Hinckley caught a flight to Japan. It was a relief to feel free again, and the temporary restrictions with which he had dealt only increased his empathy for a people who had suffered domination for decades.

When he headed for home after his month in the Orient, Elder Hinckley noted that he had given fifty-two talks, interviewed 240 missionaries, borne testimony through interpreters in English, Cantonese, Mandarin, Korean, and Japanese, and survived one coup d'Ã©tat. He wrote: "This has been a fast and busy month. I hope that it has been profitable for all whose lives I may have touched. It has been a humbling and encouraging experience to go about with our devoted mission presidents, to meet our wonderful missionaries, and to feel of the spirit of the faithful Saints. But we have many who have come into the Church and then left it. Far too many. Something must be done to increase the activity of the membership in the branches so that their faith and testimonies will grow." [^50]

In all of Elder Hinckley's travels, there was one constant: He kept close to the missionaries. From the fog of London to the oppressive humidity of the Orient, he had comforted them in their discouragement, counseled them in difficult situations, rejoiced at their accomplishments, and spent hours on his knees with those in distress.

Frequently he seized the opportunity to do some proselytizing of his own. On one occasion an airline official at the San Francisco airport inquired about Elder Hinckley's business in Asia. "I represent the Mormon Church. Do you know anything about the Mormon Church?" he asked in return. "Oh, I know a little," the man responded. "My wife is a Mormon. But she is rather backward in talking about it." "Where does your wife come from?" Elder Hinckley asked. When the gentleman supplied the information, Elder Hinckley, who coincidentally was acquainted with the family, replied with enthusiasm: "Your wife comes from wonderful people, great stock, pioneer stock. Wouldn't you like to know something about the faith of your wife's people?" When the man said that he would, Elder Hinckley called the local mission president with the referral. Eight weeks later the airline official joined the Church. [^51]

On one Atlantic crossing he found himself seated across the aisle from a couple traveling from England. When he learned that their son wished to study forestry in an American university, he recommended Utah State as an excellent institution of higher learning. The young man later came to attend the northern Utah school, and the Hinckleys picked him up, drove him to Logan, and helped him get situated. That young man and his brothers subsequently joined the Church, married in the temple, and reared faithful, active families. [^52]

Over the years Elder Hinckley had gradually refined the way he taught and represented the gospel, and he was comfortable telling almost anyone about the Church. He was articulate without being pompous or preachy, and fearless when it came to bearing his testimony of Jesus Christ, Joseph Smith, and the Book of Mormon. In his address at the April 1960 general conference, he spoke about the process of conversion: "When we started emphasizing in our missionary program the truth about God as a basic and fundamental and primary principle, and began to encourage those who were willing to listen to get on their knees and ask him . . . concerning the truth of that teaching, we began to get converts in such numbers as we had not had in many, many years." [^53]

In June 1961, Elder Hinckley and others of the General Authorities presented the first-ever seminar for all mission presidents and, for the first time, introduced a standardized plan of six lessons to be adopted by every mission. They also encouraged the leaders throughout the Church to emphasize President McKay's slogan "Every member a missionary." At this seminar the missions of the world were divided into nine areas, with General Authorities called to administer each.

Elder Hinckley still handled many of the day-to-day affairs of the Missionary Department. He was the person, for example, whom nineteen-year-old Jeffrey Holland was told to visit in the summer of 1960 to see if he might gain permission to leave on his mission prior to turning twenty years of age: "Here I was, an unknown boy from St. George who showed up without an appointment at Elder Hinckley's office," he remembered years later. "It was obvious that he was busy. There were stacks of paper everywhere. But he treated me as though I were as important as the General Authorities down the hall. I made a short and simple appeal to be able to leave on my mission a few months before turning twenty, which was the standard age then. He told me that the process was complicated but that he was grateful I wanted to serve a mission and that I should watch the mail. I wasn't sure what that meant, but ten days later I got a letter calling me to the British Mission. I am sure that special permission was granted because of the intervention of Gordon B. Hinckley." [^54]

With extended trips away from home and heavy assignments to occupy his attention when he was in town, Elder Hinckley was finding that life as a General Authority was rigorous and demanding. If Marjorie hadn't had a "business-as-usual" approach to home management, his responsibilities might have had greater impact on their family. She traveled with him when Church policy permitted, but with grade-school and teenage children still at home, she also felt a responsibility to provide a sense of stability and routine for them.

When he left for assignments away from home, rather than moan about his absence, Marjorie might say to the children, "Oh, good, your father's gone. Let's order pizza"—something they rarely indulged in otherwise. Or she took the girls shopping—again, an activity reserved for times when they were home alone. "Mother put no pressure on Dad," Ginny remembered. "He was free to do what had been asked of him, without worrying that she was secretly resenting his time away. Mother made us feel it was a privilege for our father to do what he did." [^55]

Other factors, however, accentuated the drawbacks of Elder Hinckley's lifestyle. He had been home from a trip to Asia only two weeks when, on June 5, 1961, his father passed away. One editorial summarized Bryant Hinckley's long and distinguished life: "Of some men who have risen to renown, it might be said that they won high esteem among their fellows, but little affection; of others it might be said that they were loved far more than they were esteemed; but of Bryant S. Hinckley . . . it must be said that he won both esteem and love in equal and overflowing measure. . . . wanted goodness in the world, brought so much of it with him, and left it for our benefit and blessing." [^56]

With his father's death, Gordon found himself deeply absorbed in memories of their experiences together. He remembered the way his father had cared for their large family during the Depression and pondered the faith he had seen him demonstrate time and again. He reflected on the way they had laughed together, on the times he had sat spellbound as his father spoke, and on his father's perpetual optimism. Bryant's passing filled Gordon with a deep sense of loss and a renewed determination: "My great desire was to so conduct my life that it would reflect only good upon my father and my mother," he said. "Having them both gone renewed within me that desire. I only hoped that one day I might measure up to my heritage." [^57]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] In Conference Report, 1 October 1961, pp. 115-16.
[^2] Interview with GBH, 18 April 1995.
[^3] Interview with Richard Gordon Hinckley, 24 June 1995.
[^4] Ashton, "Gordon B. Hinckley of the Quorum of the Twelve," p. 983.
[^5] See Francis M. Gibbons, David O. McKay: Apostle to the World, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986), p. 406.
[^6] Interview with MPH, 16 March 1995.
[^7] Marjorie P. Hinckley, address at Araneta Coliseum, Manila, Philippines, 30 May 1996.
[^8] See Gordon B. Hinckley, address to BYU student body, 17 October 1962, p. 4.
[^9] Interview with GBH, 18 April 1995.
[^10] MPH to Kathy, Alan, and Heather Barnes, 1 March 1962.
[^11] MPH to Kathy, Alan, and Heather Barnes, 1 March 1962.
[^12] MPH to Kathy, Alan, Heather, and Dick, 20 March 1962.
[^13] See "Gordon B. Hinckley: Man of Integrity," video.
[^14] Interview with Rhee Ho Nam, 13 August 1996.
[^15] See Excerpt from Minutes of Council of Twelve Meeting, GBH Journal, undated.
[^16] MPH to Barnes, 1 March 1962.
[^17] MPH to Kathy, Alan, and Heather Barnes, 21 February 1962.
[^18] MPH to Barnes, 1 March 1962.
[^19] MPH to Kathy, Alan, and Heather Barnes, 21 February 1962.
[^20] MPH to Kathy, Alan, and Heather Barnes, 21 February 1962.
[^21] MPH to Barnes, 1 March 1962.
[^22] MPH to Kathy, Alan, and Heather Barnes, 21 February 1962.
[^23] "An Evening with Marjorie Hinckley."
[^24] See "Elder Hinckley Reports Tour of Three Missions," Church News, 24 March 1962, p. 6.
[^25] MPH to Kathy, Alan, Heather, and Dick, 20 March 1962.
[^26] MPH to Kathy, Alan, Heather, and Dick, 20 March 1962.
[^27] MPH to Kathy, Alan, Heather, and Dick, 20 March 1962.
[^28] Gordon B. Hinckley, "The Church in the Far East," Improvement Era, June 1962, pp. 440-43.
[^29] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "Magnify Your Calling," Ensign, May 1989, pp. 46-47.
[^30] Gordon B. Hinckley, "President Henry Dinwoodey Moyle: 1889-1963," Improvement Era, October 1963, pp. 840, 889.
[^31] Theodore M. Burton, in Conference Report, October 1962, p. 65.
[^32] N. Eldon Tanner, in Conference Report, October 1962, pp. 68-69.
[^33] Interview with Boyd K. Packer, 10 April 1995.
[^34] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "Report from the Correlation Committee," Improvement Era, December 1962, p. 937.
[^35] Address to BYU student body, 17 October 1962.
[^36] Interview with Ray Goodson, 15 June 1995.
[^37] Gordon B. Hinckley, "The Heavens Are Not Stayed," Improvement Era, June 1964, p. 477.
[^38] Seiji Katanuma to Sheri L. Dew, 27 April 1995.
[^39] Peggy H. Andersen to Sheri L. Dew, 30 June 1995.
[^40] Dorothy O. Rea, "Marjorie Pay Hinckley," Church News, 23 May 1964.
[^41] Interview with Augusto A. Lim, 31 March 1995.
[^42] Interview with Han In Sang, 31 March 1995.
[^43] Interview with Han In Sang, 31 March 1995.
[^44] GBH Journal, 1 December 1962.
[^45] GBH Journal, 2 December 1962.
[^46] Yoshihiko Kikuchi to Sheri L. Dew, 27 April 1995.
[^47] Yoshihiko Kikuchi to Sheri L. Dew, 27 April 1995.
[^48] GBH Journal, 26 November 1962.
[^49] Interview with GBH, 24 May 1995.
[^50] See R. Lanier Britsch, Unto the Islands of the Sea: A History of the Latter-day Saints in the Pacific (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986), pp. 78-80.
[^51] See Deseret News, 21 September 1963; also "President Henry Dinwoodey Moyle," pp. 840, 891.
[^52] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "Except the Lord Build the House," Improvement Era, January 1964, pp. 32-33; also Salt Lake Tribune, 7 October 1963; Church News, 12 October 1963.
[^53] GBH Journal, 19 October 1963.
[^54] GBH Journal, 23 October 1963.
[^55] Mary Ellen Edmunds to Sheri L. Dew, 22 June 1995.
[^56] Mary Ellen Edmunds to Sheri L. Dew, 22 June 1995.
[^57] GBH Journal, 27 October 1963.
