Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Fourteen

Quorum of the Twelve

At 7:00 A.M. on Saturday, September 30, 1961, the phone rang in the white frame house in East Millcreek. Marjorie answered to find President McKay on the other end of the line. Might he speak to Gordon? "Have I interrupted anything?" President McKay asked when Gordon answered the phone. "Only my morning prayers," he responded. "Could you come to my office as soon as possible?" Gordon indicated that he would hurry downtown.

Less than an hour later the two men sat knee to knee and President McKay explained the reason for this early visit prior to that morning's session of general conference: "I have felt to nominate you to fill the vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles," he told Elder Hinckley simply, "and we would like to sustain you today in conference." The words took Gordon's breath away, and he searched without success for a response. How could it be, that such a call would come to him? He had known, of course, of the vacancy in the Quorum. But never for a moment had he—or would he have—thought he would be called to fill it.

President McKay continued: "Your grandfather was worthy of this, as was your father. And so are you." With these words, Elder Hinckley's composure crumbled, for there was no compliment the prophet could have paid him that would have meant more. "Tears began to fill my eyes as President McKay looked at me with those piercing eyes of his and spoke to me of my forebears," he remembered. "My father was a better man than I have ever been, but he didn't have the opportunities I have had. The Lord has blessed me with tremendous opportunities."

Later that day Elder Hinckley was sustained as the newest member of the Quorum of the Twelve, filling the vacancy created in June when President Hugh B. Brown had been called to serve as a third counselor in the First Presidency. The following afternoon he spoke briefly during the concluding session of conference. He began: "Sister G.] Romney told me yesterday afternoon that she knew that I was the one to be sustained because of the appearance of my eyes when she talked with me yesterday morning. I confess that I have wept and prayed." He then admitted an overwhelming sense of inadequacy: "I am subdued by the confidence of the Lord's Prophet, and by the expressed love of these, my brethren, beside whom I feel like a pygmy. I pray for strength; I pray for help; and I pray for the faith and the will to be obedient."

He concluded with his testimony of the divinity of the work in which he would be engaged for the rest of his life: "I would like to say that this cause is either true or false. Either this is the kingdom of God, or it is a sham and a delusion. Either Joseph talked with the Father and the Son, or he did not. If he did not, we are engaged in a blasphemy. If he did, we have a duty from which none of us can shrink—to declare to the world the living reality of the God of the universe, the Father of us all; and his Son, the Lord Jesus Christ. . . . I give you my testimony that this is true." [^1]

The impact of what had happened was just beginning to register. As the seventy-fifth man in this dispensation called to serve as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve headed home, he tried to sort through the range of emotions swirling within him. "It was a sobering thing," he later recalled. "Such a call brings with it a tremendous sense of responsibility and duty to bear witness of the Lord." [^2]

Such singular life experiences invite reflection, and Elder Hinckley found himself pondering what he had witnessed during his lifetime. The Church now had 1.8 million members living in 345 stakes, or nearly five times the number there had been the year he was born. More missionaries were serving in the field (more than nine thousand) than there had been convert baptisms the year he left for his mission (around seven thousand). He was two generations removed from his grandfather, who had helped colonize Utah, yet he had engaged in some pioneering of his own, particularly with respect to temple work and public relations. Now it was impossible to imagine what lay ahead.

In a letter he pecked out on his own Underwood manual typewriter, he wrote his missionary son serving in Duisburg, Germany. "I thought I would let you know that I have been called to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles," he told Dick. "I don't know why I have been called to such a position. I have done nothing extraordinary but have tried only to do the best I could with the tasks I've been given without worrying about who got the credit." Dick said later, "I could tell from the letter that Dad was overwhelmed with it all. I myself was surprised with the news. The thought had never crossed my mind that he might be called into the Twelve. I was quite overcome as I thought about what had happened back home." [^3]

Public response to Elder Hinckley's call was immediate and favorable. Telegrams, letters, and phone calls poured into his office. G. Homer Durham, then president of Arizona State University, said of his longtime friend: "Gordon has magnificent gifts of written and oral expression. His judgment stands up in every situation. His insight into human character and situations is rich and meaningful. He knows when silence is better than utterance. He has a sense of humor that endears him to all." [^4] Thomas S. Monson, who was serving as president of the Canadian Mission and with whom Elder Hinckley had worked on the printing of missionary materials, nearly cheered out loud when he heard the news announced during the radio broadcast of priesthood meeting that night.

On October 5, assisted by his Brethren of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve, President David O. McKay ordained Gordon B. Hinckley an apostle and set him apart as a member of that quorum. The experience was at once overwhelming and tender. As he entered the room on the fourth floor of the Salt Lake Temple where the Twelve regularly met, he was overcome with feelings of awe and inadequacy. The fifteen chairs surrounding the table had been filled by men who had been his heroes and whom he had sustained and upheld. Heber J. Grant, David O. McKay, Stephen L Richards—each had, at one time or another, occupied the twelfth chair. The responsibility to bear witness of the Lord Jesus Christ was both glorious and burdensome. He wondered if he would ever be able to fulfill this mandate to the full satisfaction of the Lord.

The days that followed were filled with introspection, pondering, prayer, and many tears. Above all else Gordon desired to be worthy of this calling, but he felt acutely aware of his personal failings. For a time it was as though he was experiencing his own dark night and in the process coming face-to-face with his inadequacies. He found himself pleading with the Lord to make him equal to the mantle he now bore. Perhaps the intensity of the loneliness, the realization that he of himself wasn't equal to the call, was for a reason—so that he would never forget whose errand he was on and who would make him capable of filling this overwhelming assignment.

It was an emotional time, made all the more so the day after Elder Hinckley's ordination when his longtime friend and mentor President J. Reuben Clark Jr. passed away at the age of ninety. President Clark had been solicitous of Gordon during his formative years at Church headquarters, and over the years the two had spent many hours together. Elder Hinckley admired President Clark for his keen judgment and masterful oratory. He concurred completely with President McKay's funeral tribute that "a truly great man gone back to his creator." [^5]

Two days after President Clark's funeral, President McKay reorganized the First Presidency, naming Henry D. Moyle as first counselor and Hugh B. Brown as second. New assignments, leaders, and opportunities were a given. But for the time being, Elder Hinckley continued to be deeply involved with missionary work, though he now relied heavily upon others for assistance. During the recent conference, Elder Boyd K. Packer had been sustained as an Assistant to the Twelve, and one of his first assignments was to assist Elder Hinckley in the Missionary Department, which itself was undergoing continual evolution as the needs of missionaries and members changed and expanded. In November 1961, a Language Training Institute was established at Brigham Young University for missionaries called to non-English-speaking countries. The Institute, later renamed the Language Training Mission (LTM), was an attempt to better prepare missionaries for service. And just four months later, the age at which young men could be called on missions was lowered from twenty to nineteen.

Elder Hinckley's feelings about missionary work had only intensified, if that was possible, since he had sent his own son into the mission field. Seeing firsthand what young men and women all over the Orient were accomplishing, often in difficult circumstances, also affected him. He was anxious to return to Asia, and his next trip, in February 1962, promised to be different, for Marjorie was going with him. He had not enjoyed their long separations during previous journeys but had been reluctant to subject her to the rigors of travel in areas where conditions and accommodations were often inhospitable. And she had been concerned about leaving the children for such an extended period—particularly Jane, who was only eight and missed her parents terribly when they were gone. Nonetheless, he had vowed after his last trip: "Next time you're coming with me. The Saints in Asia are starting to wonder if I have a wife." [^6]

For Marjorie, the thought of such an adventure conjured up "pure excitement," though her ties to home were perhaps greater than ever, for now she also had a granddaughter she would be leaving behind for several weeks. Marjorie felt a constant tug between her responsibilities there and her desire to be with her husband. On the other hand, she was intrigued by different cultures and she loved meeting people. "Travel gets old fast," she explained. "But when you get where you're going and meet the people, it's wonderful because they are wonderful!" She had a comfortable way of putting others at ease and making friends easily.

In early February the Hinckleys left for Asia, with Manila their first stop. Elder Hinckley was pleased to find that missionaries who had arrived a few months earlier had already baptized thirteen Filipinos. Marjorie would never forget one meeting they attended where twelve people gathered in the living room of the missionaries' apartment. In the midst of bearing her testimony, an eighteen-year-old convert explained that her friends had deserted her because of her decision to join the Church. "But I don't care," she proclaimed, "because I love the Church." Marjorie later said: "That girl did something for me. She had joined the Church in sacrifice, and I realized how little I had sacrificed for the gospel, which was handed to me as on a silver platter. I vowed to do more and be better." [^7]

The work was also progressing in Hong Kong, where some 350 individuals had joined the Church the year before, raising the membership there to 1,763. The need for property on which to build a meetinghouse was becoming urgent. During this stay, Elder Hinckley formally organized the Church corporation in Hong Kong.

The next stop was Taiwan, where the missionaries continued to live in conditions that in some instances were shocking. The elders seemed happy, however, and the previous year 304 Chinese had joined the Church, increasing native membership to more than 800. At a testimony meeting in Taipei, held in a cold, concrete block of a room, Elder Hinckley was touched by the words of a handsome elder, measured by breath so cold that it could be seen. The young man made a simple statement that became a classic with Elder Hinckley: "I thank the Lord for eyes to see, and mouth to speak, and feet to carry me from door to door, to teach the gospel of Jesus Christ to the wonderful people of China." [^8] It was through such devotion that the work continued to go forward.

From Taiwan, the Hinckleys flew to Fukuoka on the south island of Japan and worked their way north through the island nation. Teaching the gospel to the Japanese wasn't easy. "It was difficult, even discouraging at times," Elder Hinckley said years later. "The Japanese young people were under tremendous pressure for schooling. They felt they didn't have time to be involved in a lot of Church activities. The missionaries were wonderful young men and women, but they got discouraged. Gradually, however, one family was converted, and then another. And we began to strengthen the work." [^9]

In Hokkaido one missionary was so ill that he had gone to the hospital to get a shot just so he wouldn't miss the conference with Elder Hinckley. "I could have cried every time I looked at him," Marjorie wrote home. "Even Dad felt depressed. When we got on the plane to return to Tokyo he said he felt like we were running off and leaving those young people to the wolves. It's rough up there." [^10]

In Osaka, a "little town of 5 million people," as Marjorie described it, she went tracting for the first time. "What an experience!" she wrote the family. "At the first couple of houses I wanted to run and hide, but after that it got quite interesting. We were in a good neighborhood where all the homes had walls around them. The biggest problem was opening the gates. When you get through the gates and past the dogs you don't bother with such formalities as knocking—you just open the doors and walk into the entrance hall and call to see if anyone is home. Either the maid or the lady of the house comes and drops on her knees and remains kneeling during the entire conversation. The first few gave us the 'too busy' brush off. . . . Between houses the Elders made me hand out tracts to all the passers-by and repeat a Japanese phrase which says 'Please read this, please.' I just about choked on it the first time. . . . They got an appointment to go back to one place. . . . I would surely like to have been there to go back with them." [^11]

Everywhere Elder Hinckley went, he engaged in the recurring ritual of looking for suitable property. Marjorie joined him for an eye-opening tour of Seoul as he inspected potential building sites. She wrote home: "For a place to see is a clock stopper. And I guess we looked as curious to them as they did to us. Every time we would stop a dozen children and old folks would gather around to stare, so everyone was staring at everyone. Their native dress is so different—everything from white blouse pants like the Egyptians to beautiful satin brocade coats worn by the women over six or seven layers of long johns and sweaters and other clothing. Women walking down the streets with big jars of water balancing on their heads, oxen drawing big loads of bricks, men carrying huge pieces of furniture on A-frames on their backs. The whole thing was a sight to behold." [^12]

Elder Hinckley continued to lament the conditions endured by the Korean Saints. During some meetings they wrapped in blankets and put their feet on hot bricks to keep warm. The hall where he presided over a district conference in Seoul was bitter cold. Oil barrels burning in the corners provided some heat, but the temperature never rose above twenty-six degrees Fahrenheit during the entire meeting. He was amazed by a group of children who sat uncomplaining in front of the pulpit on blankets. Said one American who lived in Korea for a number of years: "I can still see Elder Hinckley seated in some dark, unheated, partially lighted meeting hall where people were crouched in discomfort. But he always had a peaceful, happy look on his face. He would express his faith and inspire the people to think that this was paradise if they could have the Spirit of the Lord in their lives." [^13]

Rhee Ho Nam remembered one meeting held in the Chung Woon Dong area on a cold winter day. A large pipe connected to the stove that heated the room came loose, throwing black soot all over Elder Hinckley and everyone else. He just smiled and continued to speak. [^14]

For her part, Marjorie couldn't get over her first experience in the Land of the Morning Calm. Every turn of the road introduced a strange sight. "The smell of garlic and pickled cabbage and fresh ginger everywhere, and poverty the likes of which would put you into a state of shock," she wrote to her children. In Taegu, she and Elder Hinckley walked up one street and down another looking for property where the elders could live and hold meetings. They often went all day without eating (as it was risky to do so outside of a recommended hotel), traveled in vehicles of ancient vintage, and stayed in run-down hotels.

After one meeting, a young couple confided in Marjorie that Elder Hinckley's message the previous year had so inspired them that they had decided to get married. "We were just delighted, as this will be one more strong family here," Marjorie wrote home. Indeed, the progress in Korea was encouraging. The previous year, missionaries had averaged eighteen baptisms each, most of them university students and the majority males. Elder Hinckley later recommended in his report to the Twelve that a mission be established there as soon as a Korean-speaking mission president could be located. [^15]

Marjorie was always hungry for news from home, and she read and reread every letter that caught up with them as they dashed from city to city. Her frequent letters filled with detailed descriptions of people and places helped the children feel a part of their experiences. She was thrilled when a couple of letters found them during a thirty-minute airport stopover in Tokyo, and she promptly responded to the one from Kathy: "I sat right down in the middle of 10,000 people and laughed and laughed. As soon as we got settled back on the plane I handed your letter to Dad and when he began to read about Heather . . . I thot he was going to burst his safety belt. It really struck him funny." Her parting comment revealed her longing to stay in touch: "Send us another letter as soon as you can. . . . What I wouldn't give to get hold of for just 5 minutes!" [^16]

Though each country was different, Elder Hinckley followed a similar pattern wherever they went. One of Sister Hinckley's letters home described a typical schedule: "Sunday was a full day. We started with a Servicemen's Conference at 8 A.M. Then a conference with all the Chinese members at 10 A.M. Said goodbye to Taiwan and all our friends, many of whom came to the plane. Flew to Okinawa and got there 30 minutes late for a meeting with the Japanese members at 7:30 P.M. and then rushed across the island for a Servicemen's Conference at 8:30 P.M. Monday morning we started the routine all over again." [^17]

Marjorie could now better appreciate the long trips her husband had made to the Orient. To Kathy she wrote: "There is surely a lot of work that needs to be done here to strengthen the church. . . . Dad could spend his full time here to advantage, just going from mission to mission and district to district, but I'm not about to mention it." [^18] There was plenty of opportunity for her to participate as well. "I've never done so much preaching in my life," she wrote home. "The English gatherings aren't too hard but the ones with translators are beastly. . . . Dad does a wonderful job—especially with the missionaries. He has been sharp with the wit and they really enjoy him. It is amazing how he can remember their names and faces." [^19]

Marjorie fell in love with Asia and its people as easily as had her husband. "All last week we were in Taiwan and I loved every minute of it. . . . I went to a Chinese Relief Society in Taipei. It was cold and had a concrete floor, no drapes, and was about as cheerful as a prison cell, but those sweet service wives were there even tho they couldn't understand a word." [^20]

During seminars and meetings where her presence wasn't required, or while Elder Hinckley interviewed missionaries for hours on end, Marjorie took a closer look at the local culture. One afternoon in Tokyo she lunched at a fine department store, which proved an adventure. "They were serving about 1000 people at once, and there was no such thing as getting a fork or spoon, so I had to manage with the chopsticks. I made it to the bitter end, but found I had an audience. But I am getting used to that now." [^21]

Throughout the Orient the shopping was extraordinary. Rugs, clothing, lacquerware, bolts of silk, and whale meat—everything was exotic and, often, inexpensive: "My idea of a good time," Marjorie wrote her daughter, "would be to have a purse full of money and go shopping in this part of the world with you. . . . Dressmakers about 3 to a block who will make a dress to order for $1.25 to $2.50. No patterns required. . . . I paid 60 cents for a shampoo and set at the hotel in Taipei, and that was good, but the servicemen's wives say they can get the same on the outskirts for 25 cents." [^22] In Hong Kong she tracted with the sister missionaries in the resettlement flats, where she was astounded to find one bathroom for seventy-five people. They walked along the balconies, looking through open doors to find people to teach. When they finally located a family who invited them in, they sat on packing boxes during their discussion. Marjorie couldn't take her eyes off a small vase of artificial flowers positioned on a high shelf. "No matter what conditions women find themselves in," she said later, "they find a way to bring beauty into their lives." [^23]

All in all, this first experience in the Orient more than lived up to Marjorie's expectations. When they left Asia for Hawaii, Elder Hinckley was also satisfied. There was progress. The missionaries were working hard, and native members were slowly joining the Church and gaining experience and understanding. [^24]

Still, Marjorie was relieved when they touched down in Honolulu. "It was like landing in the Garden of Eden," she wrote. "Everything so green and lush and prosperous." [^25] By now, however, the strain of six weeks of rigorous travel was beginning to tell, and Marjorie worried that her husband wouldn't be sharp for a stake conference that weekend in Laie. "Dad was so tired by this time that I wondered how he would ever make it," she confided to the family. "We had lost a night's sleep in the time change and he looked gray. But that morning he gave one of the best talks I have ever heard him give. He told of some of the experiences we had during the past 5 weeks and everyone was weeping. I have seldom heard him bear such testimony as he did that morning." [^26] The pace didn't let up. "The next three days were very hard, because we were all but exhausted. Dad was so far gone that voices were beginning to sound far away and he had to sit down occasionally during the workshop sessions to keep from falling. We were really on the countdown. But notwithstanding it was still a wonderful three days." [^27]

As exotic as Asia and Hawaii had been, Marjorie was relieved when she walked into her own home. She had loved spending the previous month and a half with her husband, but it had been hard to be away from her children so long. There had been days, in fact, when she had indulged herself in a good cry over the fact that the huge Pacific separated her from the family.

Elder Hinckley also enjoyed returning home, though he was beginning to take these jaunts halfway around the world in stride. Perhaps to no one's surprise, he took as a text for his April 1962 general conference address the work in Asia. "I wish you might have been with us recently in a conference in Hong Kong to hear our young Chinese brethren and sisters sing the songs of Zion in their native Cantonese and bear witness of the truth of this work to congregations numbering more than eight hundred," he said. "I wish you might have been with us in Taiwan to hear a handsome and brilliant young man discuss the gospel in his native Mandarin. He was a local missionary, a young man whose forebears for generations before him had been Buddhists. . . . How I wish you might have been with us in the upstairs room in Tsim Sha Tsui in Kowloon, where for thirteen hours the elders and sisters bore testimony of their love for the Chinese people."

Though he had championed the cause of missionaries for nearly thirty years, Elder Hinckley's experience in Asia was expanding his vision of the work. He concluded with a plea to all Saints: "The work is becoming very much enlarged. It does require a commensurate accumulation of men and means. It requires an expansion of mind and energy, ability and perseverance. Let us prepare ourselves more diligently for the great assignment which God has laid upon us to carry this work to the children of the earth." [^28]

Not long after Elder Hinckley returned from Asia, President Moyle asked him to outline what he did on these extended tours—and particularly what he did with the missionaries. After hearing his report, President Moyle invited him to join him in California to hold seminars with the missionaries there. That trip was followed by a similar one to Chicago, after which President Moyle continued on to Europe while Elder Hinckley was joined in the Midwest by Marjorie, Virginia, Clark, and Jane, who came to help him drive home a new car he had purchased. The brief vacation during which the Hinckleys drove home from Detroit was a welcome break, and the family enjoyed having Gordon to themselves for several uninterrupted days. They told stories, read books aloud to each other, and stopped at historical markers along the way as they drove to Salt Lake City. Some patterns, regardless of the children's ages, never changed.

They had just pulled into their driveway and walked into the house when the phone rang. It was President McKay, who asked Elder Hinckley if he had heard from President Moyle. When Gordon explained that he and his family had just returned home, President McKay indicated that President Moyle would soon be calling from Europe. About an hour later the phone rang again. "Gordon," President Moyle began, "I've scheduled a seminar for tomorrow night in London with the missionaries, and I want you here." A few hours later Elder Hinckley was on his way to England, where he and President Moyle began a twenty-three-day canvassing of all twenty-one missions in the British Isles and Europe. Each day they conducted a seminar in a different city. "I took the morning hours until noon, and President Moyle took the afternoon hours," Elder Hinckley explained. "Then we packed up and flew to the next city. It was the most tiring thing I've ever done." In less than a month, however, they got a firsthand look at missionary work throughout Europe—including Germany, where Elder Hinckley spent a few hours with Dick.

At the end of their tour, President Moyle presented his colleague with a pair of binoculars as a memento of their experience together. Elder Hinckley treasured the keepsake as a "reminder of a great and good man who magnified his priesthood." [^29] President Moyle returned home by ship, hoping to rest in the process, and invited Elder Hinckley to join him. But Gordon preferred to fly so he could enjoy a few days off with his family. The experience with President Moyle, however, was one he would never forget. He later said: "He was a champion, a crusader, a clear-thinking, unequivocating exponent of any cause he espoused, unrelenting in his advocacy. . . . I his unrelenting drive, his untarnished devotion to this great work, his unforgetting love for the young men and women who are in the world as ambassadors of the Lord." [^30]

During the general conference that followed two months later, General Authorities serving in Europe described the effect of President Moyle's and Elder Hinckley's visit. Elder Theodore M. Burton said: "Usually in summer we have quite a drop in converts during the time the Europeans take their summer holidays. . . . This year, just as the holidays were beginning, we had a wonderful visit from President Moyle and Elder Hinckley. These two wonderful men, devoting themselves to the work of the Lord, came over to help us. . . . As a result of their visit our August conversions were twenty-eight percent above our conversions for July. Our September conversions were thirty-seven percent above our August conversions." [^31] Elder N. Eldon Tanner, who as an Assistant to the Twelve was serving as president of the Western European Mission, added: "These two men, I believe, had fourteen consecutive meetings in fourteen consecutive days, in fourteen different towns in four or five countries. I do not see how they stood it, but if anybody ever forgot himself or lost himself in the service, this is an example of it." [^32]

About this series of mission conferences, Elder Boyd K. Packer later said: "They seemed to have a tremendous effect on the missions of the Church. It was an energizing movement that helped give missionary work worldwide a significant boost." [^33] President McKay subsequently reorganized the Missionary Executive Committee with President Joseph Fielding Smith as chairman and Elders Harold B. Lee, Marion G. Romney, Gordon B. Hinckley, and Boyd K. Packer as committee members.

Elder Hinckley's appointment to the Missionary Executive Committee was only one of many assignments. One of his first as a member of the Twelve had come immediately after the October 1961 general conference, when Elder Harold B. Lee had organized the All-Church Coordinating Council, with correlation committees for three groups—adults, youth, and children—to be headed by Elders Marion G. Romney, Richard L. Evans, and Gordon B. Hinckley, respectively. As the forerunner of what became the Correlation Committee, this council functioned as the screening process responsible for coordinating the teaching programs of the Church. [^34]

Elder Hinckley's numerous and varied assignments required him to switch gears constantly. But regardless of the setting or obligation, he was immersed in his work. He concluded a stirring address to the BYU student body with a challenge: "What a tremendous thing it is to be a part of a Church that has a great heritage, . . . that speaks of faith and courage and sacrifice and giving. If we ever lose it, we had better close up shop. Without sacrifice there is no true worship. . . . As you go forward with your ambitious programs, forget yourselves now and again. Lay aside your selfishness; lose yourself in the service of others and in some great cause." [^35]

The great cause in which Elder Hinckley had lost himself was the gospel of Jesus Christ, and for the time being, he was focused intently on that cause as it related to the Orient. In late November 1962, he and Sister Hinckley returned to Asia, where both had learned to expect the unexpected and to enjoy the region's unique intrigue. Though Asia was halfway around the world in distance and even further in culture, with each trip Elder Hinckley's attachment to and affection for the Oriental Saints increased. He felt strangely at home with these olive-skinned people whose resilience had been tested through untold hardships.

Elder Ray Goodson was serving in Hong Kong during Elder Hinckley's early visits, and was one of four missionaries transferred into the Philippines to open the work there. "Elder Hinckley was the first General Authority to come to Asia who wasn't convinced he was going to die before he got back to Salt Lake," he said, "though it took him a while to understand the people. On his first visit to Hong Kong he talked about the Boy Scout program, and the Chinese sat there puzzled. But by his next visit he was more comfortable, his talks were appropriate, and the Asians started to warm up to him. He wasn't afraid to shake their hands, ride their public transportation, walk their streets, or eat their food." [^36] One notable exception was the Koreans' kimchee, a pungent side dish made of oriental cabbage, radish, and cucumber pickled in garlic and red pepper. Elder Hinckley could not stomach either the taste or the smell of the Korean staple. In return, his Korean friends teased that nothing could be as bad as American blue cheese dressing.

He may not have always enjoyed all of their cuisine, but Elder Hinckley loved these people. At another general conference he said before beginning his prepared text, "My heart skipped a beat this morning when I looked into this group and saw a man from Korea, one of my beloved brethren." [^37]

The affection was reciprocated, and despite the reserve and formality inherent in most Asian cultures, soon each group of Orientals—the Japanese, Koreans, Filipinos, and Chinese—adopted him and Sister Hinckley as their own. Elder Hinckley was the first General Authority to make repeated trips to Asia and to venture into outlying areas. And he was perhaps the first to instill in the Asian Saints a confidence that he understood them. As a result, they responded to both his testimony and the manner in which he expressed his love for and confidence in them. The Koreans teased him that after he died, he would be resurrected a Korean.

Seiji Katanuma, who later served as president of the Sapporo Japan Stake and as a Regional Representative, said, "Elder Hinckley made me feel like a brother who lived next door. He gave us counsel as an Apostle of the Lord and talked and listened to us as if he were an Oriental. I have never forgotten his words, 'Your generation is the pioneer of the Church in Japan.' This made me visualize myself as I would like to be in the Church." [^38]

When the Hinckleys arrived in Japan for the first time after President Dwayne Andersen assumed leadership of the Northern Far Eastern Mission, Sister Andersen described the occasion: "We never stopped to catch our breath. They arrived and we left immediately for a serviceman's retreat in Hakone, Japan. Afterwards they spent much time shaking hands with these lonely servicemen. I wrote in my journal: 'Oh, how Apostle Hinckley loves these servicemen, and they know it, for he truly shows it!'" After two days of nonstop meetings with servicemen, missionaries, and members in Tokyo, Sister Andersen again recorded her impressions: "As we sat in front of hundreds of Saints, I glanced at Elder Hinckley. He was weary, and he turned to my husband and asked what he should talk about, that he had drawn a blank. Dwayne gave him a suggestion, and Elder Hinckley stood up and spoke almost completely to the subject suggested. He delivered a marvelous message, so sincere and meaningful, and the Saints' faces radiated. They seemed to understand his English even before the interpreter started each thought pattern. It was obvious that he loved those Japanese people every bit as much as he did the servicemen! He could make anyone feel loved." [^39]

Sister Hinckley also related well to the Asians, who had won her admiration and respect. She told one interviewer: "I always find spiritual refreshment among the Oriental people, who have the gifts of humility and sincerity. They are receptive to the message that assures them of a personal God and a Savior. Their many talents . . . seem to unfold as they apply the gospel in their lives. For example, one discouraged woman in Hong Kong was working in a dingy food establishment when the missionaries found her. Five years later she is managing a prosperous export-import business, has a fine family of children, and is an officer in the Relief Society." [^40]

Augusto Lim, an early Filipino convert, described Sister Hinckley's interaction with his people: "Sister Hinckley would go out of her way to shake our hands and embrace us, and she always kissed my wife. She was so easy to be with, so caring and loving and concerned about our mutual friends as well as our own welfare. In those early days she spent a lot of time among the people, and that is what impressed us." [^41] During the Hinckleys' early trips to the Orient, accommodations weren't always favorable. "We didn't have any decent hotels in Korea," Han In Sang explained, "so it was a tremendous sacrifice for them to come. Sometimes they would sleep at the mission home. We didn't have a boiler system, so we would heat water on a big kettle for them to use. Sister Hinckley never complained. In fact, she made us feel as though what we had to offer was a palace. In return, she always brought several pounds of chocolates to give to the missionaries and members." [^42]

Perhaps without their realizing it, the manner in which Elder and Sister Hinckley interacted with each other appealed to many Asians. "Elder Hinckley was always looking after his wife, taking care of her and protecting her," Han In Sang continued, "but almost as though he were her big brother. It was easy to see that he loved her, but he did it in a way that impressed the Oriental people. Another leader from Salt Lake City told us we should tell our wife we love her every day. We love our wives but we don't say it that way. Elder Hinckley told us, 'Just express it in your own way.' He understood us." [^43]

With each trip to the Orient, the Hinckleys better understood their new friends. Their visit in late November and early December 1962 was much like their earlier trip in the spring. In July the Korean Mission had been created, and Elder Hinckley spent time with the new mission president, Gail C. Carr, as well as Presidents Jay A. Quealy and Dwayne N. Andersen of the Southern Far East and Northern Far East missions, in a president's seminar in Tokyo.

Although there were always concerns in the Far East missions for Elder Hinckley to address, he remained optimistic about Asia. In Hong Kong he and Sister Hinckley attended a dance festival with more than five hundred Chinese youth in the Kam Tong Hall. "I could see in their presence a vision of the future of our work here," Elder Hinckley recorded afterward. "If we can just hold these young people and keep them busy and active and set up situations under which they will marry honorably in the Church, the future of the Church in this part of the world will be assured. Many of them are fine-looking, intelligent people. I am sure that all of the brethren would have been tremendously impressed had they witnessed this." [^44]

The following morning Elder Hinckley presided over a district conference in Hong Kong attended by nearly nine hundred members, and he thrilled at what he witnessed there: "The Sunday morning session was like a stake conference. In fact, it looked better than many stake conference congregations I have seen. It was a thrilling sight to see all these wonderful Chinese people. . . . It was a sight to make us weep." [^45]

There were many experiences that evoked great emotion. On November 20, 1962, in the Fukuoka Branch on the island of Kyushu, Elder Hinckley and President Andersen convened an all-day zone conference that, for the benefit of the largely American audience, was conducted in English. Elder Yoshihiko Kikuchi, the lone Japanese missionary, understood only that which his companion translated for him.

As part of the conference, Elder Hinckley invited each missionary to bear testimony. One by one the elders did so, until only Elder Kikuchi had not spoken. Finally Elder Hinckley arose and, pointing to Elder Kikuchi, invited him to come forward. His companion quickly translated Elder Hinckley's request, and Elder Kikuchi asked if he could bear his testimony in Japanese. "Hai, hai," yes, Elder Hinckley responded. At that, Elder Kikuchi walked to the pulpit. Almost immediately a powerful spirit fell upon him and he began to speak in English. "It must have been very simple English," he remembered years later, "but it was as though I was lifted by the Spirit and my tongue was loosed and my ears could easily comprehend the other language. The sweetness and the celestial glow that I felt was unforgettable. I was moved by the Holy Spirit. I was touched by the sweetness of how the Holy Ghost can work with people. I felt the shadow of my mind fade away, and I caught a glimpse of the great light of the gospel." [^46] As he spoke, Elder Hinckley wept, as did most in the room.

As soon as he said "Amen," Elder Kikuchi's mind closed to English, and his companion had to translate what happened next. Elder Hinckley walked to the pulpit and, in a voice filled with emotion, said, "I do not usually bless people from the pulpit, but I feel impressed to pronounce a blessing upon this young Japanese man. Brother Kikuchi, this missionary system is a great blessing to your life. If you are faithful and humble always, and keep the commandments of the Lord continually, the Lord will prepare you to establish the Lord's kingdom in this part of the vineyard. The Lord is preparing you to serve him in a greater way." [^47] It was the beginning of a strong bond between the seasoned Church leader and the Japanese elder, who was later called as a General Authority.

Not all encounters were as joyful. Local leaders looked to Elder Hinckley to solve difficult problems that arose in the lives of Church members. He grieved, for example, over a young man who had served with distinction as a local missionary but had subsequently fathered a child out of wedlock. After counseling with the young man and outlining the steps of repentance, he wrote: "Notwithstanding the gravity of his offense, I feel disposed to help him in every way possible, and to encourage him so that he may get his education. He is a most capable young man who has slipped, and it would be tragic if his entire life was blighted because of this." [^48]

Despite such episodes, there was much to be encouraged about throughout Asia. The Church was clearly moving forward there.

Though he spent an enormous amount of time during the early 1960s in the Orient, Elder Hinckley's assignments weren't limited to that part of the world. In May 1963, for example, he traveled to the Windward Islands in the heart of French Polynesia, where he found himself charmed by the exuberance of the peoples of the South Seas. Among other obligations, he was to dedicate a chapel for the Haapu Branch on the island of Huahine. Several hundred members of the Church from neighboring islands chartered small trading boats to attend the dedication and hear Elder Hinckley speak, and afterward the atmosphere was festive as the Polynesian Saints celebrated the landmark event in their own unique and colorful style.

At the end of the day, some fifty members and friends from the nearby island of Maupiti boarded an old boat, the Manuia, to begin their overnight voyage home. Many of the islanders' livelihoods revolved around the sea, and this excursion was no different from hundreds of others they had made. Their journey proceeded normally until the ship passed between the islands of Raiatea and Tahaa, where the ocean was suddenly filled with sudsy bubbles that experienced seagoers recognized as a sign of rough water ahead. By the time the boat reached Maupiti, where the channel through the coral reef into the calm waters of the lagoon was one of the most dangerous in all of the South Pacific, the seas had become very rough. As the captain attempted to maneuver the vessel through the narrow opening, he lost control of the ship and it hit the reef, rolled three times in the pounding waves, and broke apart. Fifteen of the fifty aboard drowned, including all but two of the Relief Society sisters of the Maupiti Branch.

It was the following morning before Elder Hinckley, who had returned to Papeete, Tahiti, with mission president Kendall W. Young, received word of the tragedy. Heartsick at the news, he immediately canceled his return flight to Salt Lake City. By late afternoon he and President Young had located a seaman who agreed to sail them to their destination some 160 miles away on his old World War II PT boat. At dusk Elder Hinckley and President Young set sail for Maupiti. Elder Hinckley tried to sleep out on the deck, but he spent most of the night worrying about those whose lives had been irreversibly altered by the tragedy.

About noon the next day, as their boat wended its way through the reef and they caught sight of the mangled Manuia, the horror of the tragedy became apparent. Elder Hinckley wept as he stepped onto the pier and greeted the grief-stricken people. "I picked up the little children who had lost their mothers and struggled to hold my emotions," he recalled. "It was heartbreaking to see those motherless children and the men who had lost their wives. To see that stark hull ravaged on the coral reef was one of the most difficult moments I have ever had." [^49]

Elder Hinckley conducted a memorial service that afternoon and did what he could to extend comfort and sympathy. That evening his party left by boat for Bora Bora. Some of the survivors accompanied them to Tahiti for medical attention, among them Claire Teriitehau, a nonmember nurse who had attended the dedication at Huahine. During the voyage she consented to receive a blessing from Elder Hinckley, who told her that she would join the Church and explained that she was needed by the Lord. A short time later she was baptized. [^50]

Elder Hinckley was deeply affected by what he had witnessed, and he found that he couldn't erase from his mind the image of those small, motherless children, many of them clinging to their fathers. His heart was heavy as he began the trip home.

Other experiences were sobering as well. Early in the morning of September 18, 1963, President Henry D. Moyle passed away unexpectedly. The news shocked Elder Hinckley, who grieved the loss of the counselor and friend with whom he had toured many missions of the world. Theirs had become a warm and collegial relationship, beginning in earnest when Gordon had written James H. Moyle's biography and continuing with their association in the Missionary Department. He was highly complimented, and a little overwhelmed, by invitations to write a memorial about President Moyle for the Improvement Era and to speak at his funeral. In his eulogy he honored President McKay's counselor as a man of unwavering devotion under whom missionary work had gone forward in an unprecedented way. During the three and a half years President Moyle had chaired the Missionary Committee, the number of missions increased from forty-seven to seventy-one and 267,669 converts joined the Church, Elder Hinckley explained. "Perhaps of comparable significance," he continued, "is the miracle wrought in the lives of thousands of young men and women who, under the influence of his pleading, his logic, his challenges, went into the world as ambassadors of the Lord. . . . Within a period of three years the number of missionaries more than doubled as he pleaded over the Church for workers in this dedicated service." [^51]

Once again, there would be changes in the First Presidency. On October 4, 1963, at general conference, Presidents Hugh B. Brown and N. Eldon Tanner were sustained as first and second counselors to President McKay, and the vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve was filled by the thirty-six-year-old returned president of the Canadian Mission, Thomas S. Monson. On the Sunday morning of conference Elder Hinckley was invited to deliver the address broadcast nationwide on CBS Radio's "Church of the Air" program. Drawing his subject from the words of the psalmist, "Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it," he developed a theme that gave him increasing concern—the quality and stability of family and home life. With his characteristic blend of optimism and stark honesty he began: "I am not one to believe that all was good in the long ago, and that all is bad today. I think that this is the greatest age the world has known. But I am also confident that there is trouble in the land." He then declared that no nation is stronger than its homes and that, as simple as it might sound, "a return to the old pattern of . . . family prayer in the homes of the people, is one of the simple medicines that would check the dread disease that is eroding the fiber of our character. We could not expect a miracle in a day, but in a generation we would have a miracle." [^52]

The talk apparently struck a chord, for notes and telegrams of appreciation flooded his office. It was a message Elder Hinckley believed in passionately, a practice he and Sister Hinckley had cultivated at home. Family prayer had been and was the central stabilizing force in their own family.

The year 1963 brought with it difficult moments, but there were joyful occasions as well. After thirty months in Germany, Dick returned from his mission. As pleased as Elder Hinckley had been to see his son enter the mission field, it was more wonderful to welcome him home. Where had the time gone? His children were growing up so quickly and one by one leaving home. Kathy had a daughter of her own, Virginia had graduated from high school, Clark would graduate in just two years and leave soon thereafter on his mission, and Jane was nearly ten. It was sobering to realize that even his youngest child, who had been a source of unusual delight to him, would spend only a few more years under his roof.

In the fall of 1963, as Elder and Sister Hinckley prepared for another trip to the Orient, they decided to take Jane with them. A third grader, she had little idea what her parents did when they left for weeks at a time; she knew only that she disliked being left behind with her older sisters or an aunt. As the youngest child, Jane perhaps bore the brunt of her father's high profile and frequent absence. Elder Hinckley's rationale for taking Jane with them was simple: "At her age we can take her for half price, and we feel that we would rather put some money into this kind of investment than spend so much on new cars and such things." On Saturday, October 19, the day they left for Honolulu, he noted, "Jane was so excited she could hardly contain herself." [^53]

The three Hinckleys arrived in Hawaii around midnight, and after a hot, muggy night they arose for a Sunday during which Elder Hinckley dedicated two buildings and toured the new Polynesian Cultural Center, which had been dedicated a week earlier by President Hugh B. Brown. The next morning they were off to Tokyo, where he inspected the renovation under way on the mission home and, as always, was fascinated with the process. "I am amazed at the construction required by the Japanese government," he noted in his journal. "Piles had to be driven in the ground for a distance of thirty feet and then heavy concrete piers are placed on these. It looks like construction for a ten-story building, rather than a two." [^54] The builder in Elder Hinckley never failed to notice the architecture in everything from the hotels he patronized to new skyscrapers under construction.

This visit to the Philippines provided an unusual experience for two sister missionaries who greeted the Hinckleys at the airport. His arrival in Manila coincided with an elaborate gathering of several international leaders who had come to attend a summit conference, and the atmosphere was one of pomp and circumstance. Jets flew in formation, military attachÃ©s and diplomats lined red carpets, and cheering crowds greeted arriving dignitaries, who were then whisked away in black Cadillacs. After the leaders had all arrived, the red carpet was rolled up, the jets circling overhead disappeared, and the military officers walked back into the terminal. Shortly thereafter, Elder Hinckley's plane landed. Sister Mary Ellen Edmunds, one of the missionaries, observed in her journal: "And then down the ramp came an Apostle of Jesus Christ. A man chosen of God. The most beautiful person who walked down the ramp that day. Elder Gordon B. Hinckley. No earthly fanfare greeted him, except the loud beating of my heart and a feeling of great happiness just to be close to him. More authority in this one servant of God than all the leaders assembled for the summit conference could muster together—even with all their material wealth and titles." [^55] Later, Elder Hinckley teased an audience of members and missionaries that he hoped they weren't disappointed to find that he was short, losing his hair, and not terribly good-looking. Wrote Sister Edmunds: "The members weren't disappointed, and neither were we. We were filled beyond our greatest need and expectation. How he lifted our spirits and renewed our dedication to God's holy work!" [^56]

One of the tour's most memorable experiences occurred during a Sunday worship service in Seoul with sixty LDS servicemen. After many of them bore testimony, Elder Hinckley recorded:

It was one of the most moving experiences of my life to listen to them. Here were strong military men who wept as they thanked the Lord for the Gospel, for their families, and one another. . . . Colonel Hogan, who is executive officer of the Air Force installation at Taegu, wept as he spoke. . . . He told of how he had been ordered to Korea, and of how he had concluded that he would resign rather than leave his family behind him. There appeared no way that he could take his dependents. But the way suddenly opened, and he brought his six children with him. Then the Falconer boy stood up. He said that he knew why the Hogans had come to Taegu. He said the Falconer family . . . had prayed that another LDS family might be sent there so that they could organize a branch. . . .

A veteran artillery captain told of how he was drifting downhill following his transfer to Korea. . . . Then Colonel Plant, who had been the servicemen's district president until recently, visited him and got on his knees prayed] with him. He had changed the course of his life. . . . And so it went for the better part of three hours to become an unforgettable spiritual experience.

Elder Hinckley concluded: "I have never seen a group of men anywhere in the world who evidenced such love for the Church. What an experience to have had this morning. There is something about Korea that gets me. It is the grayest, saddest land I know. Perhaps this is the reason I feel the spirit of the Lord so strongly each time I come here. It is the great gratitude which both the missionaries and our servicemen have for the gospel. the contrast is so great and so apparent." [^57]

Elder Hinckley's faith was always strengthened by the testimonies of those wearing olive drab, and whenever he spoke with servicemen, Elder Hinckley promised them that those who lived the gospel were indeed missionaries.

Such experiences were not lost on Jane, who saw her father with new eyes as they met with the Saints. "I remember thinking that Dad loved what he was doing," she later said. "And I saw the mantle of his calling rest on his shoulders. Even as a young girl I could feel something when he bore his testimony of the Savior and his great love for the Prophet Joseph Smith." [^58]

This was the first of several international trips for Jane, and Marjorie rejoiced that they were able to share their experiences with their youngest daughter. She often told her husband that her only regret about their trips to the Orient was that she longed to have the family with them. "I want to walk the streets of Hong Kong with my children," she said again and again.

The following spring Elder Hinckley wrote a series of articles on the Church in Asia for the Improvement Era. Identified as president of the "Hawaiian-Oriental Missions," he had become the most visible and enthusiastic supporter of the Asian people and the missionaries who served them. He concluded his message with a vision of what would come: "To date, our labors have been relatively small among so many, but they have been tremendously significant. We have not touched the millions of the Chinese mainland. . . . We have not as yet taught other millions in other areas, but it is apparent that the Spirit of the Lord is brooding in the hearts of men in this part of the earth, and that doors now locked will some day open." [^59]

It was clear to Elder Hinckley that the responsibility to move the work forward in Asia lay heavily on his shoulders. Church headquarters was half a world away, and some of the traditional methods of missionary work were not effective among the distinctive Asian cultures. All he could do was seek the direction of the Lord, then roll up his sleeves and go to work.

His willingness to blaze trails was evident in other areas as well. Since the mid-1930s, when he had first become responsible for helping produce the Church's Sunday evening programming aired on KSL, he had been involved with developing Church-oriented material for broadcast. He was fascinated by the power and the reach of electronic media and had been since boyhood, when he had built a crystal radio set and then marveled over being able to pull sound out of the air through a steel wire on a crystal.

In 1957 his link to KSL had grown even stronger when President McKay named him first to the board of directors of the Radio Service Corporation of Utah (or KSL) and subsequently as a member of its executive committee. With others, he had been involved in making broadcasts of general conference available to the public; the first nationwide broadcast took place in April 1962. [^60] In early 1964, after lengthy negotiations, the Church purchased KIRO-TV and KIRO-AM/FM in Seattle, and he was elected a director of that company. [^61] He had also been involved two years earlier with the purchase of a New York shortwave station, WRUL (later WNYW), acquired to facilitate broadcast capabilities to Europe and South America.

In 1964, when it appeared that the Church would continue to acquire media properties, Bonneville International Corporation (BIC) was created to supervise the management of all broadcasting entities. A signatory for the incorporation of that company, Elder Hinckley was named a vice president, a member of its board of directors, and a member of the executive committee. [^62] Decisions at Bonneville ran the gamut, and as he and other principals looked for ways to appropriately extend the Church's broadcasting influence, it became increasingly clear that new technologies would open up the world in ways never before imagined.

Elder Hinckley was anxious to use technology more creatively in spreading the gospel. If anything, he believed, the Church needed to expand its use of media. His experience in Asia alone suggested that the time and number of missionaries required to make personal contact with every soul rendered such an approach impractical.

In early November 1964, he set out on a trip that would take him around the world and in the process give him even greater appreciation for the vast regions as yet untouched by the gospel message. He and Marjorie would miss Thanksgiving with their children, and the idea of being separated from the family on such a holiday pained Sister Hinckley. But this trip was unusual in that they were to visit countries Elder Hinckley had never before seen, and he wanted her with him.

At times it seemed almost incredible to him that the progress of the Church rested largely in the hands of young missionaries—hence the countless hours he spent teaching, interviewing, encouraging, and blessing them. He had found it necessary on a previous trip to deliver a stern message to missionaries serving in Japan. Afterward President Dwayne Andersen of the Northern Far East Mission had worked to increase the spirituality of his missionaries so that the next time Elder Hinckley visited they could lighten his load rather than add to his burden.

One evidence of progress occurred on this trip. The morning of November 26, 1964, Elder Hinckley and President Andersen arrived at the Tokyo Central Branch building to find eighty missionaries singing "Come, Listen to a Prophet's Voice." Elder Hinckley entered the back door, removed his shoes, and then suddenly stopped. After a few moments, he proceeded up the middle aisle to the front of the room. Tears filled his eyes as he admitted that he had come fasting and had expected to speak sternly with them. "But I felt your spirit when I came in, and I can see that things have changed here." He then asked if there were any sick among them. President Andersen remembered: "We had three missionaries with serious health problems. I anointed them and Elder Hinckley sealed the anointings and gave each of them a very special blessing. The Spirit was so strong that there was not a dry eye in the room. Over the years I have had many missionaries recall this sacred occasion as one of the choicest spiritual experiences they had ever had." [^63]

Elder Hinckley seemed to have the ability to encourage members and missionaries to greater works. "Everywhere he and Sister Hinckley went," Sister Andersen explained, "the Saints thronged to hear them, shake their hands, and feel of their genuine love. When missionaries were discouraged, Elder Hinckley could lift them with just a few words of comfort and counsel. Sometimes he shared discouraging times in his own life, and that changed their spirits." [^64]

After visiting the cities that they typically included on their itinerary, Elder and Sister Hinckley headed west, to countries where the Church was still limited to small groups of scattered members. With President and Sister Jay Quealy they traveled to Bangkok, where they met with a few expatriate Latter-day Saints. On the one hand, it was exciting to find Saints in such faraway places; on the other, the visit to Bangkok was sobering. "When we come to this part of this world," Elder Hinckley noted in his journal, "we are almost overwhelmed by a realization of the immensity of our task in preaching the Restored Gospel." [^65]

From Bangkok the Hinckleys and the Quealys flew to Saigon (later named Ho Chi Minh City), where nearly sixty Saints awaited them in a hot and steamy room in an American school. A horde of bugs crawled over Elder Hinckley as he attempted to address an audience composed largely of servicemen, though two Vietnamese converts participated in the meeting. The Hinckleys' brief experience in Saigon was eerie. "One would never think South Vietnam is at war," he noted. "The people seem to go about their business with an indifferent attitude. This appears to be the chief problem in the conflict. The people are not involved in it. . . . At home we read the newspapers and think that Saigon is a strife-torn city. It certainly does not appear that way." [^66]

The quartet flew on to Singapore and then to India, which proved to be a singular experience. Their dilapidated hotel room on the outskirts of Madras was inhabited by ants nearly an inch long. In Coimbatore they witnessed a degree of poverty that stunned them. "Some of the people are dressed only in rags. Many were naked from the waist up. Squalor and filth and poverty and hunger are evident on all sides," Elder Hinckley recorded. [^67] There they also met Paul Thirithuvodoss, a man who had written to the Church requesting baptism. At his invitation they drove to Medukerai to tour his school for underprivileged children and attend religious services for several hundred of his associates. Some were beating drums and playing an organ, all of which reminded Elder Hinckley of a Salvation Army gathering. To these "poor of the earth," as Elder Hinckley described them, Paul delivered a Pentecostal-type sermon. Despite his repeated request that he and others be baptized, Elder Hinckley was concerned: "My thoughts are greatly troubled over what I have seen. I do not know what we should do. These are earnest people, but they have been schooled in the Pentecostal ways which are not our ways. . . . We certainly need the inspiration of the Lord in whatever action we take here." [^68]

Both alone and with President Quealy, Elder Hinckley pleaded with the Lord for direction. He ultimately declined to perform the ordinance, recommending instead that missionaries be sent to teach Paul and others. It was not an easy decision: "We said goodbye to him and his group with real affection in our hearts, particularly for him. . . . I go to sleep somewhat troubled in my mind over not performing the ordinance in his behalf, but fully satisfied that good has been accomplished by our coming here and that the end results will be very much . . . in harmony with the Lord's will." [^69] Paul was later baptized.

From India the Hinckleys bid the Quealys farewell and flew on to the Near East, stopping in Beirut to meet with a small group of members and then continuing on to Jerusalem. This was their first trip to the Holy Land, and everything they saw aroused emotions of one kind or another. Their route from Jerusalem to Bethlehem, which crossed a no-man's-land with Arab soldiers stationed on one side and Jewish guards on the other, reminded Elder Hinckley of Korea's DMZ and of the Berlin Wall. Most poignantly, it served as a stark reminder that peace would not come to the world until men accepted the teachings of the Master.

Despite such impressions, he and Sister Hinckley marveled as they walked in the footsteps of history at Golgotha, the Mount of Olives, and other sites central to the Savior's life and ministry. Elder Hinckley felt strongly the presence of Him who had lived and died there. "There may be some uncertainty about the specific site but there is no uncertainty about the fact that this is the area in which the Savior of the world was born, lived and taught, and gave His life as a sacrifice for all men. It is a sobering and wonderful experience to be here," he wrote. [^70]

Their last night in Israel, Elder Hinckley became violently ill; by morning he was so weak that he could scarcely hold his head up. Against Marjorie's protests, they left for Athens as scheduled. The smell of food on the plane only aggravated his condition, and he feared he would pass out during the flight. Once in Athens, they had scarcely arrived at their hotel when the phone rang. The leader of the small group of Saints there was calling to request a meeting. After inviting the man's family to the hotel for dinner and agreeing to meet with any who could be gathered together, Elder Hinckley fell into bed. "When it came dinner time, I was extremely ungracious," he recorded. "I asked them if they would feel all right about eating in the coffee shop where I could get two boiled eggs and some soda water. . . . I was so tired and weak I could not hold my eyes open. I was ashamed of myself." [^71]

By morning his illness had passed, and he and Marjorie enjoyed some quick sightseeing around the Greek capital before leaving for Frankfurt. Elder Hinckley was eager to stand on Mars Hill, where the Apostle Paul had preached his famous sermon on the unknown God. "It was a sobering experience to stand where Paul had stood to declare the true nature of God our Eternal Father, and His Son, the Lord Jesus Christ. It gave me a sobering sense of the high and holy calling which has come to me," he recorded. [^72]

Just six days before Christmas, the Hinckleys arrived in Frankfurt to a welcome surprise. Though Elder Hinckley had expected to meet there with Elder Ezra Taft Benson, who was serving as president of the European Mission, he and Sister Hinckley had not expected the Bensons to greet them at the airport and invite them to stay at the mission home. They were delighted to accept the Bensons' invitation. "Their home is beautifully decorated for Christmas and it is a wonderful thing to be . . . with these good people," Elder Hinckley recorded afterward. "The spirit here is so different from that in hotel rooms." [^73] By the following evening the Hinckleys had flown on to Brussels. Their brief stopover in Germany, however, had revived them, as Sister Hinckley explained in a thank-you note to Sister Benson: "After going through the Orient and across Asia, where there was so little evidence of Christmas, and then to suddenly find ourselves in your beautiful home with the Christmas tree and the lights, and music and the red-ribboned staircase, and . . . most of all, the sweet spirit and peace of a Latter-day Saint home, was something that will always remain with us. After weeks in hotels and strange cities, you could not possibly know how we felt when we saw you at the airport." [^74]

From Brussels the Hinckleys flew to London, which always rejuvenated Elder Hinckley. This brief stopover was particularly delightful, as for the first time this holiday season they had a few moments to enjoy the bustle of shoppers and a rare evening of entertainment, during which they indulged in a roast beef and Yorkshire pudding dinner and tickets to Noel Coward's Light Spirits (known as Blithe Spirit in America). It had been a long and tedious trip. Before leaving for the airport, Elder Hinckley dictated a few benedictory thoughts about their around-the-world tour: "We will have circled the globe when we arrive in Salt Lake City tonight. . . . I am grateful to say that notwithstanding a bout of illness I feel stronger and more rested than I did three weeks ago. For one thing, the cool weather has done much to revive us. . . . it has been an inspirational experience. I have interviewed 479 missionaries have met with many of the Saints. . . . I have listened to their testimonies and felt of their spirit and my own faith has been strengthened and my testimony bolstered. Surely God lives and Jesus is the Christ. Surely this is Their work, and it is good to be engaged in it." [^75]

When the Hinckleys finally touched down in Salt Lake City, it was just two days before Christmas Eve. Ten-year-old Jane, who had been panicked that her parents wouldn't make it home for the holidays, was thrilled when they walked through the door. For their part, as much as Elder and Sister Hinckley enjoyed the far reaches of the world, there was nowhere they were more comfortable or content than home.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See "160 Japanese Saints Make Historic Hawaii Temple Trip," Church News, 31 July 1965, pp. 3, 6.
[^2] See GBH Journal, 16 December 1965.
[^3] See GBH Journal, 25 May 1971; also 1993-94 Church Almanac, p. 400; 1995-96 Church Almanac, pp. 418-20.
[^4] GBH Journal, 17 December 1966.
[^5] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Mission Calls and Selective Service," Improvement Era, December 1965, p. 1145.
[^6] GBH Journal, 5 August 1966.
[^7] GBH Journal, 23 June 1966.
[^8] GBH Journal, 25 December 1965.
[^9] See Spencer J. Palmer, The Church in Asia (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1970), pp. 182-83.
[^10] GBH Journal, 28 December 1965; also Improvement Era, March 1966, p. 170.
[^11] In Conference Report, April 1966, pp. 85-87.
[^12] "The Wonder of Jesus," pp. 74-75.
[^13] GBH Journal, 5 April 1969.
[^14] See GBH Journal, 27-28 July 1966.
[^15] GBH Journal, 6 October 1966.
[^16] See, for example, Gordon B. Hinckley, "The Loneliness of Leadership," address delivered 4 November 1969 at BYU.
[^17] MPH to Kathy, Jane, & Heather, 11 October 1966.
[^18] Kensei Nagamine to Sheri L. Dew, 27 April 1995.
[^19] See "Philippines Chapel Dedicated," Church News, 10 December 1966.
[^20] MPH to Kathy Barnes, 24 October 1966.
[^21] MPH to Kathy Barnes, 24 October 1966.
[^22] GBH Journal, 28 October 1966.
[^23] Interview with Allen C. Rozsa, 28 June 1995.
[^24] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Asian Diary," address delivered 10 January 1967 at BYU; also Allen C. Rozsa to Sheri L. Dew, 20 December 1995.
[^25] GBH Journal, 29 October 1966.
[^26] Interview with Allen C. Rozsa, 28 June 1995.
[^27] GBH Journal, 29 October 1966.
[^28] See R. Lanier Britsch and Richard C. Holloman Jr., "The Church's Years in Vietnam," Ensign, August 1980, pp. 25-30; also Gordon B. Hinckley, "A Silver Thread in the Dark Tapestry of War," Improvement Era, June 1968, p. 49.
[^29] Interview with Allen C. Rozsa, 28 June 1995; see also "Asian Diary"; Allen C. Rozsa to Sheri L. Dew, 20 December 1995; "Church Men Meet on Battlefield," Deseret News, 3 October 1966.
[^30] "A Silver Thread in the Dark Tapestry of War," pp. 49-50.
[^31] See The Korean Saints: Personal Stories of Trial and Triumph, comp. Spencer J. Palmer and Shirley H. Palmer (Provo, Utah: BYU Religious Education, 1995), p. 188.
[^32] See "Asian Diary."
[^33] GBH Journal, 1 January 1967.
[^34] See Interview with Jane Freed Hinckley, 16 April 1996.
[^35] Interview with Richard Gordon Hinckley, 21 October 1994.
[^36] GBH Journal, 11 April 1967.
[^37] GBH Journal, 14 April 1967.
[^38] GBH Journal, 21 April 1967.
[^39] GBH Journal, 27 April 1967.
[^40] GBH Journal, 29 April 1967.
[^41] GBH Journal, 14 March 1973.
[^42] GBH Journal, 29 September 1967.
[^43] GBH Journal, 15 October 1967.
[^44] See GBH Journal, 25 October 1967.
[^45] GBH Journal, 26 October 1967.
[^46] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "Feed the Spirit-Nourish the Soul," Improvement Era, December 1967, p. 87.
[^47] GBH Journal, 1 November 1967; see also "Joseph the Seer," BYU Speeches of the Year, 5 December 1967.
[^48] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Lest We Forget," BYU Speeches of the Year, 10 November 1970.
[^49] Gordon B. Hinckley, Sharing the Gospel in Military Service (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1970).
[^50] Interview with Han In Sang, 31 March 1995.
[^51] GBH to Spencer J. Palmer, 1 August 1966.
[^52] Interview with Spencer J. Palmer, 13 July 1995.
[^53] R. Lanier Britsch Interview with Adney Y. Komatsu, James Moyle Oral History Program, 1974; LDS Church Archives.
[^54] Ray C. Hillam to GBH, 5 March 1996.
[^55] "Asian Diary."
[^56] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "A Challenge from Vietnam," Improvement Era, June 1967, p. 54.
[^57] "A Silver Thread in the Dark Tapestry of War," p. 48.
[^58] See GBH Journal, 20-21 November 1967.
[^59] GBH Journal, 21 November 1967.
[^60] GBH Journal, 23 December 1967.
[^61] GBH Journal, 31 December 1967.
[^62] 62. See W. Dee Halverson, "Bonneville International Corporation Historical Record 1922-1992," unpublished corporate document, 1992, pp. 12, 18, 21-25.
[^63] 63. Dwayne N. Andersen to Sheri L. Dew, April 1995; see also R. Lanier Britsch Interview with Dwayne N. Andersen, James Moyle Oral History Program, LDS Church Archives.
[^64] 64. Peggy Andersen to Sheri L. Dew, 30 June 1995.
[^65] 65. GBH Journal, 9 December 1964.
[^66] 66. GBH Journal, 10 December 1964.
[^67] 67. GBH Journal, 12 December 1964.
[^68] 68. GBH Journal, 12 December 1964.
[^69] 69. GBH Journal, 14 December 1964.
[^70] 70. GBH Journal, 17 December 1964.
[^71] 71. GBH Journal, 18 December 1964.
[^72] 72. GBH Journal, 19 December 1964.
[^73] 73. GBH Journal, 19 December 1964.
[^74] 74. Marjorie Hinckley to Flora Benson, 29 January 1965.
[^75] 75. GBH Journal, 22 December 1964.
