Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Fifteen

Growing in Asia

In the United States, the sixties were a volatile decade, a dizzying era of highs and lows, triumph and tragedy. The president was assassinated on November 22, 1963; hot spots in the cold war between East and West threatened to ignite; and angry college students, feminists, and blacks bent on challenging the status quo demanded the nation's attention. But despite the proliferation of special-interest groups opposed to anything that represented a traditional institution or way of life, the Church continued to grow at home and abroad. During 1963 Church membership crossed the two-million mark, and some of that growth was occurring in the Far East and Pacific Rim.

In July 1965 Elder Hinckley flew to Hawaii to participate in a historic event. In a seven-thousand-mile journey believed to be among the longest temple excursions in Church history, 131 adults and 29 children from Japan flew to Hawaii to attend the temple. For the first time ever, all of the work of the temple was available in Japanese.

Elder Hinckley's reunion with Japanese friends in Hawaii was joyous. For several days he performed sealings, participated in temple instruction, posed for pictures with happy families, and saw in the faces of good friends the delight of being linked eternally to their loved ones. While in Hawaii, he also attended a testimonial for the newly called president of the Northern Far East Mission, Adney Y. Komatsu, a Hawaiian-born Japanese man who was the first of his race called as a mission president. [^1]

Such happy occasions were the fruits of missionary work, and though Elder Hinckley had been relieved of handling the day-to-day affairs in the department, he served as managing director of the Priesthood Missionary Committee. Accordingly, it fell to him to deal with the difficult administrative problems that affected the expanding program. Late 1965, for example, found him preparing budgets for the operation of the Missionary Department, travel of missionaries, and other related items for all missions throughout the world. The process was tedious and demanded precision, and he never began the annual ritual without reflecting on the first budget he had prepared in 1938 at the request of President J. Reuben Clark Jr. That year he had budgeted $85,000 for the Missionary Department, and President Clark had taken him to task for being too imaginative and extravagant in the projects he proposed. Now the department's annual budget ran to millions of dollars. [^2] Of course, during the intervening years the number of missions had more than doubled (from thirty-six to seventy-six), and there were now more than 12,000 missionaries in the field, a number that would have been unfathomable twenty-seven years earlier, when only 1,146 new missionaries were set apart all year. [^3]

When the First Presidency, Quorum of the Twelve, and Presiding Bishopric assembled as the Council on the Disposition of the Tithes, where the Church's budget for the following year was reviewed, modified, and finally ratified, he was relieved that the Brethren approved the missionary budget without changing so much as a dollar. He had worried about how they would respond to his proposals, particularly a substantial expenditure for automobiles. "This is a meeting," he recorded, "in which there are frequently differences of opinion but also a meeting in which the inspiration of the Lord is felt when the President of the Church finally announces the decision on various matters." [^4]

Other challenges confronting the missionary program weren't addressed as readily. Escalation of the conflict in Vietnam (the number of U.S. troops there increased from 11,200 at the end of 1962 to nearly 200,000 by the end of 1965) had fueled the government's need for draft-eligible young men. Once again Elder Hinckley found himself negotiating with Selective Service officials regarding LDS men who were eligible both to serve missions and to be called up in the draft. As before, there were no easy answers. And this time, the steady hand and voice of Stephen L Richards were not available. Numerous meetings with Selective Service officials, including General Lewis B. Hershey, who was still national director, and others with whom Elder Hinckley had worked closely during the Korean crisis, led finally to a First Presidency letter, dated September 22, 1965, in which a new missionary quota was announced: one missionary per ward each six months was allowable, with ward and branch quotas transferrable within stakes and districts.

At the priesthood session of the October general conference Elder Hinckley devoted his remarks to this arrangement. "I suppose, brethren," he began, "that not in a long while have we had a communication which has brought greater disappointment than did the First Presidency's letter . . . placing restrictions on the number of young men who may be recommended for missions. No one feels more concerned than I over the thought that possibly some of our young men who have counted on and dreamed of missions may not be able to go." He concluded with an expression of faith: "Several bishops have been in during the last few days and have said that our young men have been saving money for years to go on missions. What shall they do? I say keep saving and praying. . . . I feel satisfied that God will hear our prayers and that most of those young men who want to go on missions will have the opportunity to go on missions." [^5]

Decisions about young men torn between the armed forces and the mission field were never easy ones, and as the demand for troops in Vietnam increased, tensions intensified with the Selective Service. After a meeting with Utah Selective Service officials, who asked the Church to further reduce its number of missionaries, Elder Hinckley recorded in his journal: "This is a matter that greatly worries me. My phone rings constantly both day and night asking for some liberalization of quotas so that more young men may go on missions. At the same time I am under pressure from military incident to the war in Vietnam. I pray night and morning that somehow our Father in His power will bring to pass a cessation of hostilities there so that our young men may go without restriction into the world and teach the gospel of peace." [^6]

Problems relative to the draft only increased throughout the duration of the Vietnam War. It was an emotional issue, with an eerie sense of dÃ©jÃ vu in the efforts to create a delicate balance between the requirements of government and those of the Church. On occasion this conflict left Elder Hinckley feeling isolated and even misunderstood. In response to a memorandum from Elder Harold B. Lee to the Missionary Executive Committee outlining complaints regarding the quota system, he presented a detailed review of the problem to the Twelve. "I was greatly concerned," he confided in his journal. "I felt as though I were presenting a case to an unsympathetic jury. I covered the subject in every aspect and tried to anticipate every question. The Lord blessed me. When I had finished there was no criticism and much appreciation. Marion G. Romney was especially complimentary and said, 'As I heard you I thought you had been trained as a lawyer.'" [^7]

Despite such frustrations, Elder Hinckley was absorbed in his work and grateful to be so engaged. On Christmas Day of 1965 he recorded: "We have received many gifts but best of all our good health, testimonies of the truth, love one for another, and the friendship of marvelous people. Furthermore, it is a privilege and a great trust to be engaged in the Lord's work." [^8] Three days later he received a gift more precious than anything he had unwrapped on Christmas morning when four copies of the new Chinese translation of the Book of Mormon arrived at his office. He immediately took a copy to President McKay, and the ninety-two-year-old Church president was delighted with the gift. When a formal presentation was later made, the prophet's copy carried an inscription that read in part: "The Book of Mormon is now available in the language which is the mother tongue of more people than any other on earth. May it go forth among them as a witness of the Son of God, the Savior of the World. With sincere respect and deep affection. Gordon B. Hinckley." [^9] President McKay took his associate's hand in his and said warmly, "You have done a great work in this part of the world. The Lord has blessed you and He will continue to bless you." [^10]

When he had received the assignment to supervise Asia nearly six years before, two of Elder Hinckley's priorities had been publication of the Book of Mormon in Chinese and in Korean. With the first off the press and the latter nearing completion, he was grateful for the translators who had completed those difficult assignments.

Though Elder Hinckley was frequently inundated with the administrative aspects of his calling, his responsibility to bear testimony of the divinity of the Savior's life and mission weighed foremost on his mind. The more he traveled the world and saw the diversity of its ills, the greater was his testimony that only in the Savior lay the power and strength to overcome the pitfalls and heartaches of mortality. In the April 1966 general conference he denounced those who sought to undermine Jesus Christ: "Modern theologians strip Savior] of his divinity, then wonder why men do not worship him. These clever scholars have taken from Jesus the mantle of godhood and have left only a man. They have tried to accommodate him to their own narrow thinking. They have robbed him of his divine sonship, and taken from the world its rightful King." To those who hungered for "a faith that would satisfy," he promised: "If you will read the word of the Lord, if you will serve his cause, if in prayer you will talk with him, your doubts will leave, and shining through all of the confusion of philosophy, so-called higher criticism, and negative theology will come the witness of the Holy Spirit that Jesus is in very deed the Son of God, born in the flesh, the Redeemer of the world. . . . It is your opportunity so to know. It is your obligation so to find out." [^11]

Three years later at conference, he spoke on "The Wonder of Jesus," again declaring that through Christ lay solutions to societal maladies: "One of the complaints of the young pot smokers and drug takers who are seeking escape from reality is that the world has become intolerably impersonal. If this be the problem, the answer is not the kind of escape in which they waste their lives. The solution lies in implementing the transcendent teachings of the Son of God, who more than any other walked the earth gave dignity and worth to the individual. He declared us each to be a child of the living God, endowed with a divine birthright, capable of eternal achievement. Who, I ask, possessed of such conviction, would seek relief in the euphoria of debilitating drugs? . . . Is there relevancy in Jesus for our time? The world never needed more urgently the power of his example; the world never needed more desperately the vitality of his teachings." [^12] Following this address, even the modest Elder Hinckley allowed in his journal, "I spoke on the relevance of Jesus to the lives of people in our time and bore witness of his living reality. I think this to be one of the most satisfying talks I have ever given. I was in harmony with my calling as a special witness of the name of Christ in all the world." [^13]

Perhaps he would always wonder if there were more he could and should be doing to magnify his calling. That feeling, coupled with his numerous community-oriented assignments—he was serving on the boards of Beneficial Life Insurance Company, Zion's Bank, Bonneville International, KIRO in Seattle, and the Deseret News Publishing Company—allowed him precious few opportunities to relax. Perhaps nothing cleared his head or revived him more than doing physical labor outside. And occasionally he actually took a short vacation. In July 1966 he, Marjorie, Clark, and Jane drove up Provo Canyon to the Aspen Grove family camp, situated nearly seven thousand feet above sea level behind the commanding Mount Timpanogos. There they hiked, read, and relaxed. On July 24, the Hinckleys spoke in the camp's sacrament meeting, with Jane and Clark joining their father on the program. Their "Pioneer Heritage" theme was a Hinckley favorite. Kathy and Virginia and their families joined their parents for dinner in the mountains one evening, and the Hinckleys persuaded Kathy to leave five-year-old Heather—"a pixie," her grandfather called her—with them for the remainder of their stay. The relaxation was just what Marjorie had hoped for on her husband's behalf. Nevertheless, after four days he was restless and anxious to get back to work, so two days earlier than planned he drove home, leaving the rest of the family behind to enjoy the remainder of their week. [^14]

Marjorie considered any break her husband took as a triumph, however, for she saw him bearing an ever-increasing burden as well as maintaining an ambitious travel schedule. In October 1966, they left on another trip to Southeast Asia and were greeted in Tokyo by an enthusiastic entourage of Saints who had stretched a huge "Welcome LDS Church Leader" banner across the balcony. Though Elder Hinckley grumbled quietly to his wife about such conspicuous attention, he wrote afterward in his journal: "We belong to the greatest society of friends on earth. . . . No matter where you meet them, no matter the language they speak, no matter whether they are round-eyed or almond-eyed, they are the same." [^15]

One aspect of his call to the Twelve that bothered him at times was the attention paid him at every turn. It was embarrassing and sometimes distracting, not to mention dangerous. "Adulation is poison," he often said, and he meant it. He had been known to tell individuals assigned to introduce him, "I'd appreciate it if you'd just delete all the fancy talk and let us get on with the battle." [^16]

Enduring any related attention on this trip was worth it, however, for while in Korea he dedicated the chapel of the East Seoul Branch, the first such building constructed on mainland Asia. It was an emotional experience for him to look into the faces of more than four hundred Korean Saints who had gathered for the historic event. "It was a big affair, with a capacity audience and city and government officials," Marjorie described in a letter home. "I thought surely Dad would let me off speaking, but he did not. . . . It was by far the best Korean audience I have ever seen. They were well dressed and well groomed. Every man had on a white shirt and tie and they were very sharp looking people. The reverence was something to behold." That the Korean Saints were delighted to have the Hinckleys with them was obvious. "These people are just great," she reported in the same letter. "They are so friendly and they make us feel like they are genuinely glad to see us. They came up to me by the dozens and said, 'I love you. Thank you for coming to Korea.'" The feeling was mutual. She wrote, "I feel sad in leaving Korea. Dad seems so sure that he is not coming back." [^17]

In Naha, Okinawa, more than 350 members crowded into a new chapel that stood in the shadow of the Shuri line, where 21,000 American soldiers had died during one of the bloodiest campaigns of World War II. Kensei Nagamine, who later became the first stake president on Okinawa, remembered that meeting: "When Elder Hinckley dedicated our chapel he wept as he said, 'I love the people of Okinawa and the American people who are living in Okinawa.' As I was looking at Elder Hinckley and his weeping countenance, in him I saw the Savior represented and heard the Savior saying to me, 'Behold, my bowels are filled with compassion towards you.' This was seen not only by me, but also by many other people. We shall never forget the message of the Savior's love that he expressed to us who are here, scattered on these isles of the sea." [^18]

This particular trip, marked by a series of chapel dedications, was evidence that Elder Hinckley's efforts to provide the Saints with facilities were bearing fruit. In Taipei he dedicated the first building erected by the Church in China, and in Manila nearly a thousand members crowded into the dedicatory services of the small Luzon District chapel. [^19] It had been only five years since Elder Hinckley had inaugurated missionary work in the Philippines, and the growth there was astonishing. Sister Hinckley described the meeting in a letter to the family: "The dedication was a thrill. There were 1,000 there and they could all speak English. What a relief! . . . When I stood up I didn't know what in the world I was going to say, but we had the Spirit with us all through the meeting and we came out just walking on air. Dad has never done better. We shook hands with the entire congregation, which was very tiring but also very thrilling. The Filipinos are so affectionate and loving and warm. . . . The Church is simply going wild here." [^20]

The chapel dedications throughout Asia filled Elder Hinckley's heart almost to bursting. Although the growth of the Church in Asia was infinitesimal when compared with the number of people yet to be reached, there had been progress during the six years he had been coming to the Orient. Everywhere he went, Elder Hinckley thanked the people for their faithfulness and hard work.

In Hong Kong mail from home caught up with the Hinckleys, and Marjorie expressed her delight in a quick reply. "Thank you, thank you, thank you for your letters," she wrote. "After three weeks I was getting to the point where I was dreaming about all of you every night . . . so it was wonderful to be reassured that all is well. I just wish I could enjoy this without wishing so much that you were here. . . . Let's all plan to come together sometime. I love every street in this crazy city." Her parting words were filled with characteristic enthusiasm and promise: "Be good children and work hard, so you can . . . see this gorgeous, wonderful world and meet all these wonderful people. It is the greatest thing in the world to be a Latter-day Saint." [^21]

In Hong Kong, Elder Hinckley and Elder Marion D. Hanks of the First Council of the Seventy, who with his wife, Maxine, had joined the Hinckleys, met with the missionaries, after which Elder Hinckley recorded: "My spirits have been revived and my testimony enriched. . . . How marvelous to feel the spirit of these young men and women who dedicate their lives to the work of the Lord. As they were speaking, I looked over to a corner of the room and saw in my mind's eye a sailor who had dropped in on such a meeting some years ago while his ship was anchored in Hong Kong harbor. He was touched by the spirit of that meeting and out of the impressions of that day came his conversion. I met him in the eastern part of the United States the other day as a member of a branch presidency. Tomorrow we go to Vietnam. . . . I wonder how many of the good young men with whom I have talked today will . . . find themselves in the hot jungles of that sad land as soldiers of war." [^22]

The next day, as Elders Hinckley and Hanks and President Keith Garner of the Southern Far East Mission soared over the delta country of the Mekong River en route to Saigon, Elder Hinckley observed how beautiful the land appeared—a stark contrast to the bloody conflict being played out on the terrain below. It was steamy hot as the three Church officials landed at Tan San Nhut Airport in Saigon. Elder Hinckley bounded off the aircraft first and greeted Major Allen C. Rozsa, the president of the South Vietnam Zone of the Church, with the words: "Your father sends his love. He is proud of you. I saw him not long ago in California." Major Rozsa said later: "Being in a combat situation, it was wonderful to hear something from home. Though I had never met him before, it was as though I had known Elder Hinckley all my life. He made us feel as though he really wanted to spend time with us." [^23] After their initial interchange, Major Rozsa asked Elder Hinckley for his signature on a waiver absolving the U.S. military from liability while he was in Vietnam. It was an eerie beginning.

As an advisor to South Vietnam's Air Force Photographic Reconnaissance Squadron, Major Rozsa had arranged for a Vietnamese Air Force C-47 (with an American flight crew) to transport the Church leaders around Vietnam. They all climbed aboard the "Gooney Bird" and strapped themselves into uncomfortable basket-type seats along the sides of the cargo hold. Once the plane was airborne, Elder Hinckley noticed the camouflage coveralls and survival gear on a rack at the rear, though he doubted he would know what to do with them if it came to that. When he asked Major Rozsa if they were flying along a safe corridor, the major responded, "We're safe as long as we stay out of the range of enemy fire." Elder Hinckley was calm until the port motor began to lag and sputter. "Strange thoughts fill your mind under such circumstances," he admitted. "Our spirits lifted when the engine caught hold again." [^24] As they approached Da Nang, Major Rozsa warned Elder Hinckley that if they were going to get shot, it would happen as they landed. Once safely on the ground, Elder Hinckley better understood the gravity of the situation as he watched an admiral's plane land with a five-helicopter escort.

In Da Nang the Church leaders were greeted by the base commander and then driven to a Quonset hut chapel to meet with more than a hundred LDS servicemen. What he experienced would etch itself indelibly in Elder Hinckley's mind. "I shall never forget that picture or that meeting," he wrote. "What a sight they were! What a wonderful group, these young brethren of ours. We loved them the minute we looked into their eyes." [^25]

Dressed in battle fatigues, with mud caked on their boots, the soldiers had come down from the Rock Pile and Marble Mountain along the DMZ, where the fighting had been vicious and the smell of cordite and death hung in the air. As they entered the chapel, they stacked their M-16 automatic rifles along the two back rows and sat down, most of them with pistols on their right hips and knives on their left.

Three LDS men had died the previous week, and Elder Hinckley began the meeting with a memorial service and concluded by inviting anyone who so desired to bear his testimony. During his own remarks, Elder Hinckley offered to call the loved ones of anyone who asked, and almost every soldier listed a telephone number on an improvised sign-up sheet. "Elder Hinckley made us feel that we weren't forgotten," said Major Rozsa. "His visit boosted our morale in a phenomenal way. He made us feel that we were good, honest men, and that what we were doing was honorable." [^26]

At six o'clock, the Air Force mess hall staff served dinner under the eaves of the Quonset hut. When a small group of Jewish servicemen approached the makeshift chapel for their scheduled Saturday evening meeting and saw the large contingent of LDS men, they invited them to use the building for the remainder of the evening—so Elder Hinckley convened another meeting with the soldiers. He lamented in his journal: "It was an experience both wonderful and depressing to be so close to these good young men, men who hold and honor the priesthood, men who are valiantly doing their duty as citizens of this country, but who would rather be doing something else. I thought as I talked with them that they ought to be in school . . . rather than walking fearsome patrols in the dark of the Asian jungle where death comes so quickly and quietly and definitely. These are the kids who ran and laughed and played ball back home, who drove the highways in old jalopies, who danced with lovely girls at the Gold and Green balls, who administered the sacrament on Sunday. These are boys who come from good homes where the linen is clean and showers are hot, who now sweat night and day in this troubled land, who are shot at and who shoot back, who have seen gaping wounds in a buddy's chest and who have killed those who would have killed them. I thought of the terrible inequality of sacrifice involved in the cause of human liberty." [^27]

That night, with no guest quarters available, the Church leaders were loaded into a field ambulance and bounced along a rutted road until they came to an unfinished hospital where beds with clean sheets awaited them. Every few minutes throughout the night an F-4 Phantom jet roared overhead, traveling north at lightning speed. With each one Elder Hinckley wondered, "Will it come back?"

The next day Elder Hinckley and his group climbed aboard the Gooney Bird and lifted into the sky as dawn made its appearance across the South China Sea. Their first stop was Nha Trang, where they convened a meeting much like the one they'd held the night before, and then they returned to Saigon. Elders Hinckley and Hanks had arrived in Southeast Asia with authorization from President McKay to dedicate South Vietnam for the preaching of the gospel if they felt impressed to do so. After their experiences of the past thirty-six hours, they believed such an action was in harmony with the Lord's will, so with the sound of mortar and cannon fire in the distance, they convened a meeting of 205 Church members and friends on the roof of Saigon's Caravelle Hotel. After the opening prayer, offered by Brother Nguyen Cao Minh, the first Vietnamese man ordained an elder in South Vietnam, President Garner and Elder Hanks gave inspirational messages. Elder Hinckley then spoke and offered a dedicatory prayer, in which he acknowledged the role that soldier-priesthood holders had played in introducing the gospel to native Vietnamese and pleaded with the Lord to touch the hearts of leaders and settle the conflict: "We have seen in other parts of Asia the manner in which thou hast turned the hand and the work of the adversary to the good and the blessing of many of thy children. And now we call upon thee at this time that thou wilt similarly pour out thy spirit upon this land." [^28]

That evening Elder Hinckley presided over a final meeting in Saigon. Again, artillery fire crackled in the distance as those pres-ent bore testimony to each other. "Soldiers who know they may never return home have a unique perspective of life," said Major Rozsa, "and their testimonies were filled with great emotion and conviction. It was a profoundly moving meeting. I will never forget how we felt when Elder Hinckley told us he had stood at his brother's grave in France and thanked the Lord for the sacrifice of those who died protecting our freedom, and then told us there were no better LDS men on earth than those in uniform doing their duty as holders of the priesthood of God." [^29]

The next morning Elder Hinckley and company took their leave of Major Rozsa, but as they lifted off and watched Saigon fade into the distance, Elder Hinckley's mind was filled with the haunting images of those with whom he had worshipped over the past forty-eight hours. He thought of the young man from a quiet country town who had seen sixty-eight of his company of seventy killed, and about soldiers who had contributed their combat pay differential—more than $3,000 by the men of the Saigon Branch on a single Sunday—to a fund for chapels they would never see or use. The horrors of war exceeded anything a peace-loving and God-fearing person could imagine or tolerate. But he believed the Lord would use these events for His good, as he expressed in a subsequent general conference: "I make no defense of the war from this pulpit. . . . I seek only to call your attention to that silver thread, small but radiant with hope, shining through the dark tapestry of war—namely, the establishment of a bridgehead, small and frail now; but which somehow, under the mysterious ways of God, will be strengthened, and from which someday shall spring forth a great work affecting for good the lives of large numbers of our Father's children who live in that part of the world. Of that I have a certain faith." [^30]

The three priesthood leaders were reunited with their wives in Bangkok, where, on November 2, 1966, at 6:30 A.M., in Lupini Park, Elder Hinckley dedicated Thailand for the preaching of the gospel. Later that day he and his associates met with the minister of education and religion, who, after energetic discussion, agreed to open the way for missionaries to enter the country, though on a severely restricted basis. From Thailand, the Hinckleys, Hankses, and Garners flew to Calcutta, and after being thwarted in an attempt to stop in Madras went on to Bombay. The morning after their arrival there, they understood why their efforts to reach Madras had been blocked. A violent storm with hundred-mile-per-hour winds had struck the city, and ten thousand people were left homeless, rail traffic had ceased, and the airport was closed. From India the Hinckleys took leave of the Hankses and flew to the Holy Land before returning home.

As they flew westward, leaving behind them the Far and Near East, Elder Hinckley reflected on all he had experienced over the past five weeks. Testimonies borne in the midst of war, countries opened to the preaching of the gospel, the faithfulness of members separated from the body of Saints—there was much that bolstered his own faith. Likewise, he was encouraged by the growth of the work in Asia. Local leaders were emerging, and he had already identified several men who he felt would have tremendous influence in their respective countries. A number of new buildings had been dedicated or were being built, and by early next year the Korean edition of the Book of Mormon would be available. [^31] He found himself thinking about the winter in 1839 when most of the Saints had been dispossessed of all they had and had fled across the bottomlands of the Mississippi to find asylum in Illinois, leaving Joseph Smith incarcerated in the Liberty jail. Under those circumstances, the word of the Lord had come to the Prophet: "The ends of the earth shall inquire after thy name, and fools shall have thee in derision, and hell shall rage against thee; while the pure in heart, and the wise, and the noble, and the virtuous, shall seek counsel, and authority, and blessings constantly from under thy hand." (D&C 122:1-2.) Elder Hinckley was witnessing, he believed, the fulfillment of prophecy. [^32]

Marjorie and Gordon were also witnessing the fruits of their labors at home, for they had reached the stage of life where their family was scattering. Though it was satisfying to see their children mature and make sound choices, it was also difficult to watch their home empty. Dick had returned from his mission, graduated from the University of Utah, entered graduate school at Stanford University, and announced his intentions to marry Jane Freed; Clark had graduated from high school and was preparing for his mission; and Jane was soon to be a teenager.

In September 1965 Virginia had married James Pearce, which event had again ignited a flurry of remodeling as the Hinckleys prepared to host a second daughter's wedding reception in their backyard. They added a patio, improved the landscaping, and remodeled the kitchen slightly. Things went reasonably well until a few days before the wedding, when a stray horse helped itself to the new front lawn and left it looking as though a tractor had cultivated the ground for planting. The problem was solved by ingenuity, hard work, and some sod. Elder Hinckley officiated at Virginia and Jim's temple sealing, and that night the home and yard looked beautiful.

The evolving nature of his family's life was on Elder Hinckley's mind when he noted that New Year's Day in 1967 dawned as a "day of gladness and a day of sadness": "The largest measure of our joy comes from the fact that all of our children are with us, and our sorrow comes from the fact that it will be a good while, even years, before it will happen again." It was a happy table around which the large contingent of Hinckleys gathered for a holiday dinner. "All of this served to remind us that our family is leaving the nest," Elder Hinckley concluded in his journal entry. "Clark and Dick bade one another goodbye. It will be at least two years before they see one another again." [^33]

Two months later Clark entered the LTM, bound for the North Argentine Mission. Not long after that the telltale signs of spring appeared at the Hinckley home, the most predictable of which was Gordon's annual "let's-sell-this-place-and-move-closer-to-town" refrain. Though it might have been more convenient to live closer to Church headquarters, neither Marjorie nor the children took seriously his routine complaints about the amount of work around "the place," or his threatened move. The home and lot had become permanently intertwined with his life, and everyone in the family knew it.

As Dick's wedding approached in July 1967, Marjorie took solace in the fact that this time the festivities would not call for a major overhaul of the yard or house, as the reception was being arranged for by the bride's parents. Her comfort was short-lived, however. When she and Gordon decided to host the wedding breakfast in their own home, and they determined that the dining room might not accommodate the crowd, he hit upon a logical solution. He would enclose the patio, add a fireplace for atmosphere, and then remove the wall between the dining room and patio so tables could be extended the full length of what would then be one large room. He would rebuild the wall after the wedding was over. As always, the last coat of paint was applied the night before the event.

The fuss didn't seem at all unusual to Dick, who took his father's unorthodox scheme in stride. It amazed his new wife, though, who had been at first apprehensive about dating an apostle's son and then relieved to find that Dick's family was a lot like hers—they laughed, chattered, teased, and generally enjoyed each other. [^34] When she arrived at the Hinckley home for the wedding breakfast, however, she was astonished. "Dad and I didn't knock the wall and bay window out until the day before the wedding," Dick explained, "so Jane hadn't seen our renovation, and she couldn't believe her eyes. I suppose it was out of the ordinary. But we just did those sorts of things. Our house was relatively small, but Dad made up for it with ingenious improvisations." [^35]

Despite going to great lengths for certain events, Elder Hinckley didn't encourage a great deal of socializing at home. He was a private man who found refuge there from his demanding schedule. A notable exception was the Hinckleys' annual hosting of the Windsor Club, which had met monthly for decades. Preparing to entertain some of their oldest friends was nothing short of an ordeal. The house and yard had to be perfect, so everyone in the family was recruited to prune, trim, dust, and deep-clean. Inevitably the event prompted some new project—pouring concrete, redoing flower boxes, painting entryways.

The Hinckley home had also become a gathering place for their Asian friends who traveled to Salt Lake City for general conferences. As Marjorie told her daughters, "I think the Orientals think that dinner at the Hinckleys after the Sunday afternoon session is a regular part of the conference program." Nevertheless, they loved feting their friends. At first the dinners were small affairs, but as the number of Asian visitors to Utah increased, so did the festivities at the Hinckleys', and the home was sometimes filled wall-to-wall with people.

Gordon and Marjorie also enjoyed their extended families. Marjorie in particular maintained close ties with her sisters. They enjoyed each other, confided in one another, were the first to come to each other's aid, and even took occasional trips together. Marjorie's attachment to her younger sisters made it even more difficult when in January 1967 her sister Helen was killed in an automobile accident, leaving her husband seriously injured and eight children without a mother.

As devastated as Marjorie was personally with her sister's death, it was more heartbreaking to see her niece and seven nephews mourning the loss of their mother. She couldn't help but think of the tens of thousands of miles she had traveled, in unfavorable weather and circumstances, and of the weeks she had been separated from her children. Yet her sister had died in an accident a few miles from home. Such a tragedy would be unbearable, she reflected, were it not for the hope of an eternal family. That knowledge had never been so poignant or appreciated.

Three months later, on April 11, 1967, when Elder Hinckley left again for the Orient, Marjorie did not accompany him. He had mentioned to President McKay that no member of the First Presidency had ever been to mainland Asia, and asked if such an assignment might be considered. The prophet subsequently asked President Hugh B. Brown to make a tour of the Orient, and Elder Hinckley was accompanying him. Because he knew his attention and energy would be focused on President Brown, he felt it best that Marjorie remain at home. But it was with some reservation that he left her behind. "It was a little difficult to say good-bye to Marge and to leave for the Orient without her," he confided in his journal. "It is always so much better when she goes along." [^36] After he had arrived in Hong Kong, he mentioned old friends with whom he had been reunited and added, "The only thing missing was my wife Marjorie." [^37]

This trip took President Brown and Elder Hinckley to the Orient's primary metropolitan centers, with Elder Hinckley taking pains to make President McKay's eighty-three-year-old first counselor as comfortable as possible, even securing first-class accommodations rather than the economy seats with which he generally made do. Everywhere, large numbers of members and missionaries gathered to meet with the two Church leaders.

In more than one setting, President Brown prophesied about events to come. At a meeting of the Abeno Branch in Japan, a particularly unforgettable experience occurred. Elder Hinckley felt prompted to say there would someday be stakes in Japan, but that this depended upon the faithfulness of the youth. President Brown was visibly moved during the meeting, and he subsequently prophesied that some who were in the audience would live to see the day when a Japanese man would sit in the leading councils of the Church. "I do not know when that will happen," he said. "I will not live to see it, but some of you young people will. And I feel to make this prediction in the name of the Lord." He then added that they would also live to see the coming forth of further records, that the gospel would be preached to the Russians in their own country, and that Japanese missionaries would go to the people of kindred nations. It was, as Elder Hinckley described it, an impressive pronouncement that those present would never forget. That evening Elder Hinckley discussed the day's events with his file leader. "I told President Brown that while I felt reluctant to say this, I had a feeling tonight that he would not live to see the fulfillment of that which he had said, but that I would, and that the Lord had sent me here to become acquainted with these people that I might be prepared when the day of fulfillment comes," he recorded. [^38]

Nearly a hundred Saints gathered at the airport in Tokyo to bid farewell to the visiting Church authorities. Many carried flashlights, two of which they gave President Brown and Elder Hinckley so that they could signal to the crowd after they boarded the plane. "I have a great love in my heart for these good people of Japan," Elder Hinckley wrote, "and for all of our Saints throughout the Far East. It is always hard to leave them." [^39]

There was, however, nothing quite like getting one's feet back on home soil, and Elder Hinckley was happy to be home. The day after his return he and Marjorie celebrated their thirtieth wedding anniversary. It hardly seemed possible—three decades together! He presented his wife with a diamond he had purchased in Hong Kong, and though it was larger and more vibrant than the one she had worn for three decades, she still preferred the original. "It has been a rich and wonderful experience," he reflected, "although when I look back upon our early years I shudder to think we had to get by on so little. This is probably a blessing, but it is almost frightening to realize how little we did manage with and at the same time build a house and have a family. I suppose that out of such experiences come the real joys of living." [^40]

Elder Hinckley had been home less than two weeks from his Asian tour with President Brown when he left on another international trip, this time to South America. Despite having traveled hundreds of thousands of miles, he had never before set foot on South American soil. His first sighting of Rio de Janeiro from the air took his breath away; the ultramodern city flanked by two great arcs of oceanfront was stunning.

Though he met with mission presidents, missionaries, and gatherings of Saints during his ten days in Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Peru, and Mexico, the primary purpose for this trip was connected to Bonneville's ownership of WNYW, a shortwave station in New York City that had been purchased with the intention of improving communication with the Saints in Europe and South America. The station had never been profitable, however, and Elder Hinckley wanted an on-site appraisal of its potential in reaching the Latin American members.

His ten days in South America proved to be grueling. But when he returned to Salt Lake City, he possessed the information he had been seeking: WNYW was not effective and probably never would be; he subsequently recommended that Bonneville sell the property. Time would unveil other and better ways of communicating with Saints around the world.

Other problems had no easy resolution. For one, as the war in Vietnam dragged on, problems with the Selective Service continued to dog Elder Hinckley, and it seemed that one meeting after another, often charged with emotion, was required in order to keep the missionary program functioning. And then there was the semiannual dilemma of what to speak on in general conference. Though Elder Hinckley was regarded among his colleagues as an articulate man who spoke well even on a moment's notice, pulling together his address was nearly always an ordeal. Often he was still fussing with his message just days before conference. One spring he noted: "I am concerned about my General Conference talk. . . . Anyone not faced with this responsibility would have difficulty in appreciating the weight of the burden." [^41] One fall he still did not have his talk prepared five days before conference was to begin, and he was "much worried." Two days later he noted, "I have been working on a conference talk, a constant recurring problem every six months. I worry much and pray much, and confidently hope that I will have something acceptable to the Lord and inspirational to those who listen." [^42]

His struggle was rewarded on that occasion with an address he titled "Feed the Spirit—Nourish the Soul," in which he proclaimed that the forces against which honorable men and women labored were tremendous and that they must rely on more than their own strength. The October 1967 general conference was also memorable in that sixty-nine men were called to serve as Regional Representatives of the Twelve—evidence that the Church was moving forward.

With general conference behind him, Elder Hinckley was scheduled for another tour of Asia, and fortunately Marjorie was able to accompany him this time. That did not guarantee a perfect trip, however, and this one seemed jinxed from the out-set. Typhoons played havoc with their itinerary, and then Elder Marion D. Hanks, who joined him in the Philippines, received word that his mother had passed away, necessitating his immediate return to the United States. With such setbacks, Elder Hinckley was unable alone to accomplish everything he had hoped. Following a meeting with the missionaries in Tokyo he admitted: "We had a good meeting, but I feel a deep regret over leaving here without having held with them a testimony meeting and interviewing them individually. I feel that I am not doing nearly as much good when I come on these visits now as I did years ago when I took the time to permit every missionary to bear his testimony and then had an individual interview with each missionary. However, there simply is not enough time." [^43]

While in Osaka, Elder Hinckley met with officials of the World's Fair to be held there in 1970 and discussed possible locations for the Church's exhibit; in Kobe, he scouted sites for a new mission office, looking toward the division of the Northern Far East Mission. And once again, accompanied by President Keith Garner, he traveled to Saigon. The three thousand LDS servicemen scattered throughout the country were actively proselytizing among the Vietnamese, and there were now almost fifty native members of the Church. [^44]

Despite a testimony meeting in Saigon in which servicemen had shared tender feelings about the gospel, after twenty-four hours in Vietnam, Elder Hinckley left for Bangkok feeling discouraged about the war. "I become angry when I think of the terrible bloodshed, the deaths and wounds of many good young Americans who ought to be going to school instead of fighting in these jungles, of the tens of thousands of orphan children, of the displaced refugees, . . . of thousands of illegitimate children born of American soldier fathers, of the corruption evident in the luxury one sees in Saigon made possible by the American presence with the expenditure of billions of dollars," he recorded. [^45]

He thought of a poignant scene he had witnessed just a few days before leaving for Asia. In the Salt Lake Temple, he had performed a sealing for an Air Force fighter pilot assigned to Vietnam and his wife and three children. After the ordinance had been performed, the young husband and father had taken his family in his arms and wept at the knowledge that, regardless of the future, they were his forever now. Hours later, the pilot was on his way to Southeast Asia. How grateful Elder Hinckley was for the gospel, but how he wished there were no war to tear families apart. [^46]

Despite his feelings of anguish for the LDS men stationed in Vietnam, he measured his words carefully. The last thing they needed was an apostle giving voice to the sentiment that they shouldn't be there in the first place. It wasn't always easy to hold his tongue. He was heartsick after visiting an American military hospital near Yokohama in an effort to locate Church members who had been evacuated from Vietnam. One young man's chest had been blown nearly away. Others had lost limbs or had been so tragically wounded or traumatized that they would never regain their faculties. He gave blessings to those who desired them and left feeling haunted about what he had seen.

His concerns about Vietnam were in stark contrast to what he experienced a few days later when he and Sister Hinckley checked in at the General Walker Hotel in Berchtesgaden, Germany, for a conference with nearly fifteen hundred LDS servicemen from as far away as Spain and the Azores. The hotel, which had served as a Nazi headquarters during World War II, sat high atop a hill overlooking a valley in the midst of the Bavarian Alps, which the season had painted an exquisite blend of green and gold.

During one meeting Elder Hinckley took as his text Doctrine and Covenants 50:23-24: "And that which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness. That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day." There, possibly in the same hall where a quarter century ago evil men had plotted the conquest of millions, the Saints bore testimony of Jesus Christ and contrasted those who walk in dark-ness with those who walk in light. That night Elder Hinckley recorded: "As I walk up and down the corridors of this old hotel I see in my mind's eye Nazi storm trooper sentries. . . . I am fascinated and intrigued with the sweetness of peace, equity, and justice in contrast with the terrible evils of war, a desire for conquest, and a terrible thirst for power." [^47]

Repeatedly he reassured LDS servicemen that they could make a difference, often citing an experience he had had in Korea at a servicemen's retreat:

I have been in many inspirational meetings in my life . . . but I think I have never been in a more inspirational meeting than one I attended in Korea. . . . the bread of the sacrament was administered that morning by a tall captain of infantry on whose chest were many campaign ribbons. He had been ordained a priest only that morning. . . . As he knelt at the sacrament table, he gave, with a quiver in his voice, that solemn and beautiful and simple prayer. Somehow the Spirit of the Lord went through that old Quonset-hut chapel in a marvelous and touching manner. When I opened my eyes, every man in that hall was weeping. . . . I was weeping too. After that, as each of the sixty-one men present bore his testimony, there was an outpouring of the Spirit of the Lord that was marvelous to experience. [^48]

That meeting continued with another memorable experience:

Then the water was administered to us by a sergeant who in his testimony afterwards said, "I grew up on the banks of the Susquehanna River and I almost inherited a hatred for the Mormons. I discovered when I was in the barracks in Korea that the man who was in the bunk next to mine was reading the Book of Mormon and I went over and started ribbing him. . . . I was mean and I was nasty. One night he got up out of his bed when I was saying something . . . and I have never seen a man stand so tall in all my life. and he held out the book and he said, "Have you ever read it?" I said, "No, of course not." and he said, "Here it is! Now you read it and you keep your mouth shut until you are through reading it and then we will talk about it." I didn't know what else to do—and I took it. And I began to read it, and as I read it, the Spirit of the Lord bore witness to me that it was true. And now I know why I was sent to Korea." [^49]

These men who, in the midst of war, taught the gospel by example and precept had Elder Hinckley's deepest respect.

It was difficult to believe that Elder Hinckley had supervised the work in Asia for the better part of a decade. In 1960 it would have been impossible to know how profoundly the peoples of that vast continent would influence and affect him. Neither could he have predicted either the heartaches and frustrations or the joy and enlargement of soul and spirit that had come from his service there. From the jungles of Vietnam and the squalor of Calcutta to the quiet peace and symmetry of an American cemetery in Manila, his experiences had ranged from the heartbreaking to the sublime. And through it all, his own testimony of and conviction about the work had been magnified.

In turn, his influence upon the fledgling Church in Asia was equally great. He had traveled from branch to branch and taught men and women—at first in such small numbers that the future might have appeared dim—the fundamentals of gospel doctrine and administration. "In those early days the Church was an American Church," Han In Sang explained. "Missionaries would baptize and then hand us regulation books. Until Elder Hinckley started coming to Korea we weren't trained to be leaders. At times I was discouraged. In Oriental countries seniority is important, and I was younger than some of the others. One time Elder Hinckley said to me, 'Brother Han, I am lonely in this world and many times I have challenges, but the work is true. I'll bet you're lonely, aren't you?' Knowing he understood made it easier, and he gave that same kind of attention to many others." [^50]

Through word and deed Elder Hinckley communicated his optimism for what was happening in Asia. After monsoon rains sent a wall of water cascading down a canyon near the mission home in Seoul, destroying both property and spirit, President Spencer J. Palmer's report to Elder Hinckley had the ring of a disheartened attitude. By return mail Elder Hinckley responded: "We have your letter of July 22, 1966, with reference to the flood, which engulfed the mission home property. Needless to say this was a frightening experience and doubtless a costly one. You may be interested to know that the night before the London Temple was dedicated we had a flood of serious proportions there. I stood in water to my waist with others bailing it out. This went on for hours. I only want to suggest that your experience is not peculiar to Korea. Noah had a worse time. Sincerely, your brother." [^51]

"He expected us to take challenges on the chin," President Palmer explained. "He would bounce off the airplane ready to go to work, and his practical and sometimes humorous disposition in the face of difficulty was like a balm of Gilead. It was an ointment for all of us who sometimes felt that the challenges were just too great. His approach and personality were well suited to the peoples of Asia and the challenges there." [^52]

Adney Y. Komatsu had similar experiences: "One of the things I appreciated about Elder Hinckley was that never once in my three years mission president] did he criticize me, despite all my weaknesses. . . . And that spurred me on. Every time he came . . . I thought, 'I'm going to get it right between the eyes this time. I didn't turn in this report properly or I didn't follow this program right.' But every time he came off the plane he would grab my hand like he was pumping water out of a well with great enthusiasm. 'Well, President Komatsu, how are you getting along? . . . You're doing great work.' He encouraged me like that . . . and when he left I felt I should give 105 percent, not just 100 percent. . . . He didn't come into my area and tell me all about the weaknesses that I already knew about." [^53]

Elder Hinckley's frequent trips to and throughout the Orient gave him a familiarity with and working knowledge of the continent rare for an American in those days. When digni-taries, leaders, or experts connected with Asia called on Church headquarters, their visit almost always included a meeting with him. Dr. Ray C. Hillam, a professor of political science at BYU, recorded one such encounter: "During the late sixties . . . I accompanied Professor Robert Scalapino, a Harvard trained and UC Berkeley professor, to Elder Hinckley's office. Dr. Scalapino had just given a lecture on Asia at BYU and was at the time perhaps our country's leading scholar on the subject. It was a cordial visit. Elder Hinckley listened to him, asked questions and made several comments. We visited for almost an hour. Walking down the front steps of the building Scalapino turned to me and said: 'Who was that guy? He has historical perspective. He has read the literature on Asia. . . . Are all of your Church leaders that well informed?'" [^54]

That the influence of Asia had penetrated Elder Hinckley's being was evident not only from his public statements on the subject but also from how frequently he referred to experiences there. After his trip in the fall of 1966 to dedicate Vietnam and meet with LDS servicemen, he devoted an entire BYU devotional address to the subject, drawing almost exclusively upon the diary entries he had made throughout the trip. He began with characteristic light humor, telling his audience how they could react if they didn't care for the tone or text of his remarks: "Do what you do in some of your dull classes. Close your eyes and quietly dream of the girl who is sitting next to somebody else." Then he conceded that he had a "miserably difficult time" keeping a journal and that his entries were sporadic at best, added that he hoped no one would feel he was trying to inflate his own image, and then explained that he wished to share some of his experiences because of the effect they had had in building his testimony. [^55]

At the next general conference, April 1967, he took the war in Vietnam as his text, praising LDS soldiers for their accomplishments in a hostile environment. [^56] And a year later, at the April 1968 general conference, his address followed a similar theme: "I see the finger of the Lord plucking some good from the evil designs of the adversary. I see coming out of this conflict . . . an enlargement of the Lord's program." The growing membership in Okinawa, Japan, Korea, and the Philippines, he maintained, was the "sweet fruit of seed once planted in dark years of war and in the troubled days immediately following," when worthy priesthood bearers laid the foundation of the work to come. [^57]

In addition to his frequent trips to Asia, Elder Hinckley continued to juggle numerous other responsibilities, many of them weighty. In November 1967, for example, he met with the First Presidency to present a new temple film, a project to which he had given general supervision for months. He was pleased when President McKay authorized him to proceed.

He also remained heavily involved with the missionary program. During one twenty-four-hour period, for example, he dealt both with a missionary who was excommunicated in the field for moral transgression and with the family of another who was killed in a tragic automobile accident. He noted in his journal that the excommunication depressed him for a good part of the day; the death broke his heart. [^58] That same day he found himself the senior General Authority in the meeting of the Missionary Committee, which left with him the obligation of assigning new missionaries to their fields of labor. "This is a task from which I shrink because of the enormity of the responsibility," he wrote. "I have lived so long and so intimately with this missionary program that I think I have a very sensitive feeling about the importance of a missionary's assignment, not only in the area to which he is assigned but more particularly in the leadership under which he will work. Each time I have had this task I have pleaded with the Lord for direction and I have tried to listen for the whisperings of the Holy Spirit in making assignments. I know that many prayers are offered by missionary candidates, their parents and loved ones, and it is sometimes a frightening thing to recognize that I am the instrument through which the Lord will make manifest an answer to those prayers." [^59]

With no more long trips scheduled before the end of 1967, Elder Hinckley was relieved to find a day here and there to spend in the yard. It was as much a relief to put on his old work clothes after being in suit and tie week after week as it was to do physical labor in the cool, crisp air of late autumn. With each new season, however, he was seriously beginning to wonder how long he, Marjorie, and Jane could stay in East Millcreek. Two days before Christmas he spent the day shining things up outside and shoveling snow from the walks. "I know I am growing older," he admitted, "because of my distaste for this kind of work. I don't know how I can keep up with the old place. In the wintertime I feel as if I am ready to move into an apartment." [^60]

There were other indications that time was marching on. At year's end he reflected on life as he saw it: "Marge and I have the feeling that we are growing old. We have four grandchildren and streaks of gray hair. It is a melancholy feeling, and yet there is something pleasant and satisfying as we see our children grow to maturity and continue to walk in faith. . . . For us it has been a great year, and we look forward with anticipation to an even greater year in 1968." [^61]

Perhaps he sensed that the days ahead promised to deliver an entirely new set of opportunities and challenges.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Gordon B. Hinckley, Notes from Special Meeting, 12 May 1968.
[^2] Notes from Special Meeting, 12 May 1968.
[^3] GBH Journal, 15 May 1968.
[^4] See Church News, 29 June 1968; also "Liquor by the Drink," Improvement Era, October 1968, pp. 4-7.
[^5] Deseret News, 4 November 1968.
[^6] GBH Journal, 4 November 1968.
[^7] Interview with Thomas S. Monson, 28 April 1995.
[^8] Interview with Neal A. Maxwell, 30 June 1995.
[^9] Sports Illustrated, 14 December 1970.
[^10] "Policy Statement of Presidency," Church News, 10 January 1970.
[^11] GBH Journal, 25 November 1973.
[^12] GBH Journal, 11 November 1968.
[^13] See 1995-96 Church Almanac, p. 327.
[^14] At the end of 1967, 66,729 members lived in South America. Eight years later, by 31 December 1975, membership had more than doubled, to 159,038. (1977 Church Almanac, p. 212; 1982 Church Almanac, p. 222.)
[^15] GBH Journal, 23 November 1968.
[^16] GBH Journal, 24 November 1968.
[^17] See GBH Journal, 24 November 1968.
[^18] GBH Journal, 27 November 1968.
[^19] GBH Journal, 28 November 1968.
[^20] Interview with Clark Bryant Hinckley, 5 July 1995.
[^21] Interview with Clark Bryant Hinckley, 5 July 1995.
[^22] Interview with Richard G. Scott, 4 August 1996.
[^23] GBH Journal, 2 December 1968.
[^24] GBH Journal, 3 December 1968.
[^25] In Conference Report, October 1969, pp. 113-14.
[^26] See Conference Report, October 1969, pp. 113-14.
[^27] GBH Journal, 26 September 1968.
[^28] Interview with GBH, 24 May 1995.
[^29] GBH Journal, 14 November 1971.
[^30] Interview with GBH, 24 May 1995.
[^31] GBH Journal, 11 December 1967.
[^32] "Feed the Spirit-Nourish the Soul," pp. 85-86.
[^33] See Church News, 2 November 1963.
[^34] GBH Journal, 9 January 1973.
[^35] GBH Journal, 15 December 1967.
[^36] See Improvement Era, April 1970, p. 67.
[^37] Gordon B. Hinckley, "A Friend for Every Child," Improvement Era, December 1970, pp. 97-98.
[^38] GBH Journal, 21 February 1968.
[^39] Gordon B. Hinckley,"Contend Not with Others, But Pursue a Steady Course," Improvement Era, June 1970, p. 39.
[^40] See GBH Journal, 11 April 1969.
[^41] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Rise, and Stand Upon Thy Feet," Improvement Era, December 1968, p. 69.
[^42] See GBH Journal, 18 April 1969.
[^43] GBH Journal, 17 April 1969.
[^44] GBH Journal, 18 April 1969.
[^45] GBH Journal, 30 April 1969.
[^46] GBH Journal, 4 September 1969.
[^47] GBH Journal, 6 September 1969.
[^48] GBH Journal, 18 January 1970.
[^49] Interview with GBH, 11 July 1995.
[^50] GBH Journal, 6 February 1970.
[^51] GBH Journal, 25 February 1970.
[^52] See Interview with Allen E Litster, 24 June 1996.
[^53] GBH Journal, 7 November 1972.
[^54] GBH Journal, 12 March 1970.
[^55] GBH Journal, 17 March 1970.
[^56] GBH Journal, 3 June 1970; also Interview with Allen E Litster, 24 June 1996.
[^57] Interview with Allen E Litster, 24 June 1996.
[^58] GBH Journal, 4 June 1970.
[^59] GBH Journal, 6 June 1970.
[^60] See "Elder Hinckley Reports Missionaries Safe in Peru," Church News, 13 June 1970, p. 10.
[^61] See Deseret News, 25 February 1971; also Daily Utah Chronicle, 26 February 1971.
