Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Eighteen

The Church Moves Forward

Elder Hinckley couldn't remember a period when there had been more to do and less time in which to do it. The Church was growing, and that growth demanded more of each General Authority, particularly members of the Twelve. After some of their weekly temple meetings, Elder Hinckley noted how weary he felt. "This is a little difficult to understand, since these meetings are inspirational," he wrote on one occasion. "However, they are so very important and the matters considered are of such seriousness that I think we all feel tired when we have been there for anywhere from five to six hours. These are certainly among the most important meetings held in the Church, and I believe in all the world." [^1]

In the early spring of 1977 President Tanner called Elder Hinckley into his office and asked if he wasn't loaded too heavily. "You are responsible for many of the programs of the Church, and you cannot keep up with everything," he said. Accordingly, he recommended that, among other things, Elder Hinckley be released as president of the Deseret News Publishing Company. Elder Hinckley agreed that the change would be welcome.

Sister Hinckley described one sequence of events from early 1977: "Somehow Dad made it down to Phoenix last Saturday from where he had to drive 100 miles south to his conference assignment. He left . . . a terrific head cold. But by some small miracle he looked better when he finally got home Sunday night. . . . He still has a big bass voice and is worried about being in condition for two solemn assemblies this weekend. . . . The President requests that they fast for the two days, eating only one meal at 10 P.M. after the meetings. I don't know how President Kimball keeps it up, as they go almost every other weekend. . . . When one sees the way they work compared to the life of U.S. Presidents described in Upstairs at the White House, one wonders what we are trying to prove. Dad could not get over the fact that Eisenhower could spend weekends playing bridge with the entire responsibility of the United States of America on his shoulders. . . . But the wonderful thing was that he said he learned one thing from reading the book and that was that one doesn't have to be a workaholic to be famous. Not that it will make any difference—but it was nice to have him say it." [^2]

Elder Hinckley revealed the nature of his schedule at the beginning of one address to religious educators: "It was almost foolish of me to try to be here tonight. I was scolded by the stewardess for trying to get off the plane before it stopped. I have had a long and crowded day. I arose early this morning and dictated these notes. I then hurried to the temple to perform a marriage, rushed to the barber to get my hair clipped, hurried to the airport to fly to Seattle, attended two meetings there, then rushed to the airport, flew back, and I am here. It is too much to put that much into one day, and it is symptomatic of the jostling, busy times in which we live." He wasn't likely to change his pattern, however. In the same message he encouraged his audience to keep growing, regardless of age. "Your industry in so doing will cause the years to pass faster than you might wish, but they will be filled with a sweet and wonderful zest that will add flavor to your life," he said. [^3]

Such a schedule made Elder Hinckley wonder if the sheer volume of work was taking him too far away from the people. After he and Marjorie read the biography of President Kimball, in which some of the prophet's early mission tours were described, she wrote her daughter, "I guess those days are gone forever. The brethren are getting farther and farther away from the people. It is a melancholy prospect. As we read of some of his mission tours, Dad longed for the good old days, hard as they were." [^4]

He missed the personal contact most, the individual connection with members. The growth of the Church, however, was making it increasingly difficult to maintain those relationships. The Hinckleys did what they could to keep in touch with their friends around the world. Augusto A. Lim, who presided over the first stake in Manila, learned that Elder Hinckley expected a visit from him when he came to Salt Lake City for general conference: "He wanted to be kept abreast of what was happening in the Philippines—not so much with the statistics . . . but more particularly about people. He was concerned with what was happening to his friends in their personal lives." [^5] Indeed, conference provided a semiannual opportunity to renew friendships from all over the world. After one conference Sister Hinckley reported to the family: "Most of the conference visitors have gone home. There are still a few around . . . and we will try to have them up for lunch next week. We had a group for lunch on Saturday and another group on Monday. Sunday night was a bash. I think that is the last time we can have the Orientals to an open house unless we hold it in the Salt Palace." [^6]

Such relationships, however, were what made the frequent travel bearable. In January 1977 the Hinckleys were off again to Asia. They loved returning to Hong Kong, the site of a mission presidents' seminar for those serving in Asia. After their three days there he wrote, "We felt a tug in our hearts as we left Hong Kong. . . . We have had so much to do with the Church here, that we leave with sadness each time we depart, without any idea as to whether we shall return again." [^7] The tedious exit requirements at Hong Kong's Kai Tak Airport prompted another observation: "Someday I would like to write a book on the man with the rubber stamp. Life is a series of rubber stamps with our eternal passports being marked by those who judge us along the way and clear us if all is in order." [^8]

There was little time to indulge in much regret or introspection, however, for Hong Kong was only their first stop in a long and ambitious trip. After an overnight stop in Bangkok, they flew on to Kuala Lumpur, the capital of Malaysia—a first for both of them. Some of Elder Hinckley's colleagues had questioned why he had included it on his itinerary. But as he and Marjorie disembarked from the airplane, they saw coming toward them an American member of the Church, who invited the Hinckleys to his home. There they met several other LDS families, some of whom had driven for hours over crude roads carved through the jungle, and held a tender, spiritual meeting. One woman who lived up-country far from any other Latter-day Saints broke into tears upon meeting Elder Hinckley. At day's end he recorded: "I learned tonight why we had come to Kuala Lumpur. At the close of the meeting, the Saints presented us an engraved pewter plate, indicating that I was the first General Authority to ever visit this city." [^9]

The next morning they headed for India, and there they met with small groups in several villages. Most of the people were poor and illiterate, though Elder Hinckley felt encouraged when he met two or three men who were well educated and showed leadership promise. "Life here is not like going back 100 years," Marjorie wrote home, "but like going back to Old Testament times. Women are all dressed in saris. White horned cows and donkeys carrying their burdens, women filling their jugs at the well. . . . I think of my elaborate home in America and I wonder what the Lord thinks of our living in such opulence. On the other hand, the Lord has provided the good things of the earth for the benefit of his people—if only the good things could be more evenly distributed." [^10]

The plane ride from India to Cairo was tedious—twenty-two hours, including stops in Bangalore, Bombay, and Pakistan—and when they finally arrived in Egypt, the Hinckleys were exhausted and anxious to meet their hosts. The customs officer, however, had something else in mind. "The Bureau of Investigation . . . removed all of Dad's papers including his little black notebook and began to pore over them," Marjorie reported. "Even the laundry marks on his shirts were scrutinized. He had dictated his daily diary on tapes and they took all of those. The entire plane load of people stood in line during all of this for the better part of an hour while we were interrogated." [^11] They were finally allowed to enter the country, but only after Elder Hinckley's papers and tapes had been confiscated.

He later uncovered the motivation for such scrutiny. There were strict laws in Egypt against converting Muslims to Christianity. When planning his itinerary, Elder Hinckley had written to the members in Cairo about his planned stop there, but the letter had never reached them. "It is now perfectly evident that the secret police received notice of my arrival and were waiting for me when I reached Cairo," he recorded. "It gave me an uneasy feeling to realize that I was being followed. Now they were having my papers translated in an effort to find something in them to confirm their suspicions. I realized that a false interpretation of some of my notes could have grave consequences, and earnestly prayed that no trouble would result, particularly to hinder the future of the Church in Egypt." [^12]

Despite the scare, their visit to Egypt proved fascinating. They climbed inside the massive Cheops Pyramid and visited other ruins. And after gathering with small groups of Saints who were meeting quietly in homes, Elder Hinckley left believing there was hope for working among the nine million Christians living in Egypt. Back at the airport, he retrieved all of his materials except one cassette. All in all, his foray into Egypt ended better than it had begun.

The Hinckleys flew on to London and then headed home after a difficult trip that had taken them around the world in two weeks' time. Though the number of members he had visited was modest, he believed occasional visits in primitive areas were necessary if the Church was to fulfill its destiny. From initial plant-ings would eventually come a bountiful harvest.

The year 1977 brought a number of other major excursions. In the spring Elder and Sister Hinckley spent almost two weeks touring the missions in Australia, and while there they celebrated their fortieth wedding anniversary. The missionaries of the Australia Perth Mission presented Sister Hinckley with a corsage, something her husband had not had time to arrange for himself. He was nonetheless aware of how much she had come to mean to him. "We could write quite a volume on the past forty years," he reflected. "Our hair is grey and our figures have slipped. We have had our struggles and our problems. But by and large, life has been good. We have been marvelously blessed. At this age, one begins to sense the meaning of eternity and the value of eternal companionship. Had we been at home tonight, we likely would have had some kind of a family dinner. As it is, we are far from home in the service of the Lord, and it is a sweet experience." [^13]

Late spring took them again to the Orient. Elder Hinckley was particularly concerned about two Vietnamese priesthood leaders who had been left behind in the evacuation of Saigon, and his primary objective for stopping in Hong Kong was to see what he could learn about them. He made little headway and found it difficult to leave. "But life for a member of the Council of the Twelve is a series of greetings and farewells," he noted. [^14]

During Elder Hinckley's July recess he and Marjorie spent a week in upstate New York. The purpose for their trip east was to attend the Hill Cumorah Pageant, meet with missionaries, and handle other Church business, but through the kindness of Milton H. Barlow, then serving as mission president, the Hinckleys also enjoyed a few days' respite in a condominium near Lake Canandaigua. During their stay Marjorie took the last stitch in an elaborate tablecloth she had been embroidering for twenty-seven months during their travels. Elder Hinckley declared it to be the most widely traveled tablecloth in existence. And as he watched sailors manage their boats on the choppy lake, he marveled at the way they sailed by turning into the wind and then tacking back and forth. "It is so with the life of a man," he philosophized. "By setting his course and knowing the rules of seamanship as they apply to life, he can move forward and upward even in the face of adversity." [^15]

It was impossible to be in the Palmyra area without focusing on the life of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and Elder Hinckley was grateful for uninterrupted time to study the Book of Mormon and review some of his notes about the Prophet. One morning he recorded that his heart had been touched by the Spirit as he read, and that he had experienced a reaffirmation of the divinity of the Book of Mormon and the prophetic calling of Joseph Smith.

Indeed, he never tired of studying or speaking about Joseph Smith. In his April 1977 conference address, he bore eloquent witness of the man through whom the gospel of Jesus Christ was restored. Declaring that he did not understand those who expressed admiration for the Church but could not accept Joseph Smith as prophet, he said: "That statement is a contradiction. If you accept the revelation, you must accept the revelator." He then clarified the Prophet's unique role: "We do not worship the Prophet. We worship God our Eternal Father, and the risen Lord Jesus Christ. But we acknowledge him, we proclaim him, we respect him, we reverence him as an instrument in the hands of the Almighty in restoring to the earth the ancient truths of the divine gospel." [^16]

Some years later, in a BYU symposium on Joseph Smith, he would state: "I have walked about the beautiful grounds in Sharon, Windsor County, Vermont, where Joseph was born December 23, 1805. . . . I have walked where he walked through the fields to the Sacred Grove . . . and there came into my heart a conviction that what the Prophet described actually happened in 1820 there amidst the trees. I have climbed the slopes of the Hill Cumorah. I have walked the banks of the Susquehanna River. I have been to Kirtland, to Independence, Liberty, Far West, Adam-ondi-Ahman, Nauvoo, and Carthage. While I have never met Joseph Smith, I think I have come to know him, at least in some small measure. I know that he was foreordained to a mighty work to serve as an instrument of the Almighty in bringing to pass a restoration of the work of God of all previous dispensations of time. . . . I know that in the natural course of events before many years I will step across the threshold to stand before my Maker and my Lord and give an accounting of my life. And I hope that I shall have the opportunity of embracing the Prophet Joseph Smith and of thanking him and of speaking of my love for him." [^17]

Central to Elder Hinckley's testimony was a fierce loyalty to the Presidents of the Church. In both prepared addresses and private interchange he represented and defended their divine callings. When an influential man asked him to deliver to President Kimball a packet of materials encouraging the Church to change its policy on a certain issue, Elder Hinckley was not subtle in his response: "I told him there was no future for him in this kind of campaign, that anything he said or did would not affect a decision of this matter, that it has never been the policy of the Church to take a stand simply on the basis of popularity. . . . I gave him my testimony that no one was more anxious to do the will of the Lord than President Spencer W. Kimball, and that he and his counselors and the members of the Council of the Twelve prayed often for the direction of the Lord in all of their undertakings. I told him that we either have a prophet, or we don't have a prophet. If we have a prophet, we have everything. If we do not have a prophet, then we have nothing." [^18]

In August 1977, Elder and Sister Hinckley accompanied President and Sister Kimball to Switzerland, where they installed a new temple presidency, and to England, where Elder Hinckley organized the Crawley England Stake. And it was with particular pleasure that they returned to the British Isles in the late spring of 1978 when, with Elder David B. Haight, Elder Hinckley reorganized the stakes in the London area. Their stay was exciting by any standard: when fire broke out in their hotel, they lugged their bags down six flights of steps to escape danger. Despite the inconvenience, Marjorie reported, "Dad's never happier than when he is riding the London underground without a chaperon." [^19] Then Sunday morning brought an unforgettable event: Members of the six London-area stakes gathered in Royal Albert Hall just two blocks from the Hyde Park Chapel for the reorganization of those stakes and the creation of three new ones.

Forty-five years earlier, as a missionary, Elder Hinckley had paid a shilling and sixpence to hear Fritz Kreisler play the violin in the magnificent old building with its five tiers of balconies, red velvet drapes, and gold filigree. Now he occupied that same stage as he presided over a meeting of nearly five thousand English Saints. With thoughts of past and present surging through his mind, Elder Hinckley struggled in vain to restrain his emotions. Tears flowed as he expressed his love for the British Saints and promised them that if they were obedient, the gospel would grow in their land. "As I looked up into the balcony where I had once sat as a young missionary and thought of being down in front as an elder of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, I never dreamed such a thing could happen," he later said. "I have a vision, I think, of the majesty and the strength of this work as it moves over the earth." [^20]

Though on occasion it seemed to Elder Hinckley that his life was one long excursion with periodic layovers at home, that really wasn't the case. His time in Salt Lake City flew by, however, for the press of responsibility rarely abated. After he was appointed to the executive committee of Zion's National Bank, Marjorie reported to the family: "He went to their first meeting yesterday and decided that banking is a very complicated business, and he feels very inadequate. But it is nice to have a challenge at an age when most men are retiring. So many of our friends all around us are retiring that we are getting a complex." [^21] Certainly the challenges seemed never to end. His responsibilities as chairman of the executive committee of Bonneville's board of directors remained demanding, as the broadcast conglomerate continued to acquire new stations and investigate progressive technologies that could increase the Church's reach across the world. This work, however, was almost fun for Elder Hinckley, who was both fascinated by and concerned about media.

In his keynote address at the twenty-fifth anniversary of BYU's Media Production Studios on September 1, 1978, he sounded a familiar theme, expressing his fascination with technology as well as his horror that it was being used to advance that which was demeaning and degrading. " have the] challenge to use these marvelous techniques for that which teaches truth, which builds faith, which motivates improvement in behavior, and which stirs the soul to a sense of the eternal nature of man as a son of God," he said. [^22] The topic intrigued and worried Elder Hinckley, and when he came across an article warning that protracted television viewing could seriously damage a child's ability to think, he sent copies to his own children with a scribbled note: "This is a most perceptive article on this subject—one of the best I have seen. It is worth reading and reflecting on—since you have both children and a television set. Love, Dad." [^23]

Elder Hinckley continued to sit on numerous Church committees, and in the early spring of 1978 he and Elder Packer were appointed as advisers to the Historical Department—an assignment tailor-made for a Church history aficionado. His love for the past was evident in his remarks at the dedication of the new Temple Square South Visitors Center on June 1, 1978, where he repeated President Brigham Young's prophecy that Salt Lake City would "become the great highway of nations, and that kings and emperors, and the noble and wise of the earth would visit us here. It is of singular importance that the beautiful visitors center to the north of this square . . . has become inadequate to accommodate the crowds of visitors who come every day of the year. They include some of the rulers of the earth, and the learned, the noble and the wise." [^24]

As memorable events went, however, few if any rivaled the one that occurred later that same day. After the monthly temple meeting of the General Authorities, President Kimball excused all present except his counselors and the Twelve and then raised a subject that had been discussed repeatedly during preceding months—that of conferring the priesthood on worthy males of all races. After inviting a lengthy discussion of the issue, acknowledging how he had worried over this matter and how vigorously he had pleaded with the Lord for direction, President Kimball led out in prayer. Elder Hinckley recorded his impressions of the experience: "There was a hallowed and sanctified atmosphere in the room. For me, it felt as if a conduit opened between the heavenly throne and the kneeling, pleading prophet of God who was joined by his Brethren. The Spirit of God was there. And by the power of the Holy Ghost there came to that prophet an assurance that the thing for which he prayed was right, that the time had come, and that now the wondrous blessings of the priesthood should be extended to worthy men everywhere regardless of lineage. Every man in that circle, by the power of the Holy Ghost, knew the same thing. . . . No voice audible to our physical ears was heard. But the voice of the Spirit whispered with certainty into our minds and our very souls. . . . Not one of us who was present on that occasion was ever quite the same after that." [^25]

Though electrifying and intensely spiritual, the day's events did not come as a great surprise to Elder Hinckley. "Not only had President Kimball agonized over this situation, but President Lee and President McKay had before him," he later explained. "It was, however, a wonderful development. President Kimball was bold in petitioning the Lord for this revelation. He wrestled over it. He worked at it. He went to the Lord again and again. And when the revelation came, there was among the Twelve a tremendous feeling of gratitude for this unspeakable blessing." [^26] In a letter dated June 8, the First Presidency announced the stunning news that all worthy males were now eligible to receive the priesthood.

The Church was progressing in every measurable dimension, and with such growth came the need for near constant reworking of the administrative machinery. The April 1978 general conference marked a significant milestone for Elder Hinckley personally, who twenty years earlier had first spoken from the Tabernacle pulpit as a General Authority. In his remarks he briefly looked at the growth of the Church during the intervening two decades. There were now nearly four million members of the Church, compared with a million and a half in 1958. And there were 937 stakes as compared with 273 the year he was called as an Assistant to the Twelve. It was hard for him to comprehend the growth he had witnessed. If indeed the greatest problem in the Church was the swell in membership, as both President Kimball and President Lee before him had stated, it was a wonderful problem with which to deal. [^27]

Even more exciting was a knowledge of how and where that growth was occurring. The first stake outside North America and Hawaii had been established in Auckland, New Zealand, in 1958. But since 1971 more than half of the new stakes had been created outside the United States. On one weekend in September 1976, Elder Howard W. Hunter had organized sixteen stakes in the Mexico City area. And on February 18, 1979, President Ezra Taft Benson created the one thousandth stake of Zion—this one in Nauvoo, Illinois.

It was an era of progress and innovation, and the Church was taking unprecedented steps forward. In the fall of 1978 it was announced that those called to English-speaking missions would receive four weeks of training and those learning languages would receive eight at the new Missionary Training Center in Provo, Utah. At the October 1978 general conference, in an address to Regional Representatives, President Kimball left no doubt about their charge to move the work forward: "We have an obligation, a duty, a divine commission to preach the gospel in every nation and to every creature. . . . It seems as though the Lord is moving upon the affairs of men and nations to hasten their day of readiness when leaders will permit the elect among them to receive the gospel of Jesus Christ. . . . Much of the technology for telling the truths of the gospel seems to be in place, but we seem tardy as a people in availing ourselves of it. Technology and developments in transportation have made the world smaller, but it is still a big world so far as numbers of people are concerned when we think of nations like China, the Soviet Union, India, the whole continent of Africa, and our Arab brothers and sisters—hundreds of millions of our Father's children." [^28] Elder Hinckley had been an early convert to the potential of media to spread the gospel, and he constantly urged Bonneville executives to harness evolving technology for the Church's good.

Behind all the statistics and developments, however, lay the most optimistic and hopeful aspect of the work in which they were engaged. Elder Hinckley repeatedly declared that the real strength of the Church was found not in its buildings, corporations, or other tangible assets but in the testimonies of its people. [^29] An experience with a young naval officer from Asia who had come to the United States for advanced training illustrated his conviction. The officer had been intrigued about the lifestyle of some of his associates in the U.S. Navy, and he inquired about their beliefs. Though not a Christian, he had been moved when he learned about the Prophet Joseph Smith, and he was subsequently baptized. Before returning to his native land he was introduced to Elder Hinckley, who asked what would happen when he returned home. His face clouded as he replied: "My family will be disappointed. I suppose they will cast me out. They will regard me as dead. As for my future and my career, I assume that all opportunity will be foreclosed against me." "Are you willing to pay so great a price for the gospel?" Elder Hinckley questioned. Tears rose to the young man's eyes as he responded, "It's true, isn't it?" When Elder Hinckley replied, "Yes, it's true," the man concluded, "Then what else matters?" [^30] Such commitment stirred Elder Hinckley's soul and spurred him forward when he was tired, frustrated, or wondering if he was doing much good. He must never forget, he often cautioned himself, that behind all the numbers were people—men and women, boys and girls—whose lives had been transformed by the power of the gospel. In such lay the power and strength of the Church.

Such feelings may have prompted him in his April 1979 conference address to appeal to those who had strayed: "If there be any within the sound of my voice today who by word or act have denied the faith . . . there is a way for you to turn about, and add your strength and faith to the strength and faith of others in building the kingdom of God." He then referred to a man sitting in the Tabernacle whose obsession with a career had clouded his faith. But he had retraced his steps and was now serving as both a stake president and a senior officer in one of the nation's premier industrial corporations. "My beloved brethren and sisters who may also have drifted," Elder Hinckley concluded, "the Church needs you, and you need the Church. You will find many ears that will listen with understanding. There will be many hands to help you find your way back." [^31]

There seemed never to be a shortage of people listening to Elder Hinckley. When he arrived at Madrid's Barajas Inter-national Airport in August 1978, he was met not only by five hundred members of the Church but also by television crews from two Spanish stations that broadcast his remarks to the country's estimated 22.5 million viewers. He also met with Spain's King Juan Carlos I and JoÂ´se Luis Alvarez, the mayor of Madrid. This was not the first time Spanish journalists and dignitaries had demonstrated interest in the Church, but it did seem to signal a dramatic change in attitude in a country that had only recently legalized religious liberty. [^32]

The scene in Johannesburg, South Africa, nearly three months later was somewhat different. More than three thousand Church members gathered to hear President Kimball, Elder Hinckley, and three other General Authorities for the first-ever area conference on that continent. From the South African bush and through the guerrilla warfare of Rhodesia the Saints came. Tears flowed freely as members gathered with their leaders in what most assumed would be a once-in-a-lifetime experience.

From South Africa the party flew to South America for more area conferences and the dedication of the SÃ£o Paulo Temple in Brazil on October 30, 1978. How wonderful it was to see members of all races in the temple's celestial room! Indeed, the dedication of this temple in a land where many Saints were of mixed lineage was poignant evidence of the effect of the recent revelation on priesthood.

President Kimball continued to keep a vigorous pace, and Elder Hinckley participated with him in many events. On March 13, 1979, he joined the President and other General Authorities in rededicating the Logan Temple following an extensive remodeling. In June he accompanied President Kimball to Houston, Texas, where they addressed 17,000 members in the first area conference held in the United States. Speaking about missionary work, President Kimball urged older couples to serve missions. "Many people are—what do you call it?" he asked, turning to Elder Hinckley, who was seated behind him. "Retiring," Elder Hinckley prompted. "Yes," the President continued. "They are retiring too early. They could go on missions." [^33]

There had been nothing retiring about President Kimball, and when he began to slow down in the fall of 1979, it was not by choice. On September 7, he underwent surgery to relieve pressure from an accumulation of blood on the brain. To the relief of his Brethren, he recovered sufficiently to speak five times at general conference a month later. In November, however, his condition deteriorated, and he underwent a second surgery around Thanksgiving. This time he did not regain his strength as quickly.

With all the Brethren, Elder Hinckley was concerned about the prophet's health. Apart from his love for President Kimball, a milestone of unusual import—the sesquicentennial anniversary of the organization of the Church—was just a few months away, and he hoped the President would be strong enough to lead out in the commemoration. As chairman of the sesquicentennial executive committee, Elder Hinckley relished the opportunity to focus on the Church's beginnings. He believed events of the past should be celebrated, and this landmark anniversary provided an unparalleled opportunity. Accordingly, in his October 1979 conference address he reminded members that six months hence the Church would participate in a great celebration and challenged them to reread the Book of Mormon before then. [^34]

In connection with the sesquicentennial, Elder Hinckley committed to writing some of his feelings about the significance of this milestone. His essay on Joseph Smith was entered into the March 27 Congressional Record, and the sesquicentennial edition of the Ensign published his "150-Year Drama: A Personal View of Our History," in which he rehearsed signal events from the Church's founding era. Though still far from being a perfect society, he wrote, the Church now flourished in a world of secularism, and its work would roll forth to fill the whole world. "What a terrible price has been paid for what we have today," he asserted, adding: "All of the work of the past is but prelude to the work of the future. . . . There must be much more dedication, devotion, consecration. There must be a great expansion and a great acceleration. . . . This is his work. He will overrule for its blessing in the future as he has in the past. His Spirit will brood over the nations according to his will and wisdom." [^35] The acceleration of the work was beyond question. On Wednesday, April 2, 1980, in preconference meetings with priesthood leaders, President Kimball announced plans to construct seven new temples—in Sydney, Buenos Aires, Santiago, Apia (Western Samoa), Nuku'alofa (Tonga), Papeete (Tahiti), and Atlanta.

Among his responsibilities for overseeing the master plan for marking the Church's 150th anniversary, Elder Hinckley supervised arrangements for a segment of the April 1980 general conference to originate from the Peter Whitmer farm and newly completed meetinghouse and visitors center in Fayette, New York. For the first time, conference was broadcast from two locations and linked by satellite transmission. Elder Hinckley had encouraged Bonneville's venture into the satellite arena, and he believed that this initial experiment foreshadowed future possibilities for broadcasting conference throughout the world. [^36] Beamed to the Salt Lake Tabernacle by satellite and projected on seventeen-foot-high screens next to the organ pipes, the highlight of the Fayette proceedings was the dedication of the Whitmer home and the new meetinghouse by President Kimball.

Saturday morning, as customary, the first general session of conference began with President Kimball presiding at the Tabernacle. But the session on the morning of April 6—Easter Sunday—was anything but traditional. After the first hour the meeting switched to the reconstructed log farmhouse in Fayette, where President Kimball stood behind the wooden box in which Joseph Smith had placed the gold plates after receiving them from the angel Moroni. Seated behind him were Elder Hinckley and Elder Hugh W. Pinnock, as well as descendants of three of the six original members of the Church, a direct descendant of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and Eldred G. Smith, the Church Patriarch Emeritus.

Following brief introductory remarks from President Kimball, Elder Hinckley read a proclamation from the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve reaffirming that the gospel of Jesus Christ had been restored. Meanwhile, President Kimball and Elder Pinnock walked a hundred yards to the Fayette Branch meetinghouse and were in position there as Elder Hinckley concluded and the telecast switched to the Fayette chapel. From there President Kimball, Elder Hinckley, and Elder Pinnock delivered their conference addresses.

This day fulfilled many dreams for Elder Hinckley, who had played a pivotal role in preparing the Whitmer farm for the sesquicentennial celebration. Several years earlier, during a trip to Fayette, he had learned of plans to build a modest red brick meetinghouse for the branch on a piece of property near the farm. He was disturbed with what he saw, and in a subsequent temple meeting expressed his feelings: "The Whitmer farm is a place of tremendously significant history, and it deserves more than a little building. It will be a sad mistake if we proceed as planned." When President Tanner asked for his recommendation, he suggested that they build a New England-style chapel on the farm and re-create the original Whitmer cabin in which the Church had been organized. "That's a big project," President Tanner responded. "Yes, and it will cost some money," Elder Hinckley replied. "But there is only one place where the Church was organized, and outside of the First Vision, the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, and the restoration of the priesthood, nothing is of greater historical significance." [^37] With President Tanner's authorization, Elder Hinckley met with the real estate and building departments and conferred with architects who designed the white chapel with a visitors center at one end. To now be participating in this historic commemoration on a site that bore structures commensurate with its history was for him a deeply emotional and spiritual experience.

As one who both revered the past and championed the advancements of the day, Elder Hinckley found in this celebration a remarkable melding of past, present, and future. "One wonders whether any of who helped organize the Church], other than Joseph Smith who saw with prophetic vision, had any idea of the greatness of the thing they were beginning," Elder Hinckley said in his conference address. "Those of us who are here today, reliving the events of history, are filled with emotion as our words and faces are caught by the wondrous technique of television, flung to a satellite high in the heavens, then fed back to an earth station and placed on a screen before those in the great Tabernacle. . . . As we think of this miracle, our minds are drawn by contrast to chapters in that epic and painful movement of the Church from these farmlands of rural New York to the valley of the Great Salt Lake, and thence to the nations of the earth." He concluded with words of testimony: " Church's] history has been heroic. It stands today a tower of strength, an anchor of certainty in an unsettled world. Its future is secure as the church and kingdom of God." [^38] In a simple prayer President Kimball then dedicated the chapel, farm home, and other buildings on the Whitmer farm. [^39]

For Elder Hinckley, whose ongoing study of Church history had filled him with a passion for the people and places of yore, accompanying President Kimball on this historic occasion was an unparalleled privilege. "On the morning of April 6th when we drove to this scene, I had great difficulty restraining tears because of the strong emotions that welled within me," he later recorded. "I felt particularly emotional over standing in the restored Whitmer home under circumstances designed to simulate the meeting which occurred 150 years earlier where the Prophet Joseph Smith and his associates stood. Those of us who were in the little log house on April 6, 1980, were touched by the Spirit of the Lord in a wonderful way, as we were also when we moved over to the chapel. I was moved and impressed to reflect on the wonderful ways of the Almighty and of the terrible price paid by those who have gone before us for what we enjoy today. There came a strong and certain reaffirmation of my conviction that God our Eternal Father lives and that Jesus is the Christ, the Savior and the Redeemer of the world, that the Father and the Son in very deed appeared to the boy Joseph Smith in the grove. . . . I knew with renewed certitude that the Book of Mormon is exactly what Joseph said it is . . . I felt to rejoice over the opportunity to be a part of this great eternal work restored to the earth." [^40]

Elder Hinckley's knowledge of the area did not forestall a few moments of anxiety Sunday evening. After conference the leaders and their wives planned to have dinner together in nearby Rochester, New York, and agreed to meet at a specified time and place. Without Elder Hinckley, Elder Pinnock, or Church Security realizing it, President Kimball accepted a ride back to the city with members and on impulse asked them to stop at the Hill Cumorah so he could greet the missionaries there. When those still at the farm home realized the prophet was missing, a hasty search ensued. "Everyone was worried," said Elder Pinnock. "Security was embarrassed. We searched and searched. When we finally located President Kimball at the Hill Cumorah Visitors Center, Elder Hinckley was enormously relieved and grateful that he hadn't lost the prophet. Several times since then he has said to me, 'Remember when we lost the prophet?'" [^41]

The sesquicentennial attracted the local and national press. President Kimball and Elder Hinckley were interviewed by the news media in Fayette, and Monday morning Elder Hinckley and LDS businessman J. Willard Marriott Jr. were interviewed live on The Today Show, the nation's top-rated morning news program. After briefly outlining the Church's beginnings and growth, co-host Tom Brokaw asked Elder Hinckley to identify the key to the Church's success. "It meets the spiritual and social needs of members and gives motivation to their lives. It is an anchor of sorts in an uncertain world," he responded. [^42] Though he was always anxious about representing the Church before the press, as even the slightest miscue could cause long-term public relations damage, Elder Hinckley was comfortable and able to respond to double-edged questions without becoming flustered or defensive. His public relations instincts had been honed through years of experience on both sides of the interview setting.

On December 5, 1979, Sonia Johnson had been excommunicated from the Church, and her claim that the disciplinary action was a by-product of her support of the Equal Rights Amendment had caught the fancy of the national media. Elder Hinckley acted several times as a Church spokesman on the matter. On other occasions he responded to questions on everything from the Church's position on blacks and the priesthood to abortion and homosexuality. [^43] Regardless of the topic, Elder Hinckley was unflappable under fire.

In addition to meeting the press, there were other concerns that demanded his time and attention. As chairman of BYU's executive committee, he was immersed in the affairs of the dynamic university. In 1977 BYU President Dallin Oaks had written the First Presidency suggesting that the six years he had served at BYU might be an ideal tenure for a university president. They had thanked him for his recommendation but taken no action. Then, in a meeting with Church leaders on April 11, 1980, in which he was invited to identify candidates qualified to prepare legal position papers for the Church on sensitive church-state issues, President Oaks again raised the question of his tenure at BYU, admitted that he would welcome the challenge of such scholarly work, and suggested it might be time for someone fresh at BYU.

Three days later, when President Oaks's flight from Chicago to Salt Lake City was delayed by bad weather, he was presented with the opportunity to make his case to Elder Hinckley, who had not been in the April 11 meeting. President Oaks noted: "Just as I was sitting down, Elder and Sister Gordon B. Hinckley rushed on the plane after a breathless dash from a connecting flight to catch this departure rather than their much later and delayed scheduled connecting flight. . . . I had a strong impression that my long delay today was no coincidence but was for the purpose of meeting Elder Hinckley . . . and talking about my release or leave of absence to do the Church legal and public policy study. . . . I told him . . . that a release rather than a leave of absence would be best for the university. . . . He took this soberly and promised to discuss it with his colleagues." [^44]

Elder Hinckley was true to his word. Though reluctant to lose an excellent BYU president, as chairman of the Church's Special Affairs Committee he recognized the pressing need for the scholarly research in question and acknowledged there was likely no better candidate than Dallin Oaks. The week of May 6, 1980, President Oaks's release and Jeffrey R. Holland's appointment as BYU president were made public in two surprise and separate announcements. As commissioner of Church Education, Brother Holland had chaired the search committee for a new president—all two days' worth—and he was speechless when summoned to the First Presidency's office and told of his new assignment. "President, you must be kidding," he exclaimed to President Kimball, who issued the call. President Tanner laughed at Brother Holland's response, and President Kimball chuckled before replying, "Brother Holland, in this room we don't kid a lot." [^45]

President Holland had just returned to his office when the phone rang. It was Elder Hinckley, who asked just one question: "Have you been with the First Presidency this morning?" "Yes sir, I have," President Holland responded. "Well, I guess that ends the search, doesn't it? Good luck!" Chuckling, he hung up the phone.

President Oaks's release was effective August 1, and in his remaining months as university president he had opportunity to interact with Elder Hinckley in a memorable way. BYU's popular performing group, the Young Ambassadors, had been invited to tour China in the early summer of 1980, and Elder Hinckley was assigned to accompany President and Sister Oaks and the BYU troupe. Although he had traveled extensively throughout Asia, this would be his first trip to mainland China, and during the last two weeks of May he and Sister Hinckley visited the great cities of this vast land. President Oaks recorded his impressions: "Virtually everyone we see in the morning on their way to work here wears a navy blue tunic much like the top of a pair of army fatigues. . . . .he entire picture is one of sameness. . . . Elder Hinckley characterized the hordes of bicycle riders as typical of the attitude in the country. Everyone pedals stolidly without any attempt to pass the person in front of them. All is secure and steady with nothing competitive in evidence." [^46]

This trip to Asia was different in other ways from previous visits, as Marjorie explained: "Dad has no responsibilities and goes around in grey slacks, blue shirt and blue blazer. I scarcely know him. We go sightseeing nearly every day. The most impressive was the Great Wall of China. . . . It goes for 3,000 miles thru the mountains. We hiked up the wall . . . to a lookout point which . . . was a monumental effort, one flight of steps after another. Some of our party did not make it all the way, but we had our pride to deal with. It was a warm spring day and about 10,000 Chinese had the same idea." [^47]

Throughout their tour the BYU company was hosted by high-ranking officials representing the Communist party. At these receptions President Oaks found himself in an awkward position, for as university president he was singled out for special recognition. Because of Chinese sensitivity to religious matters, the university had of necessity downplayed Elder Hinckley's title and role; yet President Oaks was uneasy that a member of the Twelve was being overlooked. About four days into the tour he hit upon a way to rectify the situation, and at the next opportunity he introduced Elder Hinckley to his Communist hosts as the "Chairman of the Committee of our University." "There were many oohs and aahs at this point," President Oaks recorded. "It had occurred to me that 'chairman' and 'committee' were both words that would translate well in this culture, and they did." [^48] When they returned from China, President Oaks enjoyed telling other members of the Twelve that Elder Hinckley was "chairman of BYU's central committee."

Casual opportunities to mingle with the Chinese as well as Communist party representatives occurred daily. One afternoon a crowd of several hundred materialized when the Young Ambassadors spontaneously began to sing on a public street. President Oaks wrote: "Elder Hinckley held what amounted to a street meeting by explaining through an interpreter . . . that we were Americans who had come to express our friendship for them and who were grateful for their hospitality and warmth. He spoke directly with an older man, asking him if he was a grandfather, and the man said yes, he had five grand-children. Elder Hinckley said he had twenty-one, and the crowd exclaimed in astonishment. He is so skillful at interacting, and remarked later how much he is 'fascinated' by the Asian people." [^49]

One Sunday in Shanghai the group attended a large Christian church into which some fifteen hundred people had crowded. Elder Hinckley learned that there was freedom to preach without fear of censorship but that no separate denominations were functioning. When he asked if missionaries from other countries were welcome in China, a Communist party representative immediately interjected, "Don't they have enough to do at home?" President Oaks noted: "Elder Hinckley and I discussed how this meeting had been very heartening in demonstrating how many Christians had retained their faith. . . . At the same time, the outlook was quite discouraging for any formal missionary activities in a church with loyalty to a prophet in America. It will require a miracle to reinstitute the work in China, but I believe that miracle will be forthcoming." [^50]

After the group's performance at a teachers college in Nanking, one gathering of Chinese students asked the young Americans why they were so happy. "It is because of our faith in Jesus Christ," they replied. Elder Hinckley reported later, "Here were the youth of America—wholesome, clean, happy—expressing themselves with beauty to the people of China. Political borders evaporated." [^51] All in all, the trip was everything Elder Hinckley had hoped it would be. After a fortnight, he and Sister Hinckley took leave of the group and returned home by way of Hong Kong, Japan, and Korea.

Marjorie's frequent postcards to grandchildren provided her family half a world away with glimpses of life on the road. From Korea she wrote: "There are hundreds of people on the beach today, but . . . it is hard to enjoy this alone. As I walked along the beach I pretended one of you was with me." [^52] Another card mentioned a friend in Korea: "We are in Pusan today with our friend Rhee Ho Nam. You have met him at our house at conference time. . . . He went down to the beach at 6 A.M. this morning to get fresh shrimp from the first fishing boat that came in. We are eating it at his home tonite. It will be a real treat." [^53]

Not every culinary experience was as pleasant, as Marjorie's postcard following a stop at a Hong Kong McDonald's explained: "I told them I wanted a plain bun without sesame seeds. They served me a plain bun with no hamburger also, just a little catsup. Our Chinese and their English is not all that good." [^54] A postcard from Kowloon described an afternoon there: "This is a typical street scene in Hong Kong. Grandpa and I had to hold onto each other so we wouldn't get separated and lost. The noise in the streets is so loud we have to shout to each other to be heard." [^55]

Asia remained a favorite destination, and just five months after their excursion to China, Elder and Sister Hinckley joined President and Sister Kimball and other General Authorities for a three-week tour that included area conferences in the Philippines, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Korea, and Japan, as well as a singular event: the dedication of the Tokyo Temple. "Dad has to give 8 talks on this tour and is not prepared with even one. It is driving him up the wall," Marjorie wrote Virginia's family. [^56] Pressure notwithstanding, these gatherings in Asia offered welcome reunions with old friends and revealed in dramatic fashion the growth of the Church in those lands. In meeting after meeting he tried without success to contain his emotions as he looked upon those who had pioneered the work in the Orient. In muggy Manila he reminded the audience that only one native Filipino, David Lagman, had been present when missionary work was inaugurated in the spring of 1961. In a tender display of affection and respect, Elder Hinckley called Brother Lagman, who as a counselor in the Philippines Manila Mission presidency was seated on the stand, to the podium, put his arm around him, and thanked him for all he had done to help spread the gospel.

At the Hong Kong conference, Elder Yoshihiko Kikuchi of the Seventy, the first native-born Japanese man called as a General Authority, provoked laughter during the priesthood session when he suggested a program for converting the entire city of 5.2 million: "If each member living in Hong Kong brings just one convert into the Church each year, then the whole city could be baptized in eleven years." Elder Hinckley, who conducted the meeting, prompted more laughter when he said, "You have just listened to Elder Kikuchi, who has been using one of those Japanese calculators." [^57]

Weather for the conference in Korea was as cold as it had been hot in the Philippines. Sister Hinckley wrote home: "Had a missionary mtg. with over 400 in the stake house this afternoon. Pres. Kimball called on me to speak. Very frightening. Could not hire out a hall big enough for area conference so they have constructed an amphitheater on Church grounds. It is raining and blowing and freezing cold. All are praying for rain to stop before morning." [^58] During the same meeting, Elder Hinckley asked the missionaries to pray that the elements would be tempered. That night it rained hard and snowed intermittently, but the next morning the skies were clear. The temperature, however, plummeted to 28 degrees F., forcing the first session of conference inside the Seoul 4th Ward chapel. Thousands of members who couldn't find seats in the building sat outside and listened to the message over a public address system. The afternoon session was moved outdoors so that those who couldn't squeeze into the building could see President Kimball and the other visiting leaders, all of whom sat huddled on the stand in heavy coats and blankets.

While in Korea, Elder Hinckley presided over the creation of the Kwangju Stake. The previous year, when he and Sister Hinckley had arrived in Pusan to create a stake there, members had greeted them at the airport with flowers and banners proclaiming "The Saints of the Pusan Mission Love Elder Hinckley" and "Did You Bring a Stake?" Elder Hinckley had then organized both the Pusan and Seoul North stakes, the fourth and fifth in the country respectively.

Such assignments were demanding but provided opportunities to be guided by the Spirit. In the creation of one stake in Korea, Elder Hinckley was assisted by Elder Arthur K. Nishimoto, the Regional Representative for Japan and Korea. After a long day of interviewing brethren, they had yet to settle on which of three men should be called as stake patriarch. Elder Hinckley suggested they kneel in prayer and invited his colleague to be voice. "This was a most humbling experience," Elder Nishimoto recalled. "We ended the day without naming a patriarch. The next morning, as we sat on the stand before the meeting, I looked at my watch and realized it was just five minutes before the hour. I knew that a patriarch had not yet been called. No sooner had that thought passed through my mind than Elder Hinckley asked me to call one of the brethren we had been considering. I knew instantly that he had received the answer. What a great lesson. I learned never to act upon any sacred duty until moved by the Spirit." [^59]

From Korea the group flew to Japan, where President Kimball dedicated the Tokyo Temple on October 27, 1980, in an intensely spiritual service. For Elder Hinckley, the dedication was an emotional as well as spiritual feast. He thought back to his first trips to Asia twenty years earlier, when small groups of Saints had gathered in dingy, rented buildings, and reflected on the sacrifices so many had made to join the Church and stay active.

At the conclusion of the Asia area conferences, Elder Hinckley remained in Japan to create the first stake in the Japan Sendai Mission. When he and Sister Hinckley arrived in Sendai after an exhausting week, the first thing he asked mission president Kiyoshi Sakai was, "Do I have time to comb my hair?" meaning, "Have you allowed me any time in my personal schedule?" Sunday evening, after the stake had been created, Elder Hinckley invited members of the new stake presidency to the mission home for an orientation meeting. Not feeling well, he went to his room to rest in the late afternoon. Just before the meeting he asked a surprised President Sakai if he had any consecrated oil and then added, "I am so exhausted; would you give me a blessing?" President Sakai remembered, "I was so afraid and felt too weak to bless an Apostle of the Lord. I told him I could not give the blessing in English. Elder Hinckley said Japanese would be fine. So Elder Hitoshi Kashikura, the Regional Representative, and I proceeded." After the blessing had been pronounced, Elder Hinckley said simply, "Thank you, thank you. Now I can go home tomorrow."

The next morning Elder Hinckley looked strong and healthy, and when President Sakai asked how he felt he responded, "Dai Jobu, more than fine. I am well." A few days later President Sakai received a letter of thanks from Elder Hinckley, who wrote: "We arrived home on schedule, tired, but happy with the opportunity that had been ours to travel with President Kimball, and as a conclusion to that long journey, to organize the new stake in Sendai. I was sick while I was there, and I so much appreciate the blessing which you gave me. I immediately began to feel better after that. My recovery was quick and total. Sister Hinckley and I are deeply grateful for the privilege of staying in your mission home." [^60]

There were times when the press and intensity of work got to him. "This sounds repetitious," Marjorie wrote family members in early 1980, "but I have never known Dad to be so busy. He is trying to keep so many balls in the air he does not do justice to anything and it is frustrating for him. He said last night that he is weary of sitting in meeting after meeting trying to be smarter than he is. At a time when most men retire he seems to be stretching himself further and further. I told him two nights ago that the sink drain is plugged, but he has not even made reference to the problem as yet." [^61] And prior to yet another speaking engagement she noted, "Tonight Dad speaks to the Mayflower Society. . . . He spent most of yesterday preparing a talk. He is sick, sick, sick of grinding out words." [^62]

Indeed, he appeared to be constantly either behind a pulpit or attending a never-ending sequence of social events connected with his various stewardships. In January 1981 the Hinckleys participated in a BYU-sponsored occasion when the U.S. Ambassador from China culminated his visit to Utah with dinner at the home of President and Sister Holland. Marjorie described the event: "After dinner a handful of the Young Ambassadors with whom we toured China last May entertained with some of the songs from their tour. To see those beautiful kids again and hear those songs . . . was a thrill. Many of the songs they sang were in Mandarin and they also gave their memorized speeches about brotherhood in Mandarin. The ambassador was completely captivated. He could scarcely believe his ears. No place but BYU with its Chinese speaking RMs could this happen." [^63]

Meeting with VIPs and dignitaries was all in a day's work for Elder Hinckley. There was nothing routine, however, about accompanying President Kimball to the White House in March 1981 for a meeting with President Ronald Reagan, to whom they presented a book outlining his family history. The newly elected U.S. president expressed sincere pleasure at the gift and declared that this was one volume he would find time to study.

Temple work, which was the capstone of family history research, was moving forward as never before. The following month, at the April 1981 general conference, President Kimball electrified the Tabernacle audience and Church membership worldwide by announcing plans to build nine temples—two in the United States (Chicago and Dallas) and the remaining seven scattered across four continents and one island nation: Frankfurt, Stockholm, Guatemala City, Lima, Johannesburg, Seoul, and Manila. Never before had the Church been engaged in such an ambitious agenda of temple building. Elder Hinckley was overjoyed. He could imagine the jubilation of the Saints in each of these areas, but in particular envisioned those living in Korea and the Philippines. How far the work had come in those corners of the vineyard! At times progress had seemed slow, but the cumulative effect of years of work was reaping an almost unbelievable harvest.

In early May 1981 the Hinckleys again accompanied BYU's Young Ambassadors on tour, this time to Scandinavia, Yugoslavia, Romania, and Russia. From Yugoslavia, Marjorie fired off a postcard to Dick's family that, among other things, revealed her husband's frame of mind: "Dad is very restless. I am loving it. . . . We are well." [^64] As much as Elder Hinckley enjoyed the Young Ambassadors, this tour was too much like a vacation, and after a few days he was anxious to get back to work. He returned home by way of Japan, where, with Elder Kikuchi, he organized the Tokyo South and Hiroshima Stakes—the nineteenth and twentieth in that land.

During the conference at which the Tokyo South Stake was organized, Elder Hinckley had just completed conducting the sustaining of the new stake presidency when he abruptly paused for an uncomfortable length of time. Finally he said solemnly, "We have yet one more calling to make, and this one was not part of today's agenda. My old and faithful friend, Brother Kan Watanabe, is attending the meeting today, and the Lord has made it known that he would like to call Brother Watanabe as a patriarch in the Machida Stake." Brother Watanabe said: "All attending that day were very surprised with this sudden announcement, but no one was more surprised than I. Following the meeting I was ordained as a patriarch under the hands of Elder Hinckley. This experience was one of the most clear examples in my life of a prophet, seer, and revelator in action." [^65]

Some experiences were, though tender, much more sobering. Only a few weeks later, on July 1, Sister Freda Joan Lee, the widow of President Harold B. Lee, passed away one day short of her eighty-fourth birthday. Elder Hinckley represented the Quorum of the Twelve in eulogizing Sister Lee and related experiences he and Sister Hinckley had had with the Lees in their various travels. President Kimball also spoke, though briefly. His voice was weak, and his words came out in a near whisper.

Life was fragile. Elder Hinckley's colleagues and friends were beginning to pass on, and it was a little unsettling. In particular, he worried about President Kimball, who since the latter part of 1980 had gradually declined in health and energy. There were days at a time when he didn't feel up to coming into the office, and it was beginning to look as though he might never regain his former vitality. Elder Hinckley found it difficult to watch President Kimball suffer the toll of advancing age. He often wished there were more he and his Brethren could do to ease the prophet's load.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] GBH Journal, 15 July 1981.
[^2] Interview with L. Tom Perry, 31 May 1995.
[^3] GBH Journal, 22 July 1981.
[^4] GBH Journal, 22 July 1981.
[^5] Minutes of the Council of the Twelve, 23 July 1981, as recorded in GBH Journal, 23 July 1981.
[^6] Interview with Kathleen Hinckley Barnes, 17 October 1995.
[^7] GBH Journal, 23 July 1981.
[^8] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^9] Church News, 1 August 1981.
[^10] D. Arthur Haycock to GBH, memorandum, 8 June 1984.
[^11] GBH Journal, 24 July 1981.
[^12] Interview with GBH, 9 August 1995.
[^13] GBH Journal, 1 August 1981.
[^14] See "Cornerstone Put into Place in Jordan River Temple Rites," Deseret News, 15 August 1981.
[^15] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Charity Never Faileth," Ensign, November 1981, p. 98; see also Deseret News, 28 September 1981.
[^16] GBH Journal, 1 October 1981.
[^17] Interview with GBH, 18 October 1995.
[^18] In Conference Report, October 1981, p. 5.
[^19] GBH Journal, 4 October 1981.
[^20] GBH Journal, 20 November 1981.
[^21] GBH Journal, 5 December 1981.
[^22] GBH Journal, 1 February 1982.
[^23] GBH Journal, 23 December 1981.
[^24] See First Presidency Memorandum to All General Authorities and Managing Directors, 18 March 1982.
[^25] See Conference Report, April 1982, p. 108.
[^26] See "President Kimball Closes Session with 'All Is Well,'" Deseret News, 4 April 1982.
[^27] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Five Million Members-A Milestone and Not a Summit," Ensign, May 1982, pp. 44-46.
[^28] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "A Sacred Trust," Remarks at Meeting of Regional Representatives and Stake Presidents, 2 April 1982.
[^29] GBH Journal, 30 November 1981.
[^30] "Pres. Hinckley Dedicates 16 Sites in Nauvoo," Deseret News, 14 August 1982.
[^31] Interview with Ruben Lacanienta, 14 June 1995.
[^32] See GBH Journal, 10 September 1982.
[^33] GBH Journal, 2 June 1982.
[^34] GBH Journal, 31 August 1982.
[^35] GBH Journal, 13 September 1982.
[^36] In Conference Report, October 1982, pp. 47, 62.
[^37] "Remarks by President Gordon B. Hinckley, Counselor in the First Presidency," Ensign, January 1983, p. 13.
[^38] GBH Journal, 28 November 1982.
[^39] See D. Arthur Haycock to GBH memorandum; also "First Presidency Reorganized," Ensign, January 1983, p. 14.
[^40] GBH Journal, 2 December 1982.
[^41] Interview with GBH, 9 August 1995.
[^42] Interview with Neal A. Maxwell, 30 June 1995.
[^43] See GBH Journal, 15 December 1982.
[^44] Interview with Richard Gordon Hinckley, 21 October 1994.
[^45] GBH Journal, 23 December 1982.
[^46] GBH Journal, 25 December 1982.
[^47] Gordon B. Hinckley, "He Slumbers Not, Nor Sleeps," Ensign, May 1983, pp. 5-6; see also "LDS Leader, First Counselor Weak, Tired from Illnesses, Advanced Age," Salt Lake Tribune, 17 November 1983.
[^48] GBH Journal, 13 March 1984.
[^49] GBH Journal, 30 April 1984.
[^50] "If I Were You, What Would I Do," p. 8.
[^51] "Mission Goal: Saving Souls Across World," Church News, 3 July 1983.
[^52] Interview with Boyd K. Packer, 1986.
[^53] Gordon B. Hinckley, remarks at President Benson's ninetieth birthday commemoration, 30 July 1989.
[^54] See Holland, "Stalwart and Brave He Stands," p. 12.
[^55] Interview with Thomas S. Monson, 28 April 1995.
[^56] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Small Acts Lead to Great Consequences," Ensign, May 1984, p. 81; also "Pres. Hinckley Says Lord, Not Men, Called Pair," Deseret News, 9 April 1984.
[^57] Gordon B. Hinckley, "The Miracle Made Possible by Faith," Ensign, May 1984, pp. 46-48.
[^58] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Special Witnesses to Christ," Ensign, May 1984, p. 51.
[^59] Arthur K. Nishimoto, "My Experiences with President Gordon B. Hinckley," memo to Sheri L. Dew, 24 May 1995.
[^60] Related in Kiyoshi Sakai memo to Sheri L. Dew, 27 April 1995.
[^61] MPH to Barnes, 22 March 1980.
[^62] MPH to Barnes, 8 November 1980.
[^63] MPH to Kathy Barnes, 12 January 1981.
[^64] MPH to Mr. and Mrs. Richard G. Hinckley, 14 May 1981.
[^65] Kan Watanabe to Sheri L. Dew, 11 May 1995.
