Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Nineteen

The First Presidency

Early the morning of Wednesday, July 15, 1981, President Kimball called his personal secretary, D. Arthur Haycock, into his office and told him that after prayerful consideration he felt impressed to call a third counselor in the First Presidency, and that his choice was Elder Gordon B. Hinckley. Brother Haycock spontaneously lifted both hands high in a show of support and offered: "I can vote for him with both hands. I don't think you could ever make a better selection." President Kimball had already talked with Presidents Tanner and Romney about the proposed change in the First Presidency, and they were supportive.

At President Kimball's request, Brother Haycock phoned Elder Hinckley and invited him to the President's office. Minutes later he was seated across the desk from the prophet. President Kimball got right to the point: He had decided to call another counselor in the First Presidency. What did Elder Hinckley think of that? His first reaction was curiosity. Why, he wondered, was the President of the Church confiding something of this nature in him? He responded that there was precedent for such action and that, in any case, the President of the Church was free to do whatever he wished in such matters. President Kimball smiled, expressed appreciation for Elder Hinckley, and then said simply, "I would like you to serve as my counselor."

Elder Hinckley was stunned. President Kimball's words hit him like a tidal wave. After a few moments of silence, he managed to say that he was overwhelmed and that he felt totally inadequate to assume such responsibility. If President Kimball had confidence in him, however, he would do his best to serve, and he would be pleased to lighten the prophet's burden any way he could.

Somewhat shaken and totally preoccupied with what had just occurred, he left President Kimball's office and hurried to a meeting of the Utah Power & Light Company board. But he couldn't keep his mind on the meeting. Later that afternoon he met with President Tanner; though both men knew of the morning's event, neither spoke of it. "This has been a day for sober reflection and prayer," he noted that evening. [^1]

Because the General Authorities had scattered during their traditional July recess, the Quorum of the Twelve was not scheduled to meet again until early August. Rather than wait until then, however, President Kimball asked that the Twelve be summoned from their vacations to a special meeting on Thursday morning, July 23. When Elder L. Tom Perry received word of the unscheduled meeting, he had an immediate impression: "Before I even left for Salt Lake City I knew that President Kimball was going to call Elder Hinckley as a counselor, and that he was just what President Kimball needed." [^2]

During the days between his call and the meeting of the Twelve, Elder Hinckley was consumed with what President Kimball had told him and distracted by his new circumstances. "I have done much of praying, and much of reflecting," he noted in his journal. [^3] He reread his patriarchal blessing, which sixty years earlier had indicated that he would "become a mighty and valiant leader in the middle of Israel." He also struggled with the thought of leaving the Quorum of the Twelve, where he had served for nearly twenty years. "I have felt a sense of sadness and depression the last few days," he admitted privately. "It has almost overwhelmed me." [^4]

Clark and his family were visiting Utah that week, and as they prepared to return to their home in Michigan, Elder Hinckley told his younger son that he didn't know when he would see them again, that some changes might be coming in his routine. Smiling, Clark teased, "You mean, you're going emeritus already!" He said nothing further. In fact, he had not yet said anything to Marjorie, although she already seemed to know that something was brewing.

After one of the longest weeks of his life, at 9:00 on the designated morning the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve convened in the Salt Lake Temple. There President Kimball proposed that Elder Hinckley be made a counselor in the First Presidency. The Twelve sustained the action, and President Kimball set him apart in that office. He then proposed that Neal A. Maxwell be called to fill the resulting vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve, and he subsequently ordained Elder Maxwell. Each member of the First Presidency and the Twelve had opportunity to express their support. Said President Tanner: "I think this will be a great assistance to the President. He has chosen a man who has been here headquarters] longer than anyone. He understands Church procedure, and he has proven himself to be a very faithful, devoted member, and I can sustain him with both hands." Others offered similar expressions.

Finally President Kimball asked President Hinckley to share his feelings. "I feel totally inadequate," he began. "I feel overwhelmed. . . . I think my only qualification, if I have any, is that I love President Kimball and I love his counselors. I love the Lord. I love His work. I know this is His work. I know President Kimball is His prophet; and if there is anything I can do by reason of the meager talents I might have and by the blessings of the Lord, I stand ready to do whatever is necessary. . . . I want to say to you brethren in the Twelve that I have a very sad feeling about leaving this group. I presume this may be only a temporary absence in the natural course of events, but I love the Quorum of the Twelve." Turning then to President Kimball, he concluded: "I pledge to you my loyalty, my love, my consecrated effort, and whatever help I can give. I feel like a pygmy among giants as I think of you and President Tanner and President Romney. . . . I feel like a little boy moving into the big league." [^5]

At 10:45 President Kimball held a press conference to announce the appointments of President Hinckley and Elder Maxwell. Just before it began, President Hinckley made a quick phone call home to tell Marjorie what had happened. Kathy and her family were visiting from out of town, and she was with her mother when the phone rang. "Mother took the call from Dad," she remembers, "and when she hung up the phone she had tears in her eyes. Finally she said, 'Dad has just been called as a counselor in the First Presidency.' I was absolutely shocked. I can remember feeling an unbelievable kind of surprise. It never crossed my mind that something like this could happen. As we talked, we were convinced that this would be short term, and that he would go back to the Quorum and life would return to normal." [^6]

The phone in President Hinckley's office began to ring immediately after the press conference, followed by countless telegrams, hand-delivered notes of congratulations, and other acknowledgments. Overwhelmed by the events, he returned home feeling an unexpected weight on his shoulders and an uncharacteristic gloom. "I have put on a veneer of smiles," he confided in his journal, "but I feel under a deep cloud of depression. I suppose it is the spirit of the adversary, but it is real indeed." [^7] Marjorie, however, was upbeat about her husband's change in assignment. "I was happy that he was going to be able to help President Kimball, because I knew he needed the help," she explained. "I also felt that Gordon would be able to do anything he needed him to do." [^8]

For President Hinckley the new calling induced anxiety and apprehension. There was precedent for calling an additional counselor to serve in the First Presidency—at one point President McKay had had five counselors—but though President Kimball's health had been deteriorating, he had two able and experienced counselors who were vigorous and alert. President Hinckley realized that his addition to the Presidency would alter the pattern they had enjoyed for nearly eight years, and he worried that his presence would be intrusive. In addition, he was sensitive to the fact that four men senior to him remained in the Quorum of the Twelve and worried that they might feel slighted by President Kimball's action.

A subsequent Church News editorial from one of those four, Elder Mark E. Petersen, was significant: "As a member of the First Presidency, President Hinckley will provide superb assistance. He is truly one of the great men of the Church, and has been for years. . . . His close association with the First Presidency from the days of President David O. McKay and President Stephen L Richards, under whom he worked personally and closely, qualify him most effectively for his new task. But his own great and humble spirit, his intelligent approach to the work, his remarkable consideration for his fellowmen, especially endear him to the people of the Church." [^9] Grateful for Elder Petersen's public indication of support, President Hinckley was nonetheless mindful of the Brethren whose tenure exceeded his own.

The circumstances attending President Hinckley's addition to the First Presidency were indeed exceptional. Arthur Haycock recorded his perspective on the unique sequence of events:

For some time prior to the calls President Kimball extended to President Hinckley and Elder Maxwell, the President had not been at all well. . . . was very noticeably suffering the effects of the oncoming of his last and most serious operation. It seemed difficult for him to concentrate and make decisions and because he was frequently very tired . . . it was necessary for him to take a rest two or three times a day while at the office. Nevertheless, when he called me into his office to advise that he was naming Elder Hinckley as a member of the First Presidency and Elder Maxwell to the Twelve, his mind was clear and his actions as definite and controlled as if it had been 30 or 40 years ago. Immediately following the call of President Hinckley and Elder Maxwell, President Kimball seemed to revert at once to his former condition of . . . general ill health.

Perhaps no one spent more time with President Kimball during his tenure as President of the Church than did Arthur Haycock, who added: "in my 46 years of close association with the last six presidents of the Church, I can say unequivocally that, to me personally, this is the greatest testimony of direct revelation I have ever witnessed. . . . There is no doubt in my mind that the Lord strengthened President Kimball in mind and body and raised him up and inspired him to call Hinckley and Elder Maxwell] to their high offices so that His work could continue on." [^10]

President Hinckley slept little the night after his setting apart. The overwhelming events of the day jockeyed for position in his mind and rendered sleep impossible. The next morning he made his first public appearance as a member of the First Presidency and with Sister Hinckley rode with President Romney in the Days of '47 Parade in Salt Lake City. Twenty years earlier, leaders in the San Antonio Stake had presented him with a Stetson hat that had sat in a box on his closet shelf ever since. That morning he was happy he had held on to it all those years, though he felt awkward riding along the parade route. "There was much mentioning of our names, and it was all a little embarrassing," he recorded afterward. [^11]

During the following weeks, President Hinckley was the object of more attention than he cared for. He took little notice, however, for he was focused on making his transition from the Quorum of the Twelve to the First Presidency as seamless as possible. Presidents Tanner and Romney welcomed him warmly into their circle, but the new circumstances were at first uncomfortable. "I felt like a fifth wheel," he admitted. "These two strong men had been in the Presidency for years. President Tanner had been a counselor to three other Presidents, President Romney to two. They had experience, a great deal of it. But there wasn't any question in my mind that in those circumstances the Lord had acted directly. I didn't know why he chose me, but I did know that I was chosen, so I had no choice but to press forward." [^12]

During one of their first meetings together as a newly constituted First Presidency, a discussion ensued about whether President Hinckley should be sustained as a counselor to or in the First Presidency. He felt it presumptuous to suggest that he was a counselor to the Presidency, implying that he had been brought on to counsel all three members, so President Kimball determined that he would be designated as a counselor in the First Presidency. And soon thereafter President Hinckley moved into an office in the southeast corner of the main floor so that he could be closer to his colleagues. It was a homecoming of sorts, for he had occupied the same office years earlier when he managed the Missionary Department. "It appears that I have come full circle," he wrote, noting the irony of his long tenure in the Church Administration Building. [^13]

Despite the uncomfortable process of integrating himself into the daily routine of the First Presidency, President Hinckley soon saw the wisdom of President Kimball's call of an additional counselor. Just six weeks later the prophet underwent his third and most serious brain operation. His recovery was slow and discouraging, and at times his condition was even desperate. More than once President Hinckley left the hospital feeling depressed about the prophet's health and pessimistic about his recovery.

After two weeks, however, President Kimball's vital signs stabilized and he was moved from intensive care into a private room. At the same time, President Tanner's health began to deteriorate from the long-term effects of Parkinson's disease. These circumstances weighed heavily upon President Hinckley, who was still adjusting to his new role. His visibility had increased exponentially because so many events required the presence of a member of the Presidency, which was already shorthanded.

In August he participated in the cornerstone laying at the Jordan River Temple, presided and spoke at BYU commencement, and dedicated the national headquarters of the Sons of Utah Pioneers. [^14] The week before October general conference he greeted visitors at the traditional VIP showing during the prededication open house of the Jordan River Temple and represented the First Presidency at the general Relief Society meeting. In his remarks he praised Sister Kimball while providing a glimpse of President Kimball's condition: "I have seen her frequently as she has stood by the side of her husband day and night during the illness which he has suffered. Her loyalty to him, the evidence of her unflagging love for him, her tender care of him, have become as the threads of a beautiful tapestry. Her prayers in his behalf, her pleadings with the Lord, have been those of a woman of strength."

In striking contrast, he also referred to an increasingly vocal group with which he had become more familiar since his call to the Presidency: "There is rampant among us a spirit of criticism. . . . None of us is perfect; all of us occasionally make mistakes. . . . Men and women who carry heavy responsibility do not need criticism, they need encouragement. One can disagree with the policy without being disagreeable concerning the policymaker." He concluded with a plea: "Restrain your tongues in criticism of others. It is so easy to find fault. It is so much nobler to speak constructively." [^15]

With his first general conference as a member of the First Presidency approaching, and President Kimball confined to a hospital bed, President Hinckley realized that members of the Church would be looking to him and the other counselors for direction. In a temple meeting of General Authorities prior to conference, his attention was drawn to the portraits of the former Presidents of the Church that hung there. "I was called on to give my testimony," he noted, "and among other things expressed my view . . . that there are councils in heaven as there are here; and I have the feeling that a council is in session there with all of the prior presidents of the Church who are custodians of the work in this dispensation under the direction of the Lord whose church this is. In our present circumstances, with President Kimball so seriously ill, many questions naturally arise. I am confident that the heavenly council is considering these matters and that they have the power, or have available to them the power, to govern the time frame in the affairs of the Church as well as the course it will take. I therefore have peace in my heart concerning the present and the future." After he sat down, President Hinckley had an interesting impression: "I saw President Lee looking at me from his portrait, smiling as if to indicate that he knew what the future holds." [^16]

The immediate future included his being sustained on Saturday morning, October 3, as a counselor in the First Presidency. This conference for him was significant because it marked both a milestone and an anniversary: Exactly twenty years earlier he had been called to the Quorum of the Twelve, and now he was delivering his first address as a counselor in the First Presidency. He spoke of the "worrisome responsibility" and "satisfying experience" that had been his during previous years and thanked members the world over for their kindness, loyalty, and conviction. Then he referred to the announcement that a network of five hundred satellite dishes would be placed in stake centers around the United States and Canada to link members and Church leaders. This development was particularly gratifying as he had, with Bonneville executives, for years investigated various technologies to develop just such a network and had toured a plant in southern California where satellites were being built. Of that experience he said, "As I learned what a satellite and a transponder were, how far above the earth they would orbit, that they worked through the conversion of sunlight to electricity through voltaic cells, and so forth, I got the picture. I could envision the tremendous impact a network of satellites would have on our people. This was the culmination of years of effort in trying to find a way to communicate with our members." [^17]

Referring then to his own circumstances, President Hinckley concluded his address: "And now a new assignment has come. . . . This sacred calling has made me aware of my weaknesses. If I have offended at any time, I apologize and hope you will forgive me. Whether this assignment be lengthy or brief, I pledge my best effort, given with love and faith." [^18] After conference President Hinckley recorded in his journal: "The absence of President Kimball has been noticed by all, but . . . the Spirit of the Lord has been with us and we have cause to be grateful." [^19] Two weeks later President Kimball was released from the hospital, and he and Camilla moved into an apartment in the Hotel Utah.

By November 1981, when the Jordan River Temple was dedicated, President Hinckley was already beginning to feel the burdens of the First Presidency gradually shift to him. Although President Kimball attended one session each of the five days of dedication, he was weak and unable to speak. President Tanner had difficulty speaking clearly, and after the first two sessions he returned to the office. President Romney's eyesight was failing, and he found it difficult to read even large type, but he and President Hinckley alternated conducting sessions and reading the dedicatory prayer. In all his involvement with temple dedications for more than twenty-five years, President Hinckley had never led out in this way. He felt weary after fifteen sessions in five days, but it was a jubilant weariness from which he readily recovered. "There has been an outpouring of the Spirit of the Lord and we have much reason for rejoicing," he summarized. "The only dark cloud has been President Kimball's condition." [^20]

The daily affairs of the Church were multifaceted and complex and demanded attention despite the fragile health of the prophet and his first and second counselors. During the first few months of his new assignment, President Hinckley both marveled at and was sobered by the detail and sheer volume of issues that came before the First Presidency, which was the court of last resort on any important decision. In early December 1981, he noted, "I find that there are few days off in this job. Even weekends are consumed by business that must be taken care of." [^21]

They considered issues affecting various Church-owned businesses and pondered organizational changes that would make the ecclesiastical hierarchy more efficient; called and set apart temple presidencies and sealers; considered names of men to be called as General Authorities or mission presidents; and handled a plethora of details related to the Church's burgeoning bureaucracy. With President Kimball's authorization they reviewed divorce clearances for those wishing to go to the temple, cancellations of sealings, and restorations of blessings, always causing President Hinckley to anguish over the suffering that attended transgression. "It is almost impossible to believe that some of our people get into the kind of sin they do," he lamented in one journal entry. "One evil thing begets another, until they are entrapped in a terrible web. Excommunication usually follows, and then there are years of regret before there is baptism and eventually a restoration of former blessings. But the wonderful thing is that there is repentance and forgiveness." The process weighed on him. "I do not like to sit in judgment. . . . However, it is a necessary responsibility. I constantly hope and pray that if we err we will err on the side of mercy. The Lord Himself will be their judge." [^22] He often cautioned his Brethren that such judgments affected not only the person in question but subsequent generations as well. Indeed, he was finding that most First Presidency decisions had grave consequences.

By late December, President Kimball's condition had improved enough that he went occasionally to the office. After a rare meeting of the full Presidency two days before Christmas, President Hinckley summarized: " advised him that in his absence we . . . have been endeavoring to take care of the ongoing work of the First Presidency, that no changes in personnel, policies, or procedures have been made, and that if and when such changes are proposed, they will be presented to President Kimball for his review and approval. He acknowledged this with appreciation." [^23]

Such was the pattern the counselors followed before organizing in March 1982 three new Church executive committees: the Missionary Executive Council, Priesthood Executive Council, and Temple and Genealogy Executive Council. Each would be chaired by a member of the Presidency and would consist also of three members of the Twelve, two presidents of the Seventy, and a member of the Presiding Bishopric. President Hinckley chaired the Missionary Executive Council, which gave him responsibility for an area in which he had been engaged again and again. [^24]

President Kimball felt well enough to attend the opening and closing sessions of the April 1982 general conference. Though his address was read for him by Arthur Haycock, on Sunday afternoon he stepped to the Tabernacle pulpit briefly and extended his love and bore testimony. [^25] It would be the last time he occupied the pulpit during general conference. President Tanner also spoke briefly during the closing moments. [^26]

In his Sunday morning address, President Hinckley referred to the significant benchmark the Church had reached just the week before—membership now stood at five million—but hailed it as a milestone rather than a summit. "This is a time to ask ourselves whether . . . we are any nearer perfection in the virtue of our individual lives," he began. "The milestone of five million members has real significance only to the degree that we as a people bring the gospel into our lives and demonstrate its fruits in our actions." Then, perhaps thinking of antagonists who continued to criticize the Church, he appealed to members: "I urge you to see the big picture and cease worrying about the little blemishes. . . . Of course, there are aberrations in our history. There are blemishes to be found, if searched for, in the lives of all men, including our leaders past and present. But these are only incidental to the magnitude of their service and to the greatness of their contributions. Keep before you the big picture, for this cause is as large as all mankind and as broad as all eternity." Finally, he pleaded with the Saints to emulate the devotion of Joseph Smith and other early leaders, whose faith under the most trying circumstances had been remarkable: "Great sacrifice was made in the past to bring us to this level of growth. Lives were forfeited, and those not a few. We are not asked to give up our lives, and actually very little of our comfort. But we are expected to give of our loyalty, our devotion, our hearts, minds, might, and strength to the on-rolling of this, the Lord's work." [^27]

April conference provided the setting for other significant events. On Wednesday of that week, the First Presidency announced that four new temples would be built—in Boise, Denver, Taipei (Taiwan), and Guayaquil (Ecuador). And in the preconference meeting with Regional Representatives, President Hinckley made two striking announcements. First, after much deliberation, it had been decided that the term of missionary service for single elders would be reduced from twenty-four to eighteen months. Second, when congregations in need of new meetinghouses qualified as tithing-worthy (meaning a specified percentage were full tithe-payers), all costs for building the structures would come from general Church funds. [^28] President Hinckley had previously served on the committee that had recommended this change in funding buildings, and he was pleased with the new policy. He noted on one occasion in his journal: "Personally I feel that tithing is the Lord's law of finance for his Church, that we should teach our people to pay an honest tithe, and in large measure rely on that to do the work of the Church." [^29]

It was the consecrated offerings of the Saints that allowed the Church to pursue a multitude of projects, including some that reached fruition later that summer. On August 14, President Hinckley dedicated seventeen restored historical sites in Nauvoo, including the Nauvoo Temple block, and spoke of the faith it had taken both to build and later to leave Nauvoo. [^30]

Eleven days later he arrived in Manila to break ground for a temple, proclaiming this an event that represented the fruits of modern-day pioneers. His elation over the prospect of inaugurating the construction of a temple in the Philippines was dampened only slightly by the fact that Manila lay in the path of a hurricane. The wind raged all day, remembered Ruben Lacanienta, chairman of the temple fund-raising committee. "Then around 4:00 P.M., nature seemed to calm down and we were able to proceed with the ceremony as planned. A few minutes after the final amen, the wind began blowing hard again. It was something I cannot forget." [^31] Despite the severe weather, more than two thousand Filipinos attended the groundbreaking. Two days later President Hinckley broke ground for a temple in Taipei. These two events in the Orient filled him with emotions too tender to articulate. Could it be just twenty years since he had first traveled up and down this part of the world? In some respects, it seemed like yesterday. He could remember hoping for the day when a temple would be located somewhere in Asia. Now the second and third were under way.

President Hinckley returned home to host U.S. President Ronald Reagan, who in early September visited Utah to get a firsthand look at the Church's welfare system. The president seemed impressed with what he saw at a local welfare cannery and remarked that if other groups across the nation had followed suit, the country would not be facing a welfare crisis. President Hinckley enjoyed the experience and noted afterward that he felt the nation's president was a man of integrity. [^32]

By mid-1982 the day-to-day responsibilities of the First Presidency had shifted almost entirely to President Hinckley. He found it impossible to take the hiatus from the office that General Authorities enjoy during July and only hoped that with fewer scheduled meetings he could dispose of some of the accumulated items begging for his attention. Most days he carried home a briefcase filled with work. He rarely felt on top of things, though in retrospect he could see that a tremendous amount of business had been transacted. It was fruitless to speculate about how long he would serve in this capacity, and he tried to keep his work up-to-date so he could move back into the Quorum at any time.

In his journal he described something of the worry that enveloped him: "The responsibility I carry frightens me. The president of the Church is unable to handle any detailed matters of business. President N. Eldon Tanner, his first counselor, suffers seriously in his speech and walking. . . . His mind is good, but he has difficulty of expression. President Marion G. Romney . . . has serious problems of recall. . . . I pray each day for strength and wisdom and inspiration. . . . This is the marvelous work and a wonder of which the Lord spoke, and I carry so heavy a responsibility in it. Sometimes I could weep with concern. But there comes the assurance that the Lord put me here for His purpose, and if I will be humble and seek the direction of the Holy Spirit, He will use me according to His will to accomplish His purposes." [^33]

If President Hinckley himself missed meetings of the First Presidency, his absence was sorely noted. When in the spring of 1982 he became quite ill and tried unsuccessfully to control an apparently serious infection with antibiotics, he reluctantly agreed to be admitted to LDS Hospital. Though he had been an outpatient before, this was the first time he had endured an overnight stay in a hospital, and the timing couldn't have been worse. With the other members of the First Presidency beset with serious limitations, he did not want his hospitalization made public for fear that it would worry members of the Church. When he returned home four days later, after undergoing a myriad of tests, he was still weak from the effects of the illness and able to do little more than rest in bed. But he had received a clean bill of health.

In late summer, after returning from an overseas trip, President Hinckley felt almost guilty about being gone for so long. "I am here to help the members of the First Presidency, who urgently need help," he wrote. "When I am not here, a heavy burden is placed upon them, and their health is such that they cannot carry it adequately. I really ought to stay home. But I need the stimulation that comes from getting out with the people. To stay here all of the time, and to do little else than attend meetings and make decisions, leads to dullness and a lack of understanding of the problems of people across the world." [^34]

Meanwhile, there were challenges right at home. For some time his sister Ruth Willes had been suffering with cancer. After an illness that alternated signs of recovery with periods of decline, her condition worsened quickly and dramatically, and the family was summoned to her bedside in mid-September 1982. At the invitation of Ruth's husband, Gordon offered a prayer in which he pleaded with the Lord to release his sister from the miseries of her physical body. About an hour later, she was gone. "There was a wonderfully sanctifying and sacred feeling about the room," he described. "We all felt it. We had tears in our eyes, but not for regretting her going. We had prayed that she would. It was just such a wonderfully spiritual occasion." He and Marjorie drove home that rainy night feeling that they had just had one of the sacred experiences of their lives. [^35]

Each member of the First Presidency attended at least some portion of the October 1982 general conference, though again President Kimball's address was read for him. President Romney was showing the signs of his age, but his sense of humor was as keen as ever. President Hinckley explained during his opening remarks at the priesthood session, "When President Romney learned that President Kimball and President Tanner would not be here, he leaned over to me and said, 'We are getting down to the kids.'" Then later in the session, as President Hinckley began his address, he quipped: "President Romney was to have spoken when I concluded, and he has asked that he be excused from doing so and that I take all the time. They really are turning it over to the kids!" [^36]

President Tanner spoke only briefly at conference, bearing his testimony during the Sunday afternoon session. It was to be his last message. On November 23, the Tuesday before Thanks-giving, he attended the First Presidency meeting. Late Friday evening he called President Kimball to inquire about his health. Less than four hours later, he quietly passed away. At 1:20 A.M. Arthur Haycock called President Hinckley with the news, and at daybreak they together informed President Kimball.

In his remarks at the funeral, President Hinckley rejoiced that though President Tanner's body had worn out, his mind had remained alert to the end. "It is a marvelous and wonderful thing when an individual at 84 retains his mental acuity and his capacity to reason and is able to call up the experiences of the past as they pertain to the problems of the present," he said. He then admitted feeling a "terrifying sense of loss and a tremendous loneliness" at President Tanner's passing. [^37] "I feel as one who has tremendous responsibility without authority," he confided in his journal. [^38]

On December 2, 1982, the First Presidency was reorganized. President Kimball asked President Romney to serve as first counselor and President Hinckley as second. [^39] President Romney set President Hinckley apart in a brief blessing that included the promise that he would be able to operate in his holy office under the direction of the Spirit to the "blessing and glorification of the Church" and that he would have health and strength and vigor of mind, body, and spirit. "It was a great honor when I was named a counselor," President Hinckley recorded that evening, " I have always felt that the naming of a counselor when there were already two counselors was something of an aberration of the organization outlined by the Lord. I now feel that in terms of the revelation the First Presidency is properly organized." [^40]

Nonetheless, after President Tanner's passing President Hinckley felt frighteningly alone. Three nights after the funeral, he accompanied President Kimball to a Churchwide youth fireside broadcast from the Tabernacle—the largest-ever gathering of youth in the Church and the first use of the satellite network for an event other than general conference. With President Romney at home and a fragile President Kimball on the stand, President Hinckley felt the weight of the Church pressing upon him. His bold warning against pornography, petting, drugs, drinking, and immorality demonstrated, however, that he was not inclined to shrink from tackling even sensitive subjects head-on.

Within a month of President Tanner's death, President Romney's condition deteriorated such that he no longer came into the office or participated in meetings of the Presidency. And by now President Kimball was venturing only infrequently out of his Hotel Utah apartment. He periodically attended meetings, but his vitality was gone. It was painful for President Hinckley to watch this dynamic leader slowly decline.

Barring a miraculous turn of events in which either or both of his colleagues would be restored to health, the burden of the First Presidency's office now fell principally to him. The volume, let alone the complexity and gravity, of matters that came before the Presidency was daunting. But workload was less a concern to President Hinckley than were other questions for which there were no simple answers: Which decisions must be made only by the President of the Church, and which were within his delegated authority to make? How would members react to the feeble condition of the Presidency and to the obvious fact that only he was active and healthy? More important, how could he continue the pace President Kimball had set and advance the work of the Church without getting ahead of the President or stepping out of line? There was no manual, no step-by-step outline on how to proceed under such circumstances. Indeed, the dual mandate seemed almost contradictory. At the very least, his was a delicate balance to strike.

The prospects of what lay ahead might have been paralyzing had it not been for President Hinckley's innate optimism and his unwavering faith that the Lord knew the circumstances and would provide direction. "It was a difficult period," he wrote later. "But I was careful. I had no question about moving ahead where there was established policy. But with anything that called for new policy or decisions that weren't covered by policy, I went to see President Kimball when he was well rested and explained in great detail the things we wished to do. Arthur Haycock went with me and kept a detailed record of every discussion we had. There were times when I returned to President Kimball several times to make sure he was clear about a decision on a given matter. Only when I was sure that he both comprehended our conversations and agreed with the course of action did we move ahead. I also discussed many issues with the Twelve. Often I told them that I was not disposed to move ahead of the President of the Church, that the Lord was at the helm and knew what was going on. This was His Church, and He could do with His leadership as He pleased. He was and is the master of life and death, and directs things according to His pattern. I was satisfied to be patient and to not move ahead of the President on anything. And we didn't." [^41]

"President Hinckley was conscientious in bringing matters to the Twelve," recalled Elder Neal A. Maxwell, "some of which he probably didn't need to. He went the extra mile in sharing things that were well within his prerogative as the surviving counselor to handle on his own. He was also reluctant to move on things that would take us a different direction, even though at times it seemed that the President would wish him to proceed. But he had great faith in the process of revelation and in the belief that things would work out. The things that needed doing got done. He didn't lack for boldness, but he understated his role. Unless he was pressed by the Spirit to take certain action, he waited." [^42]

After President Tanner's death his responsibilities—many of which concerned Church financial management—shifted to President Hinckley, and gradually President Romney's decreased capacity led to other administrative adjustments. Worried that two of the three major executive councils no longer had functioning chairmen, President Hinckley asked the vice chairmen of those committees, in each case a senior member of the Twelve, to conduct the meetings, and he rotated among them. This approach became the pattern. [^43]

Despite the pressure and workload, President Hinckley adjusted to demands that kept him at his desk long hours during the week, drew him to the office on weekends, and rarely abated in intensity. Dick watched his father deal with the circumstances at hand. "In many respects, the situation with President Kimball, as difficult as it was, was tailor-made for Dad," he said. "It never occurs to him that something is too difficult to manage. Leisure for him is planting trees or pounding nails. He's never as happy as when he's working." [^44]

At times, though, the strain made him irritable. On Thursday, December 23, 1982, he was annoyed to find that most of the Church employees had left for home by early afternoon. He complained in his journal: "I do not know why people feel justified in leaving early when they are given a holiday tomorrow and again on Monday. As a matter of fact, I do not know why the Church offices should be closed on Monday. This is an international organization now, and a tremendous operation where business must be handled every day except Saturday and Sunday." In a postscript, he tempered his comments: "Well, it's Christmas, and I had better feel happy and generous than grumble. I suppose it is the tremendous pressures that weigh on me that develop in me something of a critical spirit on occasions." [^45]

He spent half of Christmas Eve day at the office and felt better for having caught up with several nagging tasks that had been hanging over his head. Early Christmas morning he and Marjorie drove to the MTC in Provo to speak to the missionaries. He had determined the time of their visit, hoping they could cheer those who might be homesick on their first Christmas away from home. They spent the rest of the day with family, and at day's end he summarized: "We have so much to be thankful for. I feel a profound sense of gratitude. Marjorie and I are feeling something of the effects of growing old. But we have good health for which I feel so thankful. I am able to carry on a rigorous schedule of work in the greatest cause on earth. . . . We have the confidence and the love and respect of wonderful people. We have a great family. All of our children are active in the Church. They appear to be happily married in every case. They have beautiful children of their own, and we have the love of our grandchildren. We live in comfort but without ostentation. . . . We love each other. And above all, we have faith in God our Eternal Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ whose birth we commemorate this day." [^46]

Neither President Kimball nor President Romney was able to attend the April 1983 general conference, the first at which President Hinckley alone represented the First Presidency. Members who now heard him speak more frequently were becoming familiar with his unique phraseology, almost formal in construction, that mirrored patterns found in the classics and the scriptures. They were also coming to expect discreet flashes of his sense of humor, a candid discussion of sensitive topics when called for, and his testimony and reassurance that the Lord was in charge and all was well.

In his remarks, President Hinckley attempted to dispel rumors about the prophet's health and to assure members that the Church was moving forward. Explaining that President Kimball had not spent several months in a hospital or been in a coma, as some had publicized, he acknowledged that the prophet was weak and his body was tired. Those facts, however, changed neither the scope and extent of his past service nor the fact that he continued to preside over the Church. Said President Hinckley: "What a magnificent example he has been for all of us. He has given impetus to this work in a remarkable way. The whole Church has quickened its pace and lengthened its stride in response to his clarion call. He has been a prophet to us, a prophet whose vision and revelation have reached out to the people of the entire earth." [^47]

By the summer of 1983, when President Romney was hospitalized with pneumonia and heart problems, the First Presidency was essentially a one-man operation. President Hinckley noted in his journal: "If anyone should read this in the future, he probably will weary of the procession of meetings. I weary of them also. But they are the stuff of which my life is made. They consume my time. They tax my intellect and cause me to plead with the Lord for inspiration. I chair most of them. . . . This has been going on now for a good while. I have no idea how long it will last. For as long as I am called upon to do so, I shall give my best effort and hope and pray that the decisions reached will be the right decisions." [^48] Another day he recorded only, "After the First Presidency meeting, I spent the day dealing with correspondence and other matters which come in as a constant, unyielding stream." [^49]

He was ever aware of the need to balance the pressures of the office with his desire to spend as much time among the people as possible. During the summer he dedicated the renovated Assembly Hall on Temple Square and the new N. Eldon Tanner Building at BYU, dedicated four temples, and broke ground for another. When he spoke to the BYU student body on September 20, 1983, he had just returned on an all-night flight from dedicating the temple in Santiago, Chile, and he offered a glimpse of his routine: "Prior to that were similar experiences in Atlanta, Samoa, Tonga, and other parts of the world. I think I have spoken to fifteen different congregations in the last ten days, scattered from California to Santiago, Chile, to Detroit, Michigan. Just ahead is the general conference, for which much preparation is needed. I do not have a speech writer. I have only the opportunity to pray and work. When I have concluded today, you may conclude that I should have prayed more and written less." [^50]

His wit surfaced often as he handled the circumstances he had inherited. When neither President Kimball nor President Romney was able to attend the mission presidents' seminar in July, President Hinckley cited health concerns as the reason for their absence and then drew a hearty round of laughter when he added: "I know how they feel. I had a birthday myself yesterday." [^51]

As upon President Hinckley fell the weight of directing the affairs of the First Presidency, the Quorum of the Twelve, under President Ezra Taft Benson's leadership, helped pick up the slack. Said Elder Boyd K. Packer: "No one sustained President Hinckley more vocally and fully than did President Benson. When matters came to the Twelve from the First Presidency, he would say, 'Brethren, we must be about this now.'" [^52] President Hinckley greatly appreciated President Benson's support: "President Benson was my senior by eleven years in age and eighteen years in the apostleship. But without reservation and without hesitancy he sustained me in my office in the Presidency. I took many matters to the Twelve for discussion and consideration and he, as the leader of the quorum, was unfailingly loyal to the office of the First Presidency. It was a great lesson to me. I hope it was to the entire Church." [^53]

President Hinckley in turn was faithful to the scope and limits of his stewardship, forwarding many matters to the Twelve, for he was unwilling to move ahead on decisions of any magnitude without the full support of his Brethren. Nonetheless, at times the load he carried seemed overwhelming. One day, when faced with an unusually difficult situation for which there appeared to be no resolution, he dropped to his knees to petition the Lord's help. He later related what took place: "There came into my mind the words, 'Be still and know that I am God.' I knew again that this was His work, that He would not let it fail, that all I had to do was work at it and do my best, and that the work would move forward." [^54]

Elder Thomas S. Monson reflected on President Hinckley's role during this unique period in the Church's history: "President Hinckley found himself in a most challenging situation, because President Kimball was still the prophet. Even though a man may be impaired physically, he might not be impaired mentally or spiritually. President Hinckley had the unenviable task of not going too far too fast, but of going far enough. He always had the rounded ability and common sense to do what a counselor should do—that of never intruding on what belonged solely to the President. He was the only member of the First Presidency in attendance many times in our meetings of the Presidency and the Twelve. We made certain we were in total agreement on any issue before we moved forward. We had worked many years with President Kimball, and we knew how President Kimball felt about many matters and what his decisions would most likely be. When President Kimball was unable to make some of the decisions that otherwise would have been his, President Hinckley knew what the prophet would want him to do. Short of assuming that prophetic mantle, he moved as far as he could." [^55]

Working in concert with the Twelve, President Hinckley kept the work of the Church moving forward. Between October 1983 and April 1984 he held a regional conference in London; dedicated temples in Tahiti and Mexico City, as well as the new Museum of Church History and Art in Salt Lake City; and honored innumerable speaking assignments. At the April 1984 general conference, he announced the first calls of men to the First Quorum of the Seventy who would serve three- to five-year terms. These Brethren were later sustained to the Second Quorum of the Seventy, created in 1989, with a term of service standardized at five years.

One visible reminder of President Kimball's condition was the continuation of vacancies in the Quorum of the Twelve. In January 1983 Elder LeGrand Richards had passed away. At the April 1983 general conference, Church members anticipated the call of a new apostle, but the vacancy was not filled. When October conference passed without a new member of the Twelve having been called, some members were just disappointed; others more critical began to speculate about the delay and even to second-guess the system that allowed an aging prophet to stay in office. Matters were complicated further by Elder Mark E. Petersen's death a year to the day after Elder Richards's. With President Hinckley shorthanded in the First Presidency, it was imperative that the Quorum be fully organized. But the nomination and call of apostles was the prerogative of the President of the Church, and though President Hinckley was concerned about the vacancies, he was unwilling to move ahead without President Kimball. Anticipation mounted as the April 1984 general conference approached.

Dr. Russell M. Nelson, a noted heart surgeon in Salt Lake City, was one of several doctors who were caring for President Kimball. Aware of the prophet's condition, he assumed there was no way two new apostles would be called. He was particularly surprised, therefore, to be summoned to a meeting with President Hinckley the afternoon of Friday, April 6. When he responded affirmatively to a question about whether his life was in order, President Hinckley said, "Good, because tomorrow we're presenting your name to be sustained as one of the Twelve Apostles." Dallin H. Oaks, former president of BYU and then a Utah Supreme Court justice, was similarly called.

After the two new apostles had been presented for a sustaining vote, President Hinckley assured the Saints that these calls had been issued only with the sanction of President Kimball and under the direction of the Lord. "I want to give you my testimony that they were chosen and called by the spirit of prophecy and revelation," he stated. "While President Kimball is unable to stand at this pulpit and speak to us, we are on occasion able to converse with him, and he has given his authorization to that which has been done. We would not have proceeded without him." [^56]

He also sought to allay any concern about the state of the Church. In the priesthood session President Hinckley delivered by his own definition an "annual report to the shareholders," assuring those present that, despite an "insidious effort going on to try to undermine the Church and destroy its credibility, even among its own members," the Church was healthy, its finances in sound condition, and its membership of 5.4 million thriving. "Some of our critics and enemies challenge us to give the number of those who have left the Church during the year," he said. "I assure you that they are relatively few in number. Each time I see such a request I feel sorry for the individual." He then referred to the hundreds of church buildings under construction and the five new temples (Bogota, Toronto, Portland, San Diego, and Las Vegas) announced that morning, and added: "How wonderful it is to be a part of a growing, advancing organization. . . . The Church has never taken a backward step since it was organized in 1830—and it never will. It is the cause of the Master. It is the church of God." [^57]

The next day, speaking to the general membership, he declared: "It is now almost three years since I was called by President Kimball to serve as a counselor in the First Presidency. . . . During a substantial part of that period I have humbly tried to carry a great and awesome responsibility. I have known something of loneliness and worry and deep concern. I have prayed earnestly for direction and strength and guidance. . . . I am somewhat familiar with the history of this Church, and I do not hesitate to say that there has never been greater unity in its leading councils and the relationships of those councils one to another, than there is today. I love my brethren. To a man they are loyal. . . . Without hesitation they respond to every call regardless of personal convenience. They are true disciples of the Lord Jesus Christ. . . . The work goes on in majesty and power. The kingdom grows, solidly and consistently. . . . God be thanked for the wonder of his work and for the mysterious and certain way in which it moves forward." [^58]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See "Religious Freedom Is Their Key Aim," Church News, 16 September 1984.
[^2] "150-Year Drama: A Personal View of Our History," pp. 10-14.
[^3] See "Mormon Infighting Intensifies as Theologians Vie for Power," Daily Californian (Berkeley, California), 6 April 1982, p. 20.
[^4] "Stop Looking for Storms and Enjoy the Sunlight," Church News, 3 July 1983.
[^5] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Be Not Deceived," Ensign, November 1983, p. 46.
[^6] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "Emphasize Positive, Subdue the Negative," Church News, 6 October 1985.
[^7] GBH Journal, 22 April 1984.
[^8] GBH Journal, 10 February 1984.
[^9] "Homage Is Paid to Those Who Preserved Freedom," Church News, 9 September 1984.
[^10] Deseret News, 27 September 1984.
[^11] GBH Journal, 4 September 1984.
[^12] Robert W. Collins Interview with Gordon B. Hinckley, 18 April 1990, General Authorities Video Biographies Project; see also "Church Modifies Area Administration," press release, 24 June 1984; "New Presidencies Announced for 13 Geographic Areas," Church News, 24 June 1984; G. Homer Durham, "For the Journal History of the Church," 4 October 1984; "Sweetest, Richest, Most Rewarding Experience," Church News, 1 July 1984.
[^13] Gordon B. Hinckley, "The Good and Faithful Servants," Ensign, November 1984, p. 49.
[^14] Gordon B. Hinckley, "The Cornerstones of Our Faith," Ensign, November 1984, p. 50.
[^15] GBH Journal, 16 October 1988.
[^16] Interview with L. Tom Perry, 31 May 1995; see also L. Tom Perry, "An Elect Lady," Ensign, May 1991, pp. 72-74.
[^17] Interview with Kathleen Hinckley Barnes, 17 October 1995.
[^18] Interview with Tom Blair, 16 April 1995.
[^19] Interview with Tom Blair, 16 April 1995.
[^20] Interview with Clark Bryant Hinckley, 17 November 1994.
[^21] See "Top Team: 'No Doubt About it,'" Church News, 30 December 1984.
[^22] See "A Year to Remember, a Team to Remember," Church News, 27 January 1985.
[^23] "Words of Solace and Comfort," Church News, 30 December 1984; see also "1700 Gather to Say Their Farewells to Dead Miners," Deseret News, 26 December 1984.
[^24] GBH Journal, 2 January 1985.
[^25] GBH Journal, 9 January 1985.
[^26] Interview with Neal A. Maxwell, 30 June 1995.
[^27] "President Gordon B. Hinckley: As Seen Through the Eyes of Rodney H. Brady," memo to Sheri L. Dew, 1995, pp. 6-7.
[^28] Interview with Russell M. Nelson, 17 May 1995.
[^29] Interview with Derek Metcalfe, 8 June 1995.
[^30] "The Widow's Mite."
[^31] Interview with Neal A. Maxwell, 30 June 1995.
[^32] GBH Journal, 21 December 1977.
[^33] Gordon B. Hinckley, "The Victory Over Death," Ensign, May 1985, p. 59; see also "LDS Special Fast Nets Millions for Africans," Salt Lake Tribune, 8 April 1985; "LDS Donations to Aid the Hungry Exceed $6 Million," Deseret News, 8 April 1985.
[^34] "Milestone Challenge to Leaders," Church News, 14 April 1985; "LDS Mission Presidents Gather for Instruction," Deseret News, 4 April 1985.
[^35] "Elder McConkie Eulogized as 'A Man with a Giant Stride,'" Deseret News, 23 April 1985; "Testimony Lingers After Apostle's Death," Church News, 28 April 1985.
[^36] See "5 New Temples Add 'Great Momentum,'" Church News, 15 April 1985.
[^37] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Giving Ourselves to the Service of the Lord," Ensign, March 1987, p. 2.
[^38] "A Pentecost of Feeling," Church News, 30 June 1985.
[^39] "Polynesia's Fifth Temple Dedicated," Church News, 6 November 1983.
[^40] "New Temple Is South Africa's Brightest Jewel," Church News, 1 September 1985.
[^41] "Emotional Rites Note 'Miracle of Philippines,'" Church News, 7 October 1984; see also "First Temple in Chinese Realm," Church News, 25 November 1984.
[^42] "Glistening 'New' at 97, Manti Temple Rededicated," Church News, 23 June 1985.
[^43] GBH Journal, 16 June 1985.
[^44] See "President Hinckley Cites Bond Between Leaders," Church News, 4 April 1984.
[^45] "Questions and Answers," Ensign, November 1985, p. 49.
[^46] Gordon B. Hinckley, "To Please Our Heavenly Father," Ensign, May 1985, p. 50.
[^47] Gordon B. Hinckley, "The Scourge of Illicit Drugs," Ensign, November 1989, pp. 49-50.
[^48] Gordon B. Hinckley, "What This Work Is All About," Ensign, November 1982, p. 7.
[^49] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Our Mission of Saving," Ensign, November 1991, p. 59.
[^50] "The Healing Power of Christ," p. 59.
[^51] GBH Journal, 15 November 1981.
[^52] Interview with James E. Faust, 12 April 1995.
[^53] Interview with GBH, 7 February 1996.
[^54] "He Slumbers Not, Nor Sleeps," pp. 7-8.
[^55] "The Widow's Mite."
[^56] GBH Journal, 22 January 1984.
[^57] GBH Journal, 29 September 1985.
[^58] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Rejoice in This Great Era of Temple Building," Ensign, November 1985, p. 53.
