Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Twenty

Forward With Never a Backward Step

Unity among the leading councils of the Church, particularly in light of President Kimball's feeble condition, was vital, for the Church was attracting increased attention from a host of critics, some of whom distributed their message through the media. Films such as The God Makers, which attacked the Church and belittled sacred gospel ordinances, had received much attention. When the Arizona Chapter of the National Conference of Christians and Jews proclaimed the film "essentially unfair" and an inaccurate portrayal of "the Mormon faith, Mormon church history or anything else about the spirit of the Mormon faith," President Hinckley met personally with the chapter's representatives and thanked them for challenging the allegations. [^1]

Criticism sprang from other sources as well. In April 1980 President Hinckley had written: "Let us hope and pray that the days of burnings, drivings, and murders are forever behind us. But there will likely continue to be criticism and attacks of many kinds on the Church and its people. It will be of a more sophisticated nature than it has been in the past; and in the future, as before, we may expect much of it to come from those within the ranks of the Church—members of record while apostate in spirit." [^2] His words were proving prophetic, for some of the most vitriolic of critics were coming from inside the Church.

Certain LDS scholars, feminists, historians, and other detractors were becoming increasingly vocal with their claims that Church leaders had not been forthcoming about some of the difficulties in both the Church's past and its present. [^3] President Hinckley was evidently aware of the critics and annoyed by their tactics; at the BYU-Hawaii commencement in the summer of 1983, he spoke openly about cynics who appeared intent on undermining the Church: "These people who are our critics have overlooked the glory and wonder of this work. In their cultivated faultfinding, they see not the majesty of the great onrolling of this cause. They have lost sight of the spark that was kindled in Palmyra that is now lighting fires of faith across the earth. . . . We have those critics who appear to wish to cull out of a vast panorama of information those items that demean and belittle some of the men and women of the past who worked so hard in laying the foundation of this great cause."

He continued, elaborating on a theme about which he felt passionately: "We are not trapped by our history. That history contains the foundation of this work. It sets forth in some detail the circumstances and the events connected with the Restoration of the gospel. . . . If the picture is not always complete, or if there are various versions differing somewhat concerning certain events, intellectual honesty would dictate that there is nothing new in this. . . . The New Testament includes four gospels. The tone of each is the same, but the various writers made particular choices of what they wished to emphasize, and only by reading them all and harmonizing them do we get the fullest possible picture of the Son of God." He concluded by admonishing his audience to stop seeking out the storms and to enjoy the sunlight and accentuate the positive. [^4]

A few months later, at the 1983 October general conference, he pursued the same theme: "We recognize that our forebears were human. They doubtless made mistakes. . . . But the mistakes were minor, when compared with the marvelous work which they accomplished. To highlight the mistakes and gloss over the greater good is to draw a caricature. Caricatures are amusing, but they are often ugly and dishonest." [^5]

Certain complaints seemed to surface again and again, including those from women who claimed that the Church's patriarchal organization undervalued the contributions of women, and President Hinckley repeatedly sought to defuse their rhetoric. At a general women's meeting he addressed those who asked why they were not entitled to hold the priesthood: "To that I can say only the Lord, through revelation, could alter that situation. He has not done so, so it is profitless for us to speculate and worry about it. May I suggest, rather, that you dwell on the remarkable blessings that are yours, the great positive privileges of your lives as women of the Church . . . and the transcendent spiritual gifts that may be yours." He then identified ten blessings and privileges of LDS women, among them the spirit of prophecy, the opportunity to preside, and the privilege of motherhood. [^6]

During 1984 President Hinckley conducted a series of solemn assemblies in the Salt Lake Temple and elsewhere in which local priesthood officers assembled to partake of the sacrament and receive instruction from their leaders. The purpose of these meetings, he recorded in his journal, was to "speak to the brethren to strengthen them spiritually and to assist them in meeting those who are striving with great diligence to undermine the faith of the Saints and who are trying to destroy the Church. There are many and they are effective, and we cannot simply close our eyes." [^7] In countless settings he encouraged men and women, regardless of their circumstances, to look for the positive.

It was an approach that he not only preached but practiced. In President Hinckley's view, one needed only to look honestly at the Church to see that it was a dynamic entity moving ahead in a manner unparalleled by any other contemporary religious organization. He was confident that, despite its challenges, it would continue to move forward with never a backward step—and there were many indications that such was the case.

When Church financial officers presented a study projecting that, even with its aggressive building program, the Church's income would exceed expenditures through the turn of the century, President Hinckley noted: "This is reassuring. However, anyone with faith in this work would know that the Lord will take care of His church and its growth. The faith of the people will assure that." [^8]

By the end of 1984 President Hinckley had dedicated temples in Sydney, Manila, Dallas, Taipei, and Guatemala City; hosted an ongoing stream of dignitaries; and spoken to groups large and small, including 7,000 members of the American Legion and their families in the Tabernacle. During his stirring address there, he spoke of having stood at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Arlington Cemetery, the cenotaph in London's White Hall, the Arc de Triomphe in Paris, the Punch Bowl in Hawaii, and Fort Bonafacio on the outskirts of Manila, and then proclaimed: "The roots of this nation were planted in the great fundamentals of the Judeo-Christian doctrine. From this source came the concept of the dignity of the individual, and the recognition of the worth of the soul. These are the very foundation of our liberty. It seems that among us so many have almost lost sight of that truth. It is our great inheritance. It came from God. Without it, America has little virtue to guide its future. With it, we are unassailable. As was declared of old, 'Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord.' . . . I feel to say that preparedness] will not save us if we as a people and a nation lack the heart and the will to cultivate within ourselves moral strength and a recognition of God as our unfailing guide and helper." [^9] The former national commander of the American Legion, J. Milton Patrick, wrote afterward, "President Hinckley's patriotic message to us, along with the Tabernacle Choir, was one of the most remarkable events of my lifetime." [^10]

A visit that same month from President Ronald Reagan was particularly memorable. Joking that it was hard to know what to get the man who had everything, President Hinckley presented the commander-in-chief with a copy of the scriptures, quoted several verses pertaining to America, told him that the leaders of the Church remembered him in their prayers, and asked if it would be permissible to offer a benediction on his visit. When President Reagan agreed, President Hinckley invited Elder Oaks to offer a prayer, and he later recorded: "Brother Oaks gave a beautiful prayer. I felt that the president was deeply touched in his heart. He was most appreciative as he left us, and I felt that the Lord had answered our prayers, that we had been involved in a most significant occasion when a member of the First Presidency, representing the President of the Church, had read to the president of the United States . . . the word of the Lord concerning this nation and the Constitution which was framed by men whom the God of heaven had raised up unto this very purpose." [^11]

The year also saw important developments in Church organization. In November the First Presidency announced that, beginning January 1, 1985, the term of full-time missionary service for single elders would revert to twenty-four months. But the year's most far-reaching innovation was introduced in June when President Hinckley announced that Area Presidencies would now oversee the work in thirteen geographic areas of the world. In something of an experiment, three of the Area Presidencies would reside overseas. President Hinckley explained that the Church's dynamic growth demanded flexibility in administration and that the organization must somehow reconsider the tendency for rigid rule making, bureaucratic procedure, and policy development. "We can't lick every postage stamp in Salt Lake City. We have to do something about decentralizing authority," he told a group of new mission presidents the following month. He later elaborated on the significance of this administrative innovation: "It became evident that we had to make some decentralization. I brought that up a number of times, with the Twelve and in other discussions. Out of all this discussion came the concept of Area Presidencies . . . accountable through the Quorum of the Twelve and on up to the First Presidency." [^12] On subsequent occasions President Hinckley pleaded with department heads at the Church Office Building to embrace simplicity. As thrilling as growth was, he abhorred bureaucracy and at times felt himself swimming helplessly against a mounting tide.

Nonetheless, he was profoundly grateful for the growing body of faithful Church members, and he often said so. In the priesthood session at the October 1984 general conference, for example, he laid aside his prepared remarks and spoke extemporaneously: "I thank you from the bottom of my heart for the goodness of your lives. I thank you for your examples before your families and before the world. You bring honor to this church. . . . You indulge your generous instincts in giving to the poor, in befriending the lonely, in standing up for the very best in our society. You are the sweet fruits of this beautiful gospel." He acknowledged that such support sustained him during otherwise bleak moments: "Your sustaining vote in this conference means more than I can express. Sometimes when I think the load is heavy and the burdens are many, I think of you who not only raise your hands in affirmation, but also give of your hearts, time, and substance in loyal support." [^13]

The next morning he reminded the vast congregation linked by satellite transmission that the work of the Church was moving forward and that he had no misconception about his own role. "It is a great honor to stand before you and speak to Latter-day Saints across the world," he said. "I am not here as a substitute for the President of the Church. I am speaking as his second counselor, a responsibility I did not seek but one which I have accepted as a sacred call, in the fulfillment of which I have tried to lift some of the heavy burdens of office from the shoulders of our beloved President and move forward the work of the Lord with diligence. President Kimball is the prophet of the Lord. None other can or will take his place for so long as he lives." [^14]

Following the adjournment of the Sunday afternoon session of conference that fall day in 1984, President Hinckley took Marjorie to LDS Hospital for surgery to correct an intestinal problem that had caused her extreme discomfort during the preceding months. She recovered from the surgery quickly and within a few weeks had regained her vitality. It was a good thing, for Marjorie provided her husband with a much-needed sense of balance. When the weight of the world was pressing in on him, she seemed to know how to lighten his mood. The humor that had always characterized their relationship was ever present. When she returned home one afternoon to find him working at his desk, having been evicted from his office while minor repairs were made, she laughed and asked if it was really necessary for him to wear his tie at home. He replied that he didn't have to, but that his speech into the dictating machine was more dignified when he did.

Marjorie's effect upon her husband was obvious to those who traveled with them. When illness forced her to miss the dedication of the Sydney Temple, President Hinckley was restless. Phone calls home helped, but he did not enjoy traveling alone. During one quick trip to South America when Marjorie stayed home, he lamented in his journal: "I miss having Marjorie with me on this journey. I feel that I am only half here when she is not with me." [^15]

Furthermore, wherever they went, the Saints responded to Sister Hinckley's simple and sincere testimony, her warmth and unpretentious manner, and her spirit of good cheer. Said Elder L. Tom Perry, who with his wife traveled with the Hinckleys on occasion: "Marjorie Hinckley is the perfect balance for President Hinckley. She is full of life and full of enthusiasm. When you travel with President Hinckley, you had better have your track shoes on, because he fills in every minute. He keeps himself highly programmed so that he can meet with as many people as possible; but she is the balance. She makes certain that he spends time greeting people before rushing off to another meeting. Everyone feels comfortable around her." [^16]

Kathy, their eldest, explained: "We have always seen what Dad was doing as part of his work ethic: you do the job you're asked to do, and when that job is over, you do the next job. I can't remember ever connecting what he was doing with power or position. Part of that has to do with Mother. Her expectations for life were so simple that she has never seen herself as anyone special." [^17]

President and Sister Hinckley's children were now rearing children of their own, and some traits seemed to pass automatically from one generation to the next. Anytime two or more Hinckleys were together, their trademark family humor surfaced. His children knew his quirks and teased him mercilessly about them. When his daughters joined him downtown one day for lunch in the Church Administration Building, he warned them: "There will be no laughing in the dining room."

Nonetheless, they were a great source of support for each other. Kathy's eldest daughter, Heather, and her husband, Tom Blair, moved into the Hinckleys' basement apartment. It so happened that their stay fell in an era when some of President Hinckley's critics had threatened him, and Church Security insisted on increasing protective measures. An elaborate security system, so sensitive that it set off an alarm if anything heavy was dropped to the floor, was installed. Late one night Tom received a phone call from a worried security officer who indicated that the garage and kitchen doors were open and asked him to check upstairs immediately. The only "weapon" Tom could find was a broom, so upstairs he crept with it in hand. The doors were indeed open. "I wondered if I should run back to Grandma and Grandpa's room, but then I heard footsteps from that direction. I started walking faster with my broom, and suddenly I turned the corner and there was a man who was as big as I was. We both gasped. Just as I was getting ready to swing I realized it was Grandpa, who had heard something and gotten up to investigate. We sat down on the floor and laughed until we were sick." [^18]

Tom and Heather assisted with a number of chores around their grandparents' home. "I hope we helped in some way," Tom said. "But the real reason Grandpa and Grandma invited us to live with them was that they saw an opportunity to help us get through school and to spend some time with us as well. You would think the last thing they needed, when Grandpa had the weight of the Church on his shoulders, was grandchildren living in their basement. But what they did for us is indicative of their generosity towards and concern for their family." [^19]

When it was possible for family members to share unobtrusively in the experiences President Hinckley was having, they did so. Occasionally when he traveled to a temple dedication or regional conference he invited children or grandchildren along, always at personal expense. Though he never called attention to his family and preferred that no one knew they were there, he liked having them in the congregation. When the Chicago Temple was dedicated, for example, both Kathy's and Clark's families joined their parents in the Windy City. By day they enjoyed the dedicatory services together and in the evenings gathered in President and Sister Hinckley's hotel room for a family reunion in miniature.

"I don't know that we ever saw Dad as a man destined for greatness," Clark conceded. "To us, he was just Dad. He treated us the same when he was a member of the First Presidency as he did when he was a Church employee. What did occur to me as I grew older was that if Dad had had a career outside the Church, he would probably have been enormously successful at it." [^20]

December 1984 and the new year following brought events both sobering and sublime. Though President Hinckley had never been much of a sports fan, even he enjoyed festivities surrounding the Holiday Bowl between BYU and Michigan at San Diego's Jack Murphy stadium. Anticipation before the game was enormous, with BYU entering the contest as the only undefeated team in the nation. When asked in a pregame press conference how he felt BYU would do, President Hinckley responded: "I'm a perennial optimist. . . . But pride goeth before the fall. I don't want to predict too much before the game." [^21]

When BYU triumphed in a hard-fought game over the Big Ten squad and was named the nation's number-one football team, President Hinckley joined in the euphoria. At a rally held nearly a month later in the Marriott Center, he inspired a spontaneous roar when he stepped to the microphone and began: "It has been a great evening. I don't like to confess this, but I haven't applauded this vigorously since Washington beat Oklahoma the latter out of the national championship race]." He continued: "Not only has BYU become famous . . . but the sponsoring institution has become honored and respected and widely known as an institution that expects much from its people and gets much from its people." Earlier in the evening BYU coach LaVell Edwards credited President Hinckley with a role in the Cougars' grid success: "He was with us long before we became famous," LaVell said. "Through him, we received approval to expand the stadium, without which this never would have happened tonight." [^22]

December and January were not as kind in other settings, however. Six days before Christmas, a fire broke out in the Wilberg Mine overlooking Castle Dale, Utah, some 150 miles southeast of Salt Lake City. Twenty-seven miners trapped beneath the surface died, and the grief-stricken mining community was thrust into mourning. The day after Christmas, President Hinckley spoke at an emotional memorial service. When the mother of one of the victims concluded her remarks, she turned toward him on the stand, and he instinctively stood and embraced her in an expression of sympathy. No one could explain why such disasters occurred, President Hinckley said. But he assured those gathered that God, who was aware of the sparrow's fall, was also aware of their loss, and then promised, "He will be there to comfort and sustain you; and, as the years pass, the sharpness of today's pain will soften and a divine balm will heal your broken hearts." [^23]

Just two weeks later there was additional sobering news, this of a more personal nature. On Thursday, January 10, Elder G. Homer Durham suffered a cardiac arrest, and by evening he was gone. Friends since boyhood, President Hinckley and Elder Durham had enjoyed an enduring relationship filled with respect, common interests, and concern for each other. The two had shared a love of literature and learning, had preached in Hyde Park together as missionaries, and had explored Europe before returning home. They had even collaborated on the hymn "My Redeemer Lives"—Elder Durham composing the music, President Hinckley penning the lyrics—a poignant rendition of which was performed at the funeral. In a voice ranging from powerful to trembling with emotion, President Hinckley eulogized his friend of more than sixty years as a man of faith who had walked with presidents and kings but never lost the common touch. Elder Durham was the sixth of President Hinckley's missionary associates to pass away. On days such as this one, he felt very alone.

He often felt very much alone in the First Presidency as well. In nearly every meeting he attended, the two chairs next to his remained empty. What he had initially assumed would be a short-term assignment as a counselor to President Kimball had now stretched to nearly four years—and for more than half of that time he had been the sole visible member of the Presidency. It had been almost three years since President Kimball had last stepped to the Tabernacle pulpit during general conference, and his absence was glaring.

Despite his tendency to see the positive, there were times when President Hinckley felt the sting of isolation. "At times I feel very lonely as I am faced with the responsibility of making difficult decisions that concern the Church, the lives of people, and other organizations as well," he recorded in early January 1985. [^24] On one occasion after the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve had wrestled with a difficult challenge, he leaned back in his chair and said, "Brethren, sometimes I get weary of being a judge." There were days when he felt like the Church ombudsman, the court of last resort for anyone who was disgruntled with a Church department or organization, and he found it impossible to shake loose from the constant stream of appointments. "People need a listening ear and they are not getting it," he noted. "People are more important than programs and efficiency." [^25]

At the same time, he missed the regular association of his Brethren in the Twelve and looked forward to the day when he would return to full-time service in the Quorum. Although he took as many matters to them as he could, there were some decisions that he alone could make, and others that for the time being had to be set aside. Occasionally he thought of President J. Reuben Clark Jr., who had also served as a counselor to a prophet in feeble health and had once remarked privately that having responsibility without commensurate authority was the personification of misery. With firsthand experience acquired in the crucible of the Church's governing council, President Hinckley now understood what this counselor to three Church Presidents had meant.

Among his General Authority colleagues and others with whom he had worked through the years, President Hinckley's talents as a leader and administrator were well documented. But now these strengths were even more in evidence. His Brethren found that he had a sixth sense when it came to handling issues laced with religious, social, or political complexities; his instincts were remarkable. "President Hinckley has a rare combination of expression and judgment," Elder Neal A. Maxwell explained. "He gets to the bottom of complex issues quickly. I remember a time when I was asked to look into an incident involving a General Authority. When I asked President Hinckley how to proceed, he said simply, 'He'll tell you what happened. You can trust his judgment.' That was that. There was no long oration. He has an enviable capacity for summation. There are fifteen men in the First Presidency and the Twelve, none of whom is a shrinking violet. When we become absorbed in big issues, it is wonderful to have someone speak in a summational way. Otherwise, we could burn up a lot of time getting to the heart of the matter." [^26]

Rodney H. Brady, who was named president and chief executive officer of Bonneville International in May 1985, observed President Hinckley's approach to management: "If a decision requires information from others not in a meeting, he calls those individuals on the phone, asks the questions, and makes decisions on the spot rather than delaying the decision by calling another meeting. When his colleagues want to revisit issues after decisions and commitments have been made, he typically responds, 'We have already covered that ground and given our word to others, now let us move forward to other issues.' And when we have been faced with particularly important decisions, he has often turned to the scriptures on the credenza behind his desk and located a passage that clarified the direction we should take." [^27]

While President Hinckley's associates admired his efficiency and impressive leadership skills, they also appreciated his sense of humor, which broke the ice on many occasions and offered respite from otherwise ponderous meetings. "If a little humor crept in to provide some relief from the weighty decisions that had to be made, he employed that talent effectively," said Elder Russell M. Nelson. "As an example, when he was essentially alone in the First Presidency, he would consult with the Twelve about individuals who desired baptism but whose past life was checkered. I remember the case of a man requesting baptism who had killed someone and subsequently been released from jail. President Hinckley said something like, 'It's amazing. The police can't find these people, but our missionaries can.' The weight of responsibility was so heavy that he rescued himself by allowing humor to carry him through." [^28]

Derek Metcalfe, the managing director of the Temple Department, recounted the events in a meeting chaired by President Hinckley in which they discussed the situation of an elderly gentleman whose mental capacity had dimmed and who didn't understand that some of his property had been sold to the Church. When he found that a chapel was going up on what he thought was his land, he showed up at the building site waving a shotgun and making ominous threats. "President Hinckley listened as we related the story," said Derek, "and then said, 'I sympathize with him. That's how I feel when you bring in some of the plans you have for temples!' When meetings get tense, President Hinckley has a way of lightening them, which is wonderful because that sort of thing has to come from the presiding officer. He has the ability to do that." [^29]

In one meeting held early in the afternoon, Church Educational System administrators presented their budget for the coming year. Feelings became intense, and at one point another board member turned to President Hinckley and asked, "What do you think?" President Hinckley, who had been listening with his chin resting on the palms of his hands, replied: "I think I am never again going to have stuffed pork chops for lunch." Everyone laughed and the tension was defused.

When inspecting building projects, he often referred to "Hinckley's Law": "It will cost more and take longer than they said it would." About such matters, he knew whereof he spoke, for under his care fell the weighty responsibility of overseeing disbursement of Church funds. He chaired the Budget and Appropriations Committee, an executive committee of the Council on the Disposition of the Tithes that met weekly to consider all major Church expenditures. A typical agenda might include discussion of a score or more chapels to be built, temples under construction, buildings in need of renovation, and special projects calling for large sums of money.

President Hinckley was financially conservative, and during discussions regarding major expenses he often took from his desk a small coin given to him years earlier in Jerusalem representing the widow's mite. He kept the artifact in his office as a constant reminder of the "fearsome responsibility of spending that which comes of the consecrations of the members of the Church." [^30] He frequently explained that most of the Church's assets were not revenue-producing; disbursement of Church resources, therefore, demanded utmost care. But he also seemed to realize when large expenditures were both appropriate and necessary. "President Hinckley has a fiduciary sense about money," said Elder Maxwell. "He realizes that we really do exist on the tithes of Church members. I went to him with brochures of two or three hotels we might stay at during a trip to Sweden. He looked them over, selected the least expensive one, and said: 'This one looks nice enough. We'll take it.' On the other hand, he is indignant about foolish conservatism and has often referred to his experience of having to beg for an entire ream of paper when he first started to work for the Church. He has remarkable balance when it comes to money." [^31]

When, for example, President Hinckley first reviewed drawings of the temple proposed for Freiberg in the German Democratic Republic, he felt the building needed major revisions to give it greater dignity. Though his requested modifications would add substantially to the cost, he responded that ten years from now Church leaders wouldn't miss the money but would be perpetually critical of the structure if it wasn't designed properly from the outset. By contrast, however, when feted at an elaborate and expensive banquet by Church leaders in one Far Eastern country, he was embarrassed. "I wish they would not do things of this kind for us," he noted. "Money spent for this lunch would have kept a missionary in the field for a month." [^32]

President Hinckley was a driving force behind the invitation to members to participate in a special day of fasting on January 27, 1985, and to contribute to a relief fund for victims of famine in Africa and other third-world nations. The response was overwhelming. At the April 1985 general conference he revealed that over six million dollars had been donated, two-thirds of which had already been placed with four reputable international relief organizations for disbursement. "Thank you for what you have done," he told the Saints. "Many contributed far more than the value of two meals. You have cast bread upon the waters, and it will return to you as you experience the peace of generous hearts." [^33]

That conference served as a backdrop for a significant missionary-related milestone when, for the first time in twenty-four years, every mission president in the Church gathered in Salt Lake City to receive instruction from the General Authorities. Noting that he had been associated with missionary work for fifty-two years, President Hinckley expressed his hope that out of this gathering would come a new vitality for the work. And he promised that those who lost themselves in the service of God would find that the process would save them: "This is one of the great miracles of our time—the transformation that comes into the lives of who go out to teach the gospel. . . . They subject themselves to the discipline of the mission field. That becomes a remarkable blessing. They establish habits of work. They discover the values in life that are most important. They develop in their hearts a fervent testimony. . . . The future of the Church will be so much the stronger by reason of missionary service." [^34]

During the six months between the April and October conferences of 1985, President Hinckley's activities included events both joyous and sobering. Less than two weeks after April conference, Elder Bruce R. McConkie passed away following a long bout with cancer. President Hinckley and Elder McConkie had served together for years on the Missionary Executive Committee, and his passing revived pangs of loneliness in President Hinckley, who was the concluding speaker at the funeral. "Three great trees have fallen in the forest in the last months," he said, referring to Elders LeGrand Richards, Mark E. Petersen, and now Bruce R. McConkie. "I felt like a little puppy trying to keep up with McConkie] as he took his long measured steps," he continued. "So it has been with most of us in keeping up with the stride of his mind in scholarship in the gospel." [^35]

By contrast, the most glorious of occasions for President Hinckley were temple dedications, and this was proving to be an unprecedented era of temple building. Between the spring of 1982 and the fall of 1985, he broke ground for temples in Manila, Taipei, Dallas, Chicago, Denver, and Frankfurt; presided at temple dedications in Atlanta, Western Samoa, Tonga, Santiago, Tahiti, Mexico City, Boise, Sydney, Manila, Dallas, Taipei, Guatemala City, Freiberg, Stockholm, Chicago, and Johannesburg; and rededicated the refurbished Manti Temple. With the dedication of the temple in South Africa there were now houses of the Lord on every continent except Antarctica. President Hinckley not only dedicated in three years as many temples as had been built in all the previous history of the Church, but he took keen personal interest in each temple's design and construction. If a temple didn't have a celestial reach in its design, the architects heard about it. If an interior didn't create the desired atmosphere, workers were invited to start over. And he often scouted for property personally, climbing to the tops of hills and walking across sites himself before finalizing a location. [^36]

Since the early 1950s one of President Hinckley's primary areas of focus had been temple work, and he often reflected on the urgency he had felt years earlier to build a larger number of smaller temples in an effort to take them to the people. Now he found himself participating in the fulfillment of the mandate to take the blessings of the temple to worthy men and women everywhere.

In many respects, he was ideally suited for these assignments, and those who accompanied him marveled at his capacity. Though he typically conducted and spoke in every dedicatory session—of which there were sometimes more than twenty—he did so without notes, rarely if ever repeated himself, and suited a message to each audience. After the dedication of the Chicago Temple in August 1985, he noted that he had spoken in 185 dedicatory sessions during the previous twenty-eight months and had presided over and conducted sixteen cornerstone ceremonies.

Each dedication reflected the unique customs and circumstances of the land or area, but the Spirit was always the same—profound and penetrating. And for various reasons, each dedication was memorable. In Guatemala City in December 1984, three-fourths of those present were descendants of Father Lehi, and President Hinckley felt as though he could almost see generations of their forebears. Between sessions, when he walked out a rear exit to get some fresh air, he found a group of native Saints, some of them barefoot, who had traveled hundreds of miles to attend. He could not hold back the tears as he contemplated their circumstances and the phenomenal effort they had made to come to Guatemala City. [^37]

The Freiberg Temple's seven dedicatory sessions were a pentecost. President Monson's influence in the Communist-controlled German Democratic Republic had been instrumental in opening the way for the construction of this edifice. Recalling his own visit to Dresden, Meissen, and Leipzig fifty years earlier en route home from his mission, President Hinckley said he had never dreamed that such a structure would one day stand here, and that completion of this temple was evidence of the Lord's hand in softening the hearts of government officials who permitted it to be built. "We shed many tears; we wept with them; we prayed with them; we sorrowed with them; we rejoiced with them," he said of that experience. "It touched me to the depths of my soul when I saw the faith, the love of the Lord, the loyalty to the gospel in the hearts of Saints in the German Democratic Republic." [^38]

During the dedication of the Papeete Tahiti Temple, President Hinckley had an emotional reunion with the nurse who had assisted him twenty years earlier in the aftermath of the tragic boat accident off Maupiti Island and who had since joined the Church. In his remarks at several sessions he referred to the women who had died that fateful day: "I hope with all my heart husbands are worthy to come to this house and have their beautiful wives sealed to them." [^39]

His experience at the Johannesburg Temple dedication was likewise poignant. To see black and white Saints gathered in a service of eternal import in a country where racial tension had spawned hate and oppression stirred President Hinckley's soul. In his remarks he referred to the strife of that nation and prophesied: "Newspapers and television across the world present a dramatic picture of the flames of South Africa. But I am confident things will work out for your blessing. Things may get worse before they get better, but I am confident they will get better." [^40]

Each temple dedication in Asia was a highlight for President Hinckley, whose tender feelings for the Oriental Saints were enduring. During dedicatory services for the Manila Philippines Temple he said, "Never has there been a time that I have felt such a surge of emotion and been touched by the Spirit more than I feel now." He struggled to rein in his emotions as he added: "I don't know of any place in the world where the harvest has been so great in such a short period of time. The Lord has touched this land in a miraculous and marvelous way." [^41]

While touring the refurbished Manti Temple the night before the dedicatory services, President Hinckley again had difficulty holding back tears. "Something happens to me when I go into these temples," he explained the next day about the four built during the pioneer era. "I see the magnificence of the workmanship wrought with rudimentary tools. I have been in most of the great buildings of the world—palaces of kings and houses of parliaments—and in none of those places have I had the kind of feeling I get in coming to these early pioneer houses of God." [^42] During one session he called upon Sister Hinckley to bear her testimony and tell the story of her grandfather, who had died from injuries sustained while hanging the building's heavy east doors. "I think it was the highlight of all the talks given," he noted proudly afterward. [^43]

In each dedication President Hinckley wove into his sermons the stories of faithful Saints who had pioneered the work in their area, thereby calling attention to service that might otherwise have gone unnoticed. And regardless of country, continent, or languages spoken, he counseled temple-goers to find in the house of the Lord a place of sanctuary where they could retreat from the cares of the world and feast upon the blessings of eternity. "We never have a temple dedication when we do not have two audiences: those who sit here and those on the other side who are with us," he often explained. He invited Saints old and young to prepare for the dedications by cleansing their lives of anything displeasing to the Lord. "The temple experience is a sanctifying experience," he repeatedly taught, adding the promise, "There is no better way to cultivate a spirit of unselfishness among our people, to encourage fidelity between husbands and wives, to draw nearer to the Lord than to go to his holy house." [^44]

The magnificent spiritual outpouring of a temple dedication stood in stark contrast to other matters that came regularly to President Hinckley's attention. Letters poured in to the First Presidency from heartbroken men and women whose lives had been shattered by the misdeeds of others. "Many of these letters are fraught with sadness," he said during one general priesthood meeting. [^45] "They tell of personal tragedies, of families in distress, of broken homes and broken hearts. In reading them, I am at times almost overwhelmed by the great burdens that many people carry." As the one robust member of the Presidency, it was left to him to address difficult moral and social issues that were wreaking increasing havoc in society. Pornography, child and spouse abuse, drugs, adultery and fornication, homosexuality—his denunciation of each was unmistakable. Men who abused their children or wives were unworthy to hold the priesthood and would answer to God: "If there be any within the sound of my voice who are guilty of such practices, let them repent forthwith, make amends where possible, develop within themselves that discipline which can curb such evil practices, plead with the Lord for forgiveness, and resolve within their hearts henceforth to walk with clean hands." [^46]

President Hinckley's counsel was direct and typically exposed the ironies associated with inappropriate behavior. On the issue of illicit drugs, he said: "Some have even used as an alibi the fact that drugs are not mentioned in the Word of Wisdom. What a miserable excuse. There is likewise no mention of the hazards of diving into an empty swimming pool or of jumping from an overpass onto the freeway. . . . To you who may be partaking, I repeat, stop immediately. To you who at any time in the future may be tempted, I urge you to stand your ground." [^47]

President Hinckley frequently counseled members to strengthen and sustain one another. "Ours is the task of raising the sights of those of our people who fail to realize the great potential that lies within them." [^48] He often cited Brigham Young's plea, made when he learned that two handcart companies were in jeopardy, to "go and bring in those people now on the plains." Such a pronouncement squared with his commitment to those languishing on the plains of discouragement, despair, and sin. As he said on one occasion, representative of many others: "I know that all about us there are many who are in need of help and who are deserving of rescue. Our mission in life, as followers of the Lord Jesus Christ, must be a mission of saving. . . . We can do more to help those who live on the edge of survival." [^49] And he always identified the ultimate Source of comfort and peace: "Ours is a ministry of healing, with a duty to bind the wounds and ease the pain of those who suffer. Upon a world afflicted with greed and contention, upon families distressed by argument and selfishness, upon individuals burdened with sin and troubles and sorrows, I invoke the healing power of Christ, giving my witness of its efficacy and wonder." [^50]

His empathy for those who suffered may have been developed partly in the crucible of his own experience. He himself was forced to suffer—almost always in silence—over vicious attacks from enemies determined to humiliate and disgrace him. As the only visible member of the First Presidency, he was an easy target, a lightning rod of sorts. There were those who apparently believed that if they could discredit President Hinckley, they would also undermine and threaten the stability of the Church hierarchy. Consequently, over time he was accused of everything from dishonesty and political maneuvering to repulsive moral transgression.

His prominence left him open to bizarre attacks. Ironically, the most vocal critics came from within the Church—liberal scholars, historians, feminists, and others who felt they or their causes weren't being treated fairly or who took issue with the direction or statements of Church leaders. After a visit from one such individual, President Hinckley reflected: "Our problems do not arise from people outside the Church, but from those within who speak of their faith and their love for the work. They do not seem to realize how critics of the Church feast on such materials. . . . I am sorry do not seem to realize the damage can do." [^51]

Even when the criticism became front-page news, President Hinckley was typically optimistic about the future. "When challenges arose that seemed to distract our focus," Elder James E. Faust explained, "President Hinckley often reminded us, 'Brethren, things have never been better in the Church than they are now. The Lord is watching over the kingdom, and we will work through our challenges and our problems.' Such an attitude goes back to the wellspring of his faith and the commitment to the Church that he has developed so richly during his life." [^52] Indeed, if President Hinckley had a personal motto it was, in his own words: "Things will work out. If you keep trying and praying and working, things will work out. They always do. If you want to die at an early age, dwell on the negative. Accentuate the positive, and you'll be around for a while." [^53]

Blessed with an overarching view of the Church in this dispensation, President Hinckley saw past the temporary annoyances. "Critics may wear out their lives in trying to deny or demean or cast doubt," he said in general conference, "but . . . this mission . . . is larger than any race or nation or generation. . . . It is a cause without parallel. . . . You and I may fail as individuals and miss the blessing. But his work cannot fail. There will always be those he will raise up to accomplish it." [^54]

With such a philosophy embedded deep within, President Hinckley pressed forward through the constant pressure and occasional loneliness. His approach was practical; his pace, unrelenting. In September 1985 he told the BYU student body: "It has now been more than four years since I was called into the Presidency. For two and a half of those years, not of my own wish, I have had thrust upon me the burden of the day-to-day work of the office of the Presidency. Please do not misunderstand me. I am not complaining. I have been blessed by the Lord in a marvelous and wonderful way." [^55]

In general, President Hinckley continued in the simple and pragmatic pattern he had established years before. As he noted one Sunday, after agonizing over a talk he was to give the following week in a Churchwide fireside for husbands and wives, "I pray to the Lord earnestly for help, and then go to work." [^56] At times things fell nicely into place; on other occasions they didn't. As he prepared for the October 1985 general conference, for example, the Sunday before conference his talks were still not prepared. "After pleading with the Lord for help, I . . . dictated the talk to be given Sunday morning. . . . I was also inspired with what I might try to do for the General Priesthood meeting. It is remarkable how things begin to fall into place when the Lord takes hold after we try and become frustrated in the process." [^57]

Despite the challenges, his motivations were unencumbered and straightforward. "I am driven by two resolutions," he stated during that same conference. "The first is to serve the Lord to the very best of my ability. I think I understand, in some small measure at least, what that means. The second is to serve His chosen prophet, President Spencer W. Kimball, and lift from his shoulders every burden that I legitimately can. I consider these to be sacred and binding obligations and more important than all other considerations." [^58]

He acknowledged in the priesthood session that President Kimball was "not very strong" and was suffering "from the infirmities of age," but he again assured members that the work was moving forward and doing so under divinely established procedure, with no action of consequence taken without unanimity of feeling in the highest councils of the Church. [^59] At that conference Elder M. Russell Ballard was called to the Quorum of the Twelve, filling the vacancy created by the death of Elder McConkie. President Kimball participated in the ordination—the last it would be his privilege to be involved in, for although President Hinckley didn't know it at the time, the October 1985 conference was the last one he would preside over alone. Before the Presi-dency changed, however, he became the focal point of another controversy involving the Church.

During the previous three years President Hinckley had on occasion met with Mark Hofmann, a Salt Lake City rare-documents dealer who had come forward with several troublesome historical documents that challenged Joseph Smith's account of the Restoration. Then-Elder Hinckley had been among the first General Authorities to meet Hofmann when, on April 22, 1980, Elder G. Homer Durham, then serving as managing director of the Historical Department, had called to tell him about this university student who was in possession of an old Bible that contained an interesting document. Elder Durham asked Elder Hinckley and Elder Packer, both of whom were serving as advisers to the Historical Department, if they would meet with Hofmann. They agreed, and later were present when Elder Durham introduced Hofmann to the First Presidency and showed them what was later referred to as the Anthon transcript—or, as President Tanner noted in his journal, what "appeared to be the original paper copied by Joseph Smith from the plates and given to Martin Harris to take to New York City for examination by Professor Anthon." [^60] Though not entirely forthcoming about the provenance of the document, Hofmann indicated he had discovered the manuscript in the Bible, which he said he had purchased from a Salt Lake City man who had obtained it in the 1950s from a granddaughter of Joseph Smith's sister Katharine in Carthage, Illinois.

Another Hofmann discovery subsequently aroused widespread attention from Church members, detractors, and officials of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints—the record of a father's blessing Joseph Smith purportedly gave his son Joseph Smith III in which he blessed the eleven-year-old boy to be his "successor to the Presidency of the High Priesthood," or, as some interpreted it, President of the Church. [^61] Hofmann claimed to have located the blessing in a collection of writings of Thomas Bullock, who had served as a clerk to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Elder Hinckley first saw the Joseph Smith III blessing on February 27, 1981, and though neither he nor his colleagues of the Twelve were concerned that the letter undermined the doctrine of prophetic succession, he recognized that one interpretation of the document could provide critics with fodder for their dissection of the long-established practice. With this in mind, he devoted his April 1981 conference address to the blessing, explaining that Church leaders had publicized the discovery despite the realization that critics might seize the opportunity to suggest a flaw in the Church's line of authority. In a gesture of goodwill, he reported, the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve had given the document to the Reorganized Church, whose presidents had been lineal descendants of Joseph Smith.

He concluded his address with a ringing endorsement of the Lord's pattern of succession: "That same authority which Joseph held, those same keys and powers which were the very essence of his divinely given right to preside, were by him conferred upon the Twelve Apostles with Brigham Young at their head. Every president of the Church since then has come to that most high and sacred office out of the Council of the Twelve. Each of these men has been blessed with the spirit and power of revelation from on high. There has been an unbroken chain from Joseph Smith, Jr., to Spencer W. Kimball." [^62]

Critics debated the ramifications of the Joseph Smith III blessing, as well as other Hofmann documents that contained unflattering innuendos about early Church leaders or events associated with the Restoration. Then, on January 3, 1984, an acquaintance of Hofmann's, Lyn Jacobs, showed President Hinckley a letter from Martin Harris to W. W. Phelps in which an account of Joseph Smith's discovery of the gold plates contained noticeable differences from the official version. Reference to a spirit that "transfigured" himself from a "white salamander" ignited a fury of controversy among critics, scholars, and lay members of the Church. Describing as it did the early origins of the Church in spiritualistic terms, the "Salamander Letter" appeared to confirm other documents regarding the purported treasure-hunting activities of Joseph Smith. Jacobs said he had obtained the letter from an eastern collector whose name he had received from Hofmann.

The Twelve subsequently asked that research be conducted to place the document in historical context and to verify its authenticity. In the meantime, other memorabilia surfaced that questioned the veracity of the Church's beginnings. The majority of these documents were brought to President Hinckley's attention, and he took them to the Twelve for discussion and ultimately made most of them a matter of public record. Of the Salamander Letter he noted: "We have nothing to hide. Our enemies will try to make much of this letter, but any fair-minded individual who will read it in terms of the time it was written and the language of the day will not see it as detrimental to the history of those events connected with the restoration of the gospel." [^63]

Controversy over the Salamander Letter reached a zenith on Saturday, August 25, 1984, when Los Angeles Times religion writer John Dart published a lengthy article in which he asserted that the letter threatened to "alter the idealized portrait of church founder Joseph Smith." Among conservative Protestant critics of the LDS church, Dart maintained, the Salamander Letter was now regarded as "one of the greatest evidences against the divine origin of the Book of Mormon." [^64] Elder Thomas S. Monson, on assignment in Frankfurt, was surprised to see the Inter-national Herald Tribune's headline, "The Mormons and the White Salamander: 1830 Letter, If Authenticated, Would Prove Founder's Interest in the Occult."

Though the unfolding controversy weighed on him, President Hinckley was coolheaded in both his reactions and his response. These events weighed on his mind, however. At the October 1984 general conference he spoke of the Church's four cornerstones, among them the First Vision and the Book of Mormon: "For more than a century and a half, enemies, critics, and some would-be scholars have worn out their lives trying to disprove the validity of First Vision]. Of course they cannot understand it. The things of God are understood by the Spirit of God." [^65]

In April 1985, Salt Lake area businessman Steven F. Christen-sen, who as a collector of historical memorabilia had purchased the Salamander Letter from Hofmann, presented the document to President Hinckley, who accepted it on behalf of the Church. Later that month the Church News carried the complete text of the letter. The First Presidency statement accompanying the article quoted President Hinckley: "No one, of course, can be certain that Martin Harris wrote the document. However, at this point we accept the judgment of the examiner that there is no indication that it is a forgery. This does not preclude the possibility that it may have been forged at a time when the Church had many enemies. It is, however, an interesting document of the times." He concluded with the assurance that the letter had nothing to do with the divine underpinnings of the Restoration. "The real test of the faith which both Martin Harris and W. W. Phelps had in Joseph Smith and his work is found in their lives, in the sacrifices they made for their membership in the Church, and in the testimonies they bore to the end of their lives." [^66]

President Hinckley carried the burden of responding to the questions, attacks, and insults that followed. Not long thereafter he noted in his journal: "The media, feasting on anything they can dig up that might prove embarrassing to the Church, are having a field day. It will not adversely hurt the work in the long term, but it does produce some wounds among the weak and those of little faith." [^67] He felt confident, however, that the Church would emerge from the controversy unscathed. "I do not fear truth. I welcome it!" he said many times. "But I wish all of my facts in their proper context, with emphasis on those elements which explain the great growth and power of this organization." [^68]

Over the years he frequently encouraged the Saints to see critics for who they were. To a Churchwide young adult audience, for example, he referred to the controversial letters and then prophesied: " Church] will weather every storm that beats against it. It will outlast every critic who rises to mock it. It carries the name of Him whose it is, even the Lord Jesus Christ." [^69] It was hard for him to understand the critics' point of view, for after years of his own ongoing study of Church history, he not only had a personal witness of Joseph Smith's divine calling but found in him an exquisite model of optimism and faith.

It was as though he couldn't study, teach, or testify enough about this prophet of God. On one occasion a few priesthood leaders in Salt Lake City and their families were invited to attend a family home evening with President Hinckley. During his informal remarks, he asked all the children age eighteen and under to stand. "I love the Prophet Joseph Smith," he said with feeling, asking them to repeat the phrase with him. After they had done so, President Hinckley concluded: "Please write in your journal that I stood and bore my testimony of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and that I love him."

It was almost impossible for President Hinckley to understand or have much patience with those who tried repeatedly to undermine the Prophet during the various phases of the document scandal. Unfortunately, the Hofmann-promoted memorabilia proved to be not only spiritually but physically lethal. On the morning of October 15, 1985, tragic news riveted the residents of Salt Lake City and the Intermountain West: Two members of the Church, Steven F. Christensen and Kathy Sheets, had been killed within ninety minutes of each other by bombs concealed in packages. The community was shocked and bewildered. Initially, some believed the murders to be connected to a troubled business venture spearheaded by Christensen and Gary Sheets, the other victim's husband. Others speculated that the tragedies were linked to the Salamander Letter. Church Security immediately increased its protection of President Hinckley, who couldn't imagine that the horrifying events held any relationship to him.

The next day a third explosion ripped through a car parked just a block north of Church headquarters. Within minutes two Church Security officers arrived breathless at President Hinckley's office; the remainder of the afternoon they shuttled in and out with updates. Mark Hofmann had been seriously injured in the blast. With Hofmann's involvement, the documents connection seemed more likely. President Hinckley conferred much of the afternoon with Elders Dallin H. Oaks and Hugh W. Pinnock, who had met with Hofmann regarding what the documents dealer referred to as the McLellin Collection, papers from William E. McLellin, a former member of the Twelve who had wavered between devotion and dissidence throughout his life. They agreed that Elder Oaks should immediately tell the police what he knew about Christensen and Hofmann's connection with the McLellin transaction.

Over the next few days the Church in general and President Hinckley in particular took a beating in the press. Some reporters accused him of acting unilaterally in obtaining documents and speculated about how a Church leader could have become involved in what was beginning to look like documents fraud. Some even implied a sinister element in his association with Hofmann. After reading one such article President Hinckley noted: "I was disgusted. They are not interested in finding a solution to the murders. They are interested only in trying to make the Church look suspect." [^70] The following day he added: "I have never seen such a barrage of press innuendo, much of it downright false. The Church, as might be expected, is the target, and my name is used prominently . . . because Mark Hofmann met with me on several occasions concerning the Church acquiring various historical documents." [^71]

The morning of October 23, the Church held a press conference to clarify its relationship with Hofmann, Christensen, and others involved in what was now a murder investigation. Representatives of CBS, the BBC, the major wire services, and other international and national news agencies were among the large contingent of reporters who filed into the auditorium of the Church Office Building. Flanked by Elders Oaks and Pinnock, President Hinckley expressed sympathy to the families of the bombing victims, explained that the Church had cooperated fully with law-enforcement officials, reviewed his and the Church's association with Mark Hofmann, elaborated on his personal interest in Church history, and explained what little he knew about the McLellin Collection. In response to a question about the Church's proclivity for collecting historical materials, he stated that from the beginning leaders had been admonished to keep records.

"If this goes on," he quipped, "we will have to find a lot more room to house all the newspaper clippings." Returning to a serious tone, he added: "But we have a mandate. We would suppose the institution for which you work keeps a history, a corporate history. We have an obligation to keep a history of the Church and we regard that very seriously. We are going over to dedicate the new genealogical building . . . is] essentially a historical library. It has cost a very handsome sum and it's a beautiful archive. The finest in the world and the purpose of it is historical—historical research." [^72]

The news conference quelled some of the rumors that had flown about Salt Lake City, and, as promised, later that morning President Hinckley dedicated the Church Genealogical Library, calling it the jewel in the genealogical research crown and adding that this was a "day of rejoicing beyond the veil." [^73] It was ironic that with his lifelong interest in Church history and temple work, which relied so heavily on family history research, President Hinckley found himself in the middle of an ugly ordeal involving controversial historical documents.

Before going to the auditorium for the press conference, he had reread section 10 of the Doctrine and Covenants, which dealt with the lost 116 pages of the Book of Mormon manuscript. In this revelation, given through the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord declared, "I will not suffer that they shall destroy my work; yea, I will show unto them that my wisdom is greater than the cunning of the devil" (D&C 10:43). Feeling that he and the other Brethren had been blessed in their statements, he reflected that night: "We are witnessing that. The Church will triumph. We have done nothing wrong." [^74]

His impression proved prophetic. In February 1986 the documents dealer was charged with twenty-eight criminal charges, among them two capital counts of murder and thirteen counts of theft by deception. [^75] Eleven months later, on January 23, 1987, Mark Hofmann pleaded guilty to second-degree murder in the deaths of Steven Christensen and Kathy Sheets. Later, during interviews with prosecuting attorneys, he boasted about fooling the Church's highest leaders and confessed to having forged, among other documents, the Salamander Letter, the Joseph Smith III blessing, and the Anthon transcript. [^76]

Although Hofmann's admission of guilt removed any lingering questions the documents had raised about the veracity of Joseph Smith's account of the Restoration, President Hinckley continued to field criticism over his perceived connection to Hofmann. One question recurred in numerous letters and phone calls to the office of the First Presidency: "How could a member of the First Presidency be duped and unable to discern the evil intentions of a man like Mark Hofmann?" The criticism hurt President Hinckley, whose few meetings with Hofmann had been prompted by what he thought were legitimate reasons to pursue historical materials.

The evening before the transcript of Hofmann's confession was made public, President Hinckley noted: "I was advised that Hofmann mentions my name a number of times in these confessions. I suppose that is to be expected. I accepted him to come into my office on a basis of trust. . . . During years I was . . . heavily burdened with Church administration and met hundreds of people in my office to discuss scores of matters. The visits of Hofmann were of minor importance to me in terms of the many other larger matters with which I had to deal. They came of my desire to conduct an open door policy while serving as the functioning member of the First Presidency." [^77]

President Hinckley later summarized the Hofmann affair: "I frankly admit that Hofmann tricked us. He also tricked experts from New York to Utah, however. We bought those documents only after the assurance that they were genuine. And when we released documents to the press, we stated that we had no way of knowing for sure if they were authentic. I am not ashamed to admit that we were victimized. It is not the first time the Church has found itself in such a position. Joseph Smith was victimized again and again. The Savior was victimized. I am sorry to say that sometimes it happens." [^78]

The worst of the negative publicity regarding the Hofmann bombings could not have come at a more inopportune time. The evening of the press conference at which President Hinckley explained the Church's connection with Hofmann, he noted: "I am weary to the bone with problems. I need to get out in the sun and the air and relax a little, but I see no prospect. President Kimball is not well. The nurses think that he may be failing. All of this has added to my concern and has become the burden of my prayers." [^79] The following day when President Kimball joined the Twelve in the temple, he was lethargic and his face was flushed. After only a few minutes, he returned to his apartment. President Hinckley admitted, "I have felt today as if the world were caving in around me." [^80]

On November 4, 1985, President Hinckley and Arthur Haycock visited President Kimball in his apartment and gave him a blessing. As distinct from previous blessings, President Hinckley could not find the words to promise him a renewal of strength. Rather, he felt impressed to say that he would have peace of mind and body and relief from pain. The following evening, he and Sister Hinckley toured the Ramses II exhibit on display at BYU. As they returned to Salt Lake City, their driver called ahead for information on President Kimball's condition, and he was instructed to take President Hinckley directly to the prophet's apartment. When President Hinckley arrived at 10:25 P.M., Arthur Haycock met him at the door. The president had passed away a few minutes earlier.

Though the news was not unexpected, emotion welled up within President Hinckley. He talked quietly with Sister Kimball and called President Ezra Taft Benson and the secretary to the First Presidency. With little else to do until morning, he returned home, but before retiring he recorded: "President Spencer Woolley Kimball belongs to the ages. He was a great and remarkable man. . . . I have served as his counselor since July 23, 1981. Since the death of President Tanner and the disability of President Romney, I have been alone in carrying the weight of the Presidency, except for the Lord, who has blessed and magnified me. The First Presidency is now dissolved. I take my place in the Council of the Twelve. . . . Tonight I am weary and spent. The pressures and stresses of the past seem to have caught up with me. This has been a unique time in the history of the Church. There has never been another time like it. I suppose there will never again be one. I thank the Lord from the bottom of my heart for His blessings and mourn the loss of His beloved prophet." [^81]

Four days later, on Saturday, November 9, Elder Hinckley, at President Benson's request, conducted the funeral services that eulogized the beloved President of the Church. Leaving his prepared remarks unread, he reminded mourners of something President Kimball had once said to him when he had tried to encourage the prophet to slow down: "My life is like my shoes, to be worn out in service." President Hinckley concluded, simply, "He so lived and so died." [^82] That night Elder Hinckley wrote: "It has been a bleak day. I feel a certain deep loneliness. I have carried the burden of the Presidency for the past three years. I am tired. I do not know what will happen in the reorganization of the Presidency. I do know that things will never be the same. I am grateful to the Lord for the opportunity He has given me, although it has been difficult at times. No one will ever know quite what I have been through." [^83]

The following morning, the members of the Quorum of the Twelve went fasting to the temple. There, in a process in which Elder Hinckley was now participating for the fourth time, a new President of the Church was ordained. President Ezra Taft Benson then indicated that he wished Gordon B. Hinckley to serve as first counselor and Thomas S. Monson to serve as second. Marion G. Romney was named President of the Twelve, with Howard W. Hunter as Acting President.

"I am honored and grateful," President Hinckley recorded that night. Though he was somewhat surprised at President Benson's request that he continue on in the First Presidency, he added, "I will do all I can to help President Benson as I have tried to help President Kimball." [^84]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See "Unprecedented Church Growth Distinguishes Kimball Years," Church News, 10 November 1985.
[^2] Interview with GBH, 18 October 1995.
[^3] GBH Journal, 12 November 1985.
[^4] GBH Journal, 18 November 1985.
[^5] GBH Journal, 7 September 1985.
[^6] GBH Journal, 24 December 1985.
[^7] See Interview with Spencer J. Palmer, 13 July 1995.
[^8] GBH Journal, 14 December 1985.
[^9] "'Land of Morning Calm' Brightened by Korea Temple," Church News, 22 December 1985.
[^10] GBH Journal, 14 December 1985.
[^11] GBH Journal, 15 December 1985.
[^12] Interview with Kathleen Hinckley Barnes, 17 October 1994; see also M. Russell Ballard, "President Gordon B. Hinckley: An Anchor of Faith," Ensign, September 1994, pp. 6-11.
[^13] See 1995-96 Church Almanac, pp. 329-30.
[^14] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Come and Partake," Ensign, May 1986, p. 47.
[^15] In Conference Report, April 1986, p. 52.
[^16] Marjorie P. Hinckley, "Building the Kingdom from a Firm Foundation," in As Women of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conference (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989), p. 10.
[^17] GBH Journal, 22 November 1986.
[^18] GBH Journal, 12 March 1987.
[^19] "Church Is Shortsighted in Closing Hotel Utah," Salt Lake Tribune, 19 March 1987; see also "Save Hotel Utah! Speak Out," Salt Lake Tribune, 19 July 1978, p. 18A.
[^20] "Plan to Close Hotel Sets Off Classic Utah Struggle," New York Times, 3 June 1987, p. 10.
[^21] "Nostalgia and Poignancy Abound As a Grand Lady Becomes History," Deseret News, 1 September 1987; "At Stroke of Midnight 'The Lady' Bows Out Gracefully," Deseret News, 31 August 1987; "Church Says Public Will Be Pleased As Hotel Plans Unfold," Deseret News, 21 May 1987.
[^22] Interview with L. Tom Perry, 31 May 1995.
[^23] Interview with GBH, 22 November 1995.
[^24] See, for example, Lowell R. Hardy to Kieth Merrill, 10 May 1988.
[^25] Interview with Robert D. Hales, 26 May 1995.
[^26] See Interview with James E. Faust, 10 November 1995; also Press Release and Public Statement, Citizens for Morality in Church Government, 1988, LDS Church Archives.
[^27] GBH to President Ezra Taft Benson, President Thomas S. Monson, Members of the Council of the Twelve, 18 October 1988.
[^28] GBH Journal, 18 October 1988.
[^29] "A Statement from President Gordon B. Hinckley," read at the 6 May 1993 meeting of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve.
[^30] See "Group Criticizes Anti-Mormon Film," Deseret News, 24 December 1992; also "A Statement from President Gordon B. Hinckley"; "Film 'Godmakers II' Condemned by Several Organizations," Salt Lake Tribune, 12 December 1992.
[^31] Interview with James E. Faust, 12 December 1995.
[^32] Interview with GBH, 18 October 1995.
[^33] GBH Journal, 18 October 1995.
[^34] "The Loneliness of Leadership."
[^35] "If I Were You, What Would I Do," p. 8.
[^36] Jenkins Lloyd Jones, Deseret News, 12 June 1973; as quoted in "Four Imperatives for Religious Educators," p. 4.
[^37] "Let Love Be the Lodestar of Your Life," p. 65.
[^38] Interview with Russell M. Nelson, 17 May 1995.
[^39] Interview with Russell M. Nelson, 17 May 1995.
[^40] Interview with Russell M. Nelson, 17 May 1995.
[^41] Interview with Robert D. Hales, 26 May 1995.
[^42] Interview with Clark Bryant Hinckley, 17 November 1994.
[^43] Interview with Neal A. Maxwell, 30 June 1995.
[^44] Interview with M. Russell Ballard, 18 June 1995.
[^45] "Taking the Gospel to Britain," pp. 2-7.
[^46] Lord Thomson, "Tribute to Gordon B. Hinckley"; see also GBH Journal, 24 July 1987.
[^47] Lord Kenneth R. Thomson to GBH, 28 July 1987.
[^48] GBH Journal, 25 July 1987.
[^49] "British Strength Lauded in Birmingham," Church News, 1 August 1987; see also "Major Events Fill LDS British Calendar," "Markers Tell Where History Was Made," "Liberty Sparked First in Britain," "Church Celebrates Its British History," and "Saga of Church in British Isles Lauded at Anniversary Dinner," Church News, 1 August 1987; "LDS Mark 150 Years in the British Isles," Deseret News, 25 July 1987.
[^50] Interview with Clark Bryant Hinckley, 18 November 1994.
[^51] Interview with Virginia Hinckley Pearce, 12 October 1994.
[^52] Interview with Clark Bryant Hinckley, 17 November 1994.
[^53] GBH Journal, 19 June 1988.
[^54] GBH Journal, 20 June 1988.
[^55] Dallin H. Oaks Journal, 10 September 1988.
[^56] GBH Journal, 15 September 1995.
[^57] GBH Journal, 15-16 November 1986.
[^58] Interview with Jeffrey R. Holland, 26 May 1995.
[^59] See "BYU Chief Gets a Big Send-Off at Ceremony," Deseret News, 29 April 1989; also "BYU Leader Begins 'Lord's Errand,' Church News, 4 November 1989; "Lee Inaugurated as 10th BYU President," Deseret News, 28 October 1989; "BYU Inaugurates Rex Lee as Its 10th President," Salt Lake Tribune, 28 October 1989.
[^60] "Four Imperatives for Religious Educators."
[^61] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Out of Your Experience Here," BYU 1990-1991 Devotional and Fireside Speeches, p. 28.
[^62] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Our Solemn Responsibilities," Ensign, November 1991, p. 51.
[^63] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Daughters of God," Ensign, November 1991, p. 100.
[^64] See "Ellerbee, Hinckley Differ on Working Women," Salt Lake Tribune, 24 February 1990.
[^65] "Attitude Can Make a 'Great Difference,'" Church News, 17 September 1988; "LDS Church Official Says Attacking Church Won't Help Utah," Salt Lake Tribune, 8 September 1988; "LDS Church Plays a Substantial Role in Utah Economy, Officials Explain," Salt Lake Tribune, 25 December 1989.
[^66] "Our Solemn Responsibilities," p. 52.
[^67] Interview with Dallin H. Oaks, 28 June 1995.
[^68] See "Honoring a 47-Year Ministry," Church News, 28 May 1988.
[^69] John Holbrook to Yoshihiko Kikuchi, 3 April 1995.
[^70] GBH Journal, 30 May 1989.
[^71] See "Shrine Honors Founder of Mormons," Washington Post, 1 July 1989; also Gordon B. Hinckley, "Carthage Dedication," unpublished address, 27 June 1989; "LDS Church Dedicates the Carthage Jail Complex," Deseret News, 27 June 1989; "Hallowed, Sacred Site Made Beautiful Out of Respect, Love," Church News, 8 July 1989; "Mormons Dedicate Sacred Jail," Quad-City Times, 28 June 1989; "Renovated Carthage Jail Dedicated," Ensign, September 1989, p. 74.
[^72] Gordon B. Hinckley, "A Wonderful Summer," BYU 1989-1990 Devotional and Fireside Speeches, pp. 14-15.
[^73] "Nauvoo's Day of Glory Is Likened to Sunrise, Sunset on Mississippi," Church News, 29 September 1989.
[^74] GBH Journal, 3 July 1989.
[^75] GBH Journal, 8 July 1989.
[^76] Interview with Jane Hinckley Dudley, 9 November 1994.
[^77] "A Wonderful Summer," pp. 11-12.
[^78] Interview with GBH, 18 October 1995.
[^79] GBH Journal, 23 October 1985.
[^80] GBH Journal, 24 October 1985.
[^81] GBH Journal, 5 November 1985.
[^82] See "President Kimball Eulogized As a Man Who 'Knew the Lord,'" Church News, 17 November 1985; "President Kimball Eulogized as 'Noble Great One,'" Deseret News, 10 November 1985; "Thousands Mourn Leader of Mormons," Washington Post, 9 November 1985.
[^83] GBH Journal, 9 November 1985.
[^84] GBH Journal, 10 November 1985.
