Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Twenty-one

First Counselor

When President Kimball died, more than 40 percent of the members of the Church had never known any other prophet. Membership had nearly doubled—from 3.3 to 5.9 million—during his twelve-year presidency. Where there had been fifteen temples in operation in 1973, there were now thirty-six, with eleven more planned or under construction. The number of missions had increased from 108 to 188, and missionaries in the field from approximately eighteen to nearly thirty thousand. [^1]

President Benson and President Hinckley enjoyed a warm relationship, with President Hinckley supportive of the prophet and President Benson openly grateful for the testimony, talents, and strength of his first counselor. Though his service in a fully functioning First Presidency differed from his role in President Kimball's administration, President Hinckley welcomed the adjustment. "From the moment President Benson asked me to accept the call as his counselor, I determined that I would serve as faithfully and loyally as I was capable of doing," he observed later. "The past was behind us, and it was not my place to bring up the decisions of the past Presidency as we had made them unless he made reference to them. Of course he was different from President Kimball, but he was nevertheless a strong, able leader, and I had great respect for him. It wasn't difficult making the shift. Every time there's a change in administration, a shift has to be made, and that will always be the case. No two of us are cut from the same bolt of cloth, and thank heavens that is the case." [^2] He also looked forward to associating more closely with President Thomas S. Monson, with whom he had worked in various capacities for a number of years. He valued his colleague's numerous talents and good judgment and was grateful for their friendship.

After their second meeting as a newly constituted First Presidency, President Hinckley noted, "It is wonderful to have others to share the burden of decision." [^3] And less than a week later, after they determined to try to get along without a meeting on Mondays, he added, "I still have more work to do than I can get done, notwithstanding the fact that the Presidency is organized. However, the big shift in the load is in not having to make the decisions alone." [^4]

Away from the Church Administration Building there were other changes for both President and Sister Hinckley. For at least a couple of years, they had agonized over the increasing difficulty of maintaining their home on Capitol Hill, where they had now lived for more than a decade. Upkeep on the yard, snow removal, and their heavy travel schedules finally brought them to the reluctant conclusion that it was time to try condominium living, and they purchased a unit in Governor's Plaza in downtown Salt Lake City. Shortly before they moved he lamented: "When we built this home . . . eleven-and-a-half years ago, I planted trees. They have now grown large. . . . We have many quaking aspens, we have shrubs of various varieties, we have three peach trees that bear fruit, four apple trees, three plums, three cherries. When we move into the apartment we will have none of these, and we will miss them. But we will not miss the hundreds of thousands of leaves that fall from them in the autumn. Still, as I walked about the place today . . . thoughts came into my mind concerning whether we are doing the right thing. . . . Only my age prompts me in this direction." [^5]

The day before Thanksgiving they closed on both the sale of their home and the purchase of the condominium. The next day they moved from old residence to new. There were adjustments: They had lived there but a few weeks when President Hinckley noted, after repeated trips to the car via a long elevator ride to haul groceries and other packages, "I feel more like a dray horse than anything else." [^6] But one of the nicest things about living in "a filing cabinet," as he insisted on calling their abode, was that preparation for a major trip required little more than turning off the lights and locking the door—which they did as they left for a week in Korea and the dedication of the temple in Seoul.

This dedication, which commenced on December 14, 1985, had been scheduled long before President Benson became President of the Church, and he chose not to interrupt the plan already in place for President Hinckley to preside at the event. This was a trip President and Sister Hinckley had eagerly anticipated, and once they arrived in Korea both were enveloped in the warmth of treasured memories as they renewed friendships with the Korean Saints, many of whom they had known for twenty-five years. "We have many wonderful friends here, and they are easy to love," President Hinckley recorded in his journal.

As he walked about the newly finished edifice on a slight rise in metropolitan Seoul, President Hinckley found himself reflecting about the way the property for the temple had been acquired almost twenty years earlier. President Spencer Palmer of the Korean Mission had purchased the hillside lot when it suddenly became available, in the process incurring the displeasure of the Church's real estate office. But Elder Hinckley had intervened, and on a subsequent trip to Korea with President Hugh B. Brown he had inspected the property. President Brown had suggested that it would be a wonderful place to build a temple, and now, nineteen years later, his prophecy was being fulfilled. [^7]

The day of the dedication dawned clear and cold in Seoul as a frigid Siberian wind blew across the country. Nonetheless, when the Hinckleys arrived at the temple around 8:30 A.M., long lines had already formed. "It is a beautiful building," President Hinckley wrote in his journal. "The workmanship appears to be excellent. I am impressed with the furniture, which is first-grade Korean. I insisted on this." [^8]

It was not surprising that he had difficulty containing his emotions throughout the dedication of this first temple on mainland Asia. During various sessions he spoke of his early visits to Korea and of all he had seen since: "I have grown old coming to Korea. I have had so many experiences here; some have been painful, many have been beautiful. I recall when there were so very few and the work was so very weak. . . . I remember my first winter visit. Snow was flying through the sky. . . . I walked the streets of this city and saw many people without housing, living in boxes trying to keep warm." [^9] He declared that he had shed more tears for Korea than any other place in the world and then spoke of President Kimball's promise, given at an area conference five years earlier, that if the Saints would be faithful they would eat better, be better clothed, and live better. "We have witnessed the fulfillment of that promise among the faithful," he proclaimed. [^10]

Six dedicatory sessions and two days later, President Hinckley was bone weary but satisfied that the Lord had accepted the new temple. "We have experienced a great outpouring of the Spirit of the Lord," he reflected. "There will never be another occasion like this in the history of the Church in Korea." [^11]

Half the fun for Sister Hinckley was finding ways to share their unique experiences with the family. "None of the travel was ever lost on Mother," Kathy explained. "She absorbed everything she saw and heard, and then wrote spellbinding letters and made a full report when she got home. Sights, sounds, memories—everything. It was a production! She loved the people she met, and as we learned of them from her, we loved them too. When Mother described the dedication of the temple in Seoul, she went into great detail about the Korean women in their beautiful native dresses who lined the sidewalks as they came out of the dedication. She relived all of it—and helped us live it. Right in the middle of her description, which had us mesmerized, my father looked up and said, 'Dresses? What dresses?'" [^12]

The building of temples and the resultant ordinance work showed no sign of slowing under the new First Presidency. While serving as President Benson's first counselor, President Hinckley would participate in the dedication of temples in Denver and Las Vegas and preside at dedicatory sessions in Lima, Portland, Toronto, and San Diego and at the rededication of the refurbished Alberta, London, Swiss, and Chicago Temples. He joined in the groundbreaking ceremony for the Bountiful Temple and presided at the groundbreaking for the Mt. Timpanogos Temple in American Fork, Utah. At times he marveled at what was happening around the world. Brigham Young had lived to see the completion of just one of the four temples for which he had selected sites in Utah. By the conclusion of President Benson's term as President of the Church, there would be forty-five temples in operation. [^13]

In the solemn assembly convened during the Sunday afternoon session of the April 1986 general conference, members of the Church had the opportunity to sustain President Benson and his counselors. Earlier that morning President Hinckley spoke of the process, "beautiful in its simplicity" and absent of electioneering or campaigning, that led to the selection of a prophet of God. "I give you my testimony that it is the Lord who selected Ezra Taft Benson to become a member of the Council of the Twelve almost forty-three years ago," he testified. "It is the Lord who over these years has tested and disciplined him, schooled and prepared him. . . . As one who knows him and who stands at his side, I bear witness that he is a man of faith, of tested leadership, of profound love for the Lord and His work, of love for the sons and daughters of God everywhere."

President Hinckley concluded with prophetic words: "Under President Benson's leadership, the work of the Lord will continue to move forward. No power under the heavens can deflect it from its course. We may expect that there will be some who will try. Their efforts will be like chipping away at a granite block with a chisel of wood. The stone will not be damaged, but the chisel will be broken." [^14]

Indeed, the Church was growing dramatically. The month before the April 1986 general conference the number of missionaries in the field passed the 30,000 mark, yet during the general priesthood meeting President Hinckley issued an impassioned plea: "The Church needs you. The Lord needs you. The world needs you—yes, ten thousand more of you." [^15] In April 1987 the First Presidency announced the creation of four new areas, and in September they discontinued the International Mission, directing responsibility for its territory to the respective Area Presidencies. In May 1988 Elder Neal A. Maxwell organized the Aba Nigeria Stake, the first in West Africa; the following month the Church was granted legal recognition in Hungary; and in October 1988 Elder David B. Haight created the 1700th stake, in Manaus, Brazil, a city of 1.5 million people in the heart of the Amazon jungle. The following year, at the April 1989 general conference, the Second Quorum of the Seventy was created. The gospel was spreading into the world's far reaches.

The First Presidency not only directed the explosive growth but eagerly addressed the range of other issues that came before them on a daily basis. From issuing statements on gambling and AIDS to dealing with repercussions when missionaries were expelled from Ghana and local congregations were ordered to disband, they handled the multifarious matters that came to their attention, most of them sensitive and complicated.

As the Church increased in size, complexity, and scope, President Hinckley never lacked for things to do, and Sister Hinckley occasionally smiled as she reflected on her initial reaction that her husband's call to the First Presidency would be only of a short duration. That looked to be less likely all the time. In the meantime, her challenge was to somehow keep up with him, though at times he seemed almost ageless. Still, aches and pains reminded them both that they weren't getting any younger, and there were other events that signaled the calendar's relentless progression. In November 1986 Marjorie's children hosted a gala surprise party to celebrate her seventy-fifth birthday. Old friends from the First Ward, where she and Gordon had lived as children, as well as from East Millcreek and Capitol Hill, turned the celebration into a reunion of her closest and dearest friends. Marjorie recalled her seventieth birthday, when she had repeated to herself all day something she had heard Stephen L Richards's wife say when she was in her nineties: "Oh, to be seventy again! You can do anything when you are seventy!" Now she bragged about being the same age as President Ronald Reagan and said optimistically: "These are golden years. We no longer have to compete with anyone. We don't have to prove anything—we just have to enjoy it all." [^16]

At the evening's conclusion, President Hinckley paid tribute to his wife of nearly fifty years. "When a seventy-five-year-old woman is married to a seventy-six-year-old man," he said, "they know that this season is more like autumn than it is spring. Their prayer is for a mild and pleasant winter." Afterward he reflected privately: " has been a happy and wonderful and rewarding marriage. We have known lean times and fat times, bad times and good times. We have loved and respected one another. There is cause for much of gratitude and gladness." [^17]

For all his optimism, even President Hinckley realized that his "winter" would not consist solely of pleasant experiences. Though it was a relief to sit as a member of a fully functioning First Presidency, President Hinckley still carried the major responsibility for certain vexatious dilemmas that came before that council. One such decision was determining the fate of the Hotel Utah, which for seventy-six years had served Salt Lake City as a premier hostelry but by now had become outdated and worn out. For two years he, Presiding Bishop Robert D. Hales, and others had painstakingly studied the situation. The building was a signal landmark in the city's downtown, and almost everyone—residents, city and county officials, prominent businessmen, restorationists, other General Authorities and Church leaders—had an opinion about what should be done with it.

To tear down the grand old hotel would invite a maelstrom, yet it was difficult for the Church to rationalize commitment to the hotel business when a number of national hotel chains had constructed newer, more efficient hotels in the Salt Lake City area. During the previous five years the hotel had lost several million dollars, and studies indicated it would require an investment of at least forty million dollars to renovate the building. Further, the hotel business itself was fraught with challenges for the Church—among them, the issue of whether to serve alcohol. After lengthy discussions the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve were in full accord: The Church must stanch the flow of red ink and get out of the hotel business.

The question remained of what to do with the building. After months of intense evaluation and deliberation, the First Presidency, with President Hinckley taking the lead, determined to renovate the structure for Church purposes. By doing so they could preserve the hotel's exquisite architecture, including its beautiful lobby. Accordingly, on March 12, 1987, they released a statement indicating that the Hotel Utah would close on August 31, and that specific details about the renovation would be announced later. "No one feels sadder about the closing of the Hotel than I do," President Hinckley reflected privately. "It is a landmark in the community, and a testimony of the Church's leadership in the community. However, it has been woefully unprofitable for years. We simply cannot go on making up its deficits. . . . I am confident that in the long run the wisdom of this decision will be made evident. In the meantime we will take a good deal of flak. We should be accustomed to this by now . . . although I would prefer that we not have to take it." He continued, acknowledging the pressure he felt over this issue: "By assignment I have carried the brunt of the responsibility of this decision. It has been difficult and worrisome. It has not been hastily made. . . . It has been an agonizing period in my life. I have worried and prayed about it. every facet of the problem has been presented to the full Presidency and the Council of the Twelve, and there is unity among us. And when there is perfect unity in our meetings, after fervent prayer, we know the course is right." [^18]

Reaction was swift, sharp, and in some cases mean-spirited and personal. President Hinckley was targeted as the villain in the drama, and letters from irate businessmen and even longtime friends and associates protested the decision, claiming that closure of the hotel would permanently undermine tourism and the economy of downtown Salt Lake City. He and the Church were criticized for not consulting with the public before making an announcement of such consequence. How could the Church seriously consider reducing the city's signature hotel to an office building? One Salt Lake Tribune columnist wrote: "Most people I know greeted the surprising news of Hotel Utah's closure with disbelief. A mixture of sadness, frustration and anger followed closely the initial shock. . . . The church has placed its own, narrower interests ahead of those of the community. . . . Though the church argues it has taken the long view, it really has lapsed into parochialism. Over time, the church's decision will hurt the community, both spiritually and economically, and as a result it will damage the church as well." [^19] Salt Lake City Mayor Palmer DePaulis was quoted in the New York Times as stating, "I feel terrible. Not only are we losing our flagship hotel; we are losing our prestige as a community." [^20] The Utah Heritage Foundation fought the decision from the outset, and a full-page ad in the Tribune carried a petition of nearly one thousand names, including those of two former Utah governors, urging the Church to reconsider.

The criticism was painful. Though President Hinckley realized that even the insults directed toward him reflected frustration with the Church, it was difficult to maintain a calm exterior. But he methodically answered one complaint after another, promising the public that the Church would protect the integrity of the building and that the public would not be disappointed with the finished product. "This will be a beautiful facility. Please trust us," he said again and again, including on the eve of the closure when he delivered a statement from the hotel's Empire Room: "Following completion of the work, this will not be a dark spot in the heart of the city. You will be warmly welcomed. We ask only one thing. That is that you have confidence in us, who, with you, love this community, and who have done very much to make of the core area of the city a place of unmatched beauty. . . . That beauty will not be diminished in the actions to be taken with this treasured and gracious gathering place long known for its warmth and hospitality." [^21]

The hotel became President Hinckley's personal project, and he closely supervised every phase of its renovation. He envisioned a variety of uses for the building and was tireless in communicating a vision of what the Hotel Utah could ultimately become. By the time the building was gutted, he and Sister Hinckley had moved to a condominium in the Gateway Apartments just east of the block that housed the Church Administration Building and Hotel Utah, and he monitored progress on the project almost daily with binoculars from his balcony. One ballroom was converted to a chapel, and other areas became small meeting rooms. Ballrooms and dining rooms were beautifully renovated for receptions and formal gatherings, and the popular Roof Restaurant was restored on the top floor. Above all else, President Hinckley was adamant that the Church keep faith with the community and preserve the lobby and mezzanine for use by the public.

He hoped also to find a way to encourage Temple Square visitors to walk across the street and visit the new building. After considering dozens of options, he hit upon the idea of remodeling the grand ballroom as a theater where large audiences could view an epic film portraying the heritage of the Latter-day Saints. Initially the idea of an IMAX theater was explored, but it became apparent that constructing such a screen in the existing space would be unwieldy. President Hinckley did, however, contact Academy Award-winning director Kieth Merrill, who had extensive experience with IMAX as well as other large-format films, and invited him to produce the movie he had in mind.

Elder L. Tom Perry, who served on the committee that oversaw the hotel's renovation, said: "I sat one day with President Hinckley and Kieth Merrill as we discussed the direction this film might take. Kieth sat at one end of the desk, and I was at the other. I watched President Hinckley almost dictate a script while Kieth typed furiously on his laptop computer. Kieth actually wrote the script, but the ideas were President Hinckley's. He had the vision. He knew exactly what effect he wished the production to have on those who would see it." [^22] On that score, President Hinckley was clear: "I want people to leave with a feeling for the tremendous sacrifice that is part of this work. I want them to leave the theater crying." [^23] He reviewed each draft of the script and made numerous suggestions until it finally met with his approval. Indeed, no detail on the movie or on the entire renovation escaped his attention. [^24]

There were no easy decisions as far as the massive hotel renovation was concerned. But then, problems that reached the First Presidency were almost always serious in scope and far-reaching in implication. "The easy issues are resolved before they ever get to the First Presidency," said Presiding Bishop Robert D. Hales, who worked closely with President Hinckley on many projects relative to the Church's temporal affairs. "The ones that remain are Solomon-like. I met with President Hinckley on questions so difficult, and about which he had such concern, that he would suggest that we kneel together in prayer. He is a bright man with extraordinary judgment, but when he comes up against an insoluble problem, he goes to his knees. When he says, 'We'll take it under consideration,' it means he'll wait until he has the feeling that a certain course of action is right. He cannot be pushed or pressured into a decision. He measures before he cuts." [^25]

There was never an end to problems that required a combination of good judgment, patience, and inspiration. In the late 1980s certain self-proclaimed enemies of the Church revived their efforts to embarrass the Church by discrediting President Hinckley, and they attempted to do so by accusing him of unspeakable moral transgressions. "We want Gordon Hinckley to know that he cannot hide his sins from God and the Mormon people," a public statement from one group threatened. The accusations intensified in October 1988 when members of this group staged a demonstration in front of the Church Administration Building to accuse him of the unseemly behavior. The following Monday, they repeated their allegations at a press conference in the offices of the Salt Lake Tribune. [^26]

President Hinckley, who had been in Colombia inspecting a proposed temple site the day of the protest, was embarrassed and hurt by the ugly accusations and the distasteful public display; with the attacks made public, he wrote President Benson formally requesting him to authorize an official investigation. "These scurrilous attacks are . . . obviously intended to injure not only me, but also the Church," President Hinckley's letter explained. "I feel the time has come when a thorough, independent examination of these allegations should be made. . . . It will be for the good of the Church to get all matters pertinent to this in the record." [^27] He recorded privately: "It is bad enough to have these enemies of the Church putting forth their scurrilous statements. I want my Brethren to know for sure that there is absolutely no substance to them." [^28] He also wanted a record verifying the facts for future generations. President Benson responded by appointing a committee composed of President Howard W. Hunter and Elders James E. Faust and Dallin H. Oaks, all experienced lawyers, to oversee the investigation, and they retained the services of a highly respected non-Mormon attorney to conduct an exhaustive independent investigation of the claims.

Other developments fueled the fire. The anti-Mormon film God Makers II and a video entitled The True Story of President Gordon B. Hinckley were released, both of which perpetuated the offensive allegations. After viewing the video, President Hinckley read a statement in a meeting of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve in which he "categorically and unequivocally" denied every accusation and declared: "Has this been painful? Of course. To have one's name dragged through the slime is indeed painful. . . . If those who have fabricated these accusations have derived happiness from my pain, let that be their bitter satisfaction." [^29]

After an extensive probe, the lead attorney and his investigators rejected every accusation and concluded that the allegations against President Hinckley were pure fabrication. Some of those who had "testified" against him retracted their statements, and some admitted that they had been paid to lie. Further, the Anti-Defamation League blasted God Makers II as a "blasphemous attempt" to discredit the Church and a threat to "religious liberty," and the president of the National Conference of Christians and Jews condemned the film as "religious bigotry." [^30] President Hinckley was relieved when the matter was put to rest and the facts verifying his integrity entered as part of the official record of the Church.

For their part, President Hunter, Elder Faust, and Elder Oaks had wrestled with the age-old dilemma that confronts public figures accused of personal misconduct. The First Amendment provides sweeping protection for those who make allegations against public figures, and they are subject to legal consequence only if their statements can be proved to be malicious—which necessitates bringing the case to trial. The Brethren feared that even though the Church would prevail in a lawsuit, President Hinckley's name and reputation would be sullied by a trial that would attract widespread attention. They also felt it unwise for President Hinckley to issue a statement denying the allegations, which were so preposterous that no responsible media in Salt Lake City even picked them up; a public response almost certainly would have elevated the story to front-page news. Such a statement would also have provided a platform from which the charges could be trumpeted for months before they were ultimately exposed as false. In addition, their exposure as false would come in a single report that would fail to reach many who had heard the repetitious coverage of the charges. The only prudent recourse, the Brethren determined, was to set the facts straight for the records of the Church and hope that honorable men and women would see through the scurrilous claims.

During a meeting of the Public Affairs Committee held during this period, one individual suggested ways President Hinckley might respond and perhaps even retaliate. President Hinckley's reaction was immediate: "I won't do anything. You can't spread garbage without getting some of it on yourself."

President Faust said of the situation: "We knew from the outset that there wasn't the slightest element of truth to the accusations, but it hurt us to see how deeply President Hinckley was hurt. What is significant, however, is how he responded to the attacks. Despite his own suffering, he showed tremendous restraint, all of which demonstrated the bigness of his soul and the greatness of his character." [^31]

The ordeal was, nonetheless, painful for President Hinckley. "My natural inclination was to fight back," he acknowledged later. "But I was an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, and I knew I must turn the other cheek, go forward, and not let this derail me." [^32]

Throughout the episode, President Hinckley was sustained by his General Authority colleagues and others who supported and stood by him. Some years later he considered these attacks from a different vantage point when he recalled something President Lee had once told him—that every man who became President of the Church had first been tested in the crucible of affliction. "I guess these episodes were my crucible. They were vicious," he concluded. [^33]

During difficult times President Hinckley occasionally reflected on a talk he had given nearly twenty years earlier at BYU, "The Loneliness of Leadership," and thought that, ironically, he hadn't known the half of it. "The price of leadership is loneliness," he had stated. "The price of adherence to conscience is loneliness. The price of adherence to principle is loneliness." He had concluded with a pronouncement that was prophetic: "A man has to live with his principles. A man has to live with his convictions. A man has to live with his testimony. Unless he does so, he is miserable—dreadfully miserable. And while there may be thorns, while there may be disappointment, while there may be trouble and travail, heartache and heartbreak, and desperate loneliness, there will be peace and comfort and strength." [^34]

As before, his enduring sense of optimism helped him survive the criticism and the burdens he shouldered—an optimism rooted in his unwavering faith that the Lord was in charge and that He would overrule for good. Nothing dulled a personality quite like a negative outlook, President Hinckley often said, and he believed what he preached. A man of vision who could see beyond the here and now, he had a natural propensity for fixing his attention on where the Church was going rather than becoming bogged down by the disappointments that occurred in its everyday management. On one occasion he told the BYU student body how he viewed his lot in life: "I still feel young, with a love for life, its challenges, and its pleasures. . . . My life has been rich with challenges and associations. I have wrestled with problems large and small. I have known something of discouragement and on a few occasions have felt the exhilaration of achievement. I feel a deep sense of gratitude for the marvelous and generous blessings of the Lord. Among these is the opportunity to be associated with His great cause and kingdom." [^35]

He enjoyed quoting an article he had clipped years earlier: "Most putts don't drop. Most beef is tough. Most children grow up to be just people. Most successful marriages require a high degree of mutual toleration. Most jobs are more often dull than otherwise. Life is like an old-time rail journey—delays, sidetracks, smoke, dust, cinders, and jolts, interspersed only occasionally by beautiful vistas and thrilling bursts of speed. The trick is to thank the Lord for letting you have the ride." [^36]

When a distinguished Protestant minister called on the First Presidency and asked how they felt about the condition of the world and its people, President Hinckley responded: "I feel very optimistic. . . . I feel the spirit of Christ is brooding over the nations of the earth. Of course there are problems, many and serious. . . . there are men and women by the tens of thousands who are reaching out . . . to help those in distress. . . . I feel optimistic—guardedly so, yes, because of the extent of evil in the world. But . . . goodness is gaining, and the work of the Lord is growing in strength and power." [^37]

President Hinckley's passion for living was irresistible to members of the Church; they enjoyed a presiding official who was approachable and who had his own unique way of establishing rapport. After accompanying him to a regional conference in the Midwest, Elder Russell M. Nelson reported: "When it was President Hinckley's turn to speak he stood and said, 'It's good to be in Indiana. I don't know why, but it's good to be here,' and everyone roared. If I had said that, it wouldn't have been funny. But he has an uncanny way of making an audience feel as though he is one of them." [^38] In countries outside the United States, he greeted the Saints in their own language, even if all he knew was just a phrase. Whether "Mabuhay!" in the Philippines, "Guten Tag" in Germany, or "Buenos Dias" in South and Central America, his welcome was always enthusiastic.

After attending seven regional conferences in seven states with President Hinckley, Elder Nelson learned what others who traveled with him also observed. Regardless of the destination, he knew something about the history of the area and its people. In the pear-growing area of Medford, Oregon, for example, President Hinckley started a priesthood leadership meeting with a dissertation on fruit trees and how important it was to prune trees in February so that there would be fruit in September. "President Hinckley doesn't expect to be bowed to and prefers to be treated as though he is an ordinary worker," said Elder Nelson. "But he isn't ordinary in any respect. He is a multifaceted genius. He understands anatomy and physiology better than any non-physician I have worked with. He talks with builders about finials and mullions and speaks the language unique to their profession. When questions arise that have legal ramifications, he typically says, 'I'm no lawyer, but it seems to me that . . . ' and then renders an opinion that my lawyer colleagues insist would be a credit to any lawyer. Whether it is medicine or law, education or plumbing, it doesn't seem to matter. He grasps things quickly, has an amazing breadth of knowledge, and can apply what he knows." [^39]

A man with an insatiable appetite for learning, President Hinckley not only read widely but found other ways to increase his knowledge and understanding of specialized areas of expertise. After observing him at another regional conference, Elder Nelson reported: "One of the security officers assigned to us worked for the local police department. We had time between sessions, and President Hinckley grilled that officer for an hour about their procedures, techniques, and even the equipment they used. I marveled that he knew which questions to ask, each of which was law-enforcement specific." [^40] Bishop Robert D. Hales added: "I have never met an individual who can become so well informed through reading and through contact with people. When he spends an evening at dinner with someone, he leaves knowing something about that individual's expertise." [^41]

As son Clark progressed in his own career, he came to appreciate his father's unusual strengths. "Dad has incredible common sense and seems to instinctively know the best way to proceed with something," he said. "He is a good judge of people, and he is bright. He also has a phenomenal memory, particularly for names and faces. He consumes the Wall Street Journal, and those who worked with him on the Zion's Bank board were amazed that he not only read it but could apply what he gleaned to the discussions at the bank." [^42]

The members of the Twelve had frequent opportunity to observe similar phenomena. "What makes President Hinckley unique," Elder Neal A. Maxwell explained, "is that he remembers what he has read and distills that which he wishes to retain. His is an integrated intellect. He can draw upon what he knows to make prudent decisions." [^43] Elder M. Russell Ballard concurred: "When you combine President Hinckley's good judgment with his wealth of experience—years of supervising the construction of buildings and temples, acquisition of property, and so forth—he knows what to watch for and what questions to ask. He doesn't need to be told something twice. Once he focuses on a problem, he can hit the bull's-eye as fast as anybody I've known." [^44]

President Hinckley's reservoir of knowledge was augmented by several decades of heavy travel and study that had given him an enviable familiarity with the world and its peoples as well as a tremendous respect for its history. He enthusiastically supported opportunities to spotlight achievements from days of yore. "I am one who believes in celebrations," he explained. "I am one who believes in commemorating great events of the past. When we do so, we bring to life . . . men and women of history who did significant things of which we need reminding." [^45]

Few celebrations stirred him as did the one marking the sesquicentennial of the inauguration of missionary work in the British Isles, which commemoration was engineered by Wendell J. Ashton, then serving as a mission president in London. The evening of Friday, July 24, 1987, the Hinckleys accompanied President and Sister Benson to London's elegant Savoy Hotel for the gala anniversary banquet. Former British Prime Minister Edward Heath and Sir Rhodes Boyson, a member of Parliament and former member of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's cabinet, attended the elegant affair, as did a host of other dignitaries, including several members of British nobility and many government and business leaders. As the guests were ushered into the banquet hall, the Trumpeters of the Lifeguards played a few measures of "Come, Come Ye Saints." After dinner, President Benson gave a brief introduction, and President Ronald Reagan sent a message via video. Kenneth Thomson, Lord Thomson of Fleet, had traveled from Canada for the express purpose of introducing President Hinckley. In an effusive tribute he related key events in President Hinckley's life and then declared: "That, very briefly, is the background of President Hinckley. But of course it fails woefully to do justice to the man's great character, his deep moral and religious integrity, his outstanding administrative ability, and his almost boundless energy and drive." [^46] President Hinckley then delivered the keynote address, "Truth Shall Prevail." Afterward Lord Thomson wrote him, "Your speech was outstanding, Gordon. The message and the way you conveyed it were simply superb. Your quiet inner confidence and faith make you a very special person. . . . Thank you for providing me with one of the greatest honours in my life." [^47]

Early the next morning President and Sister Hinckley boarded the train for Preston. As they traveled through the English countryside, he reflected on the train ride he had made fifty-four years earlier when he had first set foot in Lancashire. Later that day, as he dedicated a marker in Avenham Park on the bank of the River Ribble, where the first LDS converts were baptized on July 30, 1837, he was overwhelmed by his emotions. After he had taken care of his obligations, he went by his old missionary address at 15 Wadham Road. To his surprise, the lady of the house was home and assented to their coming inside. When he asked if he might take a look at the upstairs bedroom where he had lived, she replied, "Yes, but don't get in the bed." That evening he recorded: "Marjorie and I went up into the bedroom where Brother Bramwell and I had lived and where I made an important decision in my life to think less of myself and work with greater devotion as a missionary. This was a great experience for me to come back to this place." [^48]

The following morning, 12,000 Latter-day Saints filled Birmingham's National Exhibition Centre for one of six regional conferences held in Britain that day. In his address President Hinckley admitted that he had never dreamed he would return to participate in such a historic celebration. [^49] He and Sister Hinckley returned home exuberant over their experience in a land so tender to their hearts.

Other festivities demanded Gordon and Marjorie's attention as well. As their fiftieth wedding anniversary approached, President Hinckley asked his wife how she would like to celebrate the milestone. "I want to walk the streets of Hong Kong with my children," she responded quickly, echoing a wish she had repeated countless times through the years. She knew her dream was just that—a fantasy—but when her children realized that nothing would please their parents more, they decided to gather in Hong Kong at their own expense during President Hinckley's next assignment in the Orient. It was a mountain-moving kind of project to get all five children and their spouses to Hong Kong at the right time and place. But on the evening of Sunday, September 6, 1987, all ten of them converged on the Shangri La Hotel in Kowloon for the family reunion of a lifetime.

The next three days, while their children traveled into mainland China, President and Sister Hinckley handled an assignment in Burma with the Area President, Elder Jacob de Jager. Lines from Kipling ran through President Hinckley's mind as he and Marjorie sweltered in a taxi in the congested Rangoon traffic: "Only mad dogs and Englishmen stay out in the noonday sun." Conditions in their hotel were primitive, with lizards crawling over the ceiling and walls of their room and two inches of stagnant water puddled on the bathroom floor. But any concern resulting from such inconveniences dissipated when, on the shore of Inya Lake on the morning of September 8, 1987, President Hinckley dedicated Burma for the teaching of the gospel. The following morning he and Elder de Jager baptized the first members of the Church there.

Late that night they returned to Hong Kong, and the next day Sister Hinckley's dream of three and a half decades materialized when she and her husband joined their children in touring the local sights, dickering with vendors in side-street shops, sampling the cuisine, and enjoying the noise, congestion, and spicy smells of the unique Asian metropolis. "I had heard Mother describe Hong Kong in such detail," said Kathy, "that I felt as though I had come home. To finally be in Hong Kong with my parents was like stepping into Mother's and Dad's other world." In addition to the usual tourist attractions, everyone wanted to see the places they had heard their father describe for years. Particularly emotional was their visit to Kam Tong Hall, the dark building that Elder Hinckley had thought looked like a "haunted house" when he first saw it but that had subsequently been transformed into a beautiful structure overlooking the magnificent harbor. "We had heard about this building from the day Dad saw it," Clark explained. "To us, it was a legendary landmark. He had come home scared to death after recommending that the Church purchase an expensive piece of property that needed so much work. But that property became a gathering place for the Church in the Orient. To stand there together as a family was a remarkable experience. It was as though we now shared in all the trips he had taken for years." [^50]

From Hong Kong, the family flew to Seoul for a regional conference and there witnessed firsthand the obvious affection between their parents and the Korean Saints. "Watching Mother and Dad in that setting was unlike anything I had ever seen," Virginia said. "We had always known they had a tender place in their hearts for the Oriental Saints, but we had no idea of the depth of emotion until we saw them engulfed by crowds of people who wished to shake their hands or embrace them. We thought of the days Dad had traveled the length of Korea to meet with just a few members here and there, and then looked at the thousands who came to these meetings. It was as though we were seeing the fruits of his labors." [^51] Clark summarized: "Dad knew everybody—their names, their history, when they were baptized, what positions they had held, who they had married, and what their children's names were. The Orient has been such a big part of his life, and of ours vicariously. So much of what we grew up with around the dinner table focused on Asia. To meet the people and see the sites he had talked about for decades was the experience of a lifetime." [^52]

Among other things, his children saw firsthand what anyone who traveled with President Hinckley knew—that he moved at a frenetic pace, packed his schedule as tightly as possible, and was simply indefatigable. It was not unusual for those traveling with him to get early-morning calls explaining that he had been up part of the night and had some items to discuss before they began the day's activities. If there was ever a block of unscheduled time, he squeezed in another meeting with missionaries or paid a courtesy call on local dignitaries or clergy. And even when he returned from a long trip, he allowed himself little time to recoup and readjust. After touching down on the East Coast following a trip to Tel Aviv, he headed directly for a regional conference in West Virginia, noting at day's end, "We are suffering from jet lag, but there are things to do and we keep going." [^53] The morning after he returned to Salt Lake City he was at the office early to set apart three mission presidents and to examine what had piled up during his absence. "I went through the accumulated mail and discovered, as usual, that there are plenty of problems that are constantly recurring," he noted on that occasion. [^54]

In September 1988 President and Sister Hinckley joined Elder and Sister Oaks and the Asia Area Presidency in the Philippines to conduct the first area priesthood training meeting outside the United States. Stake and district presidents, Regional Represen-tatives, mission presidents, the MTC president, and the temple president attended the meetings, which were designed to test the merits of training priesthood leaders in the field rather than having them travel to Salt Lake City at conference time. By the afternoon session of the all-day affair, Elder Oaks was feeling the effects of jet lag. But, he noted, "President Hinckley spoke during the 11th hour of continuous meetings. . . . I couldn't see that his performance was impaired at all. He is really remarkable." [^55]

The strain of nine days in the Philippines, during which they spoke to more than 1400 missionaries and 28,000 members, did begin to wear on President Hinckley, however, as he recorded in his journal: "I was sick and wobbly and weak this morning. But there is no time to slow down. This schedule is of my own making. I have only myself to blame. But I did not come to the Philippines for a vacation, but rather to do such good as I can. This means travel and meetings." [^56] While on such trips he typically announced that he would never set such a demanding schedule again, but then he proceeded to plan his next itinerary the same way.

As tiring as was the travel, meeting with the Saints rejuvenated him. Few things thrilled or motivated him more than seeing the Church grow and mature around the world. After meeting with priesthood leaders in Quito, Ecuador, on one occasion he noted: "One stake . . . is comprised entirely of Otovalo Indians. . . . These brethren sat together on my left as I spoke to them. Their dark hair was combed straight back and braided. They have strong, serene faces. They were dressed in white trousers and warm woolen serapes. They had light slippers on their feet. I suppose they work in their fields barefooted, and wear these slippers only for formal gatherings. They were tremendously impressive. They are the descendants of Father Lehi and Mother Sariah. It is wonderful to see such in the Church and to see them growing in capacity to handle responsibility." He added the following day: "I have not been to Quito in some years, and what a pleasure to come back and find this kind of strength in the Church. The work will continue to grow here in a marvelous and remarkable way." [^57]

Such experiences made the pace he kept worth the effort, and accordingly President Hinckley remained involved in as many issues as time and energy allowed and as President Benson, who was beginning to slow down, wished him to be. Indeed, there were some organizations and matters about which President Hinckley felt so deeply that even as a member of the First Presidency he chose to remain personally involved. Such was the case with Bonneville International and with BYU, where he chaired the board's executive committee.

Though the university at times faced thorny issues, many of which were complicated by the school's connection to the Church, President Hinckley was upbeat and enthusiastic about the world's largest church-owned institution of higher learning. Throughout Jeffrey R. Holland's nine-year term as president of BYU (1980-89), he worked closely with President Hinckley. He said later: "President Hinckley was wonderfully suited to his role at BYU because he loves education, he studies, he reads. This is a man who read the Iliad and the Odyssey in the original Greek. He was always pro-university, pro-education, pro-learning, and pro-growth. He was comfortable in his role and comfortable on campus. Faculty and students alike loved having him come. Even when difficult problems arose and disturbing things happened, he would say, 'Things will work out.'" [^58] Such was his approach to dealing with the fierce opposition that arose from Orthodox Jews during construction of BYU's Jerusalem Center, with the mounting challenge of funding the university, and with increasing controversy over the intense competition for admission.

President Hinckley spoke frequently at BYU devotionals and firesides and often conducted the university's convocation and graduation ceremonies. It was he who, dressed in the robes of academia, conducted the convocation in October 1989 installing Rex E. Lee as BYU's new president after President Holland was called to serve in the First Quorum of the Seventy. [^59]

He enjoyed his association with the academic world and was complimented when his modest achievements, as he referred to them, were singled out for attention. President Hinckley was awarded an honorary doctoral degree from Westminster College, an honorary doctor of humanities degree from Utah State University, an honorary doctor of human letters degree from the University of Utah, and honorary doctorates from Southern Utah University in Cedar City and from BYU. He appreciated these recognitions, for he was devoted to the learning process, as he explained to one group of religious educators: "None of us . . . knows enough. The learning process is an endless process. We must read, we must observe, we must assimilate, and we must ponder that to which we expose our minds. I believe . . . in the evolution of the mind, the heart, and the soul of man. I believe in improvement. I believe in growth." [^60] He often quoted German philosopher Georg Hegel, who stated that those who don't read history will most likely repeat it. In a message to the BYU student body, he added: "I deplore the terrible waste of the intellectual resources of so many people . . . who devote countless hours watching mindless drivel. . . . This old world needs straightening up. It needs leadership." [^61]

Regardless of the setting, President Hinckley was not one to mince words when the situation called for straight talk—though his remarks were frequently flavored with both humor and compassion. His comments at one general priesthood meeting were vintage Hinckley: "Altogether too many men, leaving their wives at home in the morning and going to work, where they find attractively dressed . . . young women, regard themselves as . . . an irresistible catch. They complain that their wives do not look the same as they did twenty years ago when they married them. To which I say, Who would, after living with you for twenty years?" [^62]

When critics accused him of delivering a "secret message" at a Regional Representatives seminar, he addressed the issue openly at a subsequent general women's meeting: "Recently I heard that someone had secured a copy of my talk, looking upon that as a singular accomplishment, as if it had been given in a secret and sinister manner, designed to keep it from the world. This is nonsense. I am therefore on this occasion going to take the liberty of rereading that portion of the talk which pertains to a matter over which some women of the Church appear to be greatly exercised. I give it to all . . . because of the activities of a few who evidently are seeking to lead others in the paths which they are following. I speak of those who advocate the offering of prayers to our Mother in Heaven." After quoting at length from the earlier address, he concluded: "Search as I have, I find nowhere in the standard works an account where Jesus prayed other than to His Father in Heaven or where He instructed the people to pray other than to His Father in Heaven. I have looked in vain for any instance where any President of the Church . . . has offered a prayer to 'our Mother in Heaven.' I suppose those . . . who use this expression and who try to further its use are well-meaning, but they are misguided." [^63]

At a conference on working women sponsored by the University of Utah, he encouraged women to educate themselves and take advantage of the fact that the entire field of human endeavor was open to women. But he also made it clear that a woman's first allegiance was to her children. [^64]

At least partially out of impatience over criticism of the Church's influence in Utah state affairs, he told the Governor's Conference on Utah's Future that he knew of no other community or state where a church contributed so much to the economy, that Church members had the right and responsibility to involve themselves in civic affairs, and that nothing good would come of criticizing the Church's influence in the state. He concluded by extending the olive branch: "If there be wounds over such matters, I want to heal them. There is no need for them. We are all essentially people of good will and generous hearts who must work together to strengthen not only the economy but every other important facet of the environment in which we live." [^65]

Despite his frank approach to difficult topics, President Hinckley delivered such counsel within a framework of charity. "What I have spoken, I have said with a desire to be helpful and, in some cases, in the spirit of a rebuke followed by an increase of love toward those whom I may have rebuked," he said in one instance typical of countless others. [^66] If anything, he erred on the side of compassion when it came to matters of Church discipline. He often said to his Brethren, "We've got to think of the family. Remember those cases in pioneer days when someone was excommunicated and we lost a whole family or a family for generations as a result." Said Elder Oaks, "He has a broad vision when it comes to consequences, and he has often counseled us to look beyond the immediate when making decisions that would affect a person's future." [^67]

Likewise, he mourned with those who mourned. Having buried his mother at an early age, lost his father, and watched siblings in their prime pass on, he knew something of the grief caused by the separation of death. When President Romney died in May 1988, he reminisced about their service together and paid tribute to him as a friend, leader, and ardent defender of the Book of Mormon. [^68] When friends and relatives passed away, he attended the services if at all possible. The family of Raymond Holbrook, a distant cousin, was startled when President Hinckley arrived for the noon funeral of their father. A son of the deceased said: "To my knowledge, no one from the immediate family notified President Hinckley of the funeral. Nevertheless, despite a hectic schedule, he and spoke of my father's abilities and service. His brief comments were powerful and greatly appreciated by all of us." [^69]

Few memorial services were more poignant than one in late May 1989 for Elder Todd Wilson, who with his companion had been shot and killed in the streets of La Paz, Bolivia. "Mission-aries are so dear to the entire church that when one is lost through death the entire church grieves," President Hinckley began his remarks. Though many have died for the gospel, he said, "only a few have been gunned down by hateful men. . . . The of Todd Wilson . . . will be engraved forever in the history of this church as of] those who lived as faithful servants of God and died as martyrs to his eternal work." Before returning home, President Hinckley visited with Todd's younger brother, who the night before the murder had been interviewed for his mission. "He will go," President Hinckley said simply. [^70] Unfortunately, this would not be the last such funeral President Hinckley would attend as a representative of the First Presidency.

Thankfully, most of his assignments were not as sobering—many were occasions for celebration and reflection. In June 1989, he joined President Benson in dedicating the renovated Carthage Jail complex—an event made more meaningful when he was reminded of his father's efforts five decades earlier to refurbish the jail while he was serving as president of the Northern States Mission. "Few could foresee the future stature of the man whose blood stained the floor of this jail," President Hinckley said in his address. With the wife of the governor of Illinois present, he concluded: "Ours is the duty to forgive and put behind us the troubles of the past. Ours is the obligation to rise above old animosities. Ours is the privilege to build well on that foundation laid long ago." The event attracted widespread interest, including that of the Washington Post, which published a report of the proceedings. [^71]

The magnitude of what had transpired in Nauvoo and at Carthage was seared into his soul. "I am always deeply affected when I walk where Joseph walked and when I stand where he was shot and killed," he explained on many occasions. "Let it be remembered . . . by every one of us . . . that we would not be here . . . were it not for the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith and the testimony of the reality and divinity of his calling that burned in the hearts of his contemporaries and followers who laid the foundation of this great work that so richly blesses our lives." [^72]

In September 1989 President Hinckley addressed a BYU symposium commemorating the sesquicentennial anniversary of the founding of Nauvoo. His poetic description revealed the intensity of his feelings about the "City of Joseph": "Nauvoo didn't grow in ragtail fashion as so many cities in early America did. It rose like the sunrise, planned from the beginning. It faded like the sunset after a short day. . . . This place fairly rang with the cutting and shaping of lumber, with the chiseling of stone, with the hammering of hot iron on the anvil, with the surveying and building of streets, the plowing of farmland, the planting and tilling of the soil, the gathering of the harvest." Such a description led to a tribute to the people who lived there: "I am not saying that the Saints enjoyed it. It was terrible. But there was something magnificent about the way they held up their heads and kept on going notwithstanding the travail through which they passed." [^73]

It was not surprising that President Hinckley admired the virtue of persistence, for he, too, kept on going. His only respite from the pace and pressure was a small country cottage that he and Sister Hinckley built. When his schedule permitted, they stayed overnight on Friday and spent Saturday there so he could work outside, dig and plant, irrigate and prune, and eat fruit from his own trees. As he puttered outside his small home, he relished his deliverance from the confines of downtown.

One sequence of events demonstrated the property's therapeutic value. In July 1989, he decided to take a few days of vacation. "I am burned out," he acknowledged. "I have no desire to go anywhere and play. I simply would like to get out and work, and I have a big project to do." Unusually heavy winter snow had crushed the roof of a storage shed on his property, and he was determined to replace it. Day after day he worked in the hot sun until he was exhausted. One evening he recorded, "My energy for the day is spent, but it has been a happy spending." [^74] He dedicated July 4 to measuring, sawing, and hammering. "I worked the way I did when I was 50. I did not think I could do it, but I have done it," he noted. At the end of that week, with his project nearing completion, he exulted that he had been able to largely forget the office. President Monson had called to say that President Benson was not feeling well. "Except for matters of this kind I have kept my mind on other things," he wrote. [^75] His children often saw their father when he stole away to the cottage. "He goes to the basement for hours, working with his tools," Jane explained. "Some people play golf. Dad putters around in his basement." [^76]

The combination of heavy responsibility—and its attendant pressure—with relief now and again to dig in the soil suited President Hinckley well. Two months after the week off he reflected on the richness of his life. "It has been a wonderful summer," he told the BYU student body. "I have not traveled as a tourist. I have not been to the beach and walked in the sand. I have not been to resorts or places of fun. . . . With the exception of a half dozen days, I have been in my office up against the stresses that are felt there. . . . There are decisions to be made every day, and some of these are difficult. The guidance of the Lord is sought in all of these deliberations. The work is demanding, but there is something wonderfully stimulating in the very challenge of it. It is a marvelous thing to sit where one can see, at least in some measure, the whole broad encompassing picture of this great throbbing, viable, growing phenomenon the Lord has called The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This summer I took a few days away from the office. . . . I spent a few days . . . perspiring in the sun, stirring the earth, and witnessing the miracles of nature. How wonderful a thing it is to stand on the soft earth after the sun has set and darkness comes. . . . I look up to the stars and sense in some small degree the majesty and wonder and magnitude of the universe, the awesome greatness of its Creator and Governor, and the implications of my own place as a child of God." [^77]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See "And the Walls Came Tumbling Down," Our Glorious Century (Pleasantville, N.Y.: Reader's Digest, 1994), pp. 420-23.
[^2] Interview with GBH, 22 November 1995.
[^3] See "European Reform Called Gift to World," Deseret News, 4 December 1989; "A Season of Love That Is Felt Anew," Church News, 9 December 1989.
[^4] See "LDS Church Welcome to Come to Soviet Union, Says Envoy," Salt Lake Tribune, 28 April 1990; also "Reliving 'LDS Question,'" Salt Lake Tribune, 15 October 1995.
[^5] Gerry Avant, "Soviet Envoy's Utah Visit Is Historic," Church News, 5 May 1990; also "Superpowers Beginning Era of Friendship, Soviet Says," Deseret News, 28 April 1990.
[^6] GBH Journal, 7 September 1990.
[^7] Interview with GBH, 22 November 1995.
[^8] "Rise to a Larger Vision of the Work," pp. 95-97; see also Boyd K. Packer, "Teach Them Correct Principles," Ensign, May 1990, pp. 89-91; Thomas S. Monson, "The Lord's Way," Ensign, May 1990, pp. 92-94.
[^9] GBH Journal, 22 June 1990.
[^10] GBH Journal, 11 July 1990.
[^11] See, for example, GBH Journal, 6 June 1990.
[^12] GBH Journal, 7 June 1990.
[^13] Interview with Robert D. Hales, 26 May 1995.
[^14] Gordon B. Hinckley, "This Peaceful House of God," Ensign, May 1993, p. 74.
[^15] GBH Journal, 15 April 1990.
[^16] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Youth Is the Season," New Era, September 1988, p. 47.
[^17] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Rise to the Stature of the Divine Within You," Ensign, November 1989, pp. 95, 97.
[^18] See GBH Journal, 22 June 1990.
[^19] GBH Journal, 23 June 1990.
[^20] GBH Journal, 24 June 1990.
[^21] MPH to Michael Hinckley, 1 March 1993.
[^22] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Trust and Accountability," BYU Devotional Address, 13 October 1992.
[^23] GBH Journal, 25 October 1992.
[^24] MPH to Michael Hinckley, 24 January 1993.
[^25] GBH Journal, 1 July 1993.
[^26] GBH Journal, 21 July 1993.
[^27] Gordon B. Hinckley, "A Unique and Wonderful University," BYU Devotional Address, 1 October 1988.
[^28] GBH Journal, 2 May 1991.
[^29] GBH Journal, 6 February 1993.
[^30] GBH Journal, 7 December 1992.
[^31] Gordon B. Hinckley, "'In . . . Counsellors There Is Safety,'" Ensign, November 1990, pp. 50-51.
[^32] Interview with Ted Simmons, 23 January 1996.
[^33] Interview with Dallin H. Oaks, 28 June 1995.
[^34] GBH Journal, 31 July 1992.
[^35] See Interview with Allen C. Rozsa, 28 June 1995.
[^36] GBH Journal, 13 September 1993.
[^37] GBH Journal, 13 September 1993; also Interview with Jane Hinckley Dudley, 9 November 1994.
[^38] Interview with Jane Hinckley Dudley, 9 November 1994.
[^39] Interview with Michael Richard Hinckley, 23 June 1996.
[^40] See "Children: The Essence of Love, Hope," Church News, 29 January 1994.
[^41] "Mothers Urged to Back Positive Entertainment," Deseret News, 3 May 1994; "Mothers Face Compelling Challenges, Opportunities," Church News, 7 May 1994.
[^42] "Saving the Nation by Changing Our Homes," address to BYU Management Society, 5 March 1994.
[^43] "Pioneer Memorial Takes Flak for Profanity, May Lose Financial Support of LDS Source," Salt Lake Tribune, 11 February 1994.
[^44] GBH Journal, 15 August 1992.
[^45] See "Address and Dedication of Willie Rescue Site Monument," 15 August 1992; also GBH Journal, 15 August 1992.
[^46] GBH Journal, 4 April 1993; also "This Peaceful House of God," p. 75.
[^47] See Interview with Derek Metcalfe, 8 June 1995.
[^48] Interview with Derek Metcalfe, 8 June 1995.
[^49] Interview with Neal A. Maxwell, 30 June 1995.
[^50] GBH Journal, 19 May 1993.
[^51] Interview with Philippe Kradolfer, 16 April 1996.
[^52] GBH Journal, 11 June 1992.
[^53] GBH Journal, 26 July 1992.
[^54] Interview with Ted Simmons, 23 January 1996.
[^55] GBH Journal, 25 April 1993.
[^56] GBH Journal, 27 April 1993.
[^57] Interview with L. Tom Perry, 31 May 1995.
[^58] GBH Journal, 6 May 1993.
[^59] "A Tour of the Joseph Smith Memorial Building," Ensign, September 1993, pp. 32-34; see also "A Heroic Figure," Ensign, September 1993, p. 38.
[^60] "Pleasing Restoration," Salt Lake Tribune, 18 August 1993.
[^61] See Stan Larson, ed., A Ministry of Meetings: The Apostolic Diaries of Rudger Clawson (Salt Lake City: Signature Books, 1993), pp. 373-75, 421, 542, 725.
[^62] Joseph F. Smith Jr. to Elder E. Wesley Smith, 18 August 1909.
[^63] GBH to Calvin P. Rudd, 9 December 1993.
[^64] Interview with Richard G. Scott, 4 August 1996.
[^65] See "Out of Your Experience Here," p. 29.
[^66] Interview with Thomas S. Monson, 28 April 1995.
[^67] Interview with Wendell J. Ashton, 3 February 1995.
[^68] See "Everyone Has Something to Contribute, Says Ford Chairman," Church News, 27 November 1983.
[^69] Interview with M. Russell Ballard, 18 June 1995.
[^70] Spencer J. Condie to M. Russell Ballard, 9 June 1994.
[^71] GBH Journal, 17 July 1992.
[^72] George Bush to GBH, 21 July 1992.
[^73] Interview with Lowell R. Hardy, 11 May 1995.
[^74] "A New Church Order," Salt Lake Tribune, 14 March 1995.
[^75] Interview with Ted Simmons, 23 January 1996.
[^76] Interview with Thomas S. Monson, 28 April 1995.
[^77] Interview with Henry B. Eyring, 9 August 1995.
