Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Twenty-two

The Opening of New Doors

One of the most dramatic events of the twentieth century began without fanfare or warning. At the stroke of midnight on November 9, 1989—at which time, the East German government had announced, all border restrictions on crossing into West Germany would be lifted—tens of thousands of Berliners on both sides of the wall surged through the newly opened checkpoints. Horns honked and bells rang, and men and women sang, shouted, and wiped tears from their eyes as sledgehammers began physically dismantling the twenty-eight-mile barrier that since 1961 had stood as the ultimate symbol of oppression and isolation.

The subsequent transformation of Eastern Europe was even more incredible, for a great tide of freedom swept from country to country. A bloodless revolution toppled the government in Czechoslovakia; Romania's brutal regime came to an abrupt and inglorious end; Poland became the first Iron Curtain country to form a non-Communist, multiparty parliament; Hungary opened its borders; and by the end of 1990 all fifteen Soviet republics had declared some form of autonomy. [^1] These astounding developments were hailed around the world, but perhaps nowhere were they greeted with more gratitude than at Church headquarters, where leaders recognized them as the fulfillment of prophecy and a dramatic answer to prayer.

For years the Church had made repeated efforts to gain entrance to Eastern Bloc countries. Under assignment from the First Presidency, President Thomas S. Monson had had major responsibilities in East Germany for more than two decades, and his influence had opened many doors. Perhaps the most conspicuous evidence of progress had been the dedication in June 1985 of the Freiberg Temple in the German Democratic Republic. And in late 1988, following President Monson's negotiations with GDR officials, missionaries had been allowed to enter the country and members living there had received permission to leave and serve missions elsewhere in the world. Though there was no doubt in President Hinckley's mind that the Eastern Bloc would one day open to the Church, the speed with which the Berlin Wall came down amazed him. "It was a miracle," he recalled. "The Lord moved to shake off the bonds under which those people had lived for so long. The time had come when in His wisdom there should be an opportunity to teach the gospel in that part of the world." [^2]

Less than a month later, at the First Presidency Christmas devotional, President Hinckley hailed the recent events as a "Christmas present of gigantic proportions to millions who have been under a yoke of bondage" and declared that the Spirit of Christ was "brooding over much of the earth." Not for many years had there been a Christmas like this. "We have witnessed in the past few weeks, and particularly in recent days, miracles undreamed of only a short time ago," he continued. "The shackles of enslavement are falling. The ruthless atheism that in some areas has hung as a cloud of darkness for decades is now being dissipated." [^3]

When asked about the Church's policy toward expansion, President Hinckley had typically responded, "We go where we're invited to go, when we're invited to go there." Spurred on by the revolutionary developments in Eastern Europe, the Church moved quickly to establish new missions. Even still, some events in April 1990 surprised him. That month, the Soviet Union's ambassador to the United States, Yuri V. Dubinin, and his wife, Liana, visited Salt Lake City at the invitation of the American-Armenian Bridge of Friendship, a project sponsored by industrialist Jon Huntsman to fund construction in Armenia, where 450,000 people had been left homeless by a massive earthquake. During an interview with the ambassador outside the Huntsman home, a reporter asked Dubinin if the Soviet Union would allow the Church to enter his country. Without hesitating, he responded that the Mormon church had "absolute freedom" to come to the Soviet Union. The reporter turned to a startled President Hinckley for comment, and he replied that the Church had an obligation to carry the gospel to the world, and though they had enjoyed conversations with Soviet officials, no decisions had yet been made. [^4]

Later that evening, the ambassador told President Hinckley: "Our friendship with your church is not so long, but it began in a very important moment for us and for the Armenian victims of the earthquake. It was a wonderful and very touching manifestation that all of us are human beings." The ambassador ended his visit by speaking at the invitation of President Jon Huntsman to a session of conference in the Salt Lake Monument Park Stake. There he said, "I would like to take this opportunity to thank the American people and your church, which was one of the first to come to our aid." [^5]

By July 1990, largely due to the diligent and inspired efforts of Elder Russell M. Nelson and Elder Hans B. Ringger, president of the Europe Area, missions had opened in Prague, Warsaw, and Budapest, and the Finland Helsinki East Mission was organized with the intent of concentrating on missionary work in the former Soviet Union. In early fall President and Sister Hinckley traveled to Eastern Europe for a firsthand look at conditions there. They were honored when Poland's minister of religion met them upon their arrival in Warsaw, and when they were permitted an audience with the chief of ministers of the Polish government. Before leaving the country they also met with Church members and inspected a new chapel under construction in Warsaw. In Czechoslovakia and Budapest, they met with small groups of members and missionaries. "We have had a remarkable experience in these new countries which have just shaken off the yoke of Communism," President Hinckley noted as they prepared to return home. "This is a season of miracles in Eastern Europe. Two years ago people would have thought it impossible that such things could happen. However the new governments are unstable and the economy in each nation is in bad condition. I fear this will be a very difficult winter with food shortages and unemployment." [^6] Just three days after they arrived back in Salt Lake City, registration of the Leningrad Branch of the Church was formally approved. And the following year, on June 24, 1991, the Russian Republic granted formal recognition to the Church.

As stunning as these events were, there were revolutionary developments in nonpolitical arenas as well. On November 25, 1989, the First Presidency announced a major change in policy for financing local Church units in the United States and Canada. All funds required to operate local units, including those needed to construct buildings, would come from the tithes and offerings of the Church, and members would no longer have budget assessments. For years leaders had looked to this day. During his eight years in the First Presidency, President Hinckley had encouraged financial policies that would put the Church in the economic position to allow this step.

"This idea wasn't new. It had been discussed for years," President Hinckley explained. "But it was a bold step, because the amount of money involved was staggering. To lift all local contributions beyond tithes and offerings from the people and have the Church assume the cost of acquiring real estate, building and maintaining buildings, and running programs required a tremendous act of faith. We talked about this for a long time in the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve, and it received very serious consideration. The decision to move ahead was tremendously significant." [^7]

On February 18, 1990, President Hinckley presided at a Churchwide fireside in which he, President Monson, and Elder Boyd K. Packer explained the principles underlying this significant operational change. Reflecting on his experience as a stake president who had been charged with raising funds to build chapels and carry on a full program of activity, he said: "In those days we would have thought the Millennium had come if we had received word that the Church would bear all of the costs of providing land, all of the costs incident to building construction, operation, and maintenance, let alone an activity and administration budget. . . . It is not the Millennium, but this long-hoped-for and prayed-for day has come. Though I have been a party to its inauguration, I still stand in awe at what has happened. . . . I have been a personal witness to this whole unfolding miracle."

His message revealed the intensity of his feelings about the Church's finances: "The Church is not so wealthy that it can indiscriminately scatter its resources. We must be extremely careful and wise, and I believe inspired, if this program, which involves many millions of dollars, is to function." [^8]

President Hinckley frequently marveled at the simplicity of the Lord's law of finance. After a meeting with President Monson and the Presiding Bishopric in which they reviewed a quarterly financial report, he noted: "Because of the faith of the people the Church is in good financial condition. We who are officers of the Church have a very special and sacred trust concerning the funds of the Church. It is a matter of deep and anxious concern to me. I wish to be prudent, and above all things inspired." [^9] Just a few weeks later, he implored the Church's department heads to exercise prudence and economy as they prepared the next year's budget: "Never has the Church been in a better position financially than it is today, but prosperity can be a fragile thing." [^10]

There was further financial history making when the First Presidency announced that, effective January 1, 1991, the contributions required to maintain full-time missionaries from the U.S. and Canada would be equalized. This possibility had likewise been considered for decades and in recent months had been discussed again and again—after which deliberations President Hinckley always noted, "This is a matter that weighs very heavily upon me." [^11] After the meeting of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve in which the decision was reached, President Hinckley recorded his feelings: "We made the very historic decision to average all missionary costs. This is a matter that has been discussed over a period of many, many years. It means that regardless of where a missionary goes, the cost will be the same. It means that half of the missionary families will be subsidizing the costs of the other half. But there is a definite element of equity in it. . . . This is a matter over which I feel great and serious concern. . . . We have set aside the tradition of more than a century." [^12]

Since the death of President Tanner in 1982, no man had borne more responsibility for, or had more influence on, the financial well-being of the Church than had President Hinckley. Bishop Robert D. Hales said: "President Hinckley's understanding of banking and economics is incredible, particularly in view of the fact that his career has been based largely at Church headquarters. Yet his influence on the investment strategy of the Church and upon the way we handle our physical facilities and assets has been nothing short of remarkable. He has a long-term view. He seems to know when it is necessary to spend money, and when resources must be conserved." [^13] President Hinckley was meticulous and demanding, for example, about the care given each phase and detail of temple construction. "We have been criticized for the cost of , a cost which results from the exceptional quality of the workmanship and the materials that go into them," he acknowledged in a general conference address. "Those who criticize do not understand that these houses are dedicated as the abode of Deity and, as Brigham Young stated, are to stand through the Millennium." [^14]

Aside from those unprecedented political and financial reformations, the year 1990 ushered in several noteworthy events in the Hinckley family, one of which occurred on April 15, when Richard Hinckley was called to serve as president of the Salt Lake Emigration Stake. "His being called as a stake president creates a remarkable thing," President Hinckley reflected, "four generations of stake presidents. It is a great tribute to him and a great opportunity. We are proud of him." [^15] Clark was serving in a stake presidency in Arizona, and President Hinckley was grateful that his sons were willing and able to handle such assignments.

When President Hinckley set apart the new President Hinckley, it was not the first such privilege he had enjoyed with his children. The year before he had set apart Virginia as a member of the Primary General Board, and two years later had a similar experience when she was named first counselor to Janette C. Hales in the general presidency of the Young Women. He felt some concern that charges of nepotism might be leveled about her appointment and initially discouraged her call when Sister Hales made the recommendation, but he was pleased that she was worthy and capable.

President Hinckley had been surrounded by strong women his entire life. His mother had been an accomplished profes-sional prior to her marriage and a devoted mother thereafter, and Marjorie had been a wonderful mother and a tremendous support to him—all while maintaining her own voice and independence. Now his daughters were carrying on in the same manner, each of them articulate, talented, and spirited. He teased them about their strong wills but was privately delighted that they were, each of them, independent thinkers who were faithful and orthodox without being necessarily wedded to convention. He both recognized and valued the influence women had, not only on the home and society but within the gospel kingdom, and he championed their cause at every opportunity.

Admittedly, he was chagrined by the dissenting voices of some women who felt they should be able to hold the priesthood, concerned about the number of young women who were inactive, and disheartened about the suffering of some at the hands of abusive or unfaithful husbands. But he also recognized that within women lay tremendous power and responsibility for molding society and making a vital contribution to the Church. "The Church has been in the forefront in training the daughters of Zion and in giving them responsibility," he said. "We believe and have taught consistently from the earliest days of the Church that a woman's greatest mission in life is an honorable and happy marriage with the rearing of an honorable and happy family. . . . But this is not inconsistent with other activities. There are tremendous responsibilities for women in the Church as well as in the community consistent with and in total harmony with marriage, motherhood, and the rearing of good and able children." [^16]

Speaking in a general women's meeting, he challenged women to "rise to the stature of the divine" within them. "I see my own companion. . . . Is her contribution less acceptable before the Lord than is mine? I am satisfied it is not. She has walked quietly at my side, sustained me in my responsibilities, reared and blessed our children, served in many capacities in the Church, and spread an unmitigated measure of cheer and goodness wherever she has gone." [^17] Beginning with his wife, the women of his own family were carrying their share of the load.

The year 1990 also marked a significant personal milestone for President Hinckley. Though it was almost impossible to believe, it had been eighty years since his parents had welcomed him into their home. In the intervening years he had logged millions of miles in the air, had seen the world's far reaches and rubbed shoulders with the world's prominent and influential, and had given more than a half century's service to the Lord's kingdom.

On the eve of President Hinckley's eightieth birthday, his family hosted a dinner in his honor for the General Authorities and their wives on the twenty-sixth floor of the Church Office Building. Each of his children and their spouses participated in a "Life with Father" presentation that reviewed highlights of his eight decades while pointing out his idiosyncrasies and personality quirks in humorous detail. President Monson paid him a warm tribute, and the evening concluded with a few remarks from the guest of honor himself, who conceded that both he and Marjorie were getting along in years and that the "rivets are getting a little loose and the solder is getting a little soft." Never-theless, he couldn't help but reflect on the unique privileges that had been his: "I have been around the Church Office Building longer than any other man except Joseph Anderson, who is in his 101st year. I have had many, many friends . . . good and wonderful people who have blessed my life and from whom I've learned a great deal. I've known disappointment at times. But by and large it really has been a great and good life." [^18]

The climax of his birthday celebration occurred the next morning, when he and Marjorie attended a session at the Salt Lake Temple with their children and adult grandchildren—nineteen in all. It was a wonderful morning, made all the better by the realization that all of their children and spouses, along with grandchildren old enough, were worthy to participate. Before retiring he wrote: "This is my 80th birthday. It does not seem possible. I cannot believe it. I do not feel old. I get out of breath rather easily, and get tired, but I still feel alert and that I can carry my load." After a few other observations, he concluded: "I feel a spirit of great gratitude and deep reverence for my beloved mother who died at the age of 50 and my wonderful father. No one could have had better parents. . . . I hope I have brought some measure of honor to their names." [^19] With these celebrations past, he hoped there would be an end to the fuss. When he went to church the next morning, however, many friends, having read notice of his birthday in the Church News, commented on the occasion. "I would feel much better if it were not so well known," he wrote. "I do not wish to be tagged as an old man." [^20]

President Hinckley may have felt physically capable of carrying his load in the First Presidency, but little by little he was forced to reduce his commitments elsewhere. He had resigned in 1985 from the Utah Power and Light board of directors, and in June 1990 he reluctantly retired from the Zion's National Bank board of directors after twenty-four years of service. He had enjoyed those associations, but the press of other responsibilities made it necessary to lighten his load.

Only occasionally did he spend a day home sick, and even then he usually attributed the ailment to stress. In August 1990 he had a small skin cancer removed, but that procedure did little more than force him to take it easy that day. And in November 1992 he submitted to arthroscopic surgery on his knee, made necessary after he injured it climbing Rocky Ridge in Wyoming. That minor operation kept him away from the office only a couple of days.

In a letter to a missionary grandson, Sister Hinckley provided a glimpse of the schedule she and her husband were keeping: "A week ago we went to Hawaii, but not to relax. On Sunday we held 3 regional conferences on 3 different islands. A brutal schedule, but very rewarding. The last one was on Molokai. They seldom have visitors and have never had a member of the First Presidency. They were so excited—they piled leis on us up to our ears. We got home 9 P.M. on Tues. and Gramps was at the office at 7 A.M. the next morning. His secretary put on his desk a list of assignments for the next 60 days. Enough to give a younger man a faint heart. There is no let-up and Gramps is suffering from severe burn-out, but somehow with the help of the Lord he will make it. . . . Sometimes when the pressures mount I have to remember that Joseph Smith did have a vision and though we give our whole souls to the work we are still unprofitable servants." [^21]

In one address to the BYU student body President Hinckley revealed something of the strain under which he routinely operated: "I cannot understand how I agreed to come here today," he began. "We have just concluded a general conference of the Church and a number of associated meetings. I am hoarse from speaking and feel drained of things to speak about. . . . The day after tomorrow I leave for London for a regional conference to be followed by the rededication of the London Temple and then the rededication of the Swiss Temple. There will be dedicatory prayers and many talks to be given. . . . How did I ever agree to come here today? I ask myself. Do you have the same problem? . . . Someone asks you to do something far in advance, and you agree without really thinking of what that will entail. Then, when the day is upon you, you doubt your capacity, you worry, you ask why you ever agreed, and you pray for inspiration and enlightenment to fulfill your commitment." [^22]

When he arrived home from that trip to Europe—which proved glorious because of the rededications themselves but also because he rekindled friendships formed during the original dedications—President Hinckley felt unusually weary. "On this plane ride home I have let down. I feel extremely tired. Since we left here a week ago Friday, I have given some 22 talks, each one different. At the age of 82 I am trying to work the way I did at 52." [^23] In another letter to a grandson, Sister Hinckley acknowledged: "Grandpa wrestles with tremendous problems and decisions every day. I am not sure whether that is what keeps him young or whether it is what makes his hair whiter and whiter. But when he sees some of his peers he is grateful for the challenge. The worst possible situation is to have nothing to do." [^24] One of President Hinckley's frequent journal entries after a heavy day was simply, "I retired weary but happy."

Physical labor provided the best relief to his busy calendar. "I work in my office all day long and then go to my home in the Gateway condominiums without going outside. I do not know whether it is summer, autumn, winter, or spring," he complained. "This may be an exaggeration, but it is not very much of an exaggeration." [^25] Not only did he thrive on the sun and fresh air, but he prided himself on being able to tolerate rigorous work. When the roof of his toolshed in East Millcreek sprang a leak, he insisted on repairing it himself. "Marjorie scolded me for even thinking of getting on the roof at the age of 83," he noted. "As is the case with most men of my age I paid little attention to her scolding, climbed the ladder, and worked on the roof. Foolish? Yes. But the roof will no longer leak." [^26]

It was fortunate that both President Hinckley and President Monson could tolerate a vigorous pace, because President Benson was declining in health. At eighty-six, he had been the second oldest man ordained President of the Church, and through the first two years of his presidency he kept a full schedule and traveled regularly. In October 1987 he suffered a mild heart attack, but the incident caused him only temporary difficulty. During 1988, however, his energy began to decrease, and he missed an increasing number of meetings. In October 1988, President Hinckley stepped in when President Benson didn't feel up to speaking at BYU: "He is now in his ninetieth year and does not have as much energy as he once had," President Hinckley began. "Neither will you when you reach that age—if you ever reach it. I bring you his love and blessing. He asked me to fill his assignment this morning, and that is what counselors are for." [^27]

By the summer of 1989, when President Hinckley conducted President Benson's ninetieth birthday celebration at the Tabernacle, the prophet was frail. He attended but did not speak at the April 1990 general conference. From that time forward his general health deteriorated, and only occasionally did he meet with the Brethren. After he attended one meeting in the temple in the spring of 1991, President Hinckley noted: "It was very good to have him there. He said nothing, but his countenance was radiant." [^28]

At first it was a little unnerving for President Hinckley to watch the prophet's health fail, for once again he found himself serving as counselor to an aging Church President whose physical strength and mental acuity were gradually slipping and unlikely to improve. There was at least one major difference this time, however, for he was joined in the First Presidency by an able, vital second counselor who shared the workload and with whom he could confer over difficult matters that demanded resolution.

He was enormously grateful for President Monson, and as the burden of leading the Church fell increasingly to the two of them, he often remarked, "We have been here before." One notation in his journal is representative: "The pressures of my work at the office are tremendous. . . . I have to make decisions. I am serving as the first counselor to the President of the Church, who is unable in his present circumstances to handle any of the business of the Church." [^29]

President Hinckley planned to accompany the Tabernacle Choir on its historic tour to the Holy Land during December 1992 but at the last minute decided to stay home because President Benson was not well and Howard W. Hunter, President of the Twelve, lay seriously ill in the hospital. "It is a great opportunity that I miss, but I feel my duty is here," he recorded. [^30] By the following spring, President Benson was generally lethargic. And after President Hunter underwent gallbladder surgery in May 1993, his condition deteriorated. President Hinckley was in London when he received word from President Monson that both men were in serious condition and that he might have to return to Salt Lake City on a moment's notice.

As had been the case during President Kimball's declining years, President Hinckley and, this time, President Monson were faced with achieving the delicate balance of moving the work forward while not overstepping their boundaries as counselors. Several times President Hinckley openly addressed the sensitive issue of the prophet's failing health and what that meant to the Church as a whole. "Brother Monson and I . . . do as has been done before, and that is to move forward the work of the Church, while being very careful not to get ahead of the President nor to undertake any departure of any kind from long-established policy without his knowledge and full approval," he explained in a general priesthood meeting. "We postpone action when we are not fully certain of our course and do not move forward until we have the blessing of our President and that assurance which comes from the Spirit of the Lord. We pray for our President. We pray often and with great earnestness. We love him and know our proper relationship to him. . . . Do not fear, . . . there is a Presidency over this Church. I hope it will not sound egotistical when I say that it has been put in place by the Lord. . . . We have no other desire than the desire to do His will concerning His kingdom and His people." [^31]

Those who interacted with President Hinckley on day-to-day matters found that he practiced what he preached. Ted Simmons, managing director of physical facilities for the Church, regularly brought matters for consideration before the Appropriations Committee. "Throughout President Benson's illness President Hinckley made it clear that he was not the prophet and that he in no way presumed to operate in that role," he said. "He constantly deferred to what the President of the Church would want done. It wasn't so much what he said but how he conducted himself. There are no top-level executives I know of in the business world who could have subordinated themselves quite as he did, and for so long." [^32]

There were times, many of them, when Presidents Hinckley and Monson refused to move forward on an issue until they were sure they had received assent from an alert President Benson. Elder Oaks witnessed one such instance that occurred while the Twelve were enjoying a social function in President Benson's apartment. "I knew that President Hinckley was going to clear a particular matter with President Benson," he recalled. "At one point President Hinckley motioned for me to join the two of them in one corner of the room so that I could witness the conversation. I saw that the prophet was tracking the discussion entirely, and with that the First Presidency was able to move forward on that issue. If President Hinckley felt something was a decision for the President and not something within the delegated authority of counselors, he would not move ahead. His integrity on that process was 100 percent." [^33]

President Benson's fragile condition did not impede the work. On September 1, 1991, Church membership reached eight million. The kingdom was growing in other ways as well, as evidenced by the increasing size of and diversity within the First and Second Quorums of the Seventy. Among many others, in the early nineties President Hinckley set apart as General Authorities Elders Han In Sang from Korea, Kwok Yuen Tai from Hong Kong, and Augusto A. Lim from the Philippines, each of whom he had known during his extensive travels throughout Asia.

The Church was also making progress on other fronts, including its relationship with leaders of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. Largely through the efforts of Allen C. Rozsa, director of the visitors center in Independence, Missouri, the Tabernacle Choir was invited to perform in the Reorganized Church's Auditorium at the conclusion of its 1992 tour to Canada and the Midwest. The invitation was tendered on the condition that President Hinckley attend the performance and address the congregation. Accordingly, on July 31 he and Sister Hinckley spent the day in Independence, Missouri, as guests of Reorganized Church President Wallace B. Smith. Among other things, President Smith showed President Hinckley the printer's manuscript of the Book of Mormon. "It was tremendously fascinating to me to see with my own eyes and touch with my own hands this very precious document," President Hinckley wrote. "It was worth the trip here to see this precious treasure." There was a good spirit between the leaders, and after their time together President Hinckley concluded, "No one could have been treated more graciously than we were treated by these good people." [^34]

The concert that evening was magnificent. Both President Smith and President Hinckley offered brief remarks to the sellout audience of 5200 prior to the performance, and there was generous and sustained applause as they concluded. "Outside of the Salt Lake Tabernacle, I have never heard the choir sing more beautifully or more powerfully," noted President Hinckley afterward. When the choir followed their traditional encore number, "The Battle Hymn of the Republic," with "God Be with You Till We Meet Again," there were few dry eyes in the Auditorium. [^35]

President Hinckley savored these experiences away from headquarters, out among the people. Such exposure was one of the best antidotes he knew for the insularity of the Church Administration Building, which could distort a General Authority's judgment if he weren't careful. For President Hinckley, his family provided another reality check; they weren't at all in awe of their father and didn't hesitate to speak their minds about almost any topic.

On occasion, the Hinckleys invited their children and grandchildren to travel with them, though President Hinckley was always uneasy lest anyone assume—always incorrectly—that the Church was footing the bill. For example, two teenage granddaughters, Jessica Dudley and Amy Pearce, joined them at their own expense on a trip to France. While there President Hinckley took them and his wife to the American Military Cemetery where Stanford was buried and told them the story of his older brother's passing. Before leaving France, he bought a bouquet of flowers, returned to the cemetery, and placed it on the grave. "I then offered a prayer standing on this hallowed ground," he recorded. "We lingered for a short time and then left. I may never get back there again. I am grateful for the opportunity to have been there." [^36]

Both granddaughters were amazed at this rare glimpse of their grandfather's sentimentality. "You will never believe this, but Grandpa actually bought fresh flowers," Jessica exclaimed to her parents upon her return, marveling over his extravagance. The girls also enjoyed their grandparents' undivided attention and couldn't stop talking about the history and poetry Grandpa Hinckley recited as they drove around Paris, made a quick trip to the Louvre, and saw the Eiffel Tower. The experience was rejuvenating for President Hinckley as well, who noted upon its conclusion: "Our granddaughters will never forget this. . . . They have had a wonderful time together talking constantly. And they have seen things which have stirred within them emotions that they will remember. I am so glad that we have brought them. . . . It has been one of the best trips in my life. Having these granddaughters with us has added to that happiness. They have seen their old grandfather in a new light as he has spoken to large congregations in the various meetings that have been held." [^37]

All of the grandchildren adored their grandparents. Marjorie was known throughout the family as the "groovy grandma," a reputation earned after countless shopping trips, sleepovers, and grandchildren's parties. Even in her eighties she planned Christmas celebrations complete with activities for all ages. "Everyone loves to be around Mother and Dad," Jane said. "They are so enthusiastic about life. They expect each day to bring a new adventure. None of us can resist their optimism and enthusiasm." [^38]

Grandson Michael Hinckley could never understand it when friends made comments suggesting that he must not get much time with his grandfather. "It seems as though I see him all the time," he explained. "Even though I know he comes home from work with a million things he would like to do, sometimes I stop by just to talk. He never seems to mind. He's always there for family events—priesthood ordinations, baptisms, courts of honor, farewells, and parties. I've never felt cheated." [^39]

Families—his own and those of the world at large—were frequently on President Hinckley's mind. He often said that "you need heaven's help in rearing heaven's child." In a January 1994 satellite broadcast sponsored by the Primary, titled "Behold Your Little Ones," he lamented that millions of children were abused and neglected and suffering at the hand of evil and selfish people. [^40] Speaking at the annual convention of American Mothers in May 1994 he repeated a common theme: "I am more concerned about the moral deficit than I am about the budget deficit. The strength of a nation lies in the homes of its people." He then decried the "filth, the rot, the violence and profanity" spewing into the home via television. "If we could follow a slogan that says, 'Turn off the TV and open a good book,' we would do something of substance in strengthening another generation," he insisted. [^41]

That same month he told members of the Washington, D.C., chapter of the BYU Management Society that the country was "experiencing a moral and ethical disaster": "We have lost a tremendous reservoir of values. . . . There has been more of scientific discovery during my lifetime than during all of the centuries of time that preceded it. But in some things we are slipping back into the jungle in terms of real civilization." Then, describing the quality of life his parents had created in his boyhood home, he declared: "Every child is the product of a home. We have a terrible youth problem, but I am convinced we have a greater parent problem. . . . I submit that there is nothing any of us can do that will have greater long-term benefit than to rekindle wherever possible the spirit of the homes in which we grew up." [^42]

Threats to the sanctity and success of family life were increasing and insidious. In February 1994 the First Presidency issued a statement opposing the legalization of same-sex marriages, and President Hinckley frequently took aim at pornography and the sleaze that could be found in nearly every sector of professional entertainment. When Salt Lake City's Pioneer Memorial Theater allowed increasing profanity and vulgarity in its productions, he registered a formal objection and withdrew the annual grant from the Church's foundation. [^43]

President Hinckley's concern for the present was linked to his reverence for the past. Few men had spoken more often or more eloquently about the Saints' pioneer heritage and its importance to the modern Church. And perhaps no one had participated in as many dedications and commemorations.

One series of dedications that held particular meaning for both President and Sister Hinckley took place on August 15, 1992, on the high plains of Wyoming. There they hiked to Independence Rock, Devil's Gate, Martin's Cove, the Willie Rescue Site, Rocky Ridge, and Rock Creek Hollow, all of which were significant to the Willie and Martin handcart companies and the Hunt and Hodgett wagon trains. Many had died—including James Goble, the brother of Sister Hinckley's grandmother—in this desolate area before rescue parties dispatched by Brigham Young reached them, and President Hinckley had taken an active interest in acquiring these sites. Members of the Riverton Wyoming Stake insisted you couldn't say the word handcart without uttering Hinckley in the same breath.

For President and Sister Hinckley, these hallowed places were sobering but inspirational reminders of men and women who had perished for their convictions. In his journal he noted: "As I dictate this I am looking at Independence Rock. . . . It is quite an experience to walk where our pioneer forefathers struggled so hard on this journey they made to the west in search of peace and the opportunity to worship according to their conscience. . . . A few miles west of Independence Rock is Devil's Gate. . . . The Martin and Willie Companies both experienced difficulties here. . . . It was bitter cold, snowing and the land was covered with snow. The temperature dropped one night to 11 degrees below zero. . . . Here they unloaded all the gear they could get rid of so that they could ride in the rescue wagons and get to the Salt Lake Valley as quickly as possible. . . . We are traveling today in luxury. . . . We have had good food this morning. . . . We are just a group of 1992 dudes." [^44] President Hinckley struggled to maintain his composure as he dedicated monuments at Martin's Cove, the Willie Rescue Site, and then Rocky Ridge, all of which had been erected by members of the Riverton Wyoming Stake under the direction of President R. Scott Lorimer. [^45]

He found great pleasure also in leading out in the commemoration of the centennial of the Salt Lake Temple dedication, and devoted his address in the Sunday morning session of the April 1993 general conference to the anniversary. After recounting the miraculous events associated with building the temple, he reported on the progress of current temple projects and then concluded by announcing that he had invited the Tabernacle Choir to sing the "Hosanna Anthem," with the congregation joining in singing "The Spirit of God Like a Fire Is Burning." "I hope that as we do so, there will be stirred within each of us a flaming testimony of the divinity of this work," he explained. He was not disappointed with the results. The congregation rose spontaneously as they began to sing, and the effect was electric. "It was a great and moving and wonderful experience," he recorded later. "It was such an experience as I have never quite felt in a conference before." [^46]

President Hinckley continued to be personally involved with every phase of temple work and temple building. No inconvenience was too great if it made a temple more accessible to more people. When heavy rains kept a group of Irish Saints from arriving at the London Temple in time for their scheduled session during the rededication, President Hinckley offered to either delay the session or add another one just for them. During the dedication of the Lima Peru Temple, a group of Bolivians en route there called several times with news that their bus kept breaking down. When President Hinckley was informed that the bus had broken down yet again and it looked as though they would miss even the last session, he replied, "The next time they call, let them know that whenever they arrive there will be a session for them, even if it's 2:00 in the morning." [^47]

When the First Presidency determined that two new temple films should be produced, President Benson assigned President Hinckley to supervise their production. He labored over the script and the overall project, which consumed him for months. Among other refinements, he authorized the production of a musical soundtrack to add another dimension to the finished product. When he was told, upon completion of the filming, that recording the ceremony in the required languages could take as long as two years, his response was predictable. "He listened to us carefully and was very gracious," said Derek Metcalfe, managing director of the Temple Department. "But when we were through he said, 'I can see your problem. I really can. But we have just four months to complete this project. There must be another way to accomplish this.' We went to work, and through a miraculous series of events located an engineer abroad who had just developed a process that allowed us to complete the work in the allotted time." [^48]

Whenever possible, President Hinckley continued to select locations for temples himself. "President Hinckley has tromped around countless hills looking for temple sites," said Elder Neal A. Maxwell. "It is not his way to sit back and have the temple committee say, 'We think a temple is needed here and we have found a location.' He wants to walk to the top of the hill himself and feel what there is to be felt there. It is almost as though he has always felt a responsibility to President McKay for temples and temple work." [^49] In a journal entry President Hinckley revealed the source of his motivation: "Every temple the Church has built has been a beautiful structure. We have never sold a temple or torn one down. Enemies of the Church dispossessed us of the Kirtland and Nauvoo temples. But of 45 temples since built, all have been kept in beautiful operating condition. It is imperative that a temple be in a stable area. I look at its life in terms of at least a century and longer." [^50]

Philippe Kradolfer was serving as director of temporal affairs for the South America North Area when he was assigned to look for a temple site in Guayaquil, Ecuador. After an intense search, he located six sites for President Hinckley's inspection on a one-day stop in that city. Philippe took him to the first site, and though that property was attractive, he seemed more curious about what lay beyond a group of nearby trees. Philippe told him that it was swampland. That and other factors discouraged President Hinckley about the location, and they subsequently visited the five other sites. Finding nothing that interested him, he asked Philippe to take him back to the first location, and again he asked what lay beyond a group of trees that bordered the property. This time the party set off to explore the area with President Hinckley giving directions as they drove, suggesting which way to turn and when. Suddenly they spotted an unpaved road. "At that moment President Hinckley said, 'This is precisely where we are going,'" Philippe remembered. "The little road led to a gorgeous piece of property that oversees the whole of Guayaquil. None of us said a word as President Hinckley got out of the car and walked to the edge of the property. As he stood alone looking down upon the city, tears filled my eyes because I knew that a prophet had found the site for the temple." [^51]

President Hinckley felt strongly that temple building must move forward in an unprecedented way. At one meeting of the Temple Sites and Construction Committee, which he chaired, he expressed frustration at delays in obtaining architectural renderings for approved temples: "I told them that we must build more temples and we must build them more quickly. This is the season to build temples. They are needed, and we have the means to do so. The Lord will hold us accountable if we do not work with greater accomplishment than we are now doing." [^52]

He was particularly anxious to select a site in Hong Kong and had on several occasions scouted locations. In July 1992 he made a quick trip there with Ted Simmons for the purpose of looking at and, he hoped, selecting property for a temple. As they toured various sites, he continued to feel unsettled about what they saw, and the decision weighed on him. Then, early one morning, he had an unusual experience. "Something very interesting came into my mind," he recorded. "I did not hear a voice with my natural ears. But into my mind there came the voice of the Spirit. It said, 'Why are you worried about this? You have a wonderful piece of property where the mission home and the small chapel stand. They are in the very heart of Kowloon, in the location with the best transportation. . . . Build a building of stories. It can include a chapel and classrooms on the first two floors and a temple on the top two or three floors.' . . . I relaxed and went back to sleep." [^53]

Apparently he didn't sleep long, for at 5:15 A.M. the telephone rang in Ted Simmons's room. "President Hinckley couldn't wait any longer to call and share with me the impression he had had that we could raze the mission home on the Kowloon property and build in its place a multistory building that would double as office building and temple," Ted remembered. "After all his worry about a temple site in Hong Kong, he had received the direction he sought. He couldn't have been more excited than he was that morning about finally resolving a dilemma that had burdened him for so long." [^54]

The ultimate experience associated with a temple was its dedication, and as he prepared to dedicate the San Diego Temple in April 1993, President Hinckley calculated that of the forty-five temples then in operation, he had participated in the dedication or rededication of all but five. "I came fasting," he wrote of his preparation for this dedication. "I always feel the weight of responsibility when we dedicate a temple." [^55] Twenty-three sessions later, he noted, "We are weary tonight. But it is weariness mixed with happiness." [^56] Elder L. Tom Perry accompanied President Hinckley to the Manila Temple dedication, and what he observed there was not unusual: "President Hinckley spoke at every session, and each talk was unique. He seemed to sense the needs of each group and impart a message suited for them. His spiritual instincts were remarkable. The feeling there was so tender that when the choir came in for the last number of the last session and lined up behind us, we could feel their tears drop on our coats." [^57]

President Hinckley's instincts had likewise proven on target with the massive restoration project drawing to a close on the northeast corner of Main Street and South Temple in downtown Salt Lake City. Renovation of the Hotel Utah demanded a combination of good judgment about physical facilities and meticulous attention to detail. In the spring of 1993, while final touches were being made on the building's interior, President Hinckley and the other Brethren reviewed the final version of Legacy, the movie produced exclusively for the new large-screen theater, and pronounced it magnificent. It appeared that everything would be ready for the dedication in late June. Even a name for the historic building had been selected and announced: the Utah Building. Though he had been the one to suggest the name, President Hinckley felt unsettled as the date of dedication neared. It bothered him that the new designation had no connection to the Church. To complicate matters, a building under construction just two blocks away had been named the Utah One Building.

On the evening of Wednesday, May 5, President Hinckley retired feeling worried about obstacles that had arisen over permits for the temple in Hong Kong. But it was concern about the name of the former Hotel Utah that awakened him in the middle of the night. After trying unsuccessfully to go back to sleep, he finally got up and stared out the window at the historic block that housed the old hotel, the Church Administration and Office Buildings, and the Lion and Beehive Houses. For a few moments his mind raced back and forth between past and present. He had spent a lot of his life on that block—beginning at the Deseret Gym as a boy and continuing as a teenager at LDS High School, where the campus had included both a Young Building and a Smith Building—one named for Brigham Young, the other for Joseph F. Smith.

Then he had a powerful and clear impression: There were many monuments to Brigham Young in downtown Salt Lake City, but none to the Prophet Joseph Smith except a statue within the walls of Temple Square. The Hotel Utah, which had been exquisitely restored and would not only serve various Church functions but provide the public with many reasons to visit its precincts, should be named the Joseph Smith Memorial Building. There was already a building carrying that name at BYU: the home of BYU's Department of Religious Education, which he had dedicated eighteen months earlier. But he was unconcerned about the duplication. "I wish there were a Joseph Smith Memorial Building in every large city in the world," he noted. [^58]

The next morning, he described his middle-of-the-night experience and recommended the name change first to President Monson and then to the Twelve in their temple meeting. Their reaction was unanimous: the restored hotel would be the Joseph Smith Memorial Building. President Hinckley then decided that they needed a piece of art commemorating the Prophet to place in the elegant but massive lobby. He considered the painting of Joseph Smith that hung in the Church Administration Building, but felt it would be dwarfed by the huge hall. Then Bishop David Burton, first counselor in the Presiding Bishopric, informed him that a statue of the Prophet had been shipped to Salt Lake City after having been removed during remodeling from the visitors center in Independence. President Hinckley and President Monson went to the warehouse to view the crated statue, which even lying unclean on its back was magnificent. Nine feet tall, cut from Carrara marble, the heroic-sized piece of art promised to add the finishing touch to the grand building. A few days later President Hinckley spent part of the afternoon in the lobby trying to determine the statue's placement. With help from a tall worker, who stood on a chair to approximate the size of the statue, he experimented with various locations until he decided that the statue would stand on the west side of the lobby in front of a reception room that would be named, appropriately, the Nauvoo Room.

On June 27, 1993, the 149th anniversary of the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith, President Hinckley dedicated the Joseph Smith Memorial Building. "This is a wonderful day—the completion of a tremendous project, which I am confident was inspired by the Lord," he told the assembled audience. He acknowledged that the effort had proved expensive. "Some people may feel in their hearts that we have been extravagant. We hope there won't be any feelings of that kind. . . . Nothing is too good to remember the Prophet Joseph Smith." Referring to the name of the renovated hotel, President Hinckley declared simply, "I think the Lord wanted this building named the Joseph Smith Memorial Building." He concluded his remarks with an emphatic declaration: "I love the Prophet Joseph Smith. I love the Prophet Joseph Smith!" [^59]

Response to the building was overwhelming. After the dedication and extended open house, during which more than 70,000 people toured the structure, President Hinckley received hundreds of letters congratulating him and the Church on what was universally regarded as a magnificent restoration. Many individuals offered apologies for their earlier expressions of resentment. The Utah Heritage Foundation conceded: "The Joseph Smith Memorial Building is an outstanding restoration/ renovation project. The vision and skill that have gone into this project have produced a first-class building. The grand architecture, the beautiful spaces and the distinguished history of the former Hotel Utah have not been vanquished. Exceptional craftsmanship with great attention to detail and design is evident throughout the building. . . . The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is to be complimented and praised." [^60]

President Hinckley was pleased when, several months later, he learned that as early as 1902 the YMMIA General Board had recommended to the First Presidency and the Twelve that the Church construct a building honoring Joseph Smith on the corner where the Hotel Utah was later built. [^61] Apparently the Smith family knew of the discussions, for in 1909 Joseph Fielding Smith expressed disappointment when the decision was made to build a hotel there. "The Utah hotel is being erected on the old Deseret News corner, where we had for so long been given to expect that a Memorial building to the Prophet and grandfather Hyrum Smith was to be built," he wrote to his brother. "I cannot help but feel that the erection of this building on that corner is going to be a great big mistake—with a capital M." [^62] After learning about the earlier discussions, President Hinckley wrote, "I think it was inspiration, and I believe revelation, that came to me when I could not sleep one night, that the building should carry the name of the Joseph Smith Memorial Building." [^63]

Elder Richard G. Scott summarized: "The Joseph Smith Memorial Building is an example of the breadth of President Hinckley's strengths. He is a man of vision who sees beyond the here and now. He is unusually adept at temporal affairs and can speak the language of builders and artisans. He has great faith in the Lord, and knows how to receive revelation. It is unusual to find someone who is so skilled with the pragmatic and yet gifted in communicating and receiving spiritual truth. His range of capability is remarkable." [^64]

President Hinckley's breadth of experience and understanding also made him comfortable hosting the world's prominent. He often encouraged youth to develop a "social ease, the capacity to mix and mingle with people wherever you meet them," and he knew whereof he spoke. [^65] "President Hinckley can converse intelligently about anything with anyone," said President Thomas S. Monson. "He knows how to ask the right questions and how to make our guests feel that he is sincerely interested in them. He is perfectly at home with high and low, and can converse with ease about everything from satellite technology to pruning trees." [^66]

When the Lord Mayor of London and his wife, the Lady Mayoress, visited Salt Lake City, the First Presidency hosted a dinner in their honor with President Hinckley serving as master of ceremonies. Wendell Ashton, who attended the elegant event, noted: "They were dumbfounded at the way President Hinckley talked about the streets and bridges in London, mimicked an English dialect, and spoke of plum pudding and other British conventions. After returning home the Lord Mayor told the Consul General to the United States that of all his visits in Canada and the United States, the best one of all was the evening he spent with the Mormon church's First Presidency." [^67]

When President Hinckley hosted a luncheon honoring Philip Caldwell, chairman of the board and chief executive officer of Ford Motor Company, he welcomed him with, "Your advertisements used to say, 'There's a Ford in your future,' but I'd like you to know there is a Ford in my past—the first auto the Hinckley family ever owned." He then produced the radiator cap from his father's 1916 Model T Ford and reminisced about driving and repairing the vehicle as a boy. [^68]

During a trip to Spain in the spring of 1992, he met with King Juan Carlos I and Queen Sofia and presented the Spanish monarch with a leatherbound copy of the Book of Mormon. Elder M. Russell Ballard accompanied President Hinckley on the visit. "It was remarkable to watch President Hinckley in action," he reported. "He recalled meeting the King several years earlier in Santiago de Compostela, and mentioned that his son Clark had been one of the Church's first missionaries to Spain in 1969. After putting everyone at ease and engaging the royal couple in conversation, he spoke to them about the Book of Mormon with the same fervor he had had with missionaries the day before. He was comfortable in the presence of royalty, and he made his hosts feel at ease with him." [^69] During the same trip, on a stopover in Rome, he and Elder Spencer Condie visited Father Leonard Boyle, prefect of the Vatican Library. "The two men greeted each other like longtime friends," Elder Condie said. "Father Boyle was amazed with President Hinckley's knowledge of books and the techniques used to prevent their aging. As the visit drew to a close, the prefect observed in his thick Irish brogue, 'President Hinckley is truly a very remarkable man.'" [^70]

Indeed, the dignitaries who visited the First Presidency in Salt Lake City formed an impressive roster of the world's influential. President Hinckley appreciated several memorable visits with President George Bush, including one in July 1992, about which he noted afterward: "We talked about our missionary work in various parts of the world. He asked how we go about opening a new country. He seemed sincerely curious. We told him the procedures we follow. We talked about our program to strengthen families. He was deeply interested. We were free to ask anything and he did not hesitate to respond. He talked openly and freely and in a very friendly way." After their meeting, he and President Monson escorted the president into the foyer where a large number of reporters had gathered. When one media representative asked him a political question, President Bush responded, "I am not here to discuss politics. It would be inappropriate for me to discuss these things in these sacred precincts." President Hinckley's reaction was one of admiration: "I felt it was a classic answer, and the expression of a gentleman who carries respect for that which is good and sacred." [^71] After his visit, President Bush wrote President Hinckley: "The fact that your church has an active mission program around the world is a wonderful thing. Not only does the program project commitment by the individual missionaries, but it also shows the church's concern for this wonderful but troubled world in which we live. You do care and that comes through loud and clear. [^72]

Those who worked closely with President Hinckley marveled not only at his social ease but at the range of his administrative skills. After observing him in countless settings, Lowell R. Hardy, his personal secretary, stated simply that he was the most effective leader he had ever met. [^73] BYU President Rex Lee put President Hinckley's strengths in context: "I've had direct contact with two U.S. Presidents, three attorneys general, and lots of Cabinet officers. But I have never known anyone who has a greater capacity to see the forest and the trees, the big picture and the very small details at the same time and keep both in perspective like President Hinckley does." [^74]

Ted Simmons, who met frequently with President Hinckley over matters related to the construction of buildings and other facilities, explained: "President Hinckley is a good student. There's not a business theory or practice he hasn't been exposed to, but he's also very savvy. He understands the pressure points in business, and he has phenomenal recall. I dare not quote him a figure unless I am absolutely certain it is correct, because he will remember it precisely. I have to obtain permission from the Appropriations Committee for every building project we undertake over a certain dollar amount, and it is amazing how often, when I take in a proposal to remodel a building, he says, 'Didn't we spend x amount on that building just six years ago?' More often than not his memory is precisely correct, and we've got thousands of buildings throughout the world. He has the capacity for infinite detail but at the same time the breadth of vision to see how it all fits together." [^75]

President Monson, who had participated with him in countless meetings and other events, said: "President Hinckley can juggle a lot of balls in the air at the same time. He can go from a meeting where the item is welfare to another where the topic is auditing and then to another where proselyting is being discussed, and be able to instantly switch gears and give undivided attention to that subject." [^76]

Nonetheless, President Hinckley couldn't be pushed to premature decisions. To the consternation of his Brethren, some proposals ended up in his left bottom drawer, or "pending" file, and he refused to force a decision that didn't feel right. Elder Henry B. Eyring, who as a member of the Presiding Bishopric for seven years met with him at least weekly, said, "He has a great sense of timing and of proportion. He knows which things matter, and he knows when it's better to wait." [^77]

There were those who described President Hinckley as a workaholic, though he didn't see himself that way. He did, however, admire a work ethic. One weekend with the luxury of no official assignment, he and Sister Hinckley attended a stake conference in a rural area of southeastern Utah. He found in that area a congregation of farmers whose livelihood depended on the law of the harvest. "They know that you do not reap wheat after sowing oats," he said later of the experience. "They know that you do not get a racehorse from a scrub mare. They know that if you are to build another great generation, you must work with vision and faith." After two days in the area among these principled and unpretentious people, Sister Hinckley told her husband, "These are the kind who constitute the glue that holds the Church together." He elaborated, with admiration: "I do not wish to imply that I could not find such in cities and towns all over the world . . . , but somehow there seemed so much larger a percentage of them among the folks whom we visited. Their feet were planted on the solid earth. They knew the meaning of work without respect to hours or season." [^78]

President Hinckley's own zeal for the work was no respecter of clock or calendar. When Marjorie asked one day if he really needed to push himself so hard, he responded, "Dear, don't you understand? I love what I do!" Through more than five decades of service, he had acquired an expansive view of the Church and its future, and he had spent much of his life trying to lift others to see the same. He believed the Lord held the destiny of the Church in His hands, and that confidence gave him the courage to press forward during difficult times. "Survey large fields and cultivate small ones," he often admonished the Saints, quoting President Harold B. Lee. "We ought to recognize something of the breadth and depth and height—grand and wonderful, large and all-encompassing—of the program of the Lord, and then work with diligence to meet our responsibility for our assigned portion of that program," he explained in one general conference message. "Each of us has a small field to cultivate. While so doing, we must never lose sight of the greater picture, the large composite of the divine destiny of this work." [^79]

He elaborated on that theme in another general conference: "I invite you to look beyond the narrow boundaries of your own wards and rise to the larger vision of this, the work of God. We have a challenge to meet, a work to do beyond the comprehension of any of us—that is, to assist our Heavenly Father to save His sons and daughters of all generations. . . . No body of people on the face of the earth has received a stronger mandate from the God of heaven than have we of this Church." [^80]

In view of the vision he had of the Church's future, it is not surprising that President Hinckley grew impatient with critics who continued to take jabs at the organization. After a group of self-described unbelievers published a Church "history" in which they concluded that its future looked dim, he responded: "Without wishing to seem impertinent, I should like to ask what the authors know about that future. They know nothing of the prophetic mission of the Church! The future must have looked extremely dim in the 1830s. It must have looked impossible back in those Ohio-Missouri days. But notwithstanding poverty, notwithstanding robbing, notwithstanding murders, notwithstanding confiscation and drivings and disenfranchisement forced upon the Saints in the ensuing years, the work moved steadily on. It has continued to go forward. Never before has it been so strong. Never before has it been so widespread. Never before have there been so many in whose hearts has burned an unquenchable knowledge of the truth." [^81]

He continued with his perspective and testimony: "It is the work of the Almighty. It is the work of his Beloved Son, the Lord Jesus Christ. It is the gospel of salvation. Men and women may oppose now, just as others opposed in those days. But the work goes on because it is true and it is divine. These are the best of times in the history of this work." [^82]

One point of contention that appeared unlikely to be resolved any time soon, however, was that fueled by antagonists who, as time passed and it became clear that President Benson would not regain his strength, pressed for a "contemporary" policy of succession that would honorably "release" a feeble President. Consequently, President Hinckley repeatedly addressed the issue. In the October 1992 general conference he told of a recent flight he had taken in which the passengers had been prepared for an emergency landing after the hydraulic system malfunctioned. An off-duty, non-LDS pilot on the flight moved among passengers, trying to reassure them. To one nearly hysterical woman he said, pointing to President Hinckley, "Do you know who that is?" When she shook her head, he replied, "That is President Hinckley of the Mormon church, and he has a lot more work to do. Don't worry. This plane will be all right."

President Hinckley spoke about the redundancy system engineered into the plane that allowed the experienced crew, who had been trained for such an emergency, to land the aircraft safely. He then drew an analogy to the Lord's system of government: "We love and respect and honor and look to the prophet of this day, President Ezra Taft Benson. . . . But he has reached an age where he cannot do many of the things he once did. . . . Some people, evidently not knowing the system, worry that because of the President's age, the Church faces a crisis. They seem not to realize that there is a backup system. In the very nature of this system, there is always on board a trained crew. . . . They have been thoroughly schooled in Church procedures. More importantly, they also hold the keys of the eternal priesthood of God." President Hinckley concluded with his testimony: "For eleven-plus years, I have served as a Counselor in the First Presidency. I know how the system works. I know that it is divine in its plan and in its authority." [^83]

During the fall of 1993, certain critics took up another banner when extensive publicity was given to disciplinary councils held in Utah on six members who had spoken out against the Church or its leaders. While Church leaders, both general and local, remained silent, the dissidents took their complaints to the press. During this period President Hinckley noted, "We have received many sad and disappointing letters from people who have accepted the one-sided newspaper reports concerning a handful who have been excommunicated. I am distressed by all of this. I could brush it off, I suppose, but it hurts me to see people who, not knowing all of the facts, jump to conclusions and become bitterly critical of the Church. I am in a very difficult situation. I am one of the . . . senior active officers of the Church. But I am not the President. I do my best, and pray that the Lord will inspire and direct me to the blessing of His work and to His glory and the glory of His Beloved Son." [^84]

On October 17, the First Presidency issued a statement reviewing the Church's policy on discipline in which they acknowledged "deep regret" over anyone's loss of Church membership and explained that considerations of confidentiality prohibited public comment by Church leaders in such matters. They reaffirmed that they had the responsibility to preserve the Church's doctrinal purity and allowed that faithful members could distinguish between mere differences of opinion and those activities formally defined as apostasy. [^85]

In spite of the media attention accorded the critics, they were a relative few when compared to the thousands, even millions, who marveled at the manner in which President Hinckley, President Monson, and other Church officials carried on under the circumstances. At the end of 1993, with President Benson confined to his home and showing no improvement, and President Hunter in poor health, President Hinckley reflected, "I am grateful that I feel as well as I do. I am 83 years of age, and carry a full schedule of work. I try to get some exercise and try to be wise in my diet, although this is not easy. . . . I am able to handle almost anything that I should do. For this measure of strength and health I am deeply grateful to the Lord." [^86]

During the first few months of 1994 President Benson's condition remained about the same, but President Hunter was admitted to the hospital with another serious condition. Then, early on Friday, February 25, President Hinckley received word that his friend of more than fifty years and personal secretary to five Presidents of the Church, D. Arthur Haycock, had suddenly passed away. And if that weren't enough, later the same day Elder Marvin J. Ashton of the Quorum of the Twelve died. "This has been a hard day," he noted simply. [^87]

Nevertheless, President Hinckley pressed on. In the April 1994 conference he once again addressed the subject of President Benson's health and affirmed the divinely mandated law of succession and Church government: "Let it be understood by all that Jesus Christ stands at the head of this church which bears His sacred name. He is watching over it. He is guiding it. . . . I do not worry about the circumstances in which we find ourselves. I accept these circumstances as an expression of His will. I likewise accept the responsibility, acting with my Brethren, to do all we can to move forward this holy work." [^88] At the same conference, Presiding Bishop Robert D. Hales was called to the Quorum of the Twelve, filling the vacancy occasioned by Elder Ashton's death, and Elder Merrill J. Bateman was sustained as Presiding Bishop.

Two weeks later, President Hinckley made a five-day trip to Scandinavia to preside at regional conferences in Sweden and Finland. After a productive weekend filled with wonderful meetings and association with "strong and able men and women" who impressed him greatly, he noted: "This has been a highly successful trip. We have held three regional conferences in three days. This has required some unusual scheduling and flying from city to city. But it has worked out smoothly and well. . . . We have accomplished in one weekend what would normally require two weekends to take care of. My brethren have been somewhat critical of me for doing this. . . . However, I am grateful that I have done it. . . . I have left my testimony and my blessings with members of the Church in two nations. . . . I hope that we may have done some good." [^89] He was grateful to return to Salt Lake City, however. "It is wonderful to be with my dear wife again after a separation of only a few days," he recorded. "The older we grow, the more we become a part of one another's lives." [^90]

During the spring President Hinckley was inducted into the Sons of the American Revolution and presented with its Distinguished Citizenship medal. [^91] The recognition was meaningful in that it highlighted his heritage, which he prized. In terms of personal historical connections, however, there were few places as meaningful as Cove Fort. In 1988 President Hinckley had acted as both giver and receiver when the descendants of Ira Hinckley had given the deed to the pioneer fort to the Church. After an extensive restoration project, the fort was now ready to be dedicated, and on May 21, 1994, President and Sister Hinckley, members of their extended family, and two thousand others gathered in Millard County, Utah, for the ceremony. President Hinckley was equally anxious to inspect a small log house—the cabin in which his father had been born in Coalville, Utah—that had been moved and restored just east of the fort. This was a personal project, and, as he might have expected, the small cabin fell victim to Hinckley's Law. Nevertheless, it was wonderful to see such tangible evidences of both his father's and grandfather's lives, and as he walked about the grounds, he was stirred by the feeling that his forebears were present.

President Hinckley was in good spirits as he convened the dedicatory service that hot summer day. After several other speakers—including Colleen Maxwell, Elder Maxwell's wife and a great-granddaughter of Ira Hinckley, and President Hunter, whose health had improved markedly during preceding weeks—President Hinckley finally stood to speak. "I know it's hot out here and it's miserable, but you came expecting this," he began. "And moreover, the whole theme of this structure is endurance, so do the best you can." He laughed at his own humor, and the audience joined in. Then he continued: "I am grateful to be here. This is an emotional experience for me. . . . When I see what has been accomplished here, I am deeply moved. It took Grandfather and his associates seven months without any resources except their bare hands to build what was built here. It has taken the Church with all of its resources nearly seven years to restore it." He acknowledged that if his grand-father were looking down on the scene he might wonder, "Why all the fuss?" and then smile at the staff of professionals involved in recreating the barn that had been built as a matter of course in his day. "He had no architect. He had no surveyor. He had no engineer. He had no committee to whom he could appeal to settle his problems. And that was probably a blessing," President Hinckley joked.

Several times during his address, he paused to allow his emotions to subside. His feelings seemed most tender as he spoke of the women who had lived at the fort and there given birth and nurtured all who walked and lived within its precincts. [^92]

That evening he recorded a sentiment he had expressed on other occasions when the Church devoted funds to the preservation of its history: "The restoration has been expensive, but as the years pass these costs will all be forgotten, and this outpost in the wilderness . . . will afford countless opportunities for telling the story of the past and building faith in the lives of those present. . . . I consider it a miracle that all of this happened. I know the hand of the Lord was in it." [^93]

President Hinckley knew also that President Benson's health was in the hands of the Lord, and throughout May 1994 the prophet's condition deteriorated further. On Saturday, May 28, President Hinckley returned from a quick trip to Nashville (which he had undertaken because he was to receive the Silver Buffalo, the Boy Scouts' highest national award) to learn that President Benson had slipped into a coma. He went directly to the prophet's apartment, and as he stood at President Benson's side, he felt a surge of gratitude for the prophet's life and service. Before leaving, President Hinckley laid his hands on President Benson's head one last time and pronounced a blessing that promised him peace and joy. At that moment he knew that the President would not live much longer. [^94]

Two days later, on Memorial Day, at 2:40 P.M., President Hinckley received the news: President Benson had died. He immediately called President Hunter and President Monson and began the process of notifying the Twelve. It was hard for him to concentrate, however. For though he had expected the news, he was flooded with emotions as he thought about his relationship with the man he had served as a counselor for just under a decade. The following morning at 9:00, when the Twelve assembled to initiate preparations for the funeral and burial of the President of the Church, President Hunter presided, and President Hinckley and President Monson resumed their places in the Quorum.

President Benson's passing prompted expressions of condolence from dignitaries around the world who were respectful not only of his ecclesiastical service but of his distinguished career as a former U.S. Cabinet officer. On Saturday, June 4, a solemn but stirring funeral service marked the passing of the thirteenth President of the Church. At President Hunter's request President Hinckley conducted and spoke at the services. "For more than thirty-two years I sat in councils with him," he reminisced. "I have been the beneficiary of his kindness and deferential manner. I have been blessed by his wisdom. I have seen the spirit of prophecy rest upon him. I have knelt with him and heard him pray." He then concluded with a passage from the Book of Mormon: "Had he been speaking during those last hours, I think he might have spoken these final words of Enos. . . . 'And I soon go to the place of my rest, which is with my Redeemer; for I know that in him I shall rest. And I rejoice in the day when my mortal shall put on immortality, and shall stand before him; then shall I see his face with pleasure, and he will say unto me: 'Come unto me, ye blessed, there is a place prepared for you in the mansions of my Father.' . . . From all of us across this broad world who have been the beneficiaries of his kindness, his service, and his life, we say thank you and good-bye, dear friend." [^95]

The next morning, Sunday, June 5, the members of the Twelve gathered in the Salt Lake Temple to reorganize the First Presidency. During the meeting each apostle had opportunity to express himself, with Elder Hinckley leading out. "I indicated that I felt it was essential that the First Presidency be reorganized immediately," he recorded of his comments. "It is necessary to carry on the business of the Church. The people wish to hear the voice of a living prophet. I expressed my love for President Hunter and assured him of my willingness to do anything to help him." [^96] After all had spoken, and it was clear that there was total unity among the fourteen men who had gathered for this sacred occasion, President Hinckley was voice in setting apart Howard W. Hunter as President of the Church. President Hunter then set President Hinckley apart as his first counselor and as President of the Quorum of the Twelve, President Monson as second counselor, and President Boyd K. Packer as Acting President of the Twelve. Without fanfare, but with an overpowering witness of the Spirit that all was in accordance with the Lord's will, the Church moved onward in an effortless manner.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Interview with GBH, 22 November 1995.
[^2] Interview with GBH, 22 November 1995.
[^3] "Pres. Hunter Is Ordained Prophet," Church News, 11 June 1994.
[^4] See "Pres. Hunter Takes Helm of LDS Church," Deseret News, 6 June 1994; "Howard W. Hunter Ordained President of the Church," Tambuli, August 1994, p. 1; "Mormons Pick Lawyer, 86, as Leader," New York Times, 7 June 1994.
[^5] "First Impressions: Power of Hunter's Spirit Soars," Salt Lake Tribune, 7 June 1994.
[^6] "Ground Broken for Preston Temple," Church News, 18 June 1994; "Ground Broken for Preston England Temple," Ensign, September 1994, p. 77.
[^7] See GBH Journal, 12 June 1994.
[^8] Interview with Jeffrey R. Holland, 26 May 1995.
[^9] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "Nauvoo Temple Site Sunstone Commemoration Address," 26 June 1994, unpublished manuscript.
[^10] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Carthage Satellite Broadcast Address," 26 June 1994, unpublished manuscript.
[^11] "A Time to Remember, Honor, Respect," Church News, 2 July 1994, pp. 3, 6-10.
[^12] GBH Journal, 1 July 1994.
[^13] GBH Journal, 29 August 1994.
[^14] GBH Journal, 8 January 1995.
[^15] GBH Journal, 15 January 1995.
[^16] GBH Journal, 28 February 1995.
[^17] Interview with GBH, 22 November 1995.
[^18] GBH Journal, 29 January 1995.
[^19] GBH Journal, 31 January 1995.
[^20] Interview with Lowell R. Hardy, 9 April 1996.
[^21] Tribute to Gordon B. Hinckley from the Right Honorable Lord Thomson of Fleet.
[^22] "Christians, Jews Honor LDS Leader," Church News, 25 February 1995, p. 3.
[^23] See, for example, GBH Journal, 1 February 1995.
[^24] Interview with Lowell R. Hardy, 13 August 1996.
[^25] GBH Journal, 27 February 1995.
[^26] GBH Journal, 1 March 1995.
[^27] Interview with MPH, 16 March 1995.
[^28] Interview with GBH, 22 November 1995.
[^29] GBH Journal, 3 March 1995.
[^30] GBH Journal, 4 March 1995.
[^31] "Pres. Hinckley: Prophet Taught Under the Plan of the Almighty," Church News, 11 March 1995, p. 4.
[^32] GBH Journal, 8 March 1995.
[^33] GBH Journal, 9 March 1995.
[^34] GBH Journal, 9 March 1995.
[^35] GBH Journal, 12 March 1995.
[^36] GBH Journal, 13 September 1993.
[^37] GBH Journal, 13 September 1993; also Interview with Jane Hinckley Dudley, 9 November 1994.
[^38] Interview with Jane Hinckley Dudley, 9 November 1994.
[^39] Interview with Michael Richard Hinckley, 23 June 1996.
[^40] See "Children: The Essence of Love, Hope," Church News, 29 January 1994.
[^41] "Mothers Urged to Back Positive Entertainment," Deseret News, 3 May 1994; "Mothers Face Compelling Challenges, Opportunities," Church News, 7 May 1994.
[^42] "Saving the Nation by Changing Our Homes," address to BYU Management Society, 5 March 1994.
[^43] "Pioneer Memorial Takes Flak for Profanity, May Lose Financial Support of LDS Source," Salt Lake Tribune, 11 February 1994.
[^44] GBH Journal, 15 August 1992.
[^45] See "Address and Dedication of Willie Rescue Site Monument," 15 August 1992; also GBH Journal, 15 August 1992.
[^46] GBH Journal, 4 April 1993; also "This Peaceful House of God," p. 75.
[^47] See Interview with Derek Metcalfe, 8 June 1995.
[^48] Interview with Derek Metcalfe, 8 June 1995.
[^49] Interview with Neal A. Maxwell, 30 June 1995.
[^50] GBH Journal, 19 May 1993.
[^51] Interview with Philippe Kradolfer, 16 April 1996.
[^52] GBH Journal, 11 June 1992.
[^53] GBH Journal, 26 July 1992.
[^54] Interview with Ted Simmons, 23 January 1996.
[^55] GBH Journal, 25 April 1993.
[^56] GBH Journal, 27 April 1993.
[^57] Interview with L. Tom Perry, 31 May 1995.
[^58] GBH Journal, 6 May 1993.
[^59] "A Tour of the Joseph Smith Memorial Building," Ensign, September 1993, pp. 32-34; see also "A Heroic Figure," Ensign, September 1993, p. 38.
[^60] "Pleasing Restoration," Salt Lake Tribune, 18 August 1993.
[^61] See Stan Larson, ed., A Ministry of Meetings: The Apostolic Diaries of Rudger Clawson (Salt Lake City: Signature Books, 1993), pp. 373-75, 421, 542, 725.
[^62] Joseph F. Smith Jr. to Elder E. Wesley Smith, 18 August 1909.
[^63] GBH to Calvin P. Rudd, 9 December 1993.
[^64] Interview with Richard G. Scott, 4 August 1996.
[^65] See "Out of Your Experience Here," p. 29.
[^66] Interview with Thomas S. Monson, 28 April 1995.
[^67] Interview with Wendell J. Ashton, 3 February 1995.
[^68] See "Everyone Has Something to Contribute, Says Ford Chairman," Church News, 27 November 1983.
[^69] Interview with M. Russell Ballard, 18 June 1995.
[^70] Spencer J. Condie to M. Russell Ballard, 9 June 1994.
[^71] GBH Journal, 17 July 1992.
[^72] George Bush to GBH, 21 July 1992.
[^73] Interview with Lowell R. Hardy, 11 May 1995.
[^74] "A New Church Order," Salt Lake Tribune, 14 March 1995.
[^75] Interview with Ted Simmons, 23 January 1996.
[^76] Interview with Thomas S. Monson, 28 April 1995.
[^77] Interview with Henry B. Eyring, 9 August 1995.
[^78] "Rise to the Stature of the Divine Within You," pp. 94-95.
[^79] Gordon B. Hinckley, "An Ensign to the Nations," Ensign, November 1989, p. 53.
[^80] "Rise to a Larger Vision of the Work," p. 97.
[^81] "Go Forward with Faith," p. 5.
[^82] "Go Forward with Faith," p. 5.
[^83] Gordon B. Hinckley, "The Church Is On Course," Ensign, November 1992, pp. 53-54.
[^84] GBH Journal, 11 October 1993.
[^85] See "Statement Released by First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve," Ensign, January 1994, p. 75.
[^86] GBH Journal, 31 December 1993.
[^87] 87. See "Elder Ashton a 'Champion of Love,' Church News, 5 March 1994, p. 3.
[^88] 88. Gordon B. Hinckley, "God Is at the Helm," Ensign, May 1994, p. 59.
[^89] 89. GBH Journal, 17 April 1994.
[^90] 90. GBH Journal, 19 April 1994.
[^91] 91. See "President Hinckley Honored for Example as 'a Good Citizen,'" Church News, 12 May 1990.
[^92] 92. See "Cove Fort Dedication Video"; also "Fort a Monument to Faith, Fortitude," Church News, 28 May 1994; "Pres. Hinckley Hails Cove Fort's Original Builders," Deseret News, 22 May 1994.
[^93] 93. GBH Journal, 21 May 1994.
[^94] 94. See Gordon B. Hinckley, "Farewell to a Prophet," Ensign, July 1994, pp. 37-40.
[^95] 95. "Farewell to a Prophet," p. 40.
[^96] 96. GBH Journal, 5 June 1994.
