Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Twenty-three

First Counselor a Second Time

President Hinckley hadn't necessarily expected the new Church President to ask him to remain in the First Presidency. But now that he had been called to continue in the role he had filled for nearly thirteen years, President Hinckley pledged to serve President Hunter with the same fidelity and energy he had afforded Presidents Kimball and Benson.

For twenty years he had sat next to President Hunter in the Quorum of the Twelve, and the soft-spoken, unassuming lawyer from California had long since won his esteem and affection. "He was a gracious man," President Hinckley said later. "He seldom got upset, and yet he had a lot of steel in him. He could take a stand and be firm about it, but his demeanor was one of kindness and consideration at all times. He was a man of great wisdom who thought clearly and could express himself succinctly. He quietly did his business without a lot of fuss and fanfare. I appreciated Howard Hunter so very much." [^1]

President Hinckley had watched as President Hunter cared for his wife, Claire, during her extended illness, and he greatly admired this man whose patience seemed inexhaustible. "His tenderness concerning his wife, his absolute dedication to her and her comfort, was a remarkable and beautiful thing," President Hinckley commented. "He didn't talk about it. He had to be prodded even to speak about what he was experiencing. But once in a while, in a quiet way, he would express his feelings. His devotion to his wife in her frail condition was indicative of the man." [^2] Claire Hunter passed away in 1983. When President Hunter decided to remarry nearly seven years later, he honored President Hinckley with the request that he perform his sealing to Inis Egan Stanton in the Salt Lake Temple.

He expressed at the first opportunity his feelings about the privilege of working closely with President Hunter. On Monday morning, June 6, the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve gathered in the Church Administration Building to announce the reorganization of the First Presidency. [^3]

In a brief statement, President Hunter caught the attention of Church members around the world with his gentle and compassionate manner and his invitation to live with "ever more attention to the life and example of Jesus Christ" and to "establish the temple of the Lord as the great symbol of membership." It was, he continued, the deepest desire of his heart to have every member of the Church temple worthy. [^4]

Members of the Church responded enthusiastically to their new President. Nearly four years had passed since they had heard from the prophet, and listening to President Hunter speak was both reassuring and invigorating. His health had been frail in recent years, but for the time being he was strong and vibrant. As a columnist for the Salt Lake Tribune wrote: "The focus on his frailty seems to miss an important aspect of a religious leader, the power of his spirit. And Hunter's soars." [^5]

Indeed, the new Church President's gentle and kindly manner, accentuated perhaps by his reliance on a wheelchair or walker, endeared him to his vast flock, who immediately began to focus intently on the two invitations President Hunter had identified: to emulate the Master and to become a temple-attending people.

President Hinckley could readily endorse both subjects. Just four days after the press conference he flew to England to break ground for a second temple in the British Isles, this one to be located just a few miles outside of Preston in nearby Chorley, where he had first served as a missionary. He had been thrilled at the prospects of this second temple in Britain, and his emotions were tender as he arrived at the temple site on the overcast but otherwise glorious Sunday of June 12, having presided at two regional conferences over the weekend. When he saw that a crowd of more than ten thousand had assembled, he was overwhelmed with the realization of how the Church had matured in northern England. And when he learned that a man from Nelson with whom he had proselytized as a young missionary, Robert Pickles, was in the audience, he immediately set off through the crowd, searching for the familiar face. He finally spotted his longtime friend, and tears flowed as he embraced his missionary colleague.

Beginning with that unexpected reunion, the day was filled with moments that moved and overwhelmed President Hinckley, who confessed during his remarks at the groundbreaking that he would never have dreamed that a temple would be built there. [^6] He returned home emotionally and spiritually drained, but grateful for having had the experience. [^7]

There were other important days straight ahead. In late June, President Hunter called Elder Jeffrey R. Holland to serve as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, filling the vacancy created by President Benson's death. The morning of his call, Elder Holland was invited to join the Twelve during their temple meeting, which was in progress when he arrived. "President Hinckley came out into the hall to get me, and I will never forget what he said and did," Elder Holland remembered. "He could see how shaken I was by the call that had come. He put his arm around me and said, simply, 'Welcome, dear friend.' When he walked me through the door, everyone in the room stood up. I was already emotional, but I was unprepared for the emotion that rose within me upon entering that room and seeing the Brethren stand. I am sure President Hinckley understood what I was feeling, because he stood right by me, held my arm, and gave me time to regain my composure. It was an overwhelming experience, but of all the things he could have said to me, the phrase he chose was so brotherly, so collegial. Here was a man I had reported to for most of the past fifteen years, putting his arm around me as if I were a colleague. I will never forget the sweetness of those three words, 'Welcome, dear friend.'" [^8]

Just two days later President and Sister Hinckley accompanied President and Sister Hunter and Elder and Sister M. Russell Ballard to Nauvoo, Illinois, to participate in commemorating the sesquicentennial anniversary of the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. Sunday, June 26, dawned hot and humid, but President Hinckley's spirits were high during meetings at the Nauvoo stake center, the Nauvoo Temple block, and the Carthage Jail. At the commemoration Sunday afternoon at the temple block, he referred to the tragic tale of a temple left behind as the Saints moved west across the Iowa prairie; then he unveiled a sunstone, on permanent loan from the state of Illinois, to be housed in a secure and permanent shelter there. [^9]

At each event President Hunter bore strong testimony of the brothers whose sacrifice had been so significant to the Restoration. Elder Ballard's comments on the life and mission of Hyrum Smith were likewise powerful. President Hinckley bore testimony of the Prophet who had ushered in the dispensation of the fulness of times. "The glorious work, begun by him who was killed at Carthage, has grown in a miraculous and wonderful way," he said. "We pause in reverence here this evening. We reflect on the miracle of the life begun in the green hills of Vermont and ended here in the jail of Carthage. That life was not long, less than thirty-nine years. But the fruits of that life have been something almost beyond comprehension. This great cause of The Church of Jesus Christ has been more precious than life itself to thousands upon thousands who have died in its service. Witnesses have gone into the world by the hundreds of thousands to bear testimony of Joseph Smith's calling as a Prophet of God. . . . God bless the memory of Joseph Smith." [^10]

Preceding the satellite fireside, President Hinckley and Elder Ballard held a press conference at the Carthage Visitors Center. Asked to contrast the conditions the Church faced in June 1844 with those of 1994, President Hinckley responded: "Their problem 150 years ago was a mob with painted faces. Our problem is accommodating growth. That's a fact as we move over the earth with tremendous responsibilities to provide meetinghouses for our people and train leadership wherever we go." He added, "But what a wonderful problem it is." [^11]

Indeed, it was impossible now, with the Church enjoying tremendous strength around the world, for President Hinckley to imagine how the small band of Saints in June 1844 had felt when they heard the devastating news that their prophet-leader was gone. Each time he walked into the upper room in the Carthage Jail where the evil deed was perpetrated, he was overwhelmed by the pathos of it. How far the Church had come since those days of heartache and travail! Just a few weeks later the Missionary Department announced that missionaries had now visited one-third of the U.S. population. The Church was beginning to come out of obscurity.

After the stirring events in Nauvoo, President Hinckley was grateful to return home to a few days of vacation during early July, which he and Sister Hinckley spent at their country home. "I find that I get weary by the end of the week," he conceded. "My health is remarkably good, but at eighty-four the spring unwinds rather quickly. Getting out in the country helps to rewind it." [^12]

He and Sister Hinckley were also rejuvenated by a drive through Yellowstone Park en route home from a five-stake fireside at Ricks College. It had been years since they had enjoyed the beauties of the country's oldest national park, and President Hinckley was horrified by the millions of dead trees that remained from the devastating fire of 1988. But he was also fascinated by the renewal of nature in progress as thousands of tiny new trees blanketed the forest floor. "The forest is being renewed," he recorded. "Another generation is taking the place of the old and the dead. These are the remarkable processes of life and its generations." [^13]

Just a month later, members of the Church witnessed a renewal of their own. At the solemn assembly session that opened the 164th semiannual general conference, President Howard W. Hunter was sustained as the fourteenth President of the Church. Having a prophet who was able to preside and speak to the conference audience not only thrilled the Saints but seemed to revitalize President Hinckley, who in conducting the solemn assembly was obviously pleased at leading out in this expression of support for President Hunter.

During his opening address, President Hunter reemphasized the two areas of focus he had identified during his June press conference statement. With his plea that the Saints establish the temple as the symbol of their membership, it seemed fitting that he had the opportunity to preside at the dedication of the Orlando Florida Temple a week after general conference. It was the first time a prophet had attended a temple dedication since President Benson had presided over the dedication of the Las Vegas Temple in 1989.

Within the following three months the First Presidency announced plans to build another temple in the Southeast, this one in Nashville, Tennessee, and two more temples in South America: one in Cochabamba, Bolivia, and the other in the northern Brazilian city of Recife.

As 1994 drew to a close, there were signs that President Hunter's strength and health were beginning to wane. He spoke at the First Presidency Christmas Devotional on December 4, and the second week of December he created the Church's two thousandth stake, this one in Mexico City. But by the time of the dedication of the Bountiful Temple in January 1995, he seemed unusually frail and weak. He was, however, able to read the dedicatory prayer and speak in the first session. President Hinckley noted afterward: "The prayer was rather lengthy and he spoke rather lengthily. It was too much. He had difficulty. It is hard for him to stand. I am deeply grateful that President Hunter was able to dedicate this temple. Unless a miracle occurs, he likely will not have opportunity to dedicate another. He is now 87. He suffers from a number of serious afflictions. It is wonderful that he has been able to do this." [^14]

President Hunter attended and presided over five more of the twenty-eight sessions, but two days before the dedication concluded he was admitted to LDS Hospital for exhaustion. The hospital stay proved to be a critical turning point, for after a thorough examination, President Hunter received the disheartening news that his former prostate cancer had not only returned but spread to the bone. The day after the temple dedication concluded, President Hinckley paid President Hunter a visit, and afterward he noted the gravity of the situation: "I asked him plainly, 'Howard, do you have pain?' He replied . . . 'No, Gordon, I do not have any pain.' That, I feel, is most significant. Nevertheless, I came away with a feeling of serious apprehension. He is in the hands of the Lord. He could live for a good while or he could go any day. There came into my mind, 'Be still, and know that I am God.'" [^15]

For some time it had been hard for President Hinckley to avoid comments from individuals, even colleagues, who spoke openly about what they considered to be inevitable—that it was only a matter of time until he became President of the Church. President Hinckley was impatient with (and sometimes upset about) such comments and innuendos, and he routinely cut short any conversation headed that direction. When Elders Faust and Ballard approached him in late February 1995 about the script for a video about his life that the Church wished to produce, President Hinckley was uncooperative. "I told them that I would not go along with any such thing at this time," he recorded. "It would be totally unfitting, inappropriate, and counter to my feelings to make it appear as if I were standing in the wings waiting to take over the leadership of the Church." [^16]

Naturally, President Hinckley knew he was next in seniority after President Hunter, but he tried desperately to avoid thinking about becoming President of the Church. Nothing good, he believed, would come of such activity. "What I did say to myself," he later admitted, "was, 'The Lord is at the head of this Church, and you don't need to worry about it. Just do what you are supposed to do. You are an old man, and anything can happen. The Lord can move you out of the way in an instant.' That is as far as my thinking went." [^17]

The weeks following President Hunter's diagnosis were filled with uncertainty. Though his condition steadily declined, there were days when he rebounded sufficiently to make it appear that he might yet live for a time. After one several-day period in which there was substantial improvement in the prophet's condition, President Hinckley noted optimistically: "One of his doctors called me this evening to say that to him it was a most remarkable thing and that he had no medical explanation for the extent of the change. It is an answer to many prayers." [^18] Two days later he wrote: "We received good reports on President Hunter again today. None of us knows what all of this means. It may be another surge before a sudden decline. It may be a gradual return to some degree of strength and duty. He is in the hands of the Lord, whose work this is." [^19]

Indeed, other than days in which his condition had worsened significantly, President Hunter continued to work with the assistance of his personal secretary, Lowell R. Hardy, who took work to the prophet's apartment almost daily. "President Hunter was bound and determined to do his part," Lowell said, "and we worked together until two days before his death. Toward the end he was in pain, but he could endure pain like no man I've ever known." [^20]

President Hunter did not feel up to attending the annual award dinner of the National Conference of Christians and Jews (NCCJ), held February 21, at which President Hinckley was honored for his contributions as a world religious leader. The evening was filled with accolades and tributes, including one from Lord Thomson of Fleet, which read in part: "President Gordon B. Hinckley has for many years set the highest example of dedication to God and his fellow man. Indefatigable in the pursuit of his religious and personal beliefs, he has been the personification of total professional and personal integrity." [^21]

After hearing a string of commendations and receiving the gift of an olive-wood statuette of Moses crafted expressly for the occasion by George Lama of Bethlehem, President Hinckley stepped to the microphone and said to the large audience assembled in the Salt Lake City Marriott's Grand Ballroom: "Maybe with Moses I can lead you out of this wilderness! I've been to these dinners before, and I know how long they can go on." After the laughter died down, he admitted that it was "almost embarrassing" to receive such an honor, adding, "I've tried to do only that which every man ought to do without any thought of recognition." [^22]

During the week following the NCCJ banquet, President Hunter's health declined steadily. President Hinckley realized that the prophet would likely not recover, though he continued to hope and pray for a miracle. Numerous times he expressed the sentiment: "I will not count President Hunter out. I have seen the Hunter miracle before. He could rally again." [^23] Nonetheless, it became almost impossible for President Hinckley to avoid thinking about the ramifications for him personally. It seemed inconceivable to him that one such as he should be next in line to become President of the Church. The very thought overwhelmed and terrified him, and he and Sister Hinckley pleaded with the Lord to extend President Hunter's life. On Monday, February 27, President Hinckley went to President Hunter's apartment immediately after returning from weekend assignments in California and, at President Hunter's request, gave the prophet a blessing. Lowell Hardy, who was present and also participated in the ordinance, said: "President Hinckley pleaded with the Lord for President Hunter's life, but he also clearly stated that President Hunter was in the Lord's hands. It was a very moving experience. Afterward they held hands and reminisced about their thirty-five years together as General Authorities. After a time I excused myself because I felt as though something important was taking place between those two men. It was as though the mantle was being prepared to pass." [^24]

After President Hinckley returned home that night, he recorded: "President Hunter seemed extremely feeble to me. I came away with the feeling that he cannot last long. He is suffering much of pain. My heart reaches out to him." [^25]

On the first day of March, President Hinckley took note of the changing seasons and recorded: "March is a month of intermittent storm and sunshine. It is almost life-like in the rhythm of its moods. We know that there will be storms, but that the snow which falls will not linger. We know also that spring will soon be here in all of its glory." [^26]

His words were both poetic and prophetic, for two days later, on the morning of Friday, March 3, 1995, President Hinckley received the phone call he had hoped would never come. President Hunter had passed away. Accompanied by President Monson, he went immediately to the prophet's apartment. After trying to comfort Sister Hunter, President Hinckley called his wife and said simply, "He's gone." Sister Hinckley began to cry. "I can't describe the void and the loneliness I felt," she reflected later. "President Hunter had gone, and we were left to carry on. I felt so sad, so alone. Gordon did, too. He was numb. And he felt very, very lonely. There was no one left who could understand what he was going through." [^27]

As soon as Marjorie's sister Evelyn heard the news, she called her older sibling. "Marge, how are you feeling?" she asked. In a feeble attempt to interject some humor into her otherwise somber mood, Sister Hinckley responded, "I have just been sitting here wondering how a nice girl like me got into a mess like this."

Though President Hinckley would not be ordained President of the Church for nine days, the mantle had shifted instantly and without ceremony to him. "I had sat next to President Hunter for twenty years before being called into the First Presidency," President Hinckley remembered. "How I loved him! How I mourned his passing! I was possessed with a terrible feeling of inadequacy. Though I had served in the First Presidency for fourteen years, and knew something about the office of the President of the Church, I had no idea how overwhelming it would feel." [^28]

President Hinckley set arrangements in motion for President Hunter's funeral, but the next few hours went by in a blur. To compound matters, his and Sister Hinckley's longtime friend Eudora Durham, the widow of G. Homer Durham, was gravely ill; that Friday afternoon they went to the hospital for what would be their last visit with her. He then spent the rest of the day at the office, going through the motions, but he had difficulty concentrating. That night he noted simply: "A tremendous responsibility has fallen on my shoulders. It seems impossible to believe that the Lord has thrust upon me this most sacred office and calling. I can only pray and plead for help." [^29]

For President Hinckley, some things changed without delay. The Brethren immediately looked to him as the presiding authority, and there were other adjustments as well. "Church Security has now surrounded me like a flock of eagles," he wrote the day following President Hunter's death. "They have taken from me all liberty to come and go. I have had freedom to drive as I pleased and go where I wished. Now I suppose all of that is gone. This morning I wanted to go out to my little place in the country. Day before yesterday I would have been perfectly free to do so. Now one man must drive us out, and a follow-up car is behind." [^30] Nonetheless, he went out to the cottage for a few hours and planted some peony roots. He spent that afternoon working at his desk at home and looking ahead to a week he knew would be busy and emotional.

On Tuesday, March 7, President Hunter's body lay in state in the rotunda of the Church Administration Building as more than 25,000 people filed silently past to pay their last respects to the fourteenth President of the Church. The following morning, March 8, the capacity audience in the Tabernacle arose as President and Sister Hinckley and President and Sister Monson entered the building ahead of the casket and funeral party. President Hunter's two counselors took their places on both sides of the empty red chair that until days before had been occupied by their leader. President Hinckley was subdued as he conducted and spoke at the service. "His chair is vacant this day, and I feel that vacancy," he acknowledged. "From our point of view, it is tragic that he has served so briefly as President and prophet, seer and revelator of the Church. . . . But during this brief period he touched the hearts of countless thousands at home and abroad." [^31]

The funeral and graveside services were beautiful, but by day's end, President Hinckley felt as though all of the emotion had been drained out of him. That night he noted: "President Hunter . . . is gone. His memorial services are completed. The burdens of leadership of the Church rest on my narrow shoulders. It is an awesome responsibility and even a terrifying thought to think of it. However, it is the Lord's Church. My responsibility will be to stand strong and listen for the quiet voice of the Spirit." [^32]

The weighty events of the previous week had been spiritually and emotionally overwhelming, and heavy decisions rested upon President Hinckley. Early Thursday morning, he arranged to spend time alone on the fourth floor of the Salt Lake Temple. With a Church Security officer positioned near the elevator to secure the floor, President Hinckley went into the meeting room of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve and locked the doors:

I removed my street shoes and put on my temple moccasins. . . . It was a wonderful experience. I read from the scriptures, from the Old Testament, the New Testament, the Book of Mormon, and the Pearl of Great Price. on the west wall are three paintings of the Savior—one depicts the calling of the Twelve, two depicts the Crucifixion, three depicts the Resurrection. . . . I took the time to study them. I was particularly impressed with the painting of the Crucifixion. There by myself, as I reflected, I thought much of the price my Savior paid for my redemption. I thought of the overwhelming responsibility of standing as His prophet in the earth. I was subdued and wept over my feelings of inadequacy.

On the north wall is a portrait of the Prophet Joseph Smith, on the south wall is a portrait of his brother, Hyrum. Between these and reaching around along the east wall are portraits of all of the Presidents of the Church from Brigham Young to Howard W. Hunter. I walked around in front of these portraits and looked into the eyes of the men there represented. I felt almost as if I could speak with them. I felt almost as if they were speaking to me and giving me reassurance. . . . I sat down in the chair which I have occupied as first counselor to the President. I spent a good deal of time looking at those portraits. Every one seemed almost to come alive. Their eyes seemed to be upon me. I felt that they were encouraging me and pledging their support. They seemed to say to me that they had spoken in my behalf in a council held in the heavens, that I had no need to fear, that I would be blessed and sustained in my ministry.

I got on my knees and pleaded with the Lord. I spoke with Him at length in prayer. . . . I am confident that by the power of the Spirit, I heard the word of the Lord, not vocally, but as a warmth that was felt within my heart concerning the questions I had raised in prayer. [^33]

After his time in the temple, President Hinckley felt a measure of peace about what lay ahead. "I feel better, and I have a much firmer assurance in my heart that the Lord is working His will with reference to His cause and kingdom, that I will be sustained as President of the Church and prophet, seer, and revelator, and so serve for such time as the Lord wills," he wrote afterward. "With the confirmation of the Spirit in my heart, I am now ready to go forward to do the very best work I know how to do. It is difficult for me to believe that the Lord is placing me in this most high and sacred responsibility. . . . I hope that the Lord has trained me to do what He expects of me. I will give Him total loyalty, and I will certainly seek His direction." [^34]

On Sunday morning, March 12, the fourteen apostles came fasting to the Salt Lake Temple. Five times previously President Hinckley had participated in the sacred experience of ordaining a new President of the Church. Never, not even nine months earlier when a frail Howard Hunter had been so ordained, had he imagined that he would be the focus of attention in such a setting. But he also knew, as did the members of the Quorum of the Twelve, that the Lord had spoken. In countless settings, he had taught and defended the doctrine of prophetic succession. Most notably, during nearly fourteen years in the First Presidency he had unfailingly preserved the integrity of that office. Though it was still impossible for him to imagine, he was to be the fifteenth President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

After each of the Brethren had opportunity to express his feelings about reorganizing the First Presidency, President Hinckley indicated that he wished for Elders Thomas S. Monson and James E. Faust to serve as his first and second counselor, respectively. President Monson was then voice in setting apart the new President of the Church.

That night President Hinckley wrote: "It was all over. So smooth is the transition of administration under the plan of the Lord. There is nothing of the noise and campaigning of politics, or the processes found in business leadership. . . . One must assume that he who becomes the President of the Church has been selected by the Lord, who has power over life and death, and who preserves and trains a man through long years of service. I returned home, greatly sobered, almost overwhelmed. No one who has not occupied this chair can fully appreciate the impact one experiences. Although I have served as counselor to three Presidents of the Church, the feeling I now experience is totally different." [^35]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Pres. Hinckley's 'Debut' Impressive," Deseret News, 18 March 1995.
[^2] GBH Journal, 13 March 1995.
[^3] George Bush to Gordon B. Hinckley, 13 March 1995.
[^4] Interview with James E. Faust, 12 April 1995.
[^5] Interview with Boyd K. Packer, 19 April 1995.
[^6] GBH Journal, 14 March 1995.
[^7] Interviews with GBH, 18 April 1995 and 22 November 1995.
[^8] Interview with GBH, 7 February 1996.
[^9] See Interview with GBH, 9 July 1996.
[^10] GBH to Michael Richard Hinckley, 17 March 1993.
[^11] See Gordon B. Hinckley, "True to the Faith," Salt Lake Valley-Wide Institute Fireside, 21 January 1996.
[^12] Interview with Michael Richard Hinckley, 23 June 1996.
[^13] GBH Journal, 27 March 1995.
[^14] Interview with Virginia Hinckley Pearce, 29 March 1996.
[^15] Interview with Henry B. Eyring, 9 August 1995.
[^16] GBH Journal, 1 April 1995.
[^17] David B. Haight, "Sustaining a New Prophet," Ensign, May 1995, pp. 36-37.
[^18] Gordon B. Hinckley, "This Is the Work of the Master," Ensign, May 1995, pp. 69, 71.
[^19] GBH Journal, 2 April 1995.
[^20] Statistics cited as of December 31, 1994. See "LDS Leaders Sustained in Solemn Assembly" and "Focus Is Unchanging, Pres. Hinckley Says," Deseret News, 2 April 1995; "Pres. Hinckley Sustained As Prophet," Church News, 8 April 1995; "Hands Go Up and Hearts Go Out to New Prophet," Salt Lake Tribune, 2 April 1995.
[^21] Interview with MPH, 20 October 1994.
[^22] Address at St. Louis Regional Conference, 16 April 1995.
[^23] Interview with Carolyn J. Rasmus, 10 April 1996.
[^24] Transcript of Gustav Niebuhr Interview with GBH, The New York Times, 17 July 1995.
[^25] Address at St. George Youth Fireside, 14 January 1996, Burns Center, Dixie College; see also "Pres. Hinckley Urges Youth to Choose Right," Church News, 20 January 1996.
[^26] Gordon B. Hinckley, "True to the Faith," unpublished address, 21 January 1996; see also "Walk Path of Faith, Young Adults Told," Church News, 27 January 1996; "Live True to Faith, Pres. Hinckley Says," Deseret News, 22 January 1996.
[^27] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Stay the Course-Keep the Faith," Ensign, November 1995, p. 72.
[^28] See "Voices of Past, Present, Future Sing Odes to Utah," Deseret News, 5 January 1996; "Utahns Remember 1896 and Celebrate Statehood," Church News, 13 January 1996.
[^29] See "This Is the Place," Deseret News, 30 June 1996; also "Pres. Hinckley Dedicates Iowa Tabernacle Replica," Deseret News, 14 July 1996.
[^30] GBH Journal, 12 June 1995.
[^31] Pat Shea to GBH, 9 August 1996.
[^32] Interview with Deedee Corradini, 13 September 1996.
[^33] GBH Journal, 23 April 1995.
[^34] GBH Journal, 16 September 1995.
[^35] GBH Journal, 20 June 1995.
