Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Twenty-four

President of the Church

"It was a startling tableau—a healthy president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints standing before a flock of surprised reporters and asking if they had any questions," wrote a Deseret News reporter about the press conference announcing President Hinckley's ordination. "Few in the ornate lobby of the Joseph Smith Memorial Building knew it had been fully 21 years since any man who served as the faith's 'prophet, seer, and revelator' had held a news conference. But they realized what they were seeing was rare and that a statement was being made. . . . His robust performance had a galvanizing effect on church employees. There were smiles everywhere, and the switchboard lit up with calls of support from rank-and-file members." [^1]

President Hinckley recorded afterward: "Words of appreciation came from many quarters. I watched the evening news, and this was the lead story. The reporters were most positive and almost enthusiastic. They made note of the fact that this is the first time that a newly sustained President of the Church had conducted a question-and-answer session in over twenty years. I did not realize this, but I suppose that is right. I am glad that is behind me, and I am grateful to the Lord for His blessing." [^2]

The reaction from friends, colleagues, members around the world, and dignitaries with whom President Hinckley had associated was swift and supportive, as telegrams, cards, and letters of congratulations poured into his office. From former U.S. President George Bush came a simple but sincere greeting: "As you assume your important responsibilities, I just want to check in to wish you well and to pay my respects. I have great admiration for the work of the Church. I know your challenge will be great; but I also know you, and I am sure things will go well." [^3]

President James E. Faust voiced a sentiment shared by many General Authorities: "I don't know of any man who has come to the Presidency of this Church who has been so well prepared for the responsibility. President Hinckley has known and worked with every Church President from Heber J. Grant to Howard W. Hunter, and has been tutored by all of the great leaders of our time one-on-one in a very personal way." [^4] President Boyd K. Packer's assessment was unequivocal: "No man in the history of the Church has traveled so far to so many places in the world with the purpose of preaching the gospel, blessing the Saints, and fostering the redemption of the dead. He made all of those trips to Asia when traveling there was tiring and difficult. He has been the length of South America again and again. He was in the Pacific when we lost those Saints to that horrible shipwreck, in Peru when a devastating earthquake hit, and in Korea during a coup d'Ã©tat. He has seen it all, and has been everywhere and done almost everything as it relates to Church administration." [^5]

The morning after the press conference, the new First Presidency met together in the Presidency's council room for the first time, and the experience aroused a variety of tender emotions within President Hinckley. Afterward he reflected: "It will be sixty years ago in July that I first came into this room as a newly returned missionary to meet with the First Presidency at the request of my mission president, Elder Joseph F. Merrill of the Council of the Twelve. It is difficult to realize what has happened since then. To think that I now sit where President Heber J. Grant sat at that time. He was a giant of a man whom I loved." [^6]

For all of the meetings he had attended in that room, many of which he had conducted and presided over, things were different now. "I had previously been in a situation of having responsibility without authority," he explained. "Suddenly I had responsibility and authority, and that in and of itself posed new challenges and great concerns, even worrisome concerns at times. There is a vast difference between being a counselor and a president. It was so when I was a counselor in a stake presidency and was subsequently named the stake president. And it is so now. There's an emphasis on the article the—the Presi-dent of the Church, the prophet, seer, and revelator—that is both different and frightening. As close as I had been to the President of the Church, I had no idea how different things would be as President of the Church." [^7]

One immediate difference was the reaction his presence elicited from members of the Church. He had been presiding at meetings for decades and during that time had met with thousands of congregations, but now whenever he entered a room, a chapel, an arena, or a meeting place of any kind, everyone stood. He couldn't even attend his home ward without being the center of conspicuous attention. Almost always the audience sang "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," and though he always trained his thoughts on the Prophet Joseph Smith during that hymn, it was hard not to feel self-conscious. After several months, President Hinckley admitted: "The people are so expressive in their feelings that it makes me ask myself if I could possibly be worthy of the love and confidence of all these people. It is hard not to wonder if I'm measuring up to what the Lord expects of me, and if I'm capable of doing what needs to be done. I feel the responsibility very keenly." [^8]

Nothing from his previous experience compared with the attention he generated wherever he went. Though he was grateful for the overwhelming kindness and expressions of support, he was uncomfortable with unfettered emotion that bordered at times on adoration. In numerous settings he repeated his warning that "adulation is poison" and that the twin traps of praise and prominence had ambushed countless men and women. "Few people can bear the burden of notoriety," President Hinckley said simply, and he was determined to keep things in their proper perspective. It was his office people were honoring, not him personally, he constantly reminded himself. [^9] He had often given similar counsel to others. When one of his missionary grandsons was named an assistant to the mission president, he wrote: "We congratulate you most warmly on this recognition of your faithfulness and your ability. All who have met you speak most highly of you. That is a wonderful thing. I know you are the kind who will not let this sort of praise go to your head." [^10] To a group of young adults he pleaded: "Be humble. Don't be arrogant. . . . The world is full of arrogant people. How obnoxious is an arrogant man!" [^11]

His preachments were consistent with the way he had handled his visibility for years. The profound changes in his own life notwithstanding, his sense of humor was still intact. After he and Sister Hinckley had moved into the official residence of the President of the Church, his grandson Michael teased them that they were now so insulated they no longer had even a mailbox to call their own. "You're not even people anymore. You're nameless." "Well, we're the hardest working nobodies you'll ever know," his grandfather shot back. [^12]

Because of the timing of his ordination, President Hinckley did not have even the luxury of a few weeks to adapt to his new circumstances. With less than three weeks before general conference to prepare for a solemn assembly and his first remarks to the Church as its President, he approached those assignments solemnly. "I hope that what I say at general conference will be inspired words that will represent the voice of the Lord to the people and will come by way of inspiration through me," he confided in his journal. "This is an almost terrifying responsibility." [^13]

The April general conference was not the first opportunity he had as President to address a Tabernacle and worldwide audience, however. The Saturday before conference—not quite two weeks since his ordination—he spoke at the general Young Women meeting. Though perhaps few recognized the relationship, the first time President Hinckley was introduced at the Tabernacle pulpit as President of the Church, the honor was performed by his daughter Virginia, who conducted the Young Women meeting and whose voice caught slightly when she said, "It will now be our privilege to hear from President Gordon B. Hinckley, President and prophet of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." "It hadn't even occurred to me until we got to the Tabernacle that night that I would be introducing Dad in that setting," she said later. "But it was a poetic moment. You find yourself at these little intersections of life that don't have any real meaning in a global sense, but that are satisfying and meaningful personally. It was wonderful to share that moment with him." [^14]

One week later, on Saturday morning, April 1, the Tabernacle was again filled to capacity, and thousands who hadn't been able to find seats inside spilled onto the grounds of Temple Square as the solemn-assembly session of the 165th semiannual general conference was convened. President Hinckley conducted but turned the process of sustaining the new First Presidency and other General Authorities and auxiliary officers over to President Monson. He seemed subdued as he participated in the proceedings during which the First Presidency, followed in turn by the Quorum of the Twelve, both quorums of the Seventy and the Presiding Bishopric, the Melchizedek Priesthood, and the Aaronic Priesthood sustained him as President of the Church. In a departure from tradition, the women of the Relief Society (eighteen years of age and older) were invited to stand and offer their sustaining vote, followed by young women twelve to eighteen. Finally the membership at large stood. Sustained also was Elder Henry B. Eyring as the newest member of the Twelve.

The afternoon before general conference began, President Hinckley had invited Elder Eyring to his office, and there for the first time as President of the Church extended an apostolic call. "President Hinckley was very gentle, very kind, even quiet," Elder Eyring said. "The very language he used, the way he talked with me, led me to believe that he knew more than he was telling me and left me to know from whence the call had come. He has a wonderful way of stepping aside and letting the Lord do His work. I don't think I have ever walked away from an encounter with President Hinckley where I've not known that I was in the presence of a man whom God directed." [^15]

President Hinckley knew something of the feelings that attended a call to such high and holy office. After the first day of general conference he recorded: "For me personally it was an extremely solemn assembly in which my feelings were subdued and my heart filled with gratitude. . . . How thankful I feel to the Lord for His great blessings upon me and to the people who have raised their hands in sustaining me. It is difficult to believe that I hold the office to which I have been called. I pray for strength, for guidance, for revelation, for faith, and for life in which to accomplish what the Lord would have done. One has to know that all of this is His doing. That knowledge has a tremendously sobering effect upon me. . . . It has been a wonderful day. There will never be another quite like it in my life. I am almost overcome by a sense of responsibility to my Father in Heaven, to my Lord and Savior, to the membership of the Church, and to all the world." [^16]

Many conference addresses were filled with expressions of support for President Hinckley and his counselors, among them remarks by Elder David B. Haight: "No man better understands the Church, nor is better known to the members of the Church, than President Gordon B. Hinckley. . . . I testify that has been carefully prepared for this divine calling from before the foundations of the earth in heavenly councils. . . . President Hinckley is not only a man for all seasons—but for all the world! . . . In the prescribed manner, we have accepted and sustained him. Through him—as has been done through prophets of old—revelation will be made available to us to meet the challenges of a modern society and advance the mission of the Church throughout the world." [^17]

In his first general conference address to the Saints, President Hinckley referred to his new assignment and the emotions it had aroused: "Mine has been the special privilege to serve as a counselor to three great Presidents. I think I know something of the meaning of heavy responsibility. But with all of that, I have, during these past few days, been overwhelmed with feelings of inadequacy and total dependency upon the Lord, who is my head and whose church this is. . . . Years ago I gave a talk on the loneliness of leadership. Now for the first time I realize the full import of that loneliness. I do not know why this mantle has fallen upon my shoulders. I suppose some of you may also wonder. But we are here."

He concluded with a call to action that revealed his zeal for the work and sounded a theme he had taught many times before: "This church does not belong to its President. Its head is the Lord Jesus Christ, whose name each of us has taken upon ourselves. We are all in this great endeavor together. . . . Your obligation is as serious in your sphere of responsibility as is my obligation in my sphere. . . . The time has come for us to stand a little taller, to lift our eyes and stretch our minds to a greater comprehension and understanding of the grand millennial mission of this The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This is a season to be strong. It is a time to move forward without hesitation, knowing well the meaning, the breadth, and the importance of our mission. It is a time to do what is right regardless of the consequences that might follow. . . . We have nothing to fear. God is at the helm. He will overrule for the good of this work." [^18]

Weary but exuberant at the close of conference, President Hinckley noted in his journal: "It has been a glorious general conference. We have been blessed of the Lord. . . . The Brethren have all spoken very well. The music has been superb. I think we are off to a good start, because the Lord has been so kind and generous toward us. To the Father and to the Son go all honor and praise and glory. How thankful I am to be a part of this work." [^19]

As President Hinckley had said countless times, the work would continue to move forward with no backward step. He had assumed leadership of a Church that now had a membership in excess of nine million, had 47,000 missionaries serving in 303 missions, and was organized in 156 nations and territories. To keep pace with the staggering growth, he announced during conference the honorable release of all Regional Representatives and then indicated that Area Authorities would be called to work under the direction of Area Presidencies, thus helping decentralize administrative authority and keep General Authori-ties closer to the people. [^20]

He too intended to stay close to the people. For the better part of fifteen years the President of the Church had been unable to travel and move comfortably among the Saints, and from the outset President Hinckley desired to get out among the members, thank them for their faith and faithfulness, express his love, and bear testimony of the divinity of the work. Accordingly, he adopted an ambitious schedule. When later in April he was introduced in an interview for an East Coast radio station as the first "sitting President of the Church to visit New England since President Joseph F. Smith," he responded with characteristic wit but also a foreshadowing of the pace he intended to keep, "I am not a sitting President, I am a running President." Indeed, those who worked closely with him quickly found that it would be a challenge to keep up with their eighty-four-year-old leader.

It seemed he couldn't squeeze enough into the days, which though laden with pressure and heavy responsibility were also rich in diversity. President Hinckley's enthusiasm for the work and excitement over all that was happening were, if anything, greater than ever. From time to time he remarked that his only regret was that he was as old as he was, and that there was so much ahead that he would never see. Sister Hinckley shared much of the same enthusiasm. "I just can't believe what is happening in the Church. It never gets old," she exclaimed on one occasion. "Every day is so exciting. When you see what is happening throughout the world it is thrilling just to get up every morning and anticipate what is going to happen that day." [^21]

Many days President Hinckley arrived early at the office and stayed late, and most weekends found him meeting with large groups of Saints. During the first eighteen months of his presidency he presided at regional conferences or spoke to large audiences (from seven to thirty thousand) in St. Louis; Pocatello; Sacramento; Boston; Tacoma, Washington; Veracruz, Mexico; Honolulu; Corpus Christi, Texas; Charlotte, North Carolina; Heber City and Springville, Utah; Anchorage and Juneau; Rexburg, Idaho; Ft. Worth; Denver; Pittsburgh; Tulsa; and Kansas City, among many others. In February 1996 he addressed what was believed to be the largest gathering of young LDS married couples ever assembled in BYU's Marriott Center.

Wherever he traveled he looked for opportunities to touch as many as possible—usually in large congregations, but when possible one-on-one. And he nearly always met with the mission-aries, greeting so many of them personally that his arthritic right hand went numb. His approach with the missionaries was often disarming and a little unexpected. "You're not much to look at, but you're all the Lord has," he would tease. "You young women look beautiful, attractive, well dressed. And you elders—well, I can tell how long you've been out by looking at your collars." He would then share some of his own experiences as a missionary, speak of those who had died while laying the foundation of the modern gospel kingdom, teach from the scriptures, and conclude with a fervent testimony: "I love you. I know missionary work isn't easy. I know something of your problems, your worries, your challenges, and your hopes. Be the kind of missionary your mother thinks you are. When missionaries come into the field, they not only save others, but they save themselves and sometimes their families. Never forget that I told you that the gospel of Jesus Christ is true. Don't ever forget it." [^22]

The reaction to President Hinckley among missionaries and members alike was overwhelming. It was reassuring, even exhilarating, to have as President of the Church a man who was physically and mentally vigorous. Many members, in fact, had never experienced such a phenomenon. One institute instructor explained that her students "were on fire about President Hinckley," adding that none of them could remember hearing a President of the Church speak. [^23]

Among other things, the Saints were energized by a leader who framed everything he said and did with optimism and a sense of vision. To congregations large and small, and even in press briefings with journalists from around the world, President Hinckley delivered a message of hope, declared that there had never been a better time in the history of the world to be alive, and encouraged all to catch the grand millennial vision of the gospel kingdom and to go forward with faith.

When, for example, a reporter from the New York Times asked him if it wasn't time to slow the growth of the Church in order to make it more manageable, he responded: "Oh, no! Growth is wonderful. It involves great challenges and brings serious problems, but what a wonderful thing to be growing and alive and viable and vital in this world. It's a tremendous thing. I think it's just wonderful to see this great pulsating . wish you could] go across the world as I have opportunity to do and meet with our people and see what's happening—it is a most encouraging, wonderful thing."

During the same interview, President Hinckley made opportunity to enumerate some of the ambitious projects with which the Church was involved. "Our Article of Faith says 'if there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy, we seek after these things,'" he began. "What do you think of what this little church is trying to do, with its emphasis on education? BYU is the largest private university in America. Go down on that campus and look at those students—tremendous! They are clean-cut, decent-looking kids, great men and women. The seminary and institute program involves two or three hundred thousand across the world who come of their own volition to study religion. We maintain the largest family history resource in the world open to the public. We have some 47,000 missionaries out in the world at their own expense. We're building between three and four hundred new buildings a year to accommodate the needs of our people across the world. This isn't any peanut organization. It is a world church with a world vision centered on the welfare of the individual." [^24]

While purveyors of gloom and doom bemoaned the fate of the younger generation, President Hinckley repeatedly proclaimed that today's youth represented the finest generation in the world's history. It quickly became a signature of his ministry to hold youth firesides whenever possible as he traveled. In a scene replayed dozens of times in other areas of the country, more than ten thousand youth lined up hours in advance for a fireside in St. George, Utah. The Spirit was powerful during President Hinckley's hour-long message, which he began by recalling an experience he had had while working for the railroad. A baggage car destined for Newark, New Jersey, ended up in New Orleans when a careless operator in the St. Louis railroad yard inaccurately moved a switch a few inches, sending the lost car off in the wrong direction. "It began with a little thing, the moving of a switchpoint," the prophet taught. "That's the way our lives are. The penitentiary is full of people who moved a switchpoint in their lives just a little." Choose the right, he admonished the audience. "Your opportunities are so tremendous, so wonderful. You've come on the scene of the world in the greatest age in the history of mankind. Nobody else who ever lived on this earth has had quite the advantages that you have." True to his pattern, he didn't conclude before expressing his confidence: "Don't you ever forget, my dear young friends . . . that each of you is a child of God and that your Father in heaven expects great things of you. . . . I hope you will remember this, that Brother Hinckley told you that you can do it." [^25]

His message to an audience of institute students in the Salt Lake Tabernacle carried much the same theme. He pleaded with them to shun pornography, premarital sex, and vulgarity in its various forms, comparing such vices to corrosive salt that eats through a person's protective armor. "The makers and marketers of this slimy stuff grow wealthy while the character of their customers decays," he told the capacity audience. After counseling them to marry appropriately and to get a good education, he said: "The picture never looked brighter. The opportunities were never greater. . . . I have now worked a full twenty years beyond what has been considered the normal retirement age. But I do not feel old! I feel enthusiastic about this great cause of which we are part. Why? Because I know it is the work of the Almighty, and that it transcends every other work under the heavens." [^26]

President Hinckley rarely spoke without sharing his vision, almost as a rallying cry, of the future of the work. In doing so he often exposed a unique amalgam of strengths—reverence for past prophets and leaders combined with an eagerness to explore new territory. Indeed, he seemed to straddle the centuries. He was a unique blend of pioneer heritage and twenty-first-century vision—all of which he seasoned with boundless optimism.

In the October 1995 general conference he referred to his recent experience of standing on Albert Dock in Liverpool and trying to visualize the faith and fortitude of those who had risked life and limb to follow their convictions to the new world. He then paid tribute to their pioneer leader: "I can scarcely comprehend the magnitude of Brigham Young's faith in leading thousands of people into the wilderness. He had never seen this country, except as he had seen it in vision. It was an act of boldness almost beyond comprehension."

President Hinckley continued, exulting over what he saw as the future of the gospel kingdom: "How glorious is the past of this great cause. It is filled with heroism, courage, boldness, and faith. How wondrous is the present as we move forward to bless the lives of people wherever they will hearken to the message of the servants of the Lord. . . . Back in the days of the great Depression, an old sign dangled by one staple from a piece of rusting barbed wire. The owner of the farm had written: 'Burned out by drought,/Drowned out by flud waters,/Et out by jack-rabbits,/Sold out by sheriff,/Still here!' So it is with us. There have been makers of threats, naysayers, and criers of doom. They have tried in every conceivable way to injure and destroy this church. But we are still here, stronger and more determined to move it forward. To me it is exciting. It is wonderful. . . . I invite every one of you, wherever you may be as members of this church, to stand on your feet and with a song in your heart move forward. . . . Together we shall stay the course and keep the faith, the Almighty being our strength." [^27]

With his regard for generations past, it seemed fitting that President Hinckley presided over the Church during a period of significant historical commemorations. On January 4, 1996, he addressed a capacity audience in the Tabernacle at a celebration marking the centennial anniversary of Utah's statehood. [^28] On June 29 of that year, he rededicated the refurbished and restored "This Is the Place" Monument at the mouth of Emigration Canyon, and in early July he made quick visits to Nauvoo, Palmyra, and Council Bluffs, where he participated in a celebration commemorating the Mormon Trail, dedicated the reconstructed Kanesville Tabernacle where Brigham Young was ordained President of the Church, and delivered a fireside address to an audience of ten thousand near where the Mormon Trail Center, announced a year earlier by the First Presidency, was under construction in the area known historically as Winter Quarters. [^29]

He seemed to be the dignitary of choice for dedications and groundbreakings of all kinds. He presided at the groundbreaking of the Howard W. Hunter Law Library on the BYU campus on May 1, 1995, and the following month joined President Monson in breaking ground for the Brigham Young Historic Park, located on an acre in downtown Salt Lake City that had once been part of Brigham Young's farm. Other names had been suggested for the park, but President Hinckley would have nothing of them, as he noted in his journal: "This was part of his farm. He is buried nearby. He constructed the Eagle Gate originally. He constructed the Beehive House and the Lion House and lived in the latter. This is his neighborhood and I felt it should be so designated." [^30] Less than four months later he dedicated the park as well as the new state-of-the-art Ezra Taft Benson Science Building on the campus of Brigham Young University. In April 1996 he dedicated the David O. McKay Events Center on the campus of Utah Valley State College in Orem, Utah. And in July he dedicated the new Ensign Peak Nature Park in Salt Lake City.

These dedications and other commemorations were more than mere ritual to President Hinckley; during his years in the First Presidency he had been unflagging in his efforts to maintain an appealing, attractive ambience in downtown Salt Lake City, where Temple Square and the Church administration block were located. As chairman of the board of Zions Securities Corporation, the Church's property-management arm, he had strongly encouraged the construction of office buildings, condominiums, and other structures—among them the Eagle Gate apartment building and Eagle Gate Plaza, the Deseret Apart-ments on South Temple at the head of Second East, a multistory office building on the southwest corner of Main and South Temple streets and another on Social Hall Avenue—to help keep the city center viable and active. A letter from a prominent Salt Lake City attorney reflects others that came from those in the community who recognized and appreciated President Hinckley's commitment to Utah's capital city. "I know that you, in your Presidency of the Church, have dedicated more temples around the world than any of your predecessors. This accomplishment is certainly noteworthy. However, in my judgment, often the greatest satisfaction comes from what is being done 'at home.' Your work in creating the Brigham Young Park, the City Creek Canyon Park, and now the Ensign Peak Nature Park will mean beautiful oases for many, many generations to come. . . . Thank you from one who, with his family, shares these beautiful places." [^31]

Salt Lake City Mayor Deedee Corradini met frequently with the First Presidency on issues related to the city's welfare and future. "We have a wonderful relationship with the LDS Church, and have enjoyed very meaningful partnerships in recent years. The City Creek and Brigham Young parks, for example, are both just glorious. What were two ugly parking lots are now two of our most beautiful parks. President Hinckley has vision for the city. He cares deeply about downtown and its people, and is eager to discuss the most difficult issues that confront us. He and his counselors always want to know who needs help. I can't think of a time we have approached them about assisting us that they have not responded in some measure." [^32]

His varied and numerous contributions notwithstanding, it was impossible for President Hinckley to accommodate more than a small portion of the requests that came to his office. But those who worked closely with him, and even those who came into contact for brief periods of time, marvelled at his energy, stamina, and drive. At times, however, his crowded calendar got to him. After one weekend trip to a regional conference on the East Coast, he returned home exhausted. "I felt terribly weary," he wrote in his journal, "so tired I could hardly get in the shower. It has been a very busy four days, and I am weary. But that is what I am here for, to get tired in the service of the Lord." [^33]

Occasionally he took time to relax, and his favorite diversion remained his small home in the country. "We spent most of the day at our cottage," he wrote after an afternoon there. "I love this place. Living in a multistory building downtown, it is wonderful to plant my feet on the sod. I love the grass, the trees, the shrubs, the birds. I worked physically and became bone tired. I thought that I might spend a little time preparing for general conference, but I did not. I got my mind on other things and rested." [^34]

There were some unique opportunities to relieve the pressure that never left him now. For as President of the Church, it was more than pressure—it was the unrelenting burden of the prophetic mantle, which was at once glorious and terrible. After presiding in June 1995 at a regional conference in Anchorage, Alaska, and speaking to members in outlying areas (some traveled ten hours by ferry to attend), he and Sister Hinckley accepted an invitation to spend three days cruising the waterways of Glacier Bay National Park. The experience was rejuvenating.

"We dressed in casual clothes, which was a great relief," President Hinckley recorded. "We had come to rest, to take time to reflect beneath the stars, to fish, and to see the marvelous handiwork of the Creator." As they moved through the park, they saw humpback whales and bald eagles, caught halibut, and enjoyed the pristine splendor of Alaska. President Hinckley recorded in his journal: "I arose early this morning and went out on the deck. It was difficult to kneel down in the little cabin room, and so I went out on the foredeck and there stood and offered my morning prayer. I felt inspired by the beauty of the scenery—the surrounding mountains thickly covered with timber that is virgin, never having seen the woodsman's saw or axe. I reflected on the wonders of nature, these great glacial waters, icy cold, and brilliant in the sunlight." That day he was the first to catch a fish, and he noted: "Several cameras were trained on me. I appreciated this, because I want to take some photographs to show President Monson, who does a lot of fishing, that I too can catch a fish." [^35] Before leaving he reflected, "Being out like this is medicine for the soul." [^36]

Ironically, though the mantle he bore as President of the Church was heavy, certain pressures from earlier days were now gone. "I cannot imagine," explained Elder Russell M. Nelson, "how challenging it was for President Hinckley during times past to know that if the work was going to move forward, he essentially had to move it in that direction. But at the same time he had to be careful to defer to the prophet. During all of those years, he never gave any indication that he was impatient or burdened. His first allegiance was always to the President of the Church. I suppose, though, that none of us will ever know how much of his time and energy were devoted to being deferential to the President and to carrying out assignments in a way that he knew conformed to the President's wishes. I feel a great sense of relief for him now, that he can move things forward without waiting for anyone else." [^37]

His colleagues of the General Authorities and other key administrators at Church headquarters immediately noticed an increased tempo in almost every area of administration. "President Hinckley is an incrementalist," said Elder Maxwell. "He will not always go for bold, sweeping moves. But on a decision-by-decision basis, a pattern emerges that is bold. Take missionary work, for example. If we watch his influence on just that one area, I believe we will see him make a series of decisions that will result in more effective missionary work that gives us greater retention of new converts. I won't be surprised if he builds in half a dozen procedural changes that significantly improve missionary work." [^38]

President Hinckley was not necessarily bound by convention. Just because something had always been done a certain way did not argue for its continuance. "President Hinckley has been working here at headquarters for over sixty years," President Packer explained, "and he has been tutored by some of the great men of this dispensation. It is what I call the 'unwritten order of things' that is conveyed from one generation of leaders to the next. From his experience here, he understands where the built-in liberties of the President of the Church are, and he also knows where the built-in limits are." [^39]

He surprised the BYU community in November 1995 by naming a General Authority, Presiding Bishop Merrill J. Bate-man, to succeed Rex Lee as president of BYU. And he whetted the audience's appetite at the outset of the April 1996 general conference with hints of plans to build a large assembly hall with seating four or five times that of the Tabernacle.

When the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve issued a Proclamation on the Family—the first official proclamation since April 6, 1980—he chose to introduce it at the general Relief Society meeting held on September 23, 1995, rather than wait for a more predictable unveiling the following week at general conference. He announced the significant document by stating that it had been prepared as a message "to the Church and to the world as a declaration and reaffirmation of standards, doctrines, and practices relative to the family which the prophets, seers, and revelators of this church have repeatedly stated throughout its history." He then read the proclamation, which reaffirmed the sanctity of marriage, the significance of family, and the importance of chastity, concluding: "We warn that individuals who violate covenants of chastity, who abuse spouse or offspring, or who fail to fulfill family responsibilities will one day stand accountable before God. Further, we warn that the disintegration of the family will bring upon individuals, communities, and nations the calamities foretold by ancient and modern prophets. We call upon responsible citizens and officers of government everywhere to promote those measures designed to maintain and strengthen the family as the fundamental unit of society." [^40]

About that meeting Elaine L. Jack, general president of the Relief Society, said: "President Hinckley honored the women of the Church when he read the proclamation in the general women's meeting, because women have long been considered the keepers of the home. I don't believe he was singling out mothers as more significant than fathers in the family structure, but simply acknowledging the value he places on their vital role. It was a wonderful statement for the entire Church, as well as an indication of his respect for women." [^41]

There were other ways he demonstrated his regard for women. He had lived nearly sixty years with a woman who didn't hesitate to speak her mind, and their daughters were each of them faithful but forthright. "I reared them that way," he said proudly. When speaking at priesthood leadership sessions, he almost always counseled leaders to cherish their wives and to be good to their children, and during general meetings he often emphasized the influence of mothers: "In this age when more and more women are turning to daily work, how tremendous it is once in a while to stop and recognize that the greatest job any woman ever does is in nurturing and teaching and lifting and encouraging and rearing her children in righteousness and truth. . . . I hope the women of the Church will not slight this greatest responsibility in favor of a lesser responsibility. . . . How grateful I am for mothers. Mothers have been the great carriers and purveyors of faith throughout the history of this Church." [^42]

His comments to an audience of young adults at a morningside in Colorado Springs, Colorado, were revealing: "I know that I am a child of God, part of His plan of creation, and that Adam is my father. . . . there was one after that, and that was Eve. She was the crowning creation. Don't you young men ever think that you're so smart in comparison with young women. The Lord created you . . . and then, as His prime creation, He created woman—Eve, she was the sublime, ultimate in all of His creations. Don't any of you young men develop any kind of a superiority complex. It isn't scriptural." [^43]

To a gathering of three thousand young married couples assembled at BYU in the Marriott Center, he shared something of his and Sister Hinckley's experience together: "We were still in the bottom of the Depression when we were married. I had a little job with a salary of $165 per month, and we had no savings. I do not know how we had the nerve to get married. I guess we just got married because we loved one another, and we closed our eyes and jumped. But I think we did so with faith. We were seated in our home the other evening. The lights were low and I looked over at my wife. I looked at her hands. . . . We are getting old. We don't stand as tall as we once did. Our hands are wrinkled and the veins show and there is a little arthritis. . . . Tears came into my eyes as I thought of our lives together, of the sorrows we have known, of the defeats we have known, of the struggles we have had, of the triumphs we have enjoyed, the glad times, the sad times, the good times, the bad times." [^44] He couldn't have been more pleased when BYU presented Sister Hinckley with its Exemplary Womanhood Award in February 1996, and three months later he attended an evening fireside featuring his wife and daughters at the annual women's conference at BYU. The audience of nearly 12,000 enjoyed the rare opportunity to witness an intimate conversation with Sister Hinckley. Virginia, in her brief introduction, gave a foretaste of the easy-going, often humorous commentary the congregation could expect: "Our father is here, probably out of self-protection. We realize he can always jump up and bring the meeting to a close if we get out of control." In prerecorded video segments that outlined his wife's life, President Hinckley called her the lodestar of their family who had gently guided their lives. Referring to their fifty-ninth wedding anniversary, which they had celebrated the week before, Sister Hinckley said, "It's been fifty-nine years of heaven on earth." [^45]

It was the subject of and the proclamation on the family that framed the conversation President Hinckley and Elder Neal A. Maxwell had in early November 1995 with U.S. President Bill Clinton during a visit to the White House. "It is our feeling that if you're going to fix the nation, you need to start by fixing families. That's the place to begin," President Hinckley told the chief executive before presenting him with a copy of the proclamation and with two large volumes containing six generations of his and the First Lady's family history. President Clinton immediately pulled a coffee table into position so that he and President Hinckley could look through the books together, and twice expressed his gratitude for the unusual gift.

After a pleasant and cordial meeting that centered largely on family-related issues, and as the men rose to say their good-byes, one of President Clinton's senior aides suggested it might be appropriate to invite President Hinckley to offer a word of prayer. The president agreed, and all present gathered in a loose circle. "I had my arm around the back of the President and his arm was around my back, and I offered prayer," President Hinckley recorded of the experience. "I thought it was a rather wonderful thing, to pray for the President of the United States in his office. When we left he expressed his gratitude for our coming. I thought he was sincere." [^46]

There were other opportunities for President Hinckley to interact with dignitaries of international repute. When Margaret, Lady Thatcher, visited Utah in March 1996, he hosted the former British prime minister at a luncheon and participated in a special convocation at BYU, where she was awarded an honorary doctorate. After a stirring address in which she declared that no country could survive without dedication to its moral foundation, President Hinckley said, "As we've listened to you, we know why you were called the Iron Lady." [^47] And he made his first-ever visit to Salt Lake City's Jewish synagogue, the Congre-gation of Kol Ami, when he and his counselors attended a memorial service following the assassination of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin. Out of respect the First Presidency donned black yarmulkes, head coverings traditionally worn by men at Jewish gatherings, as they entered the synagogue's sanctuary, and President Hinckley offered brief remarks during the service. [^48]

Such high-profile engagements and other obligations now occupied enough of President Hinckley's time that, though a hands-on administrator by nature, he was forced to delegate to others some things he had done for years. For example, in January 1996 the First Presidency announced that, in order for General Authorities to more fully focus on their ministry, they would no longer be authorized to sit on boards of directors of companies, including those owned by the Church—which would involve his stepping down as chairman of the board of Bonneville International. [^49] He also yielded his seat on various Church committees that he had long directed.

There were certain responsibilities, however, that he was unwilling to relinquish—among them the selection of temple sites and other matters related to the temple. President Hinckley made it clear to all who had responsibility for these massive proj-ects that they must find ways to do more, and to do it more quickly. After one meeting in which he urged that more architectural help be solicited to expedite the design and construction of new temples, he recorded in his journal: "I have very strong feelings about this. This is the season in which to do this work. We have the resources with which to do it. The need exists. I think the Lord will hold us accountable if we do not pursue these matters with all diligence." [^50] In one setting Ted Simmons, the Church's managing director of physical facilities, joked that he was an inch shorter because President Hinckley had been "pounding" him so hard about accelerating the work of temple building. President Hinckley quickly interjected, "Yes, and you'll be another inch shorter if you don't get with it." [^51]

In May 1995 President Hinckley and President Faust presided at the "groundbreaking" of the temple in Vernal, Utah, which signaled the beginning of an innovative project to renovate and expand the Uintah Stake Tabernacle, marking the first time a temple would be constructed from an existing building. President Hinckley testified that this decision had been reached after much deliberation and under the inspiration of the Lord, and he called upon members to prepare spiritually for the temple: "Let's clean up our lives. Let's reach heavenward a little more. Let's be more faithful Latter-day Saints. Let us choose the right more frequently in all of our decisions. Let us walk more worthily before the Lord as His sons and daughters in anticipation of the day when we can gather together and worship in this completed house." [^52]

It was not uncommon for President Hinckley to make overnight trips to cities in the United States and even to other countries to inspect potential temple sites. For some time he and others had searched for a location in the Hartford, Connecticut, area, and though a site had been identified, he felt uneasy about it. He had pleaded with the Lord for direction in the matter, and as he left for a regional conference on the East Coast in April 1995 he was determined to return with a firm decision about the placement of this temple.

After a day of looking at property in New York and Connecticut, he was still unsettled. The next day, in a luncheon meeting with stake presidents in the Boston area, President Hinckley spoke candidly with them concerning the challenge of determining a location for a temple in the East. "Brethren, I am frustrated," he admitted. "We have looked high and low around the Hartford, Connecticut, area for property, and nothing has developed. Do any of you have any suggestions?" President Kenneth G. Hutchins of the Boston Stake volunteered that he believed the Church owned a prime piece of property on a hill overlooking Boston that had never been developed. At that, President Hinckley turned the meeting over to Elder Neal A. Maxwell, who was traveling with him, and immediately left to inspect the site. Later that evening President Hinckley recorded what happened when he walked about the property: "As I stood there I had an electric feeling that this is the place, that the Lord inspired its acquisition and its retention. Very few seemed to know anything about it. . . . I think I know why I have had such a very difficult time determining the situation concerning Hartford. I have prayed about it. I have come here three or four times. I have studied maps and tables of membership. With all of this I have not had a strong confirmation. I felt a confirmation as I stood in Belmont on this property this afternoon. This is the place for a House of the Lord in the New England area." [^53] During the priesthood session of the October general conference President Hinckley apologized to the Connecticut Saints, ex-plaining that the temple previously slated for their area would not be built, and then announced that temples would be constructed in both Boston and White Plains, New York. By 1996 the First Presidency also announced plans to build temples in Monterrey, Mexico, and Billings, Montana.

The anxiety President Hinckley felt over the location of a temple on the East Coast was representative of the weighty matters that fell on his and his counselors' shoulders. Other issues weren't as readily resolved. "One thing about which I feel deep concern is the members of the Church who fall away," he explained a year after becoming President of the Church. "I have tremendous appreciation and a deep love for members who are faithful, but I worry greatly about those who drift away—what we can do to bring them back, and how we can prevent that drift in the first place." [^54]

He was concerned also about the growing size of the Church's organization and the attendant bureaucracy, and early in his presidency he asked the Presiding Bishopric to commission a study to evaluate the overall effectiveness of Church administration. "I worry about whether or not everything we're doing needs to be done in terms of the great mission of the Church," he said. "Are we as efficient as we ought to be? What can we do to get the best return for tithing dollars spent?" [^55]

He often tried to get both general and local leaders to see the Church's burgeoning bureaucracy in perspective and to find ways to avoid relegating the Church's spiritual growth to a position beneath its administrative function. Though he felt that some progress had been made in decentralizing Church government, there was much left to do. As he said on one occasion: "We must never become so engrossed with numbers and the masses that we lose sight of the fact that it is the individual who counts—his problems, his dreams, his aspirations, his desires, his heart." [^56]

"We have been through a building era in which the process of administering a worldwide Church has been established," President Packer explained, "and President Hinckley has had a vital part in all of that. But now he is expressing a clear vision of where we are to go. He has sent the signal that the spiritual ministry and the message of the redemption and the Atonement and the ministry of Jesus Christ must be emphasized in a Church that is well organized, and that the imprint of that message is more important than remodeling the system. He has called upon us of the Twelve to find the way to get the apostolic witness borne to all the nations of the world." [^57] In December 1995 the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve unveiled a new Church logo, which featured more prominently the words Jesus Christ.

President Hinckley also worried about the level of spirituality among faithful members of the Church. To one audience after another, he bore witness of the Savior as the only solution to the world's ills. In his first Christmas message as President of the Church, he spoke tenderly of the Savior's condescension and marveled at His willingness to set aside every privilege of his Divine Sonship and come to earth under humble circumstances: "The story of Christmas is so much larger than the story of His birth in Bethlehem. It is the very core of the entire plan drawn and adopted for the salvation of the sons and daughters of God of all generations. His birth cannot be separated from His earthly ministry. Neither can it be detached from His divine sacrifice. . . . I feel so profoundly grateful for that birth. But that birth would not be remembered but for the gift He made to all of us through His mortal ministry, followed by the terrible pain and suffering of His death, to rise glorious and triumphant as the Redeemer of the world." [^58]

At the April 1996 general conference, which fell on Easter Sunday, President Hinckley bore powerful testimony of the glory of the Risen Lord: "Through the centuries untold numbers have paid with the sacrifice of their comforts, their fortunes, their very lives for the convictions they carried in their hearts of the reality of the risen, living Lord. And then comes the ringing testimony of the Prophet of this dispensation that in a wondrous theophany he saw and was spoken to by the Almighty Father and the Risen Son. That vision, glorious beyond description, became the wellspring of this The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. . . . Towering above all mankind stands Jesus the Christ, the King of glory, the unblemished Messiah, the Lord Emmanuel. . . . He lives! He lives, resplendent and wonderful, the living Son of the living God." [^59]

In his Easter Sunday message President Hinckley also testified that only through the Atonement of Jesus Christ could the pain of death be replaced by the peace of eternal life. "Whenever the cold hand of death strikes, there shines through the gloom and the darkness of that hour the triumphant figure of the Lord Jesus Christ. . . . He is our comfort, our only true comfort, when the dark shroud of earthly night closes about us as the spirit departs the human form." [^60] He bore that same testimony whenever he spoke at the funerals of family members and friends, several of whom passed away during the first eighteen months of his presidency.

He was in England in August 1995 when he learned of the passing of his half-sister, Carol Cannon, and his longtime friend and former missionary companion, Wendell J. Ashton. Seven months later, in March 1996, former BYU President Rex E. Lee died after a courageous battle with cancer. In October 1995 President Hinckley had spoken to a record-setting audience of 25,875 at BYU's Marriott Center and during his address praised President Lee, whose resignation had been announced effective January 1, 1996. "He has led this institution with a growing commitment to excellence," he said. "He has even brought a smile to the rock-jawed visage of LaVell Edwards, a great accomplishment in and of itself." [^61] At President Lee's funeral, President Hinckley admitted that he had felt a foreboding when he spoke at the BYU devotional that it would be his last opportunity to speak about President Lee where he could hear him.

Indeed, President Hinckley tried never to let an opportunity pass to express gratitude for the service, faith, and faithfulness of members of the Church, whether individually or to a congregation at large. "Thank you, my brothers and sisters, for the goodness of your lives," he said again and again. "Thank you for your efforts in trying to measure up to the very high standards of this the Lord's Church. Thank you for your faith. Thank you for your sustaining hands and hearts. Thank you for your prayers." [^62]

He had always been tenderhearted about members of the Church, but now he seemed even more so. Tears flowed easily. Perhaps no one noticed the transformation more than Sister Hinckley, who frequently referred to her husband when he called on her to speak. "I have known this man since we were in high school, and I have never known him to say anything or do anything that would not be appropriate for an apostle," she said on one occasion, mirroring many others. "But he is a different man now than he was before he was ordained President of the Church. I know this embarrasses him, and I will probably get scolded when I get home, but I know he is a prophet of God. I have seen the power of the Lord magnify him. I have seen him solve problems that seemed to be almost unsolvable because the Lord has given him the inspiration and the answers he needed to move the work along. I remember that he's almost, but not quite, perfect—but that more importantly, he bears the mantle of prophet." [^63]

President Hinckley's colleagues in the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve, and indeed millions of members throughout the world, had also gained a testimony of his divinely appointed calling. "He makes you better," Elder Eyring explained. "When I'm with him, I'm wiser. It is because he brings down the power of heaven into my life. He never says, 'Hal, I think you'll be inspired,' he just acts as though I will be. I have had several experiences with him when I have thought, 'That's an idea I've never had before. Why did I have it while I was with him? Why was I able to express something to him that I had never understood before?' One great gift of a prophet is that he brings revelation to other people. I have had the experience of walking away from a meeting with him, knowing that I was given more than I had when I walked in, because I was in his presence. It is a wonderful gift. He doesn't just bring out the best in me, he helps heaven bring out the best in me. I don't know how he does it, but he has that gift. And I believe it will be transferred across the Church, such that all those who really want to help this prophet will find themselves more able to help than they've ever been before." [^64]

Elder David B. Haight, who had worked many years with President Hinckley as a member of Bonneville International's board of directors, summarized his feelings: "The world is prepared for us to move forward, and we are entering a period of tremendous growth and opportunity. Barriers are coming down, and President Hinckley has the vision, the experience, and the inspired direction to move us forward." [^65]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Address at Crawley, England, Fireside, 26 August 1995.
[^2] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Remember . . . Thy Church, O Lord," Ensign, May 1996, p. 83.
[^3] Neal A. Maxwell, remarks at meeting with missionaries of Hong Kong Mission, 25 May 1996; see also Interviews with Neal A. Maxwell, 30 June and 9 July 1995.
[^4] Interview with Joseph B. Wirthlin, 30 May 1996.
[^5] "Out of Your Experience Here," pp. 29-30.
[^6] Interview with GBH, 7 February 1996.
[^7] Interview with GBH, 22 November 1995.
[^8] For all excerpts from the luncheon press conference, see "Edelman Luncheon Transcript," 13 November 1995, pp. 1-10.
[^9] Interview with GBH, 7 February 1996.
[^10] GBH Journal, 13 November 1996.
[^11] See Sheri Dew Interview with Mike Wallace, 29 April 1996.
[^12] Interview with Bruce Olsen, 23 April 1996.
[^13] Transcript of Mike Wallace Interview with Gordon B. Hinckley, 18 December 1995.
[^14] See "Prophet Interviewed by 60 Minutes," Church News, 23 December 1995.
[^15] Transcript of Mike Wallace Interview with Gordon B. Hinckley, 10 March 1996.
[^16] "Remember . . . Thy Church, O Lord," p. 83.
[^17] Sheri Dew Interview with Mike Wallace, 29 April 1996.
[^18] "Hinckley Takes LDS Case to the Nation," Salt Lake Tribune, 8 April 1996.
[^19] Interview with Anne Osborn Poelman, 18 April 1996.
[^20] Sheri Dew Interview with Mike Wallace, 29 April 1996.
[^21] Tom Thorkelson to 60 Minutes, 8 April 1996.
[^22] Interview with Boyd K. Packer, 19 April 1996.
[^23] Interview with Bruce Olsen, 23 April 1996.
[^24] Transcript of Gustav Niebuhr Interview with Gordon B. Hinckley, The New York Times, 17 July 1995.
[^25] Transcript of Lawrence Spicer Interview with Gordon B. Hinckley, London News Service, 28 August 1995.
[^26] Interview with Neal A. Maxwell, 9 July 1996.
[^27] Gordon B. Hinckley, "This Glorious Easter Morn," Ensign, May 1996, pp. 65-66.
[^28] Interview with Boyd K. Packer, 19 April 1996.
[^29] Maxwell, remarks at meeting with missionaries of Hong Kong Mission.
[^30] Interview with GBH, 18 October 1995.
[^31] Cardall, "Trip to England."
[^32] Remarks at meeting with London Mission, 28 August 1995; see also remarks at meeting with London South Mission, 26 August 1995.
[^33] Marjorie P. Hinckley, remarks at meeting with London Mission, 28 August 1995.
[^34] Church News, 9 September 1995, p. 8.
[^35] Interview with Graham W. Doxey, 28 March 1995.
[^36] See "Members Living Abroad Outnumber LDS in U.S.," Deseret News, 26 February 1996; also "Over Half LDS Now Outside U.S.," Church News, 2 March 1996.
[^37] "Stay the Course-Keep the Faith," pp. 70-71.
[^38] Interviews with Pak Byung Kyu, 22 May 1996; and Ng Kat Hing, 25 May 1996.
[^39] Remarks at meeting with missionaries of Hong Kong Mission, 25 May 1996.
[^40] Remarks at meeting with missionaries of Hong Kong Mission.
[^41] Transcript of Duane Cardall Interview with Gordon B. Hinckley, Ho Man Tin chapel, Kowloon, 25 May 1996.
[^42] Thomas S. Monson, remarks at cornerstone-laying ceremony, Hong Kong Temple, 26 May 1996.
[^43] Gordon B. Hinckley, Address at Hong Kong Temple Dedication, first session, 26 May 1996.
[^44] See "President Hinckley Visits China," Church News, 1 June 1996, p. 3.
[^45] GBH to Elder Michael Hinckley, 1 July 1992.
[^46] Gerry Avant, "Tears Flow, Faith Grows as Filipinos Greet Prophet," Church News, 8 June 1996, p. 4.
[^47] Address at the Araneta Coliseum, Manila, Philippines, 30 May 1996.
[^48] Transcript of Duane Cardall, Gerry Avant, Sheri Dew Interview with GBH, 30 May 1996.
[^49] Interview with Joseph B. Wirthlin, 30 May 1996.
[^50] "Ground Broken for Temple in Madrid," Church News, 22 June 1996.
[^51] Die Welt, 17 June 1996.
[^52] Address at Israel District Fireside, 21 June 1996, BYU Jerusalem Center.
[^53] Address at Cove Fort, 24 June 1996.
[^54] "Remember . . . Thy Church, O Lord," p. 83.
[^55] Address at rededication of Hyde Park Chapel, 27 August 1996, London, England.
[^56] Address at Crawley, England, Fireside, 26 August 1995. 1996
[^57] Interview with Boyd K. Packer, 19 April 1996.
[^58] "Warm Messages, Festive Setting," Church News, 9 December 1995.
[^59] Gordon B. Hinckley, "This Glorious Easter Morn," Ensign, May 1996, p. 67.
[^60] "This Glorious Easter Morn," p. 67.
[^61] "Prophet Honors Outgoing BYU President," Church News, 21 October 1995; "26,000 Hear LDS Prophet Honor Lee," Deseret News, 18 October 1995.
[^62] See, for example, "This Glorious Easter Morn," p. 66.
[^63] See Marjorie P. Hinckley, remarks at San Diego California East Stake Youth Fireside, 23 March 1996; also Marjorie P. Hinckley, remarks at Plano Texas Regional Conference, 17 March 1996.
[^64] Interview with Henry B. Eyring, 9 August 1995.
[^65] Interview with David B. Haight, 18 May 1995.
