Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Chapter Twenty-five

Out of Obscurity

As President Hinckley traveled throughout the Church, meeting with the Saints in congregations large and small, his remarks and testimony followed a characteristic theme: that the faith and faithfulness of each member was vital, that the Church was not "an American church" but one that was growing in vibrant fashion wherever it was organized, and that the future of this organization was bright. "We've only begun," he told a fireside audience in Crawley, England. "We have scarcely scratched the surface in the matter of carrying forward this work to the world. But we're moving out boldly. I think of those marvelous words spoken by the Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith in the misery and loneliness of Liberty Jail when, after months of being in that cold, foul, dungeon-like place, he cried out in discouragement, 'O God, where art thou?' And among those words which came in response were these: 'The ends of the earth shall inquire after thy name, and fools shall have thee in derision, and hell shall rage against thee; while the pure in heart . . . shall seek counsel, and authority, and blessings constantly from under thy hand.' 121:1; 122:1-2.] I am a witness to the fulfillment of that prophecy. Each of you is a witness. This is the great day of prophecy fulfilled, and what a great thing it is to be a part of it!" [^1]

As he brought the April 1996 general conference to a close, he referred to the oft-quoted prophecy included in the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple—that the kingdom would "become a great mountain and fill the whole earth" and that the Church would "come forth out of the wilderness of darkness"—and then concluded, "We are witnessing the answer to that remarkable pleading. Increasingly the Church is being recognized at home and abroad for what it truly is." [^2]

Many of his General Authority colleagues believed that he himself was integral to the fulfillment of that prophecy. "President Hinckley is helping to lead the Church out of obscurity," Elder Neal A. Maxwell stated. "The Church can't move forward as it needs to if we are hidden under a bushel. Someone has to step out, and President Hinckley is willing to do so. He is a man of history and modernity at the same time, and he has marvelous gifts of expression that enable him to present our message in a way that appeals to people everywhere." [^3]

Indeed, through the years President Hinckley had learned to talk comfortably about the gospel with rich and poor, high and low, and he had a way of doing so without being patronizing or presumptuous. After accompanying him for nearly three weeks in Asia, Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin said: "President Hinckley is lifting the Church to a new height of admiration in the world. He knows how to present our message to people not of our faith. His instincts tell him what to say, how to say it, and when to speak up." [^4] He had often counseled members to cultivate a spirit of tolerance for those of varying religious and philosophical persuasions, and he insisted that it was possible to disagree without being disagreeable. "We must cultivate a spirit of affirmative gratitude for those who do not see things quite as we see them," he told one congregation. "We do not in any way have to compromise our theology, our convictions, our knowledge of eternal truth as it has been revealed by the God of Heaven. We can offer our own witness of the truth, quietly, sincerely, honestly, but never in a manner that will give offense to others." [^5]

He also believed the Church could better capitalize on its use of media in spreading the gospel message, and during the first year of his administration he explored ways that communications technology could be utilized to teach the gospel more effectively to more people. "I constantly ask myself what I can do to help the 50,000 missionaries who are laboring so diligently in the mission field," he explained. "If we could find ways to cause people to bump into the gospel in the normal course of their lives, rather than waiting for missionaries to knock on their doors, it would be one of the greatest things we could do." [^6]

As eager as President Hinckley was to step up the Church's media efforts, perhaps even he had no idea how personally involved he would become in breaking new public relations ground. In November 1995 he and Elder Maxwell flew to New York City to attend a luncheon arranged by Edelman Public Relations Worldwide, an international public relations firm contracted by the Church to help improve its image and increase its visibility. In that setting President Hinckley was to meet with some of the nation's most influential media and business executives. "An assignment such as that worries me terribly," he acknowledged openly. "I had prayed about it very earnestly. I realized, of course, that I was representing the Church and that the slightest error or slip could cause a great deal of harm and undo countless good done by so many over the years. It was a worrisome responsibility." [^7]

President Hinckley arrived at the prestigious Harvard Club in midtown Manhattan to find assembled an impressive roster of guests, among them Newsweek editor-in-chief Richard Smith; John Mack Carter, president of Hearst Magazine Enterprises; Andrew Heyward, vice president and executive producer of the CBS Evening News; Associated Press religion editor David Briggs; and Mike Wallace, the senior reporter from CBS's 60 Minutes.

The thirty or so opinion leaders were seated in such a way that all had easy access to each other. After lunch, Elder Maxwell introduced President Hinckley, referring in so doing to his experience as a young missionary preaching to hecklers in London's Hyde Park. President Hinckley played off the introduction as he began, remarking, "After an experience like that, even Mike Wallace doesn't look too formidable." At that, the tone was set for a congenial and sometimes humorous interchange. President Hinckley continued with an overview of the international scope of the Church, commented on its missionary, humanitarian, and educational pursuits, and then offered to answer questions.

Some of the inquiries that followed were predictable. One question centered on the issue of women and the priesthood, another on excommunication and dissent within the Church. Another comment dealt with the Church's emphasis on family history research, and one media executive asked President Hinckley to elaborate on misconceptions that surrounded the Church and its members. He answered each question candidly and without hesitation or any hint of awkwardness. Toward the end of the discussion one guest offered: "President Hinckley, you are obviously not afraid to answer the tough questions. It has been my perception in the past that there were certain secretisms to the workings of the Church. By your very presence, you indicate to me an openness. Is this a new openness, and is the Church concentrating on opening up some of its formerly less known facets to the public?" President Hinckley responded: "There is only one situation that we don't talk about, and that is the sacred work that takes place in our temples. . . . We enter into covenants and ordinances there that are sacred and of a character that we don't talk about in public. . . . But the door is wide open on everything else."

In one memorable interchange, Mike Wallace acknowledged that he had accepted the invitation to the luncheon reluctantly, assuming the Mormon Church President would be an elderly gentleman out of touch with the times. When, during his comment, he mentioned that President Hinckley was a mere eight years older than he was, President Hinckley interrupted him, "And here I thought we were the same age, Mike." At that, the room erupted in laughter and scattered applause. Wallace continued by admitting that he had therefore been surprised to hear President Hinckley refer to San Francisco 49er quarterback Steve Young and had found it interesting that he would be familiar with a popular sports figure. "I would like to do a profile of you, of the President of the Mormon Church," Wallace invited. After pausing for a few moments, President Hinckley responded, "Thank you. I'll take a chance." [^8]

At the luncheon's conclusion, one guest after another shook President Hinckley's hand and thanked him for the unprecedented interchange. One distinguished media executive said, "Mr. Hinckley, I am not a member of your church, but I can understand why people would join." A woman who described herself as liberal in her political and social orientation volunteered that despite their ideological differences she saw in President Hinckley a man she could respect. He was relieved and grateful at the outcome, as he reflected later: "It was quite an experience. Here was this crowd of hard-bitten executives, journalists, and star-studded media and business people, who were willing to listen to an eighty-five-year-old man from Salt Lake City. The Lord blessed us, and that's all there is to it." [^9] He recorded afterward: "I felt a deep sense of appreciation to the Lord, who blessed me. I know He magnified me. I know that He put words in my mouth. . . . I had almost dreaded coming back here and facing these people. All of the credit belongs to the Lord. I freely and gladly acknowledge it." [^10]

Mike Wallace later admitted that President Hinckley's "very presence at the Harvard Club" both surprised and impressed him. "I wondered why he was there," he conceded, "and frankly I was intrigued. The Mormons had always been a fascinating subject, not just because of their religion but also because of their lifestyle and the secretive attitude they had maintained." Wallace subsequently extended President Hinckley a more formal invitation to sit for the 60 Minutes interview. [^11]

By the time he returned to Salt Lake City, however, President Hinckley was having second thoughts about his positive response to Wallace's offer. the reporters of 60 Minutes were known for their investigative journalism, and he realized there was some risk in proceeding. "There were certainly some naysayers back at Church headquarters who were concerned about President Hinckley going ahead with the interview," explained Bruce Olsen, managing director of Church Public Affairs, who had attended the Harvard Club luncheon. "President Hinckley knew the negatives as well as anyone. He asked me to talk with industry professionals and get their advice, and he listened carefully to his counselors and others whom he trusted. After doing his homework, he prayed earnestly about the matter and decided to proceed. Even then, he was worried. But it was fascinating to watch the prophet of the Lord follow the pattern he would advocate for members of the Church: He did all he could to be prepared personally, and then he turned it over to the Lord." [^12] As part of his preparation, he spent several evenings identifying questions Wallace might ask him and writing out the answers in detail.

On December 4 President Hinckley spent the day with an advance team from 60 Minutes, and two weeks later, on December 18, Wallace engaged him in several hours of "eyeball-to-eyeball interview," as President Hinckley later described it. Wallace began by asking President Hinckley why he had agreed to the "rare" interview. "Because I felt it was an opportunity to tell the people of America something about this great cause in which I have such a keen interest," President Hinckley responded. "But that is not traditional with Mormons," Wallace insisted. "Can you tell me the last President of the Mormon Church who went on nationwide television to do an interview with no questions ahead of time so that you know what is coming?" When President Hinckley conceded that he couldn't, Wallace stated, "So, Gordon Hinckley decided, apparently, that there is a message that the Mormon Church has for America and, for that matter, the world." "Yes, indeed," President Hinckley replied. "And that message is?" Wallace probed. "That there is a way to greater peace. There is a way to greater harmony in our living. There is a way to revive the values that have made America strong. There is a way to improve things," President Hinckley said.

The two men enjoyed rapport from the outset. When Wallace asked if the Church's aggressive proselytizing was to show "the rest of us heathens what we are missing," President Hinckley responded, "It is to tell the rest of you what you are missing, yes." But such banter provided opportunity to elaborate. "And what is it that we are missing?" Wallace pursued. "You are missing the lift that comes of living close to the Lord and of knowing that life is really purposeful, that it is a mission rather than just a career. There is something wonderful about having some concept of who you are as a son of God with a divine destiny, and that you can make more of your life than you may have been making of it."

When Wallace asked President Hinckley if God talked to him as a prophet, he responded by referring to Elijah's experience in hearing the still small voice. "That's the voice of the Spirit, and I want to give you my testimony that it is real." Asked how he accounted for the rapid growth of a church that was so demanding of its people, President Hinckley responded in a tone typical of his answers throughout the grueling experience: "We have great expectations concerning our people. We have standards that we expect them to live by and to uphold. It is demanding. And that is one of the things that attracts people to this Church. It stands as an anchor in a world of shifting values. They feel they have something solid that they are standing on while the ground is moving beneath them. People are looking for something of substance and strength, based on eternal truth and eternal values."

After Wallace compared the beginnings of the Church to some cultish movements, President Hinckley responded: "Look at the fruits. That's the test. Look at this Church. From its organization in 1830 it has gone steadily forward. It has never taken a backward step. Its history is heroic. The coming of our people to these valleys of the mountains is one of the great epics of America. They gave their lives for this cause because they loved it, because they knew of its truth. They were hard-working people. They tamed this desert. They made it blossom as the rose. This isn't the work of charlatans. This isn't the work of idle dreamers."

When asked if he believed in an afterlife, President Hinckley answered, "I certainly do. I think life after this life is as certain as life here. I believe we lived before we came here, that we live here for a purpose . . ."

"Wait, wait," Wallace interrupted. "You believe we lived before we came here?"

"Oh, absolutely, as intelligences, as spirits," President Hinckley replied.

"There was a spirit of Gordon Hinckley?" Wallace asked.

"Absolutely, and of Mike Wallace."

"I hope not," Wallace joked.

"Life is an eternal thing, Mike," President Hinckley continued. "It is part of an eternal plan, our Father's plan for His sons and daughters, whom He loves. His work and His glory is to bring about the immortality and eternal life of His sons and daughters. It has purpose. It is meaningful." [^13]

Though their encounter was mentally demanding and stressful in view of the potential ramifications, President Hinckley found Wallace to be professional, well prepared, and respectful. In turn, Wallace described President Hinckley in complimentary terms. "Generally speaking, he's first rate," he said afterward, "but compared with other eighty-five-year-olds, he is incredibly responsive. There was no question that he found difficult or unpleasant. He came to talk." Wallace added that he expected the 60 Minutes segment to tell a story about the Church that had never been told by the Church's President on prime-time television. [^14]

Prior to airing the 60 Minutes segment featuring President Hinckley, Wallace and his crew returned to Salt Lake City for a second interview. This time Wallace probed on such subjects as abortion, child abuse, and political expediency. "Some skeptics say that major changes in Church policy have come from political pressure rather than as revelations from God," Wallace challenged. "For example, the business of ending polygamy wasn't a revelation but came because Utah wanted to become a state." President Hinckley replied: "One of the purposes of a prophet is to seek the wisdom and the will of the Lord. It was the case with Moses when he led the children of Israel out of Egypt. It was the case for the Old Testament prophets when people were faced with oppression. That is the purpose of a prophet, to give answers to people with regard to the dilemmas in which they find themselves. Is it a matter of political expediency? No. Inspired guidance? Yes." [^15]

Despite his positive experience with Wallace, as the time between the initial interviews and the program's airing stretched, President Hinckley became increasingly worried. In his concluding remarks at the Sunday afternoon session of the April 1996 general conference, he referred to his experience with the "tough" senior reporter from 60 Minutes and acknowledged something of his concern about the program scheduled to air that evening. He explained that he had consented to the interview because he felt it presented an opportunity to communicate "some affirmative aspects of our culture and message" to millions. "I concluded that it was better to lean into the stiff wind of opportunity than to simply hunker down and do nothing," he said, garnering a tremendous response in the Tabernacle from an audience delighted at the prophet's candor. "We have no idea what the outcome will be. . . . If it turns out to be favorable, I will be grateful. Otherwise, I pledge I'll never get my foot in that kind of trap again." [^16]

Later that evening, when President Hinckley finally saw his interview with Mike Wallace as edited for the 60 Minutes broadcast, he was enormously relieved to find that the program was evenhanded and respectful, that controversial topics were discussed without distortion, and that his comments had for the most part been used in context. Wallace had been, he felt, "very decent" to him and the Church.

"Frankly, nearly everything about this assignment surprised me," Wallace admitted afterward. "I was surprised by Gordon Hinckley's humor and his candor, neither of which I expected. We raised the issues that were on the minds of the skeptics, he was willing to answer every question, and his answers were reasonable. I was impressed with his staff. They were cooperative and accommodating, did not appear to be suspicious of our motives, and treated us with respect. The people around Mr. Hinckley obviously have confidence in him, but I didn't sense the 'fear of the CEO syndrome' that you find in many large organizations. We have done stories on many organizations, including churches, but I can honestly say we have never had an experience quite like that one." [^17]

Many Church members responded enthusiastically to the program, invigorated by a President who made no apology for the organization he led, who revealed a light but effective touch in presenting the merits of the gospel to a nonmember audience, and who deftly handled the glare of the national spotlight. The Salt Lake Tribune reported, "Veteran TV interviewer Mike Wallace looked like he was tossing softballs to Mormon Church President Gordon B. Hinckley during the 60 Minutes segment on the LDS faith that aired Sunday on CBS, but it may have been a case of the media-savvy Hinckley deflecting hardballs." [^18] One professional LDS woman said: "President Hinckley carries an almost palpable feeling of hope and optimism that is infectious. He entreats, he enthuses, he lifts. One of my nonmember colleagues from the Midwest called after watching the program. I thought he had a cold until he admitted that tears were running down his cheeks. 'That Hinckley is really something,' he said. 'He really touched me. I'm sixty years old. If I were twenty years old, you'd have me.'" [^19]

Letters poured into the offices of the First Presidency and CBS. "I think Gordon Hinckley wanted to get his Mormon gospel in front of a lot of people, and it worked," Wallace indicated several weeks after the program aired. "Response to the piece has been extraordinary. Usually mail comes for a week or two, and then drops off precipitously. But we were still getting letters a month after the program. An unusual number of letters indicated that we were balanced and fair, and of course some wrote asking why we hadn't probed more deeply into one thing or another, but that comes with the territory." [^20]

Though the extent of the program's impact was impossible to measure, mission presidents and missionaries reported instances in which it seemed to have influenced or motivated investigators. Members wrote President Hinckley to report a variety of reactions and results. Some told of family members who after years of antagonism had softened toward the Church; others mentioned professional colleagues whose interest had been stimulated by the program; one even wrote about fielding referrals over the Internet.

One nonmember viewer wrote Mike Wallace: "I enjoyed your Mormon segment Easter Sunday. Apparently their growth is threatening to some, but if we judge any group by their fruits, these people do provide an anchor in a sea of ever-changing values. Fifty thousand chaste missionaries in 150 countries probably do more good for society than all the government social programs put together." [^21]

President Boyd K. Packer evaluated the program's effect. "President Hinckley was greatly worried about the outcome. We all felt and told him that things would work out fine. But it proved to be even better than we thought it would be. He was ideally suited to the challenge, which provided a public visiting of the President as he has always been—pleasant, forthright, unapologetic about the gospel, and unintimidated by anyone." [^22] Said Bruce Olsen, who handled all arrangements with CBS and coordinated the interview through Edelman: "What we had was a journalist talking to a journalist. President Hinckley's early training added to his ability to communicate articulately but with humor and to be a little self-deprecating, which worked magically in that setting. I don't know if anyone else could have done it quite like he did, because he has such a unique combination of strengths." [^23]

Indeed, President Hinckley seemed to exhibit unusual dexterity when it came to dealing with the press. The 60 Minutes interview, which reached at least forty million people and attracted immediate and global attention, was only one of many interchanges he allowed with both national and international journalists. During the first eighteen months of his presidency, he held major news conferences in New York City, Japan, Korea, Mexico, England, Germany, and Council Bluffs, Iowa, and was interviewed by reporters from the New York Times, Wall Street Journal, BBC, London News Radio, ABS-CBN TV in the Philippines, and numerous other news organizations. In one interview after another, he answered questions about whether Mormons were Christians, explained the Church's rapid growth in a day when established religions were declining in membership, and elaborated on everything from women and politics to abortion, homosexuality, and family values. He spoke with ease and without fear or apology. He had a way of boldly articulating the Church's virtues without being overbearing, of explaining the benefits of living the gospel without slighting other religions or special-interest groups.

Always he painted a hopeful picture about not only the Church but the world in general. To a reporter from the New York Times he said: "I see so much good in people everywhere. Wonderful things are happening around the world. This is a great age in the history of the earth." Later in the interview he added: "Ours is a multicultural organization with a common purpose, and that is to offer the individual an opportunity for growth, for happiness, and to give an encouraging upward reach to people wherever we find them. . . . We believe in being happy. The gospel is the message of good news, and it's a way of happiness, the Lord's way of happiness. Now, you might find somebody who's sour here and there, but don't think he represents the entire Church." [^24]

He returned often to the theme of "shifting values," refusing to apologize for the Church's strict codes of conduct. In an interview with a correspondent from the London News Service he stated: "I noticed in the London Times yesterday that one Church had set up 'ten commandments' on the behavior of priests. That's an interesting thing to me. Any church ought to expect of its priesthood the observance of the very highest ideals of moral behavior. We stand for those things. Shifting values soon lose interest for anyone. It's constancy that people want when the world is changing around them, and we believe that we are providing that. Our doctrine, our teaching, our basic theological foundation is found in some premises that are constant and unchangeable, the first of which is that God is our Eternal Father, and we as His children are accountable to Him for our behavior. The second is that Jesus is the Redeemer of the world, the Living Son of the Living God, the Resurrection and the Life, He who set the pattern for our lives, and we ought to be trying to the degree that we can to be living those principles." [^25]

He began every press conference with a brief statement about the Church, during which he established a rapport with that particular press corps. Sometimes he used humor; often he displayed an impressive familiarity with the area or the people he was visiting, thereby creating the feeling that he was "one of them." At a formal luncheon for representatives of thirteen of the largest newspapers and magazines in Seoul, Korea, for example, he began by stating that he had been coming to Korea for thirty-six years, that he loved the Korean people and was impressed with their industry, their focus on family values, and their interest in education. And he also teased them a little. "We have a strict code of health," he explained. "We abstain from alcohol, tobacco, coffee, and tea. As has been said, I am eighty-five years of age. I enjoy good health—and that isn't because I eat kimchee." He added that the Church had invested millions of dollars in Korea in houses of worship but had not taken any money out of the country, and that in Korea local Church units were led by Koreans. Before he finished, he bore his testimony that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, that Joseph Smith is a prophet, and that the Book of Mormon is the word of God.

"President Hinckley respects the media, but he is not afraid of them," explained Elder Maxwell, who witnessed his performance in similar settings. "And he has such a solid grasp of both Church history and facts about the Church today that he is not likely to be thrown by a question that he hasn't already thought about or processed in his own mind. He is able to give answers of sound-bite length that are important. He is quick mentally and equal to the engagements that come up. And he doesn't feel compelled to gloss over any of our shortcomings as a people. He doesn't put forward any gilding or veneer. As a result, reporters respond to his genuineness. He has the capacity to connect with people from all stations and in that respect is eminently prepared to tell our story to the world." [^26]

President Hinckley was also anxious to get out personally into the world, and he quickly distinguished himself as a traveling President. He explained his motivation during the April 1996 general conference: "I am determined that while I have strength I will get out among the people at home and abroad to express my appreciation, to give encouragement, to build faith, to teach, to add my testimony to theirs and at the same time to draw strength from them. . . . I intend to keep moving with energy for as long as I can. I wish to mingle with the people I love." [^27]

"President Hinckley is tireless," President Packer acknowledged. "He's got all of us running to keep up with him." [^28] Elder Maxwell told a group of missionaries in the Far East: "President Hinckley has unusual ability and mobility that are allowing him to cover the planet in an unusual way. You are the first generation to see the globalization of the Church. No one has played a greater role in that effort than President Hinckley." [^29]

It perhaps came as no surprise that President Hinckley chose to make his first international trip as President of the Church to Great Britain, a place for which he had long had an abiding affection. "Something happened inside of me in England that was so significant and deep-rooted that I have never gotten over it," he said in an attempt to explain his feelings for the British Isles. "It is the same thing I have seen happen to thousands of other young men and women who commit themselves to the Lord, and their faith in Him becomes their anchor. Everything good that has happened to me is a result of what happened while I lived in that land." [^30]

He admitted early in the trip that he was so anxious to meet with the Saints that his zeal may have outpaced his wisdom in planning his schedule. Almost every day he and Sister Hinckley traveled by car to a new city, often more than a hundred miles away, and met with missionaries, inspected property, gave media interviews, and held special firesides for the members. In all he delivered fourteen addresses to nearly eight thousand Saints during the whirlwind trip, which revealed just how much stamina the eighty-five-year-old Church President had. "He is only happy when he is getting things done," Sister Hinckley said afterward. "I just try to keep up with him, and that isn't easy. He is a very young eighty-five." [^31]

With the looming presence of the famous cathedral just a few kilometers down the road, President Hinckley presided over the creation of a stake in Canterbury, the seat of the Church of England and the site to which Christian pilgrims had journeyed since the Middle Ages. From there he slowly worked his way north to London and then on up to Liverpool. In one meeting after another with missionaries and members who drove long distances and arrived hours in advance to get a seat, President Hinckley's emotions rose to the surface. During the rededication of the storied Hyde Park Chapel on London's famous Exhibition Road, he began with the familiar claim, "This is my town. This place carries for me a particular charm, a reminder of great and marvelous experiences with wonderful people."

The next day he returned to the chapel to speak with missionaries from the London Mission. "You have talking to you today one old, worn out, beaten down British missionary," he began before sharing some of his own experiences in England and then admonishing the young men and women not to be discouraged. "I know about knocking on doors and fighting off dogs and having doors slammed in your face. I know it's hard. But so what? What a power you are! What capacity you have to change lives! Perhaps not many. But one here and another there listens to you. And in time, an entire ward of people have accepted the gospel. You can never foretell the consequences of that which you do when you teach the gospel of Jesus Christ. The Church was small and weak when I served here. Now we have 160,000 members in these islands." [^32]

Sister Hinckley complemented her husband with her warm manner, sense of humor, and sincere expression of testimony. Without exception the Saints enjoyed the exchanges between the two. In one meeting President Hinckley introduced her by saying, "I am going to exercise my prerogative and call on Sister Hinckley to speak. This is something for which I will pay a dear price, but so be it." Sister Hinckley countered with: "What would you do if you were married to a man like that? There used to be two important men in my life—my husband and the President of the Church. Now, all of a sudden, there's only one." Typically her friendly manner and wit were but a prelude to the bearing of sincere testimony. "Every day of my life I know with more certainty that this is the gospel of our Savior," she said. "I just have to pinch myself to believe that I have witnessed what is going on across this wonderful Church. I can't tell you how much it means to us that you would be here. You strengthen our testimonies just by being here." [^33]

Their love for the Saints was everywhere evident. In Liverpool, President Hinckley went down into the audience after the closing song to shake hands with members who had traveled from the Isle of Man to attend the meeting. President Ray Turner of the Liverpool Stake explained the significance of this action: "With overnight stays the Isle of Man is a two- or three-day journey. It is expensive and time-consuming. Because we only heard three weeks in advance that the prophet was coming, some members had already booked holidays abroad. But they canceled their holidays, many of them losing money to do so, in order to listen to the prophet. For many Saints here this was a once-in-a-lifetime experience." [^34]

President Hinckley's final stop before returning home was Dublin, where he became the first Church President to visit the Emerald Isle in forty-two years. Area President Graham W. Doxey summarized his week with the prophet in the British Isles: "It has been marvelous to see the faces of the people who come with great expectation and feast on everything President Hinckley says. They love his humor and the fact that he is down to earth. He understands their problems. He bears testimony and encourages them to move forward. Seeing the response of the people to a prophet of God has been a joy." [^35]

A month after his return from Britain, at the October 1995 general conference, President Hinckley announced that if current trends continued, the Church would celebrate a meaningful milestone sometime in February 1996, when there would be more members of the Church living outside the United States than in. On February 26, 1996, a Deseret News front-page story indicated that the mark had in fact been reached, and that the Church was currently welcoming an average of 950 new members a day. [^36] "The crossover of that line is a wonderfully significant thing," President Hinckley explained. "It represents the fruit of a tremendous outreach. The God of Heaven, whose servants we are, never intended that this should be a narrow, parochial work." [^37]

It seemed appropriate that such a milestone was reached early in President Hinckley's administration, for he had covered the world in a remarkable way throughout his lifetime and was determined to continue the practice. In May 1996 he turned his trip to Asia to dedicate the Hong Kong Temple into a whirlwind eighteen-day canvassing of the Orient, with visits to multiple cities in Japan, Korea, and the Philippines, as well as stops in Taiwan, Okinawa, Cambodia, Vietnam, and mainland China. Elder and Sister Joseph B. Wirthlin accompanied the Hinckleys throughout their journey.

Like his earlier trip to Great Britain, President Hinckley's return to the Orient was a tender homecoming. Everywhere he went, huge crowds gathered to greet and hear from him. They were responding to the visit not only of the President of the Church but of a man who had spent a tremendous amount of time among them during preceding decades. In that process he had established a distinctive rapport with the Saints in each country. Nearly everywhere he went the people confessed that they secretly felt President Hinckley had special affection for them. Said President Pak Byung Kyu, president of the MTC in Seoul, "We Koreans feel that President Hinckley loves us and our country in a special way. President Hinckley is our President." The president of the Hong Kong Temple, President Ng Kat Hing, said, "President Hinckley has been coming to Hong Kong for many years, and he has told us many times that this is one of his favorite places to visit. He loves the Chinese people in a way different from others." [^38] Similar sentiments were expressed in each country.

President Hinckley's emotions were visible for all to see as he repeatedly struggled for words to express the depth of his feelings for the Oriental Saints, protesting often that "tears come easily to an old man." But in truth his age had nothing to do with the fact that in one meeting after another, from country to country, he wept as he looked upon huge congregations of Asian Saints.

President Hinckley's first meeting in Hong Kong was with the missionaries, and he was filled with enthusiasm as he stepped to the pulpit and proclaimed: "How marvelous it is to be here with you! I feel as if I have come home. Coming to this city, to dedicate a temple, represents the fulfillment of one of the greatest dreams of my life." [^39] He enjoyed teasing the missionaries about the hazards of local drinking water. "Bottled or boiled or be dead, that's my motto in some of the remote areas of the world," he joked, then continued in a more serious vein: "It is a tremendous opportunity to work among the Chinese, who are hard to reach at times. But when the gospel touches lives, they turn around. These people are as entitled to the gospel as any on this earth. Every time you bring a convert into this church you bless a life and the generations yet to come. So make hay while you're under the Union Jack." [^40]

His comment referred to the impending change of Hong Kong, in July 1997, from British rule to governance from Beijing. In that meeting and elsewhere he spoke of the upcoming sequence of events: "No one knows what will happen in 1997. But we have faith that everything will work out and go forward. I have that faith. I feel optimistic about it. I think we will go forward without hindrance. I don't know how or when we will enter China. I leave that in the hands of the Lord. So even though this is a time of uncertainty in Hong Kong, we will face it with faith." [^41]

There was no uncertainty about what he had come to Hong Kong to do, and on May 26 and 27, accompanied by President Monson, Elder Maxwell, Elder Wirthlin, and the Asia Area Presidency—Elders Kwok Yuen Tai, John H. Groberg, and Rulon G. Craven—President Hinckley presided over and participated in each of the seven dedicatory sessions of the Hong Kong Temple. He was delighted to find that the temple's workmanship was excellent and the architecture and decor were uniquely and beautifully Chinese.

Indeed, the dedication of the temple, to which Saints from as far away as Beijing and Singapore traveled, was a watershed event for President Hinckley. In his brief remarks during the cornerstone-laying ceremony, President Monson explained that no temple had ever received such close scrutiny from President Hinckley as had this one. "When we see him wipe his eyes throughout the next two days," President Monson said, "the tears won't be from hay fever but from the heart and soul of our President." [^42] In the first session President Hinckley admitted, "This is a very emotional time for me. This temple represents the fulfillment of a dream and an answer to many prayers. I first came here thirty-six years ago, when we had tiny branches that met in rented rooms. I remember trying to explain how the Church operated, diagramming it out on a chalkboard to a handful of leaders. In those difficult days I scarcely dreamed we would have what we have here today. But with this temple the Church has now reached maturity in Hong Kong. If ever I felt the inspiration of the Lord at any time in my life, it was in connection with this building." [^43]

Immediately upon conclusion of the seventh dedicatory session, President and Sister Hinckley traveled by bus for an overnight trip to Shenzhen, China, where they received a red-carpet welcome from dignitaries representing the Overseas Chinese Town of Shenzhen Special Economic Zone and the Chinese Folk Villages—sister communities with the Polynesian Cultural Center in Hawaii. President Hinckley's visit marked the first of a President of the Church to mainland China. It is possible that he was also the first to be feted in such an extravagant manner. More than five hundred dancers and performers in brightly colored costumes lined the walkways to greet President and Sister Hinckley as they arrived at the folk villages, and glittering confetti shot from small cannons added sparkle to the reception he received at each location. Though slightly embarrassed at the overwhelming welcome, he was impressed with the Chinese attractions and grateful for the hospitality of his hosts. As he left Shenzhen, President Hinckley knew he would not soon forget these experiences in Hong Kong and on mainland China. [^44]

From China President Hinckley traveled to Cambodia and then to Vietnam. He dedicated Cambodia for the preaching of the gospel, and while in Hanoi he felt impressed to offer what he described as an "addendum" to the original dedicatory prayer and dedicated the entire land of Vietnam. He also met with several small groups in both countries, gatherings that unleashed a flood of memories from days when he had held similar meetings throughout Asia.

These forays into the world's remote areas allowed him to bolster the spirits of those laying the foundations upon which future generations would build. Over and over, in areas where convert baptisms came slowly, he told the people there was no cause for discouragement, that the Church would grow. This was more than rhetoric. He gave the same advice to his own grandson serving a mission in the former Eastern Bloc: "Your parents have told me that the area where you are now laboring is much more difficult than where you previously served. It is difficult and sometimes discouraging to open a new area. It is the history of this work that pioneering is always difficult. However, once a foundation is securely laid, then tremendous results follow afterward." [^45]

Indeed, he had seen that pattern emerge again and again. Perhaps nowhere in the world were the fruits of pioneering more dramatic than in the Philippines, where he flew from Hanoi. President Hinckley felt an unusual affinity for the warm, gregarious Filipinos, as well as a personal interest in the explosive growth of the Church—there were now more than 375,000 members—that he referred to as the "Miracle of Manila." Many Filipino Saints not only revered him as the prophet but shared a feeling of kinship as well, and they demonstrated their devotion in dramatic fashion. By midafternoon on May 29, 1996, the Araneta Coliseum, where an evening fireside was to be held, was filled beyond capacity. Lines had begun to form at 7:00 A.M. for a meeting that wasn't scheduled to begin for twelve hours. The official count later indicated that some 35,000 members had crowded into the coliseum's 25,000 seats as well as the aisles and concourses. Many Saints had traveled twenty hours by boat and bus to reach Manila. For some, the cost of the journey equalled several months' salary. One woman from the Lingayen Philippines Stake said of her motivation to make the trip: "We have come from a far place to see President Hinckley. He is a living prophet." She wept as she continued, "I am so glad to be here because now I can hear with my own ears a voice coming from the Lord, just like the Book of Mormon people did." [^46]

When word reached President Hinckley that the coliseum was full and that the building manager wondered if there was any way they could begin the meeting early, he immediately said, "Let's go." He and Sister Hinckley entered the vast arena to find it packed with what was believed to be the largest audience in an indoor facility ever to hear a President of the Church in person. As if on cue, the congregation spontaneously rose to their feet, applauded, and then began singing an emotional rendition of "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet."

The Spirit was powerful as President Hinckley addressed the massive audience. Toward the end of his message, he gave voice to something that had perhaps been on his mind throughout this Asian trip: "I don't know whether I'll ever come here again. It's a big world, and I am trying to get around among our people. I just want to take this occasion to speak to you in a very personal way. I have in my heart a special feeling for the people of this nation. You have suffered so much in times past." He concluded by pronouncing a blessing upon all assembled: "In the authority of the apostolic office, in the authority of the keys of the Presidency of this Church, I bless you that if you will walk in faith, you will have food on your tables and clothing on your backs and shelter over your heads, and will constantly rejoice. Please accept of my love, my great feeling of love for you." [^47]

As he was preparing to return to the United States, President Hinckley learned that his plane would land briefly for refueling on the island of Saipan in the Central Pacific. He immediately asked Elder Ben B. Banks, president of the Philippines Area, if there were missionaries or members on Saipan and, learning that there were both, asked him to invite the Saints to the airport. When they landed there late that night, President and Sister Hinckley were welcomed enthusiastically by several dozen members and missionaries offering leis and warm greetings.

President Hinckley returned from Asia having addressed nearly 60,000 members of the Church in firesides and special conferences; presided over seven dedicatory sessions at the Hong Kong Temple, plus the cornerstone-laying ceremony; and visited eight countries plus Hong Kong and Saipan. When asked how he maintained such a pace, he joked, "I go to bed every night and make sure I get up the next morning. I just keep going." Then he admitted, "The climate in this part of the world is enervating. But you get your lift from the people. They give me the energy to keep going. I love being among the Saints." [^48]

"The last couple of weeks have been similar to running a marathon," Elder Wirthlin acknowledged at the journey's end. "But it has been an unusual privilege to recognize in President Hinckley something special, something unusual. He is superb in every way—spiritually, intellectually, and physically. He is a polished stone who has been groomed through his years as a General Authority." From his vantage point, Elder Wirthlin witnessed the obvious affection that existed between the prophet and the Oriental Saints. "President Hinckley has the enthusiasm and optimism so necessary in countries where the people have suffered so much. He loves the people of Asia, but of course he loves them everywhere. That's why he keeps such a busy schedule and extends himself as much as he can for the best good of the members of the Church. To him, poor and rich look the same. I have known President Hinckley since boyhood, and I always knew he was remarkable, but I never knew how remarkable until I spent eighteen days at his side in the Orient. I returned home a better man." [^49]

President Hinckley had only a week at home before leaving on another ambitious journey, this one a two-week trip to Europe and the Holy Land. Again, the impetus for the trip was temple related, as he broke ground for a temple in Madrid. But he also visited the Saints in Brussels, The Hague, Copenhagen, Berlin, and the Holy Land.

Wherever he went, his presence aroused attention from dignitaries and the press. In Madrid, two prominent government officials attended the groundbreaking, where President Hinckley focused his remarks on the Church's desire to be a good citizen of Spain: "I hope we will be good neighbors to those who live around here. I promise you and the officials of Madrid that what is built here will be beautiful. We will build a temple, a stake center, a missionary training center, and some other facilities to accommodate the needs of our people. The structure will be beautiful and the grounds will be beautiful. This will be a hallowed and sacred place." [^50] After President Hinckley and other officials turned over the first shovelfuls of soil, a young boy and girl were invited to come forward and take a turn with the shovels. As the youth dug into the dusty soil, a cheer rose from the crowd and a seasoned photographer from the city's press corps shouted, "Bravo!"

In Brussels, President Hinckley was welcomed by Ambassador Robert E. Hunter, the U.S. permanent representative to NATO, and Alan John Blinken, U.S. Ambassador to Belgium. Four days later, in interviews with two of Berlin's largest newspapers, Berliner Zeitung and Die Welt, the reporter from the latter began by stating that his paper was circulated in some 130 countries. "We have you beat. We're in 155," President Hinckley joked in response. The resulting article described Gordon B. Hinckley as "a charming man one would gladly have as a neighbor," adding that "the head and prophet of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints . . . makes a warmhearted, gracious impression." The article continued with a report of the Berlin regional conference, attended by more than 3700 members: "One saw many happy families clothed in white, girls in bright ankle-length dresses, and young men with black bow ties flock to the meeting. They often call the Mormon Church the 'Happy Church,' which can't be far wrong. Naturally, Mr. Hinckley had a message for us all: We must come back to God. He gives us light and understanding in a time in which all old standards are breaking down. The intact family that lives in love and shared understanding and in which there is prayer is the true source of strength of a nation." [^51]

From Berlin, President and Sister Hinckley flew to the Holy Land, where they again visited sites central to the Savior's life and ministry. At the conclusion of their stay, he spoke to members of the Israel District in the auditorium of the BYU Jerusalem Center, rehearsing his visits to Bethlehem, the Sea of Galilee, the Mount of Beatitudes, Masada, Megiddo, Nazareth, the Upper Room, Gethsemane, and the Garden Tomb. "When we were at Gethsemane today," he shared with the congregation, "we went across the street into that grotto, sat in the shade, and read the scriptures. I think that His plea to His Father, when He sweat drops of blood in His agony, was to spare Him that great pain and suffering and anguish if that were possible. But He said His Father's will be done, not His. I think it was more than the certainty of the Crucifixion that weighed upon Him. It was His place in the whole eternal plan of the creation of the earth, of the peopling of the earth, of the divine plan under which men might be redeemed and move on to eternal life if they are willing to accept His commandments and live by them. His great message was a twofold message of love and peace in an atmosphere of hatred and conflict. . . . Of course there were other great teachers. There were others who taught the Golden Rule. There were others who taught great concepts of love and peace. But here is one who taught with great power and then sealed that teaching with His very life in an offering beyond comprehension." [^52]

President Hinckley returned home on a Saturday evening to a schedule that showed no respect for jet lag or his age. Sunday at 8:00 A.M. he addressed the annual mission presidents' seminar at the MTC in Provo; then he returned to Salt Lake City and spoke to a capacity audience of Kiwanis International members in the Tabernacle. The following day he and Sister Hinckley drove to Cove Fort, Utah, where his brother Sherman was serving as director of the visitors center, to participate in the arrival there of the Utah Centennial wagon train, and he spoke to an audience of nearly twenty thousand gathered for "family home evening with the prophet." During his remarks he contrasted his travels of the past five weeks, during which he had visited seventeen countries, with the challenges faced by those who had colonized the West and laid the foundations of the restored gospel: "As we flew over this trail of our people route home from Jerusalem], when we could see between the clouds, the picture that kept going through my mind was of plodding wagons going fifteen miles a day in the heat and dust, with buffalo and rattlesnakes by the thousands to contend with. I don't know of anything else that compares with the coming of our people to the valleys of the mountains. What a price has been paid for that which we enjoy. We flew over that trail at 524 miles an hour." And he then returned to a familiar theme: "We have become a well-known people. The Church is coming out of darkness and obscurity across the world in a remarkable and wonderful way, in fulfillment of the plea made in the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple when the Prophet pleaded that it would come out of obscurity and darkness and stand fair as the moon and clear as the sun and terrible as an army with banners." [^53]

It was almost impossible for President Hinckley to visit Cove Fort without thinking of his forebears, particularly his grand-father and father, who had left a legacy of faith and devotion that he had spent a lifetime trying to emulate. His grandfather had helped pioneer the West, and perhaps from that example he had acquired an abiding respect for those who blazed trails into the unknown. And it had been his father who, years earlier, had admonished him to forget himself and go to work. Through good times and bad, during joyous moments and experiences laden with frustration and heartache, while enduring layovers in smoke-filled airports and long, turbulent flights from one continent to another, he had taken his father's counsel to heart: Indeed, he had long since ceased to be concerned principally about his own needs and comfort and had forgotten himself and gone to work. Consequently, his was a ministry that had spanned more than half the twentieth century, had covered the globe, and had required him again and again to do some modern-day pioneering of his own. There were few corners of the world in which he hadn't walked, talked, listened, taught, and testified, and there were literally no peoples for whom he did not feel great affection and esteem.

In his concluding remarks at the April 1996 general conference, President Hinckley once again shared his enthusiasm for the work in which he had been engaged his entire life: "There are still those, not a few, who criticize and rebel, who apostatize and lift their voices against this work. We have always had them. They speak their piece as they walk across the stage of life, and then they are soon forgotten. . . . we go forward, marching as with an army with banners emblazoned with the everlasting truth. We are a cause that is militant for truth and goodness. We are a body of Christian soldiers 'marching as to war, with the cross of Jesus going on before.' . . . Everywhere we go we see great vitality in this work. There is enthusiasm wherever it is organized. It is the work of the Redeemer. It is the gospel of good news. It is something to be happy and excited about." [^54]

He didn't reserve such zeal and vision for the Tabernacle pulpit. Indeed, everywhere he traveled, as he raised his voice in congregations large and small, in secular as well as religious settings, his prescience and optimism about what lay ahead, his energy, and his testimony of the Risen Lord and the Church that bore His name were infectious. During the rededication of London's Hyde Park Chapel, he told the overflow multicultural audience: "I've seen it all, from very small beginnings when we had only rented halls to tonight with this large congregation. You are a fulfillment tonight of the great words of Jeremiah, who said, speaking in the name of the Lord, 'I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion: and I will give you pastures according to mine heart.' (Jeremiah 3:14-15.) You are the fulfillment of that. This is Zion for you, and you are being fed by the message of the Lord."

His interest, as he explained, was never in the number of converts but in the power of the message to change people's lives: "What a glorious work this is! How thankful I am, how grateful I am, for the gospel of Jesus Christ. . . . I have seen the miracles of the gospel in this land. I have seen men who were dissolute in their lives, but who were touched by the power of this gospel and became giants. I have seen women who were chore women who have become queens in this work. That's the whole purpose of it . . . to lead the way, to lift us up, to point the path that we can walk to eternal glory." [^55]

In some respects, he had seen it all—everything from a staff at Church headquarters whose numbers could be counted on two hands to a sprawling organization that spanned the globe with thousands of employees and further thousands of dedicated volunteers; from intimate gatherings of fledgling members in the Orient to overflowing audiences of capable and dedi-cated Saints in massive halls there; from a missionary program crippled by the side effects of war to a force of over fifty thousand; from the dedication of the first temple outside North America to the construction and dedication of dozens of temples on foreign soil; from a Church that essentially employed no media to one that could communicate instantly and globally with its millions of members via a sophisticated satellite network and other advanced technologies.

"I marvel at what is happening in this Church," he told a fireside audience in Crawley, England, representative of numerous other settings. "But I am not surprised, because I know its mission. I know its destiny. I know what the Lord has said concerning it, that it should roll forth and fill the whole earth. . . . There is nothing like this work anywhere else on earth, my brothers and sisters. I know people in many churches, and I have friends in various churches, and I appreciate them. But I know that this is the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth. The Lord Himself has declared it to be so, and I make no apology for it. It may sound egotistical, it may sound arrogant, but I wasn't the author of that statement. The Lord Himself is the author, and I believe it with all my heart."

He went on to bear powerful testimony: "God lives. He is our Eternal Father, the Creator and Governor of the Universe, the Almighty who is above all. He who is above all deigned to talk with a boy in a grove of trees in upstate New York. He who is above all will hear your prayer and hear mine. He lives. Jesus is the Christ, the foreordained Son of God who condescended to come to earth, who was born in a manger, in a conquered nation among a vassal people, the Son of God, the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh, the Firstborn of the Father and the Author of our salvation. He is our Redeemer, our Savior, through whose Atonement eternal life is made possible for all who will walk in obedience to His teachings. May testimony grow in our hearts that this is in reality the church of the living God and that it will continue to gain momentum and move forward to fulfill its divine destiny." [^56]

Since 1933, when he had accepted a call to serve in the European Mission, Gordon B. Hinckley had devoted essentially his entire life to the onward march of the gospel kingdom. All he had learned, everything he had witnessed had filled him with an impenetrable testimony of the work of God. Now, as President of the Church, he would continue to press forward, admonishing all within his reach and influence to follow what he had found to be the only straight and secure course, the scriptural words given to him by his father when he left for his mission: "Be not afraid, only believe."

I Know That My Redeemer Lives, I Know that my Redeemer Lives Triumphant Savior, Son of God, Victorious over pain and death, My King, my Leader, and my Lord. He lives, my one sure rock of faith, The one bright hope of men on earth, The beacon to a better way, The light beyond the veil of death. Oh, give me thy sweet Spirit still, The peace that comes alone from thee, The faith to walk the lonely road That leads to thine eternity. Gordon B. Hinckley Hymns, no. 135

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Address at Crawley, England, Fireside, 26 August 1995.
[^2] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Remember . . . Thy Church, O Lord," Ensign, May 1996, p. 83.
[^3] Neal A. Maxwell, remarks at meeting with missionaries of Hong Kong Mission, 25 May 1996; see also Interviews with Neal A. Maxwell, 30 June and 9 July 1995.
[^4] Interview with Joseph B. Wirthlin, 30 May 1996.
[^5] "Out of Your Experience Here," pp. 29-30.
[^6] Interview with GBH, 7 February 1996.
[^7] Interview with GBH, 22 November 1995.
[^8] For all excerpts from the luncheon press conference, see "Edelman Luncheon Transcript," 13 November 1995, pp. 1-10.
[^9] Interview with GBH, 7 February 1996.
[^10] GBH Journal, 13 November 1996.
[^11] See Sheri Dew Interview with Mike Wallace, 29 April 1996.
[^12] Interview with Bruce Olsen, 23 April 1996.
[^13] Transcript of Mike Wallace Interview with Gordon B. Hinckley, 18 December 1995.
[^14] See "Prophet Interviewed by 60 Minutes," Church News, 23 December 1995.
[^15] Transcript of Mike Wallace Interview with Gordon B. Hinckley, 10 March 1996.
[^16] "Remember . . . Thy Church, O Lord," p. 83.
[^17] Sheri Dew Interview with Mike Wallace, 29 April 1996.
[^18] "Hinckley Takes LDS Case to the Nation," Salt Lake Tribune, 8 April 1996.
[^19] Interview with Anne Osborn Poelman, 18 April 1996.
[^20] Sheri Dew Interview with Mike Wallace, 29 April 1996.
[^21] Tom Thorkelson to 60 Minutes, 8 April 1996.
[^22] Interview with Boyd K. Packer, 19 April 1996.
[^23] Interview with Bruce Olsen, 23 April 1996.
[^24] Transcript of Gustav Niebuhr Interview with Gordon B. Hinckley, The New York Times, 17 July 1995.
[^25] Transcript of Lawrence Spicer Interview with Gordon B. Hinckley, London News Service, 28 August 1995.
[^26] Interview with Neal A. Maxwell, 9 July 1996.
[^27] Gordon B. Hinckley, "This Glorious Easter Morn," Ensign, May 1996, pp. 65-66.
[^28] Interview with Boyd K. Packer, 19 April 1996.
[^29] Maxwell, remarks at meeting with missionaries of Hong Kong Mission.
[^30] Interview with GBH, 18 October 1995.
[^31] Cardall, "Trip to England."
[^32] Remarks at meeting with London Mission, 28 August 1995; see also remarks at meeting with London South Mission, 26 August 1995.
[^33] Marjorie P. Hinckley, remarks at meeting with London Mission, 28 August 1995.
[^34] Church News, 9 September 1995, p. 8.
[^35] Interview with Graham W. Doxey, 28 March 1995.
[^36] See "Members Living Abroad Outnumber LDS in U.S.," Deseret News, 26 February 1996; also "Over Half LDS Now Outside U.S.," Church News, 2 March 1996.
[^37] "Stay the Course-Keep the Faith," pp. 70-71.
[^38] Interviews with Pak Byung Kyu, 22 May 1996; and Ng Kat Hing, 25 May 1996.
[^39] Remarks at meeting with missionaries of Hong Kong Mission, 25 May 1996.
[^40] Remarks at meeting with missionaries of Hong Kong Mission.
[^41] Transcript of Duane Cardall Interview with Gordon B. Hinckley, Ho Man Tin chapel, Kowloon, 25 May 1996.
[^42] Thomas S. Monson, remarks at cornerstone-laying ceremony, Hong Kong Temple, 26 May 1996.
[^43] Gordon B. Hinckley, Address at Hong Kong Temple Dedication, first session, 26 May 1996.
[^44] See "President Hinckley Visits China," Church News, 1 June 1996, p. 3.
[^45] GBH to Elder Michael Hinckley, 1 July 1992.
[^46] Gerry Avant, "Tears Flow, Faith Grows as Filipinos Greet Prophet," Church News, 8 June 1996, p. 4.
[^47] Address at the Araneta Coliseum, Manila, Philippines, 30 May 1996.
[^48] Transcript of Duane Cardall, Gerry Avant, Sheri Dew Interview with GBH, 30 May 1996.
[^49] Interview with Joseph B. Wirthlin, 30 May 1996.
[^50] "Ground Broken for Temple in Madrid," Church News, 22 June 1996.
[^51] Die Welt, 17 June 1996.
[^52] Address at Israel District Fireside, 21 June 1996, BYU Jerusalem Center.
[^53] Address at Cove Fort, 24 June 1996.
[^54] "Remember . . . Thy Church, O Lord," p. 83.
[^55] Address at rededication of Hyde Park Chapel, 27 August 1996, London, England.
[^56] Address at Crawley, England, Fireside, 26 August 1995. 1996
