Sheri Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley ( 1996)

Appendix B

Press Interviews

Appendix B contains excerpts from major interviews and press conferences in which President Hinckley participated during his first eighteen months as President of the Church. Excerpts are arranged according to interview.

Interview by Phil Riesen, KUTV Television, Salt Lake City, 12 May 1995

Q. For many churches in America, declining membership is the crisis to be reckoned with. It's just the opposite, it seems, for the Mormon church. There is explosive growth within the Church. Is that one of the main things you have to deal with now, managing that growth?

A. Growth is a serious problem for us, of course. But it is a wonderful problem. What a wonderful thing, to be growing, to be vital and alive and moving forward. And that's what is happening now. That entails many problems—acquisition of land, building of chapels, building of temples, all of these things. But it is a wonderful problem to face, really, when all is said and done.

Q. For a long while nonmembers, and perhaps even some members in good standing, of the Church sort of looked at the Church as "them against us." It was the "Mormons" and the "non-Mormons." That had a tendency to drive a wedge in communities and neighborhoods. Are you concerned that that perception is still there? And if you are concerned about it, are you working hard to erase, to eradicate that sort of thing?

A. I am concerned about any vestige of that kind that may be left. We want to be good neighbors; we want to be good friends. We feel we can differ theologically with people without being disagreeable in any sense. We hope they feel the same way toward us. We have many friends and many associations with people who are not of our faith, with whom we deal constantly, and we have a wonderful relationship. It disturbs me when I hear about any antagonisms of the kind that you've mentioned. I don't think they are necessary. I hope that we can overcome them.

Q. What would you do, what would you say to members of the Church and nonmembers of the Church that would help alleviate that beyond what you have just said to me?

A. Be friendly. Be understanding. Be tolerant. Be considerate. Be respectful of the opinions and feelings of other people. Recognize their virtues; don't look for their faults. Look for their strengths and their virtues, and you will find strength and virtues that will be helpful in your own life.

Q. The Church has a way of dealing with dissident members that to even the nonmembers of the Church seems at times a bit harsh. I know the reasons must go much deeper than what appears on the surface, but the message that is portrayed, it seems, when a member is disfellowshipped or excommunicated is "Stray from the central belief and you're out. Don't question or you're out." Does that perceived rigidity lead to miscommunication and problems?

A. I think the problem is not understood. In the first place, the Church does not talk about what takes place in disciplinary councils where such matters are considered. Those who are dealt with there are the ones who speak; the Church doesn't respond generally to that kind of thing. It would be inappropriate for me to discuss, for instance, any particular case because the First Presidency becomes the court of appeal in these matters and I am not familiar with the details. When they come to us in the proper form, we will give careful consideration to them and make a judgment at that time. But really, this is a minor thing—a little handful who, over a period of some years now, have been excommunicated—in comparison with the tremendous growth that is going on. We are talking of five, six, seven, eight cases in a church of nine million people. Really, it is minuscule. For those people who are dealt with it is a major thing, of course, and I don't want to minimize it. We regard it with seriousness, great seriousness. We value every member of this church, active or inactive. We want to help lift them. We want them to be happy. We want to encourage them. We want them to grow in faith and faithfulness. That is our aim and objective. When cases come along they are handled on a local basis in all instances.

Q. And you in your conference talks have almost extended an olive branch to the people who have left the Church.

A. I have. I have. They are always welcome to come back. They will find many to welcome them with great warmth and love and affection. We are anxious to help them all. We have no antagonism against people. We are trying to be as Christlike as we can be.

Q. How does the Church feel about bringing the Olympics to Utah? I know there has been no official stand taken.

A. Institutionally we have remained neutral because we know that it's a two-sided question and that we have members on both sides of that question. If Salt Lake gets the bid and becomes the city for the 2002 Winter Olympics, we will be cooperative, we will be helpful, we will do what we can to take advantage of the opportunity that will be afforded through the visits of people from all over the world who will gather here. We hope that it will be a productive time.

Q. Are you troubled by what you see going on in the world today? I mean, when you stop and think about the insanity of Oklahoma City, the diseases running rampant in our culture and our society because of all kinds of different things, the wars and the rumors of war. Are you troubled by what you see in the world?

A. I am deeply troubled, seriously troubled. I can't understand why there is so much of hatred in the world, why there needs to be hatred of any kind. We ought to live together as sons and daughters of God. We have a common Father. That means that we are brothers and sisters and we ought to live together in that way. The deplorable conditions that we see of civil war and conflict and all of the problems of hunger and strife and poverty across the world, yes, and right at home—the disintegration of the family that we see so broadly across this nation, yes, I feel a very deep concern. Suffering troubles me. I just do not like to see people suffer. And in so many cases it would be avoidable if they would live the simple law of the golden rule: Doing unto others as they would be done by would so change this troubled world. And that is our message, a message of peace and of mutual respect of one to another. That is the burden of what we have to teach.

Q. It is probably nearly impossible to explain the reverence Church members feel for you and your position. And it's probably almost equally impossible to explain to nonmembers of the Church who you are and what you stand for. I think we have gotten some degree of understanding about that in this interview. But could you say a few words to each side of that equation that I just gave you, something that might lead both sides to a deeper understanding of who Gordon B. Hinckley is?

A. In the first place, of course, this is a tremendous and sacred trust which is imposed upon me. I do not take it lightly. It is a very serious responsibility and one which I regard most seriously. I have only one desire, and that is to bring about an increased measure of happiness in the lives of people. We have a scripture which says that "wickedness never was happiness." People are happy when they are living right, when they are doing the right things. That is my desire, to increase that through the teachings of the gospel of Jesus Christ, who is our Master and our Lord and whose name is carried in the name of this church. And in that spirit we want to reach out to our own people and those not of our own faith. I think we have done a great deal of reaching out in the Church in recent times. We have extended our humanitarian aid across the world. We've given millions of dollars, really, to the aid of the suffering in many nations. We've sent tons and tons of clothing, of medical supplies, of all kinds of things to help people who are not of our faith. We've worked with the organizations of other churches in accomplishing that. We feel an obligation to all humanity, and I hope that we are doing what we can to fill that obligation. And we want to exercise that same spirit of charity and love and mutual respect in our own neighborhoods, our own communities, in the city, in the state in which we live, and help those not only of our own faith but of other faiths. And we say to those of other faiths, look at us, investigate us, study us. If we have anything of good report to offer to you, accept it—and we look for the good in you and recognize much of it and hope that you will see some of the good in us.

Q. Your legacy as President of the Church undoubtedly will be your decades of service to the Church and the community. Beyond your position as President, what would you want your grandchildren and your great-grandchildren to remember Grandpa Hinckley for?

A. I would hope that I might be held in remembrance as a man who tried to do some good in the world, to make the world a better place, to improve it. And as a man who walked with integrity with his associates, both those in the Church and out of the Church, with love and appreciation for the goodness that he saw in people wherever he went.

Interview by Gustav Niebuhr, The New York Times, 17 July 1995

Q. Have you made any provisions should you become incapacitated?

A. It's all built into the system. I have two counselors—able, experienced, remarkably fine men. If anything happens to me that I am unable to function, they carry on. I had that experience myself. There was a time during President Kimball's tenure that I was the only counselor able to function and I had that experience. And I had that experience likewise with President Monson during the tenure of President Benson. The work goes on. It didn't slacken at all. It went forward on its course. And that's another thing that's interesting—the man who succeeds to the presidency of the Church comes out of a long experience. He's come from the newest man in the Council of the Twelve to the senior man in the Council of the Twelve. During that time of service, he's traveled widely across the world; he develops a world perspective. He knows the program of the Church intimately. He's trained, he's educated, he's winnowed and refined and the chaff is blown off during years of service before he becomes the President of the Church.

Q. So revelation may be received through the First Presidency?

A. Oh, yes, it has to be. This is a vital organization. Things are happening all across the world every day. . . . We have strong local leaders in whom we have confidence. This church operates on the basis of trust, so to speak. It begins at the top and works down. Now, once in a while there's a glitch. Once in a while there's a failure. Once in a while there's some freakish thing that might happen, but that's seldom, and it's really an aberration.

Q. I would like to get your broad views of the Church and American society.

A. Let me say first as a basic premise that no nation can afford to shut religion out of its public life. I think that the history of Communism provides a credible background for that statement. But our Founding Fathers certainly did not have in mind any system under which religion would be foreclosed as a part of the lives of the people of this nation, nor that there should be a prohibition against a public expression of humility for the Almighty and the seeking of His blessings upon the people of the land. Let me say further that we, institutionally as a church, have upheld the principle of the separation of church and state. The Founding Fathers had come out of a background where there was a state church, and they wanted no more of it. And we believe that they were inspired by the Almighty in the writing of the Constitution and the Bill of Rights, the first amendment to that Constitution, which provided for freedom of worship. Hopefully, there will never be a time in our national life when there will be any kind of legal attempt to foreclose that practice. Now, anything that can be done to encourage the spirituality of the people, and acknowledgment of the Almighty on their part, and the humility and strength that will come therefrom, ought to receive encouragement so long as its aim is not to foster any particular religion or theology.

Q. As President of a church that endured real persecution in the nineteenth century, do you think there has been discrimination in the last fifteen or twenty years in our society?

A. Certainly there have been instances of it. I think there's no question about it. Unfortunately, people can't seem to be tolerant and respectful of the views of others in so many cases. We must cultivate in this land an attitude of tolerance and respect for the beliefs and rights of others. We must cultivate an increased spirit of civility among people in their expressions one to another, and toward the beliefs and practices of others. We can disagree with people without being disagreeable. We can disagree without raising our voices and becoming angry and vindictive in our ways. We must learn to do so. We must practice a greater spirit of Christ in our lives, we as a Christian community, of love one for another, and extend that to all people regardless of whom they worship or how they worship, so long as they do not infringe upon the rights of others.

Q. There are probably few places in the world as well equipped as Salt Lake City is to handle the diversity of languages that will present themselves when the Olympics come to Utah.

A. Yes, we can talk to the people in their own tongues. I tell you, this missionary program is a miracle. You take a nineteen-year-old boy and call him to serve as a missionary of this church, and you put on his narrow shoulders the responsibility of representing this church before the world; you put your trust and confidence in him and ordain him to the priesthood to serve in that capacity. And he goes out and he mingles with the rich and the poor in lands across the world, whether it be walking up and down the steep roads of Victoria Island in Hong Kong, or in the dark of night in the winters of Norway, Sweden, and Finland, or wherever. They learn to appreciate people, not as tourists but sitting with them at their firesides in their homes, discussing this great church and what it can mean to them and what effect it will have in their lives. And things happen. People listen to them and they join the Church. They're baptized and they become leaders. It is wonderful! Really, it is a miracle! And they learn languages and speak them like natives. I was told once that the American ambassador to Finland said, "There are only two groups of people who learn Finnish—babies and Mormon missionaries."

Interview With Lawrence Spicer, London News Service, London, England, 28 August 1995

Q. You are the fastest-growing Christian denomination in this country. What do you reckon accounts for that success?

A. We think that people have in their hearts a desire to improve their lives and develop their spirituality. There is within each of us something that longs for a kinship with the Almighty, and we feel that there is a response to that as we teach concerning that. We feel we are meeting the needs of people. We have a great program for the development of spirituality and for learning and for sociality and all of the things that satisfy the needs of people.

Q. What is it that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has, in your view, that makes it more attractive to some people than the established churches?

A. The Church is a constant in a world of change. It is an anchor in a world of shifting values. It emphasizes the importance of family, and all of us have to know that family life is unraveling across the world. We are holding onto the family. We are trying to strengthen the family. We teach family ideals. We have a great program for the development of family solidarity, and we think that's satisfying a human need and offers hope to many, many people who are desperately looking for something as fathers and mothers. Divorce is rampant across the world, and growing. There is a need for stability. The family is the basic organization of society. A nation can be no stronger than the strength of its families.

Q. Your detractors refer to you as a very "right-wing" church, and very recently in this country we've seen television programs that comment on the Mormons as such. Do you think this is because you are unchanging?

A. I'd rather be "right-wing" than "wrong-wing," and I think that we have perhaps been on the conservative side of things. We are not among those who are out experimenting with everything all the time. The doctrine remains unchangeable. We modify the program from time to time to accommodate certain needs and certain situations, but the doctrine remains constant, and it's that constancy that provides this foundation which becomes a straight and narrow path, if you please, on which to walk.

Q. You are accused of being a "white" church.

A. We are not a "white church," for goodness sakes. I was here at a meeting in Wandsworth where I suppose 50 percent of those in that congregation were of African descent. One of the men who was installed as a member of the stake presidency, as we call it—the head of a diocese—is a black man from Accra, Ghana. We are reaching out across the world. I was with a little group of missionaries today who were in training. One was from St. Petersburg, one from Moscow, one from Budapest, one from Paris, one from Spain—and that's indicative of what's happening. This is a great cosmopolitan body. It is marvelous what is happening. I was here as a missionary sixty-two years ago, and to note the contrast between our congregations then and our congregations now has been wonderful. We might have been considered a white church then. They were all white Englishmen. But today it is a cosmopolitan group, just as cosmopolitan as London itself. The languages in which we are dealing are wide and varied and, really, it's a miraculous thing.

Q. How far do you see your church entering into the ecumenical movement, which is strong in this country?

A. We like to be able to get along with all people. We recognize the good in all churches. We recognize the value of religion generally. We say to everyone, we tell you to live the teachings which you have received from your church. We invite you to come and learn from us, to see if we can add to those teachings and enhance your life and your understanding of things sacred and divine. We work with people on common causes, many of them, all across the world. We recognize theological differences. We believe that we can disagree theologically without being disagreeable, and we hope to do so. We have been rather careful about surrendering in any way our doctrinal standards or anything of that kind as part of an ecumenical effort, but we certainly have worked with people, and do work with people, and want to work with other groups in tackling common social problems.

Press Conference at the Harvard Club, New York City, New York, 13 November 1995

Opening Statement by President Hinckley:

Ladies and Gentlemen, thank you very much for being here. It has been suggested that we come and talk about the Church just a little. I would like to point out two or three things that I hope might be of interest to you concerning what we are trying to do and perhaps what we are accomplishing. We are no longer a Utah church. We once were regarded as a Utah church. Fifty years ago, 55 percent of the membership of the Church resided in the state of Utah. Seventeen percent of the membership of the Church now resides in the state of Utah. We are now working in some 155 nations and territories. We have 22,000 congregations who meet each Sunday and speak a great variety of languages, from pole to pole almost, as it were. There is a tremendous vigor and vitality about this work, about this program, and we hope that it is touching for good the lives of people in the many lands in which we operate.

We have a core of missionaries. Our missionary system is different. We invite our young men, call them when they are nineteen years of age, to give two years of their lives to go out. And you will find them everywhere from Thailand to Argentina. Next February our statistical people tell us that for the first time in our history we will have more members of the Church outside the United States than we have in the United States. I think that is a significant thing. We now have more than nine million members, and we are growing at the rate of about a million each three to three and a half years. It took the Church a hundred years to reach its first million, and, as I say, we are now growing at the rate of about a million each three and a half years. And that impetus will increase as the years pass.

We have this great body of young men and some young women. It is a great thing. It is a remarkable program. It is a program under which, at a time when a young man is most prone to think of himself, he is sent where he can forget himself in the service of others. It has tremendous consequences.

We are carrying on a great welfare and humanitarian service. Our welfare program, as we know it today, was begun during the Great Depression and puts tremendous emphasis on self-reliance. We try to teach our people to be self-reliant and, when they can't take care of their own needs, to enlist the help of their families. And when those needs cannot be met by the families, then the Church moves in to help them. We have a great program that involves farm properties, ranching properties, field properties where people can work and grow that which they eat. We have flour mills, we have grain storage, we have meat-processing plants, we have all of these things. We operate 99 storehouses, more than 100 employment centers, 46 thrift stores. In 1994, members donated the equivalent of over 150,000 days of labor in such facilities to help those who are in distress and in need. During the past ten years the Church has provided disaster relief and self-reliance development in 109 countries. The value has exceeded $30 million per year in humanitarian gifts to those not of our faith in many parts of the world. There are, on an average, 400 humanitarian projects each year. We have, for instance, underwritten in large measure an orphanage in India and a boarding school for the blind in Kenya in which 300 blind children in a school operated by the Salvation Army are supplied with mattresses and blankets for their beds, storage boxes for personal items, pajamas, towels and soap, educational supplies, and things such as that. In Albania full-time Church service volunteers have been providing training through attendance in a hospital for severely malnourished infants and at a pediatrics and family practice department of the medical school in the struggling country of Albania. More than $1.3 million in food, soap, clothing assistance have been provided to tens of thousands of refugees in Rwanda and Burundi. And so it goes. We have assisted with flood conditions in China, in Korea, many places.

We think that we have added to the health of the nation. We try to live by a code of health which we feel is divinely inspired. You would be interested to know that Utah has the lowest number of reported deaths from cancer—124 per 100,000. Active Church members are about one-third as likely to contract cancer as is the general population according to a study made by a professor at the University of California.

We put great emphasis on education. The high school graduation rate in Utah is 85.1 percent, as compared to a national average of 75.2 percent. We teach as a principle of our doctrine that the glory of God is intelligence, and that is reflected in our membership. Incidentally, a study recently made indicates that the higher the education level of those who are members of the Church, the more active, the more faithful, the more diligent they are in their work. I think that is a unique thing. The activity rate is higher among Ph.D.s than it is among high school graduates, which says something of tremendous significance.

We advocate strong family relationships. We have problems, of course we do. But with all of these in Utah, where 70 percent of the population is LDS, we have the fewest births to unmarried women per capita in the United States—135 per one thousand live births—whereas the national average is 300 per one thousand live births.

We have a tremendous program for religious education for our young people. Not in the public schools, but in harmony, if I can say, with the public schools. We conduct seminaries on private properties adjacent to public schools wherever we can do so. That program reaches out to over 600,000 youth across the world.

As we grow we have to build buildings. We have about 375 buildings under construction at all times, which means about 375 new buildings a year. That is a tremendous undertaking. I do not know of any other organization that is building 375 new houses of worship a year across the world. I think it is all indicative of the vitality and the strength and the outreach of this great organization. People are coming into the Church—solid, wonderful people.

Again, thank you very much for being here. If you have questions, comments, suggestions, we would be happy to talk with you.

Q. When any organization and especially when a church decides to hire a public relations firm, a spinmeister, what is it they are trying to spin? Are you concerned about misconceptions about the Mormon Church?

A. There are still many ideas that persist concerning us. We are not well-known, our people. We have grown up in the West. The Church originated in Palmyra, New York. You have all heard of the Mormon migration to the West and the establishment of modern irrigation practice by Mormon people in the West, where we established some three or four hundred different communities. Utah is now being discovered, but it wasn't for a long, long time. We would like to clear up that misconception and let people come to know us for what we are and what we are trying to accomplish.

Q. Are there any conflicts between your convictions about families and women's roles within the family and the aspirations of some women to occupy leadership positions in your church?

A. We have a few, yes. We have a few women who feel that women should hold the priesthood. We have a great women's organization. I believe it is the largest women's organization in the world—our women's Relief Society. They have their own officers who preside over their own organization. They carry forward a tremendous program of education among women. I think they are happy. They are doing a great work. Now, of course we have a few who say, "I should do this, and I should have this, and so forth," and they talk of women's rights. We believe in women's rights. We try to foster them. I think you will discover that the women of this church are happy. There may be a few who are unhappy. But you would find that in any society.

Interview With Mike Wallace, Salt Lake City, Utah, 18 December 1995

Q. Since World War II, we seem to be splintering; we seem to be becoming more selfish, more self-absorbed, less community-minded. Families don't seem to mean so much, and morality has gone to hell in a handbasket. Why?

A. The basic failure is in our homes. Parents haven't measured up to their responsibilities. It is evident. A nation will rise no higher than the strength of its homes. If you want to reform a nation, you begin with families, with parents who teach their children principles and values that are positive and affirmative and will lead them to worthwhile endeavors. That is the basic failure that has taken place in America. And we are making a tremendous effort to bring about greater solidarity in families. Parents have no greater responsibility in this world than the bringing up of their children in the right way, and they will have no greater satisfaction as the years pass than to see those children grow in integrity and honesty and make something of their lives, adding to society because they are a part of it.

Q. Your church has a very strict health code. Why is that a part of religion?

A. The body is the temple of the spirit. The body is sacred. It was created in the image of God. It is something to be cared for and used for good purposes. It ought to be taken care of, and this thing which we call the Word of Wisdom, which is a code of health, is most helpful in doing that.

Q. For some, particularly those who are not Mormons, your teachings demand conformity, rigidity. Those are the complaints one hears.

A. Oh, yes, you may hear those complaints. I don't think it is so. I don't think there is substance to it. Our people have tremendous liberty. They are free to live their lives as they please.

Q. Are they?

A. Oh, absolutely. Surely. They have to make choices. It is the old eternal battle that has been going on since the war in heaven, spoken of in the book of Revelation. The forces of evil against the forces of good. We all exercise agency in the choices we make.

Q. You also have a moral code.

A. We believe in chastity before marriage and total fidelity after marriage. That sums it up. That is the way to happiness in living. That is the way to satisfaction. It brings peace in the heart and peace in the home.

Q. Some of the students we've talked to say that the health code is easy compared to no premarital sex. And that does not mean necessarily intercourse. They say that not smoking or not drinking is a clear line, but that the sexual line is somewhere way before intercourse and they are confused, some of them anyway, about where that line is.

A. Oh, I think they know. Any young man or woman who has grown up in this church knows where that line is. When you see yourself slipping, begin to exercise some self-discipline. And if it is a serious problem, take it to the Lord. Talk with God about it. Share your burden with Him. He will give you strength. He will help you. They know that. I am confident they know that.

Q. Why must only men run the Church?

A. "Only men" do not run the Church. Men have their place in the Church. Men hold the priesthood offices of the Church. But women have a tremendous place in this church. They have their own organization. It was started in 1842 by the Prophet Joseph Smith, called the Relief Society, because its initial purpose was to administer help to those in need. It has grown to be, I think, the largest women's organization in the world with a membership of more than three million. They have their own offices, their own presidency, their own board. That reaches down to the smallest unit of the Church everywhere in the world.

Q. But they don't have the power.

A. They have office. They have responsibility. They have control of their organization.

Q. But you run it. The men run it. Look, I'm not being . . .

A. The men hold the priesthood, yes. But my wife is my companion. In this Church the man neither walks ahead of his wife nor behind his wife but at her side. They are co-equals in this life in a great enterprise.

Q. There are those who say that Mormonism began as a cult. You don't like to hear that.

A. I don't know what that means, really. But if it has negative connotations, I don't accept it as applying to this church. People may have applied it, they may have applied it in the early days. But look, here is this great church now. There are only six churches in America with more members than this church. We are the second church in membership in the state of California. We are reaching out across the world. We are in more than 150 nations. This is a great, strong, viable organization with a tremendous outreach across the world. . . . You will find our people in business institutions, high in educational circles, in politics, in government, in whatever. We are ordinary people trying to do an extraordinary work.

Q. It's expensive to be a Mormon.

A. Oh, it isn't expensive. You are living by the law of the Lord—tithing.

Q. But ten percent of your gross goes to the Church and you have nothing to do with the way the money is spent. An average Mormon, that is.

A. The average Mormon has a good deal to do with it. He is a member of the Church. That money is spent in his local unit.

Q. But he has nothing to do with how it is going to be spent.

A. If he is a bishop, he has the expenditures of his ward. A lot of that money comes back to the local units. What is that money used for? It is used for Church purposes.

Q. What are Church purposes exactly?

A. Building chapels. About 375 a year. Think about that. New buildings each year to accommodate the needs of the growing membership. It is used for education. We maintain the largest private, Church-sponsored university in the world, Brigham Young University, with its 27,000 students on that campus, as well as other campuses. We maintain a tremendous institute of religion program, where we have off-campus connection with the major universities of America. You will find institutes at UCLA, USC, Harvard, Yale, Princeton, the University of New York, the University of Massachusetts, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and so forth.

When it comes to the financial circumstances of the Church, we have all funds carefully audited. We have a corps of auditors who are qualified CPAs, who are independent from all other agencies of the Church and who report only to the First Presidency of the Church. We try to be very careful. I keep on the credenza behind my desk a widow's mite that was given me in Jerusalem many years ago as a reminder, a constant reminder, of the sanctity of the funds which we have to deal with. They come from the widow, they are her offering as well as the tithe of the rich man, and they are to be used with care and discretion for the purposes of the Lord. We treat them carefully and safeguard them and try in every way that we can to see that they are used as we feel the Lord would have them used for the upbuilding of His work and the betterment of people.

Q. Young men and women give two years of their lives to serve as missionaries?

A. Young women serve eighteen months. The work is strenuous, it is difficult. It isn't easy to go to New York, or London, or Tokyo and knock on doors and face people you have never met before. But it does something for you. It does two or three things. It creates in the first place a feeling of reliance upon the Lord. It isn't easy for a young man to do that. It builds within him something of strength and capacity. If he goes to a foreign land, he develops expertise in the language; he learns to speak the language of the people. Wherever he goes he comes to know the people among whom he serves and brings back with him something of their culture, their way of doing things, with appreciation and respect for them and their conditions and circumstances. There is nothing like it. When you think that we have nearly 50,000 out right now, and that number is constantly rotating so that it touches the lives of hundreds of thousands of these people. . . . I can walk down the streets of Salt Lake City with you and meet people who speak fluently in Japanese and Chinese and Swedish and Norwegian and Finnish and Spanish and Portuguese, and who have love in their hearts for the people among whom they served.

Q. Why are members of the Church expected to keep a year's supply of food, clothing, and fuel?

A. We teach self-reliance as a principle of life, that we ought to provide for ourselves and take care of our own needs. And so we encourage our people to have something, to plan ahead, keep a little food on hand, to establish a savings account, if possible, against a rainy day. Catastrophes come to people sometimes when least expected—unemployment, sickness, things of the kind. The individual, as we teach, ought to do for himself all that he can. When he has exhausted his resources, he ought to turn to his family to assist him. When the family can't do it, the Church takes over. And when the Church takes over, our great desire is to first take care of his immediate needs and then to help him for so long as he needs to be helped, but in that process to assist him in training, in securing employment, in finding some way of getting on his feet again. That's the whole objective of this great welfare program.

Q. Mr. President, the Church actively campaigned against the Equal Rights Amendment.

A. Yes, indeed. And I think the wisdom of that has been shown in what has happened. We weren't alone in that. We did take an active part in that and have had no regrets concerning it. We think the outcome was what it should have been.

Q. Why are you against equal rights for women?

A. We give women things that I think no other organization in the world gives. Opportunity for education. We stress it. Opportunity for growth. Opportunity to pray in public meetings. Opportunity to speak in public meetings. Opportunity to reach out and serve. They serve on the board of trustees of our university, where their voices are heard. They are heard in many of our councils.

Q. Why is Salt Lake City so clean?

A. Well, we hope it is a reflection of the people who live here.

Q. It is astonishing to walk down the streets of Salt Lake City.

A. We hope it will stay that way. I hope that it reflects, in some measure at least, some of the teachings of this church. Look at the beauties of Temple Square right there in the heart of the city, the very core of the city. Look at that magnificent temple and that great tabernacle. They were built with vision, by people with culture, with refinement, with artistry. They're not the work of charlatans. They are the work of people who had a great vision to do beautiful things.

Q. The Mormons, Mr. President, call you a "living Moses," a prophet who literally communicates with Jesus. How do you do that?

A. I do it in prayer. Let me say first that there is a tremendous history behind this church, a history of prophecy, a history of revelation, and a backlog of decisions which set the pattern of the Church so that there aren't constant recurring problems that require any special dispensation. But there are occasionally things that arise where the will of the Lord is sought, and in those circumstances I think the best way I could describe the process is to liken it to the experience of Elijah as set forth in First Kings. Elijah spoke to the Lord and there was a wind, a great wind, and the Lord was not in the wind. And there was a tempest, or an earthquake, and the Lord was not in the earthquake. And there was a fire, and the Lord was not in the fire. And after the fire a still, small voice, which I describe as the whisperings of the Spirit. Now, let me just say, categorically, that the things of God are understood by the Spirit of God, and one must have and seek and cultivate that Spirit, and there comes understanding and it is real. I can give testimony of that.

Q. Why is your church so aggressive about spreading the word, having missionaries knock on doors where they may not be welcome and where they're obviously not invited?

A. We believe that the Lord meant what He said when He said, "Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature." We believe in that mandate. We think it rests upon us to try to fulfill it. We are doing that with all of the energy and resources that we have.

Q. How do you view non-Mormons?

A. With love and respect. I have many non-Mormon friends. I respect them. I have the greatest of admiration for them.

Q. Despite the fact that they haven't really seen the light yet?

A. Yes. To anybody who is not of this church, I say we recognize all of the virtues and the good that you have. Bring it with you and see if we might add to it.

Q. Tell me about Brigham Young.

A. Brigham Young had a prophetic vision. Can anyone doubt it who looks around here today? No. And that's the way it is with this church. It has been led by revelation. We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the kingdom of God for the blessing of His sons and daughters wherever they may be found.

Second Interview With Mike Wallace, Salt Lake City, Utah, 10 March 1996

Q. As you know, some skeptics say that major changes in Church policy have come from political pressures, not necessarily as revelations from God. For example, the business of ending polygamy, say the skeptics, wasn't because it was revelation but because Utah wanted to become a state.

A. One of the purposes of a prophet is to seek the wisdom and the will of the Lord and to teach his people accordingly. It was the case with Moses when he led the children of Israel out of Egypt. It was the case for the Old Testament prophets when people were faced with oppression and trouble and difficulty. That is the purpose of a prophet, to give answers to people for the dilemmas in which they find themselves. That is what happens. That is what we see happen. Is it a matter of expediency, political expediency? No. Inspired guidance? Yes.

Q. How big a problem, Mr. President, is child abuse in the Mormon church?

A. I hope it isn't a big problem. We have had some problems. This is a serious phenomenon that is finding expression all over the world. It is a terrible thing. It is a wicked thing. It is a reprehensible thing. It is a thing of which I have spoken about time and again.

Q. What are you doing to reduce it?

A. We are doing everything we know how to reduce it. We are teaching our people. We are talking about it. We have set up a course of instruction for our bishops all across the nation. All last year we carried on an educational program. We have set up a hotline for them where they can get professional counseling and help with these problems. We have issued a journal dealing with child abuse, spouse abuse, abuse of the elderly, the whole problem of abuse. We are concerned about it. I am deeply concerned about the victims. My heart reaches out to them. I want to do everything we can to ease the pain, to preclude the happening of this evil and wicked thing. . . . I know of no other organization in this world that has taken more extensive measures, tried harder, done more to tackle this problem, to work with it, to do something to make a change. We recognize the terrible nature of it and we want to help our people, reach out to them, assist them.

Q. One sociologist tells us that the root of the problem is the fact that men, in effect, in your church have authority over women so that your clergymen tend to sympathize with the men being abusers instead of with the abused.

A. That is one person's opinion. I don't think there is any substance to it. I think that the men of this church, the bishops of this church, the officers of this church are as concerned with the welfare of the women of the Church as they are with the men of the Church and with the children of the Church. I wouldn't hesitate to say that for one minute. I am confident of that. I have been around a long time. I have known this church from the ground up, inside and out, over a very, very long period of time. I am eighty-five years of age now and I've lived with it all my life and I think I know how it functions. I think I know the attitude of our people. Now, there will be a blip here, a blip there, a mistake here, a mistake there. But by and large the work is wonderful, and vast good is being accomplished, and the welfare of women and children is as seriously considered as is the welfare of the men in this church, if not more so.

Media Luncheon and Press Conference, Tokyo Miyako Hotel, 18 May 1996

Opening Statement by President Hinckley:

I am here in the interests of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the church of which I am pleased to be a part—an organization which we feel is doing vast good throughout the world. We're expanding and growing consistently and rapidly. We are now in 155 nations and territories. Our worldwide membership is now about nine and a half million people, and we are growing at a rate of about a million every three years. I am grateful for our membership in Japan. We have something over 100,000 members here. We have about 300 congregations. We have constructed about 180 buildings, and we have strong and stable members in Japan. All of our local leaders are native Japanese. They preside over our local congregations. They do it on a volunteer basis. . . . As a church we place great emphasis on the family. We believe that the family is the basic unit of society. No nation will be stronger than the strength of its families. If you want to reform any society, you begin by reforming the family, so we put great emphasis on strengthening family life. We believe in education. We foster education. We operate the largest private, religion-owned university in the world—Brigham Young University at Provo, Utah—and many young Japanese students have attended Brigham Young University and have graduated from that university. We deplore terrorism. We think it is a terrible evil wherever it manifests itself. We read with great sorrow the news report of the poison gas attacks that were carried on in Tokyo. Twelve of our employees were victims of those attacks, and many of our people suffered. We believe in the rule of law. If we have a grievance, we have to settle it in a lawful way and not with terroristic activity of any kind. Our entire aim is to teach the gospel of Jesus Christ, which is the gospel of peace among people. Our voice is a voice of peace to the entire world. We speak the words of Jesus Christ, who said, "Peace I give unto you."

Q. There are some historians who say that when they try to conduct historical research about the Church, they are not able to gain access to historical documents and materials, and that when they publish something that may not be exactly in accordance with the Church's views, they may even be excommunicated or leave the Church.

A. This church came about as a result of intellectual curiosity. We believe in education, as I have said. We spend a substantial part of our budget on education of our young people. We expect them to think. We expect them to investigate. We expect them to use their minds and dig deeply for knowledge in all fields. If we have a motto, it is this: "The glory of God is intelligence." Now, we have been investigated ever since the Church was organized. Scores and scores of people have investigated and written about us. Some of them have worn out their lives doing so. But some of the things in our libraries are of a confidential nature. We have a trust concerning the confidentiality of some of those matters, such as private diaries, but there has been very little of our story that has not been plowed over and plowed over. Scores of books have been written and the Church just goes on and on, and grows and grows. I don't think we have anything to be ashamed of there in any sense. I think we have so much to be proud of. . . . We have only one request, that you judge us by our fruits. Judge us by what the Church is doing, what it is accomplishing across the world. It is a marvelous thing that is happening. It is so positive in its message and so positive in its growth. Of course, we have critics. Of course, we make a mistake now and again. Of course, we fail in some things once in a while. That is to be expected. But overall, the picture is one of growth, of stability, of strength, of improvement, and of accomplishment.

Q. A certain number of scholars say that the Mormon church is not sensitive to the rights of women. There are no women in the General Authority leadership positions.

A. We have probably the largest women's organization in the world—over three million members—with their own leadership, with their own program, with their own courses of study, their own officers. I don't know of any other religious organization in the world that gives women as great an opportunity as they have in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I believe that my wife is just as important as I am in the plan of the Lord. In the Mormon way, the wife walks neither behind nor ahead of her husband, but at his side as his companion, his equal. I have three daughters and two sons. I love my daughters as much as I love my sons—maybe a little more so, they are so kind to me. But, I think our Father in Heaven regards His daughters the same way. I don't apologize for one minute for the Church's program for women. We have women sitting on the board of trustees of Brigham Young University; women spoke in the last general conference of the Church; they speak in our worship services, they offer prayers, they have all the advantages that the Church has to offer.

Q. We understand that the Church has proclaimed that it is against racial discrimination, but in the early days of the Church there was racial discrimination.

A. Let me say that we are just as vigorous in carrying forward our missionary program in Ghana, West Africa, as we are in Japan. I was in Ghana a while ago, and I looked into the faces of a great congregation that filled a big theater, all wonderful members of this church, all black—marvelous people, happy people, doing a great work. I have in my own heart, I can honestly say, a love for the sons and daughters of God everywhere. For thirty-six years I have worked with the Japanese and the Koreans and the Chinese, the Filipinos, the Vietnamese, the Indians, the Malaysians; they are my brothers and sisters, they are my friends and associates in this work. I have never felt any racial prejudice of any kind, and I have worked with the people in Africa. No, we cannot be accused, I think, of racial prejudice. The fact is, we are reaching out, we are going into these countries, reaching out, spending hundreds of millions of yen, as it were, reaching out across the world to embrace people everywhere in a great brotherhood and sisterhood united in the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Q. You speak of the entire human family as one large family. Does that include the Islamics and the Buddhists? Do you recognize at all that they should be members of the family as Buddhists or Islamics, or is it your mission to convert all of them into Christianity?

A. We recognize all people as sons and daughters of God. If God is our Father, then all of us are brothers and sisters, and we so recognize people. Now, we have Muslim people living in the United States. We recently made the facilities of our cannery available to them without any cost to them so that they might can food for their people in Bosnia. We are not actively proselyting in the Muslim nations, but we respect them and honor them in their religion and thank them for all the good they accomplish.

Press Conference in Seoul, Korea, 22 May 1996

Opening Statement by President Hinckley:

Thank you for being here today. You do us a great honor by your presence. I had an appointment to go to Hong Kong and I said, "If I'm going to Hong Kong, I'll go to Japan and Korea on the way." I am not a stranger to this part of the world. I have been coming here since 1960. I think I have been here at least fifteen times. I was here in 1961 when the coup occurred. I was a witness to what took place on that occasion. I had something to do with a newspaper in the United States, and I sent a story on that coup long before the Associated Press knew what was going on. I very much enjoy this land. I like to come here. I like the people. I have many friends here.

I represent The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which is growing rapidly across the world. We are now in 155 different nations and territories. We have a membership of about nine and a half million people. More of our people live outside of the United States than live in the United States, and so we have become a great worldwide church. This is the seventh largest church in the United States. It is the second largest church in the state of California, and wherever we go we are growing.

When I first came to Korea in 1960, we had a little handful of people. Today, we have almost 70,000 members of the Church in Korea. We have constructed eighty-eight buildings in this land, houses of worship. We have spent millions of dollars in building these facilities in Korea. We have never taken any money out of this land, but we have brought a great deal of money into this land to bless the people. We now have about 22,000 congregations across the world, with about 128 congregations who gather in worship services every Sunday in South Korea. Ours is a very demanding religion. We try to follow a strict code of health. We abstain from the use of alcohol and tobacco, and even from coffee and tea. We feel that all of this leads to good health. I am eighty-five years of age. I will be eighty-six next month, and I feel great. I am thankful to say I enjoy good health. Now, that isn't because I eat kimchee. Some kimchee I like, some kimchee I don't like.

I have had many wonderful experiences here over the years, and I am glad to be back. I am glad to see the Church growing here. We do not get involved in politics. We believe in the separation of church and state. We place great emphasis on good, wholesome family life. We believe that the family is the basic unit of society. If you want to build a strong nation, you cultivate strong families, and we have a program for this. Every Monday night, all across the world, our people observe what we call family home evening, where father and mother sit down with their children and read the scriptures together, discuss family problems, and try to resolve those problems in a spirit of love and harmony. We are a church which emphasizes the need for education. We maintain the largest private religious university in the world—Brigham Young University. I am chairman of the board of trustees of that university. I have always admired the great emphasis which the Koreans place on education and I am grateful for the emphasis which we, as a church, place on education.

Now, as I come here today, I can't help noticing the differences between what I find today and what I found the first time I came. Back then, in 1960, there was very much of poverty in this land, much of hunger. People were homeless; there were many orphans. I'm glad to see the prosperity of Korea. My dear friends, thank you for being with us. If you have a few questions, I would be happy to try to answer them.

Q. My understanding is that the Mormon church is not Protestant and also not Catholic. What is the basic characteristic of your church?

A. We believe in Jesus Christ as the Son of God. The official name of the Church is The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and He is the central figure in all of our worship. We do not have a paid ministry. All of the local congregations of the Church, more than 22,000 of them, are presided over by local men who volunteer their time and their services in standing as the local leaders. All of the men work at their regular vocations and then serve as local leaders. They can do it because they have many others to assist them. Every adult member of the Church ought to have some responsibility in the Church, and that is the program which we follow and a very important differentiation.

Q. Your church originated 166 years ago by Joseph Smith?

A. Yes.

Q. You have the Book of Mormon in addition to the Bible? What does it contain?

A. The Book of Mormon is a translation of an ancient record that speaks of Jesus Christ. It becomes another witness, along with the Bible, of the divine mission of Jesus Christ. The Lord said, in the mouth of two or more witnesses shall all things be established. The Book of Mormon becomes that second witness. Do we believe in the Bible? Yes. Do we accept the Bible as the word of God? Yes. And the Book of Mormon becomes a companion with the Bible, the two standing hand in hand as witnesses of the divinity of Jesus Christ.

Now, there is another difference. Every man in this church who lives a clean life may hold the priesthood, may serve in that priesthood, may exercise that priesthood.

And there are other differences as well. We have a great volunteer missionary force. We have 50,000 missionaries. We have in Korea about 400 missionaries. About 20 percent of those are native Korean young men and young women. The young women serve for a period of eighteen months. The young men serve for a period of twenty-four months—two years. They go at their own expense and at the expense of their families. The Church does not compensate them. And they do a remarkable work wherever they go. It is a remarkable program.

Also, we are now building about 375 new buildings each year across the world. People ask how we can do it. We can do it because we do not have a paid ministry. The money of the Church which comes from the volunteer contributions of the people is spent to build facilities for the people rather than for any other purpose.

Q. In most religions the one who established the Church becomes a very important figure. What is your position on Joseph Smith?

A. Thank you for your question. It is a good question. Joseph Smith was the instrument through which this church was organized. In answer to his humble prayer, there appeared to him God the Eternal Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, and he restored the church which was upon the earth when Jesus was upon the earth. And, as the first President of the Church and the first prophet of the Church, he is held in very high esteem by us as a people. There have been fifteen Presidents of the Church, fourteen in succession from the time of Joseph Smith, and I have the high honor of serving as the fifteenth President of the Church.

Q. In the world there are many churches, like Catholics and Protestants and so forth. Many of them have hundreds if not thousands of years of history. Why do we need another church like the Mormon church?

A. Let me say first that we respect all other churches. We do not stand out in opposition to other churches. We respect all men for all the good that they do and we say to those of all churches, we honor the good that you do and we invite you to come and see what further good we can do for you. We think that we have some significant things to offer which are not found in other churches. But, I repeat, we respect all men. We believe in worshipping God according to the dictates of our own conscience and allow all men the same privilege, let them worship how, where, or what they may.

Q. We understand that you do not drink even coffee and tea. This is very restricted compared to other Christian churches. We have heard that the reason is for health purposes, but is there any religious reason behind this practice?

A. Yes. We believe that we are sons and daughters of God. He is our Eternal Father in Heaven. The body which we have is the temple of the spirit, and the body is sacred, and the body should not be abused. The body should be cared for. Health is a very precious thing. Anyone who is sick knows that. Because of the divine nature of man as a son of God, and our belief that the body is the temple that houses the spirit, we should take care of it. So yes, there is a religious purpose in this.

Q. What type of services for the community do you perform? Some churches send out doctors and are social-service providers. It looks as though you are purely preaching the gospel.

A. We carry on a great humanitarian work throughout the world. We send hundreds of thousands of dollars of clothing, food, medicine, educational materials, as well as money to help those in distress and need across the world. We have a great program to help those in need among ourselves. This is a unique feature. One Sunday a month, all members of the Church are expected to fast—to go without two meals—and contribute the value of those meals to help the poor and the needy and those in distress. We have a great welfare program under which all work together to help those in need. It is a marvelous humanitarian program.

Press Conference in Conjunction With Grand Encampment Celebration, Council Bluffs, Iowa, 13 July 1996

Opening Statement by President Hinckley:

I am delighted to be here in this beautiful state of Iowa. As we flew in a little while ago, I just could not help marveling at the magnificent beauty of the farms of Iowa. There is no greater farmland or better farms anywhere in the world than right here. If wherever agriculture is practiced it could be practiced as it is practiced in Iowa, there would be far less hunger in the world, I am confident of that. This is such a beautiful state. I wonder why our people did not stop here and stay here. But they said they wanted to go to a place "where the devil cannot come and dig us out." That is where they went, leaving this magnificent area in 1847.

We flew on Thursday morning to Nauvoo. We traveled 1,088 miles in two hours and eight minutes from Salt Lake City to Burlington, Iowa. I contrasted that with the fact that when the pioneer company crossed Iowa, they averaged two and a quarter miles a day, if the information I have is correct.

I want to thank the people of Iowa for the tremendous interest they have had in the 150th anniversary of the exodus of our people, which is a most singular thing. Ninety percent of the participants in these celebrations are not members of the Church but are people with a respect for our people and a love for the history of this area. What has happened has really been noteworthy in every respect. We could not have asked for anything more. Today we will dedicate the re-creation of the old log tabernacle at Miller's Hollow, as it was known in the days when the original was built, where Brigham Young was sustained as President of the Church on December 27, 1847, he having gone west to the valley of the Great Salt Lake and then having come back here. That proved the strength and the mettle of the man. I do not know how they stood that long, long ride, most of them in springless wagons jolting over the roughest kind of roads that were really no more than trails in Iowa, hub deep in the mud part of the way. Wherever they went, traveling was done with great difficulty and very slowly. They really blazed a trail from the Mississippi to the valley of the Great Salt Lake.

Well, my very deep appreciation to all who have participated and are participating to make of this a great celebration of a very significant part of American history.

Q. What do you see as the three greatest challenges facing the Church as you enter the twenty-first century?

A. Well, one word sums it up, and that is growth. Now the three great challenges are to increase the momentum of our work, which I think we can do, I am confident we can do. Secondly, to accommodate the growth with new buildings, which are required wherever we go. And the training of local leadership. All of our local congregations are presided over by volunteer workers not compensated financially in any way. As we grow it becomes necessary to train leaders, and that is a challenge. That is the same challenge that Brigham Young faced. We have faced it all through the years and will continue to face it as the Church grows across the world. But thus far we have met that challenge and, I think, handled it very, very well. We are building buildings in many countries, at the rate of about 375 new buildings a year across the world, which is really phenomenal. We have a tremendous program for training local leadership. Those are the challenges as I see them.

Q. Since many members of the Church are outside the United States, why should they care about this kind of historical reenactment was taking place in Council Bluffs, Iowa, on this occasion]? What does the Mormon Battalion mean, for example, to somebody in the Philippines?

A. I have just been among those people. They are proud of their church and they are proud of the roots of that church. They are proud of the foundation on which it is established. They want to know about it. They do come to know about it. They study about it, and it gives them the strength that comes of knowing that what they have has a tremendous background of courage and fortitude and sacrifice and faith. That to me is of tremendous significance to our people all across the world.

Q. The Mormon migration was one of the greatest movements of people in American history. How has that carried over into today's Church?

A. We are still pioneering. We have never ceased pioneering from the time that we did pioneer, that our people left Nauvoo and came here and then moved from here up the Elkhorn and the Platte and the Sweetwater, over the highlands of Wyoming, and down eventually into the valley of the Great Salt Lake. There was adventure in that. But the purpose of it was to find a place where they could establish themselves and worship God according to the dictates of conscience and afford that same privilege to others whom they invited among their midst. Now, we are still reaching out across the world into places that scarcely seemed possible to access a few years ago. Wherever we go, we go in the front door. We establish our credentials with government officials and move in in an open way, nothing secret or clandestine about the way it is done. It is all done open and above board with full knowledge of public officials. I have witnessed personally the growth of the Church in the Philippines. It was my privilege to open the missionary work there in 1961, when we were able to find one native Filipino member of the Church in a meeting which we held in May of 1961. The other day we were in Manila and had a congregation, so we were told by the manager of the facility, of some 35,000 in that great Araneta Coliseum in Manila. To me it is a miracle having been there, so to speak, on the ground floor when we opened the work in that great land of the Philippines. We are reaching out everywhere, and that takes pioneering. Our missionaries do not live under the best of circumstances when they go to some of these areas, but they go forward and do their work, and it bears fruit. Before long we have a handful of members, then a hundred members, and then five hundred members, and then a thousand members, and so on.
