When Nephi said to his father, “I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded” (1 Nephi 3:7), he provided us an inspiring example of faith and diligent obedience. Nephi’s commitment to go and do was rooted in two important qualities all of us can develop: his personal testimony of the Lord and His prophets, and his spiritual resilience.

Nephi was obedient because he had sought and received his own testimony of the Lord’s commandments to his father (see 1 Nephi 2:16–20). He knew that the task of getting the brass plates would be hard. But unlike his brothers, he knew that the Lord would be with him and prepare a way for them to accomplish it.

This faith in God and His prophet blessed and sustained Nephi throughout his life and helped him accomplish miraculous things. Like Nephi, we can do great things in our lives as we strive to obey the counsel we receive from living prophets, the whisperings of the Holy Ghost, and the scriptures. For instance, the Lord’s prophet today, President Russell M. Nelson, has asked us to help gather Israel and prepare for the Savior’s return.

As we study God’s word and obey it, our faith will grow and we will feel within our hearts a determination to continue to be obedient, even when we know things are hard.

Nephi’s example also teaches us about the Christlike attribute of resilience—working through challenges rather than looking for an easy way out. There are times in all our lives when we are asked to do difficult and demanding things. In those situations, if we rely on our faith in Christ and choose the “harder right instead of the easier wrong,” we will be blessed.

When you find yourself facing a difficult decision or task, having a “go and do” attitude will help you persist. Faithfully responding to the guidance that you receive shows the Lord that He is able to rely on you and increase your faith in Jesus Christ.

As you faithfully work to develop your testimony, spiritual resilience, and a “go and do” attitude, the Lord will bless you, strengthen you, and sustain you this year and throughout your life.
