When I entered the missionary training center as a full-time missionary, I found out there was a lot to learn. I did my best to study, to strengthen my testimony, and to build on the foundation I already had. I would pray, ask Heavenly Father a question, and then search for answers. This practice changed my life.

One day while I was serving as a missionary in Peru, a fellow elder received a letter informing him that his best friend’s father had died unexpectedly. He was in tears. “Why would Heavenly Father let this happen?” he cried.

This question penetrated my heart. That night, I knelt and asked Father in Heaven the same question. Then, searching in the Book of Mormon, my eyes fell on 2 Nephi 2:24, which states, “But behold, all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things.”

That passage landed in my heart and didn’t leave. I wrote a card to the elder and included that scripture as part of my testimony. I assured him that everything would be OK because Heavenly Father does things in wisdom. We can trust Him because He loves us and knows all things.

About a year and a half later, I was serving in the mountains of Peru when I received an unexpected phone call from my mission president. He told me my father had suffered a stroke and was in critical condition. After a short time, my father passed away. I was devastated, and I felt plagued with questions like, “How can I ever get over this?”

I prayed to Heavenly Father for an answer. Mostly I wanted to know why my father had to be taken away without me even having the chance to say goodbye. I turned to the Book of Mormon, opened it, and read the same words I had shared with that elder many months before: “But behold, all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things.” Those words covered me with peace like a blanket and gave me grace when I felt lost.

My earthly father was gone, but my Heavenly Father would always be there for me. Heavenly Father does all things in His wisdom, and as we search and do our best to prepare ourselves, we can find precious answers.
