In the early morning of Wednesday, 31st of Oct., the flag of truce spoken of in the previous chapter was sent out, and the traitor soon returned to consummate his horrible plan.

The day was spent by the anxious mother in work and prayer. Often she bent her knees in humble petition for the safety of her children and the brethren concealed in her house that they might not be found.

Newel was away with the men who were trying to devise means to protect their homes and families.

In the afternoon a neighbor came in to say, "Joseph has gone out to the enemies' camp."

"God protect him!" replied Lydia.

"They, that is the Prophet, Brothers Rigdon and Pratt, Col. Wight and Brother Robinson, have gone along with Col. Hinkle to see if something can't be done to prevent the carrying out of the exterminating order sent by Governor Boggs."

"What exterminating order?"

"Why didn't you hear that Governor Boggs, you remember the rascal, the one who headed the mob in Jackson Co., had sent an order to this host of robbers outside the town, telling them that they are to wipe out every one of us? Giving them authority as an organized millitia. Well you must have staid close at home last night not to have heard that!"

"Yes," said Lydia, "I was very busy all night."

"So were we all! I am told that Major-general Wallack and General Doniphan were ordered to raise a thousand men and join this General Clark who has command of the whole, and this precious trio are now trying to make arrangements to murder us all in cold blood! This is indeed a land of freedom! Why, Sister Knight, I feel just as though my blood was boiling oil when I think of this inhuman outrage."

"Be calm, sister, let your heart rather be filled with humblest prayer, that God will turn aside their wicked purposes."

The indignant neighbor departed, with many wishes that "God would exterminate them root and branch if they did not speedily repent."

Not long after the woman had gone, the air was filled by shouts and hideous sounds from the mobbers' camp. Looking anxiously from the window, Lydia saw her husband hurrying to the house. On entering he cried,

"Lydia, Lydia, pray as you never prayed before. Our beloved Prophet is taken prisoner! The wretch who decoyed him out has betray his Prophet, his religion and his God! Listen to those awful sounds! May the God of Israel hold their lives as in His hand. My wife, these are bitter days."

"Newel, I am full of weakness."

"Do not go outside the house, for prowlers are around and will injure you if they find you in their power. I must go now, my girl. You know my very soul is bowed with prayer to God to preserve my wife and babes. Be brave as you always are, and I will come when I can and bring you word of what transpires."

"Be careful, my husband, and I feel that we shall be protected."

Once more the woman was left alone with her little ones and the brethren under her care. God and her own heart alone know the anxieties of the next few hours. But into her soul crept and brooded the sweet spirit that whispered to the troubled waves, "Be still." And she was calm. Oh, that awful night! Over every thing, into every house, down into the low places, high over the tree-tops sounded the piercing, shrieking yells of that blood-thirsty mob. The flesh would creep at the fiendish sounds, the heart would quiver with the fearful though that Joseph, the beloved one, was in their power. Ten thousand wolves could never make a sound so hideously inhuman, or so fiendishly triumphant as the yells and shouts that unceasingly arose from the throats of that murderous throng from evening shades till morning light. Were these men human? Oh yes. Were they civilized beings? Oh yes; there were seventeen ministers and nineteen commissioned officers, who led the mob.

The night was spent by Lydia in one long, anxious prayer. The next morning, the 1st of November, dawned cool and bright.

With the morning came Newel. He brought the sad news that the Patriarch and Brother Amasa Lyman were taken prisoners and removed to the enemy's camp.

"Newel, how will this end? My heart is torn with anxious fears, and yet the Spirit tells me all will yet be well."

"God grant it, Lydia," replied her husband. "What is the meaning of all this? Look from the window! Here is an army marching upon us. Good by and God protect you, I must go, for there is the signal for us to gather at the public square."

So saying, he hastily snatched his rifle from the wall and rushed to the square, where the signal drum was beating long and loud. On arriving there he was commanded by Gen. Lucas to give up his arms.

He replied, "Sir, my rifle is my own private property, no one has a right to demand it from me."

"Lay down your arms, you rascal, or I will have you shot."

Full of righteous indignation, the helpless man complied, seeing that many of his brethren were also disarmed.

Their leaders were gone but they were true Saints. And were they not also free-born American citizens?

As the men rushed into the public square they were all forced to obey the summary command "Give up your arms!"

When all were assembled, they were compelled at the point of the bayonet to sign a deed of trust of all their (the "Mormons'") possessions to Gen. Lucas to defray the expenses of this unholy war.

This unrighteous deed being accomplished, and all the men of the town being placed under guard, the mob swarmed out into the town, pillaging, foraging, insulting women and abusing little children. Stock were shot down and left on the streets to rot. Fields were destroyed, houses were searched, everything of any value was taken and any one who dared to remonstrate was brutally threatened with murder.

Every house was searched for the men who were at the tragedy of Crooked river. At last three ruffians came to Lydia's door, and one who seemed to be the leader asked: "Have you any men in the house?"

"You have our men under guard," answered the fearless woman.

"Have you any man in the house?"

"I tell you, my husband is on the public square a prisoner."

"Have you any arms in the house?"

"My husband took his rifle with him."

The little children seeing the ferocious men, were frightened and commenced to cry.

"Sir, go away from here, do you not see how frightened my little ones are?"

"Well, have you no men or arms in the house?"

"I tell you again my husband is a prisoner on the square, and he took his rifle with him."

"Upon my word, at least you've got plenty of Mormon blood and to spare."

So abruptly speaking he turned away and they all left the house, leaving the brave but trembling woman whispering to her children, "God rules!"

The next morning, the sun arose on a scene of desolation. Hundreds of houseless, homeless beings huddled together as best they could, weeping, sorrowing and sad, but peaceful and full of the testimony that all suffering was in Christ Jesus, and He would be their helper and comforter. Many were without food to eat, but those who had some, shared with those who had not.

The Prophets and leaders were gone, but ways must be devised to get out of the state. Only a few short months were given them in which to leave their desolate homes and corn-fields.

That day the leaders came into the town heavily guarded, and were marched to the square. There they were permitted, after much pleading, to see their distracted families. It was ascertained from the Prophet that a court-martial had been held, and the prisoners were tried without being allowed to be present or to have any one to defend them, and were sentenced to be shot the next day. Gen. Doniphan, who was a lawyer, told the mob he would have nothing do do with such unlawful high-handed proceedings, and in disgust left them, ordering all of his men to take up their march homeward.

This circumstance made the robbers hesitate, and accordingly it was determined to remove the prisoners to Independence.

Not long were they permitted to be with their friends, but were taken back to camp. The next morning the Prophet and Patriarch, Sidney Rigdon, P. P. Pratt, Lyman Wight, Amasa Lyman and George W. Robinson were started off for Independence.
