As a member of a hospital volunteer association, I was asked to speak at a local school on the concept of service. Association volunteers provide free assistance to hospital patients. Of all the volunteers, I was the only one who could be available to make a presentation.

I realized what an opportunity this would be. I thought of what I could say to not only tell the young people about our association’s work, but also motivate them to service.

As I prayed for inspiration, I felt prompted to share the Lord’s parable of the Good Samaritan (Matt. 10:30–37).

I also began researching for a more contemporary example. In looking through back issues of La Stella (Italian), I came across an article by Elder L. Tom Perry in which he wrote of a young man who gave of his time as a ski instructor to blind people. Then I found a First Presidency Message by President Thomas S. Monson in which he discussed the concept of service to others.

On the day of the presentation, I faced an audience of six hundred students. I was very nervous, and I prayed for the help I needed. I spoke for fifteen minutes on what motivates people to serve their fellowmen. I spoke of the search for happiness and said that no one knows what happiness really is until they have served others.

Most importantly, I was able to tell them of my membership in the Church and explain the service given by the full-time missionaries.

My talk was very well received, and I felt that I had touched the hearts of many there. I was very grateful to the Lord. I feel I was blessed to have the opportunity to perhaps prepare some of these young people for the gospel message.

Thank you for the work you do.

Fabrizio Giannelli
La Spezia, Italy

I am more than happy—I am overwhelmed with gratitude—that in moments of depression or discouragement, I have been able to raise my spirits and receive strength from the articles in the Liahona (Spanish).

I hope it can be translated into many languages.

I also pray that the Church will continue to grow and that those of us who are of an age to serve a full-time mission can do so and bear strong testimony to the divinity of this work to the world.

Leonel Acosta
Santiago, Dominican Republic

[Editor’s note: The International Magazines of the Church are published in twenty languages in Latin America, Europe, Asia, and the South Pacific.]
