The following are additional ideas Primary leaders may use with the Sharing Time printed in the February 2006 Liahona. For the lesson, instructions, and activity that correspond with these ideas, see “My Life Has a Plan” on pages F4 and F5 of the children’s section in this issue.

1. Explain that we lived with Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ before we came to earth. We chose Heavenly Father’s plan, and we must continue to choose to follow Him here. Divide the children into four or five stations (see Teaching, No Greater Call [1999], 179). Give each adult leader of a station a picture of a person from the scriptures. For example, use Gospel Art Picture Kit 240 (Jesus the Christ), 303 (Nephi Subdues His Rebellious Brothers), 319 (Mormon Bids Farewell to a Once Great Nation), 400 (Joseph Smith), 117 (Daniel in the Lions’ Den), 124 (Ruth Gleaning in the Fields), 314 (Samuel the Lamanite on the Wall). Tell how each person chose and followed Heavenly Father’s plan. Give each child an opportunity to pantomime one way he or she follows Heavenly Father’s plan, and ask the group to guess what it is. Sing a song or hymn as they move from station to station.

2. Use puzzles and songs to help children understand that “to help us prepare ourselves for life with Him, our Heavenly Father has organized us into families” (Family Guidebook [2001], 3). Give each class a picture of an animal family that has been cut into puzzle pieces. Have the class put the puzzle together. Discuss that many creatures live in families. As each class shares its puzzle, you could sing a song or hymn.

Before Primary, cut up a picture of a family into puzzle pieces. On the reverse side, list songs or hymns about the family. Have the children take turns choosing a puzzle piece, singing the song or hymn with the other children, and suggesting ways to strengthen their family.

3. Song presentation: Teach the song “I Know My Father Lives” (Children’s Songbook, 5) by first bearing your testimony of Heavenly Father’s love for you. Then have four helpers hold the words Lives, Loves, Spirit, and True, printed on separate papers. Ask them to stand in different corners of the room (out of order) and repeat their word. Instruct the children to stand, and as they listen to you sing the phrases in the first verse, turn to face the word you’re singing about, and echo the phrase. Repeat, having them sing each phrase with you as the helpers hold their signs up high. Let the children tell the helpers where to stand up front, in order, and sing the verse again. Repeat the process with the second verse using the words Sent, Faith, Spirit, and Can.

For younger children: Assign helpers a word to say rather than having them hold the printed word.
