Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul ( 1983)

Key to Translations

Every New Testament quotation in this book has been checked against the Greek text. The English version selected is not the result of "shopping around" for the most pleasing reading—the criterion is always how accurately any English reading reflects the Greek original. My own punctuation and capitalization may be used to bring out the meaning of biblical and ancient quotations—and some from modern authors. Certain King James Version quotations have been used with the archaic "ye" simply to show that this pronoun was plural in Greek. Where possible, the King James Version has been favored, partly in respect for merit—its New Testament is remarkably close to the Greek text. Latter-day Saints also continue to use this translation for effective communication with English-speaking Christians. The main problem with this Bible is its frequent use of archaic terms, words vivid to 1611 readers that are little used or have different meanings today. Yet one Article of Faith commits Latter-day Saints to the Bible "as far as it is translated correctly," which leaves the option to probe the original languages for meaning, as Joseph Smith did in his Nauvoo discourses.

When no translation adequately communicates the meaning of the Greek text, my own translation is given, identified by "literal trans." Since words have objective definitions, modern translations are used where possible. Recent decades have produced bewildering numbers of versions, but six major committee translations measure up to the scholarly and group standard of the King James Version. Their names, theological acceptance (Protestant or Roman Catholic), and abbreviations are as follows:

Revised Standard Version Protestant and Catholic RSV

New English Bible Protestant and some Catholic NEB

Jerusalem Bible Catholic JB

New American Bible Catholic NAB

New International Version Protestant NIV

New King James Bible Protestant NKJB

Undesignated quotations are from the King James Version.

After the King James Translation, the recent New King James Bible is favored because it is the only widely accepted version that uses the longer Greek text followed by the King James translators. The number of verses deleted by textual critics is not large, but it is tragic to lose anything authentic from the Early Church. Some common-sense assumptions control judgment here, but there are sharp differences among scholars. My strong view is that theological bias would more easily lead to deletions from than additions to the Bible—the latter is a much more daring and detectable act. As for straight copying, my student secretaries over a quarter of a century have proved that there is little tendency to add but great danger of losing words, phrases, and paragraphs through inattention. Thus, the basic arguments of J. Reuben Clark, Jr., deserve careful thought. These are given in his Why the King James Version? (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1956). The better Greek New Testaments have full and not selective variant readings from manuscripts, and for every verse quoted here, these manuscript readings have been examined and a judgment made before translating. To help with meaning, the Greek word is often transliterated—the Greek letters are written in English script. Long "o" and "e" have been marked, and the English reader needs to know that the long "e" is pronounced like the vowel in "they." The two accents used (' and ) are stress accents and show which syllable is emphasized.

Joseph Smith's leading views on Paul are discussed with the appropriate teaching. Some of these come from Nauvoo discourses, where "it should read" is the Prophet's typical comment. But that probably was intended as "it should mean," for Joseph Smith claimed to give inspired explanations; he did not present himself as an expert in Greek manuscripts. Most of Joseph Smith's insights on Paul come from the Joseph Smith Translation (JST), where major changes are infrequent compared to his treatment of Genesis or the Gospels. Since these are fully available in the new Latter-day Saint edition of the King James Version, they are not discussed here unless they affect a featured doctrine. What is said above about the discourses may also be true of the Bible corrections in the Joseph Smith Translation. As Robert J. Matthews points out, "The New Translation could be many things," two of which are "inspired commentary" or inspired "harmonization of doctrinal concepts." ("A Plainer Translation": Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible [Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1975], p. 253.) Because of these possibilities, the Prophet's comments on Paul are treated as questions of meaning, not of textual quotation.
