Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul ( 1983)

1

Two Restless Worlds

The ultimate ignorance is unawareness of ignorance. Thus Paul sarcastically comments on "the wisdom of this world" (1 Cor. 1:20), summing up a society too egotistical to see its own shallowness. He uses similar language a dozen times as he opens 1 Corinthians, a powerful exposure of status-seeking, materiality, immorality, and a host of other false values. He expected Church members to rise to a higher standard of living—true spiritual living. He perceived men as playing games instead of facing realities, as though little children had wandered into a schoolyard for the first time and had lost themselves in enjoying the play equipment, quite unaware of the higher purpose for building the school. Virtually every letter of Paul alludes to the higher purpose in making the earth, the plan "which God ordained before the world unto our glory" (1 Cor. 2:7).

Paul's world and the modern world have learned nothing of this plan without the preaching of Christ's gospel. Jesus revealed it plainly, for, as he said, "I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father" (John 16:28). A world not knowing Jesus Christ and his gospel is a world ultimately in more trouble than not knowing about sanitation or radiation. Indeed, undeveloped countries improve only through concerned people coming to teach about germs and modern farming. The technological age is not so much a time period as it is a stage of development. By the spiritual standards of the scriptures, mankind is still primitive. Christianity is visible but attenuated; lands and peoples are widely ignorant of it. And upon examination, Christian nations may be shockingly low in conviction or understanding of how to serve God. A closer survey of this modern world will show the critical need of Paul's message and that of his modern successors. We see a world today that has remarkable similarities to Paul's world, making his message the more relevant.

Earth's population is now around 4 billion people. About 1.3 billion are professed Christians, just a third of the people of the world. [^1] So there are two non-Christians for every Christian living on this planet. A global map shows Christians in the majority in North and South America, Europe, Southern Africa, and Australia. But the world also has vast areas where Christianity is virtually nonexistent, as in Moslem areas and Asia. [^2] Yet statistics do not address the real issue of individual commitment, for John did not see groups and nations on the day of judgment—he saw only persons: "and they were judged every man according to their works" (Rev. 20:13). Jesus compared his kingdom to a net that sweeps in all kinds. But after this gathering stage comes the judgment, when God will "sever the wicked from among the just" (Matt. 13:49). Latin America leads all continents in professed Christians, just about 94 percent of the population. [^3] Yet a small fraction of that number would be found in church on an ordinary Sunday.

One spot of consistency is Ireland, where 99 percent of the population is Christian [^4] and where 87 percent are found in church "at least once a week." [^5] But this is not typical in Europe, where a middle-spectrum country like West Germany opens up the realities of living for self and not for God. Although 93 percent there are classified as Christians, [^6] one must conclude that many European Christians are not very religious. West Germany's weekly church attendance is only 20 percent, but that is not the end of bad news. Another 20 percent of West Germans said that they attend on Easter and Christmas, but there is a more dismal figure—a full 45 percent of West Germans reported going to church "only on family occasions, as marriage, baptism, funerals, or not at all." [^7] One may rationalize this inactivity by suggesting that Lutheran Christianity teaches belief, not church attendance, as the means of salvation through Christ. But a close look at belief is as distressing. In spite of the 93 percent classified as Christians in West Germany, only 79 percent went on record as believing in God. [^8] And 44 percent reversed Paul's Christianity by stating that they do not believe in "a life after death." [^9] This is precisely the issue that caused Paul to despair of the salvation of the Corinthians, insisting that disbelief in man's resurrection was totally inconsistent with the reality of Christ's resurrection (1 Cor. 15:12-14).

Indeed, a minority of West Germans believe in Christ, though the nation is classified as Christian. Only 33 percent committed themselves to this proposition: "God has sent his son Jesus to men in order to save them; Jesus was raised again from the dead, and I can pray to him." Even if that question was not perfectly framed, two-thirds chose the alternative of disbelief. Twenty-one percent expressed mild disbelief: "Jesus was only a man, though a great man who desired to lead men to good; thus he can still be an example for me today." But 33 percent chose stronger disbelief: "Jesus lived almost 2,000 years ago, and today we live in an entirely different world; Jesus has no meaning for me today." The final category of this recent survey expressed a degree of disbelief that no responsible scholar would support—7 percent of the West Germans expressed the ultimate skepticism that "Jesus never lived." [^10]

The above survey from a respected news magazine only confirms other West German data. An independent institute recently determined that 84 percent of the populace seldom or never read the Bible, a figure moving to 94 percent of those sixteen to twenty-nine years old in the same category. [^11] Surely there is a link between disbelief in Christ and ignoring the sources that speak of him. A respected English teacher bluntly explained the narrow-mindedness of many people: "You're down on what you're not up on." [^12] Paul's testimony lies buried with him if no one reads his letters. And without this heritage, the youth of a great nation find no higher purpose than pleasure. They were asked to choose between the following two attitudes:

Christian youth favored the first alternative, 43 percent seeking enjoyment as the controlling goal, 37 percent choosing stewardship with sacrifice, and 20 percent undecided. [^13] But does such a choice bring happiness? Renate Koecher, the demographer who determined these statistics on West German youth, also found that 47 percent of young people from "very religious" homes considered themselves "very happy," whereas only 23 percent from homes "without religion" said the same. So this social scientist concluded, "The loss of religious ties and the 'liberation' which accompanied abandoning the 'coercive' quality of prescribed norms has left a poorer society in its wake." [^14] But West Germany has shown a brilliant record in economics, science, scholarship, and human organization. Tragically, this proud people have lowered their flag of Christian heritage. If this standard rises again, it must come from reconversion to Christ's ancient and modern apostles.

How worldly is England, the political parent of the United States? There the same forces of apathy and skepticism are at work. Nominal Christians are 87 percent of that population, [^15] but only 15 percent said they attend church once a week; 38 percent attend "several times a year"; and 46 percent attend "less often or never." [^16] An old proverb runs true: "Out of sight, out of mind." For only 36 percent of the English population believe in "a personal God." [^17] Christ and the Father were above all personal for Paul, so only a third of British Christians espouse Paul's doctrine recorded in their Bibles. Another 37 percent of Englanders have a vague acceptance of "some sort of spirit or life force," with agnostics or atheists comprising the other 27 percent of the population. [^18] And England also is losing faith in Jesus Christ. Although 71 percent registered belief in Jesus as the "Son of God" in 1957, nearly twenty-five years later only 52 percent would make a similar commitment. "Just a man" is now the vote of another 31 percent, with "don't know" and "just a story" accounting for the remaining 17 percent. [^19] In a survey of British attitudes toward the New Testament, the source of knowledge of Christ, 34 percent said that "it is mostly a collection of stories and fables." And another 13 percent said "don't know" when asked what they thought about the New Testament, making the testimony of Christ's apostles insignificant for about half of England's people. [^20] Or is the problem really not with Bible testimony but the effectiveness of those who teach the Bible? For in evaluating the churches in England, extreme skepticism emerged. The following question was asked three ways: "Generally speaking, do you think that the Church in this country is giving adequate answers to:" [^21]

man's spiritual needs? problems of problems of society?

family life?

Yes: 29% Yes: 22% Yes: 17%

No: 44% No: 53% No: 57%

Don't Know: 27% Don't Know: 25% Don't Know: 26%

If only a fourth see the Church as relevant in their lives, what kind of Christianity are they being taught? Certainly not the warm fellowship of the Saints surrounding every letter of Paul, certainly not the family leadership and the eternal convictions that ring in his New Testament words.

Latter-day Saints know that the Book of Mormon was revealed in the latter days "to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ" (title page). Latter-day Saints also know that in modern revelation God identified the trends just discussed and spoke through Joseph Smith "that faith also might increase in the earth" (D&C 1:21). Faithful Latter-day Saints identify with Paul's world missions because they are given the same world commission today. Paul testified of new revelation—that Christ was seen after his death and that his apostles received his commands through the Spirit. Paul also quoted earlier prophets accepted by the Jews and by thinking people around them. In such a way, Latter-day Saints testify to the new and justify through the old. Providentially, their headquarters is in a nation showing more healthy faith than the older countries that people left behind. An amazing number of people in the United States accept the Bible. Conservative churches make an issue out of "inerrancy," so the latest major survey was worded in this mode, but with striking results: "The Bible is the word of God and is not mistaken in its statements and teachings"—a full 42 percent in the United States agreed with that statement. And another 30 percent agreed with a less structured belief: "The Bible is the word of God but is sometimes mistaken in its statements and teachings." This means that the Bible has authoritative value for 72 percent of the people in the United States. Only 23 percent considered it a mere "collection of ancient religious philosophies." [^22]

Missionaries should be aware of the strong faith of people in the United States and build upon it. A generation of Latter-day Saint Bible students should match the Bible believers in America. Few nations equal the United States in the warm generosity of its people, who contribute massive amounts to charity and still receive strangers with the hospitality descended from farm and frontier living. This is the hour to teach what the Bible says to a people who still believe in it. This does not mean that New Testament quotations will automatically change minds. A closed mind explains away evidence. A successful missionary, Brigham Young, said:

I had only travelled a short time to testify to the people, before I learned this one fact, that you might prove doctrine from the Bible till doomsday, and it would merely convince a people, but would not convert them. You might read the Bible from Genesis to Revelations, and prove every iota that you advance, and that alone would have no converting influence upon the people. Nothing short of a testimony by the power of the Holy Ghost would bring light and knowledge to them—bring them in their hearts to repentance. Nothing short of that would ever do. You have frequently heard me say that I would rather hear an Elder, either here or in the world, speak only five words accompanied by the power of God, and they would do more good than to hear long sermons without the Spirit. That is true, and we know it. [^23]

Brigham Young does not downgrade use of the Bible, but warns against use of it without the Holy Ghost. Missionaries stress simple testimony, but capable investigators require evidence with that simple testimony. A nation of Bible believers needs a generation of missionaries able to show how the Bible points to the truth of the restored Church. If some can believe without Bible testimony, many, like John Taylor, must be led to the restored Church through it. There is no excuse for ignorance of Paul's message if a modern missionary wishes to reach all and not just part of those who hear him.

How well do people in the United States understand the Bible? They are sheep without shepherds but have deep religious feelings. About 89 percent in the United States is nominally Christian, with another 3 percent of the population Jewish, accepting the Old Testament. [^24] Weekly church attendance in this country is 40 percent, a figure that has held stable for a decade, a figure twice that of England and Germany today. [^25] An evidence of American faith is the responses to the question "How important is religion in life?" In the United States today, 55 percent answered "very important," with another 31 percent answering "fairly important." [^26] The combined total of those who see religion as important is a little more than those who believe the Bible as basically an inspired book. So about three-fourths in the United States see religion as important and the Bible as a major source for it. Of course, there are degrees within statistics; within the 80 percent of Americans thinking religion important, there is a core of commitment—31 percent who say that religion is the "most important thing" in their lives. [^27] The Lord told Paul at Corinth that he had "much people in this city" (Acts 18:10), and it is still true that "there are many yet on the earth . . . who are only kept from the truth because they know not where to find it" (D&C 123:12).

The big cities of the United States can match the worst of Rome or Corinth in Paul's day. The movie and television industries foster that image abroad by exporting so many cheap plots. Yet United States beliefs show distinctive characteristics not only of strength but of stability over many years. Belief in God has held at 95 percent or higher over many decades. [^28] United States belief in Christ has been sorted into the same general categories earlier discussed for Europe: "Do you think that Jesus Christ was God, another religious leader, like Muhammad or Buddha, or do you think that Jesus Christ never actually lived?" The percent saying "God" or "Son of God" was 81 percent in 1952, 75 percent in 1965, and 80 percent in 1978. [^29] These figures show not only strong commitment, but the dip and rise shows continued religious search. The process of secularization has turned many Europeans to the state for security and happiness, accentuated by their "cradle to the grave" socialism. In the United States, most people think that life's problems will not be solved by legislation. Can religion "answer all or most of our present problems?" This is affirmed by a full 65 percent, a 1981 figure up from the 62 percent five years earlier. And 57 percent of Americans of college background agree with this position. [^30] Well over a hundred years ago, Joseph Smith was consumed with the duty to present accurate religious facts to "all the rising generation, and to all the pure in heart" (D&C 123:11). What Paul called the "wisdom of this world" has failed to satisfy the sincere who are spread throughout that world. They are looking to true religion for answers today.

Paul's world and today's world have incredible parallels. This similarity opens the vision of spectacular growth for the restored gospel, a massive expansion on the model of Paul's establishing Christian strongholds in land after land. The "much people" seeking in Corinth were duplicated in a dozen locations where the book of Acts details Paul's preaching. These converts were obviously of the class who took religion seriously and were looking for answers. The first and the late twentieth centuries are both times of political and ideological transition, when people of high principles seek to replace their crumbling traditions with something more enduring. European distrust of the churches may have a positive side—a disillusionment not with true religion but with inherited ceremonialism and sterile religious bureaucracy. If someone had polled Jesus and the Twelve, they would have said that first century Judaism failed to meet "man's spiritual needs." Thus, the most religious often reject traditional religion. Western Europe is in an ideological holding pattern, culturally tied to its Protestant and Catholic heritage but not converted to it. Paul's Greek and Roman contemporaries had the same relationship to paganism. Temples were symbols of state stability, the centers of civic festivals. Thus, patriotism gave a certain vitality to public religion, even as private devotion waned. The historian Polybius was a captive Greek who wrote admiringly of the Roman system over a century before Paul, and he described how the senatorial class used mass religion as a tool for social morality, though they themselves did not believe in traditional gods. Paganism in Paul's day was vigorous, but the trend for the educated was distrust of traditional worship. (See list of religions in Paul's world on the next page.)

Greco-Roman religion blended belief in all the gods, and those rejecting it had three main options. First, there were temple traditions apart from animal sacrifice, which can be categorized as mystery religions. Their popularity escalated in Paul's century and the preceding one by offering adherents these benefits: "The object of the mystery cults was to secure salvation for men, who were subject to moral and physical evil. . . . It was effected by what may broadly be called sacramental means. By taking part in prescribed rites the worshipper became united with God, was enabled in this life to enjoy mystical communion with him, and further was assured of immortality beyond death. This process rested upon the experiences. . . of a Savior-God." [^31]

Paganism had never offered immortality, traditionally the possession only of gods and heroes. Paganism reversed the Old Testament mandate by requiring sacrifice but not obedience. But mystery cults personalized religious covenants through temple drama, with the goal of immortality. This reached deeply into religious conscience and drew those in major cities and ports to the mysteries of the goddess Isis, Egyptian in origin, and, in Paul's century, to the god Mithras, Persian in origin. Athens had long had access to the nearby Eleusinian mysteries, from which Nero withdrew in fear at the announcement of the solemnity of the coming ceremony. Obviously, secret details are known by chance descriptions, inscriptions, and the archaeology of temples of mystery religions, and enough is known to see how profound needs were met that were unfulfilled in regular sacrificial religion.

Religions in Paul's World

Name Strengths Basic Beliefs

Traditional Large Belief in all pagan gods

paganism majority State temple sacrifice

No teaching on ethics or immortality

Private offerings and prayers to gods

Popular belief in immortality of the

soul

Mystery Small Myth of special deities

religions minority Secret initiation rites

Promise of immortality

Ethical duties

Stoicism Majority of Reason exists beyond the gods

the educated Man must submit to divine reason

Some belief in survival of the soul

Periodic cycles of destruction

Ethical duty of highest good

Epicureanism Small minority Gods exist but are irrelevant

of the No survival of soul at death

educated Ethical duty of highest "happiness"

Judaism Minority— Strict monotheism

maximum of Circumcision and duty to the Law

10% of Periodic visits to Jerusalem Temple

Roman Empire Belief in coming Messiah

Ethical duty to righteous life

Judaic Small minority Belief in monotheism

sympathizers in synagogues Perhaps belief in coming Messiah

Ethical commitment to

righteous life

A second replacement for paganism was Stoicism. It was named for a covered porch (stoa in Greek) where its founder Zeno taught in Athens three centuries before Paul. Zeno and his contemporary Epicurus both reacted to paganism in terms of the meaning of life and the question of immortality, the existence of the gods, and the moral duty of man. Zeno rationalized the gods into a system, seeing reason as the practical force behind all. Man's main duty was duty—putting himself into harmony with his intrinsic destiny. Since this was also a basic ideal of Roman religion and literature, Stoicism flourished to become the majority view of the governing classes of Paul's day. Stoicism spoke of cycles and periodic destruction in cosmic fire, but Stoics from Paul's time strongly hinted at the survival of the soul. Popular religion included the practice of grave offerings to the souls of the dead, and surviving gravestones show widespread belief in some kind of survival of loved ones, though many inscriptions reject hope and bluntly admit the total termination of life in death. Epicurus also taught the latter, making personal obliteration a negative triumph over pain and infirmity. The Epicureans were a minority philosophy for the educated of Paul's time, perpetuating the founder's theory that gods existed but paid no attention to mankind. But both Stoicism and Epicureanism joined in upholding the Greek philosophy of the disciplined life, one dedicated to seek happiness (not cheap pleasure) through willpower and wise actions. [^32] Thus, when Paul stood before Stoics and Epicureans at Athens (as Acts 17 describes), he capitalized on their rejection of religion but declared a physical immortality unknown to their thought.

If Greek philosophers had some empathy for Paul's position, only the Jews were Paul's forerunners. They were providentially placed in that role, though their conservatives detested this man who preached fulfillment of their scriptures. An unwilling voice preparing for the religion of the Lord, they were also a third reforming element in Paul's religious world. Religion and philosophy gradually reached toward monotheism, but the Jews stood as direct witnesses of Jehovah in every vital city throughout the Roman empire. Rome and Alexandria probably had a million people in each, with large Jewish populations. The third Mediterranean city was Antioch, with a population of perhaps eight hundred thousand, with an estimated 20 percent Jewish. The record of Paul's preaching rarely discloses a city without a synagogue. The dispersion of the Jews came from the earlier captivity by Babylon and by later resettlement for commercial gain. Thus, congregations were spread throughout the western world, meeting weekly to honor God and prepare for the Messiah. Expectation was high, for in the hinterland of Asia Minor, Paul mentioned without explanation how John the Baptist recently came to testify of the nearness of the Messiah: "I am not he; but behold, there comes one after me, the sandals of whose feet I am not worthy to loose" (Acts 13:25, NKJB). Jews abroad kept close ties with Jerusalem, partly because the faithful traveled to the temple for the great feasts of Passover, Pentecost, and Tabernacles. Thus, the deep expectation of the Messiah, intensified by John, was dry bark into which the sparks of Paul's testimony fell. Believing Christians today are not in a different situation, for threatening world catastrophe makes vivid the judgments that Christ promised before his second coming. And Latter-day Saints ask pointedly, will a loving God not raise up prophets to warn and ready every faithful person for these great events?

Ancient Judaism was leaven, permeating the world and stimulating serious thought toward God. Its synagogues preselected faithful Jews but also thoughtful Gentiles who sought Moses' morality and the God who transcends mythology. Ancient sources, including the New Testament, show two types of Gentile affiliation. First, there were full converts, who took the burden of ceremonialism, including circumcision for males. The Pentecostal pilgrims were "Jews and proselytes" from all lands ringing the Mediterranean (Acts 2:10). As the plain preaching divided the Asia Minor synagogues, "many of the Jews and religious proselytes followed Paul" (Acts 13:43). "Proselytes" came from a wider circle of Gentile worshippers not burdened by the law, and Paul included all in the synagogue by addressing "men of Israel, and you who fear God" (Acts 13:16, NKJB). These uncircumcised "God-fearers" are also designated by a Greek term broadly meaning "religious," which is also translated "devout" and "worshippers" in the King James Version. Paul's Jewish preaching is sprinkled with references to these principled people who affiliated with the synagogue. In northern Greece the apostle's message of Christ brought fierce opposition, but there was also belief of "some" Jews and "of the devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief women not a few" (Acts 17:4). These Jewish sympathizers were not always on Paul's side, as earlier when persecution arose, because "the Jews stirred up the devout and honourable women, and the chief men of the city" (Acts 13:50). Thus, Jewish preaching generally included this wider audience. At Athens Paul first met "in the synagogue with the Jews, and with the devout persons" (Acts 17:17).

These sincere seekers of Paul's world should remind Latter-day Saints how many honest in heart are today found waiting in all places of worship. Ancient wickedness and shallowness was one layer of society, but there were others of straighter grain and strength.

The history of mankind holds ages of faith. Republican Rome was religiously solid, and Medieval culture was confident of its convictions. On the other hand, there are ages of doubt and troubled questioning. The first century moved from skepticism to positive replacements of its old creeds. Deeper religions and new philosophies were gaining ground. The twentieth century is also such a world. Skepticism for its own sake is not respected by the thoughtful. They have watched science long enough to value it for what it can do, and they do not pretend that it can solve the moral problems of mankind. When traditions and values were anciently challenged, Christianity gave strong answers, and the restored gospel offers the same in this age of doubt. The gospel that revolutionized the ancient world did not come from the political capitals or the intellectual centers. Instead, it was revealed to prophets rising above "the wisdom of the world," for God has "chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise" (1 Cor. 1:27).

God's preparation of the world is plain in the first spread of Christianity. Paul's biography is an awesome illustration of the efforts of many, known and unknown, to carry out Christ's commission to preach the gospel to "all nations" (Matt. 28:19). And where there is God's will there is God's way. The political system furnished more security, and the economic system allowed more effective communication, than was available in the centuries before Christianity's spread. Rome's civil wars had ended as Augustus bested Anthony and Cleopatra in 31 B.C. (See coin of Augustus on next page.) Grandnephew and political heir of Julius Caesar, Augustus founded the imperial system by shrewd use of power and wise restraint. The empire was a potential dictatorship, as careers of the worst first century emperors show. But Augustus and his wiser successors carefully ruled by Roman due process, the closest thing to extended constitutional government that the ancient world knew. Moreover, the empire was a political system of experienced civil servants, so that the moral breakdown of an emperor did not generally disturb the fair government of the provinces. Augustus left his own political autobiography with instructions to engrave it on the entrance pillars to his mausoleum. A combination of his achievements and his aspirations, the long testament has language like this: "I extended the boundaries of all the provinces which were bordered by races not yet subject to our empire. The provinces of the Gauls, the Spains, and Germany . . . I reduced to a state of peace." [^33] He wove this major design into this document, stressing the triple closing of the temple of Janus in his lifetime, an event honoring peace that had occurred only "twice in all since the foundation of the city." [^34] Moreover, he added, the senate had honored him with the altar to "Augustan peace" (pax Augusta). [^35] Modern archaeologists have dug it up and have repositioned its dramatic symbols of security and prosperity—Augustus' expression of gratitude for the blessings of heaven upon the new empire, its leaders, and its people.

This propaganda was true for the citizens of the inner empire, as shown in the letters of Peter and Paul that gave their government credit for being divinely blessed. If Augustan peace was not absolute, at least civil strife ended and war was exported to the frontiers. Paul traveled some thirteen thousand miles in Roman territory with less danger of bloodshed than one could meet in the same lands today. Rome's economic lifeline was tied to Egyptian grain, so shipping lanes were clear and travel largely secure. The sea was in the middle of the lands (the meaning of "Mediterranean"), giving easy access that would have been impossible on a landlocked continent. And peace stimulated Roman commerce, making travel easier and cheaper than ever before. Most of Paul's missionary miles were traveled by the relatively fast ships of that time. In addition to peace and the efficiency of travel, Paul's mission was eased by the common language, Greek. Paul was divinely called to leave his base of operations in the Near East and carry the gospel ever westward. Three centuries before, the brilliant Alexander the Great felt divinely impelled to march from Greece ever eastward until he had spread Greek troops and traders throughout the Near East. Politically, Alexander was a brilliant meteor, extinguished after an awesome trajectory. But his generals stabilized Greek dynasties around the eastern Mediterranean, so his real conquest was cultural, establishing Greek as the world language. Rome issued its decrees to that part of the world in Greek, a language also exported westward by trade. Paul's missions and letters to converts would have been impossible without this international language.

This chapter has quickly reviewed Paul's world. Paul's world doubted its pagan heritage and actively sought new answers; it was sprinkled liberally with Jewish centers, where the message about the Messiah was best understood; it was peaceful, with smoothly working transportation and an international language. Many historians, generally a fact-bound and unsentimental lot, are forced to ask how such a combination of favorable circumstances for the spread of Christ's gospel could come about by chance. Was it an accident that Paul was the right man at the right time with the right message? And is it for no purpose now that man's power to spread ideas has never been greater?

NOTES

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] John Paterson, "Jeremiah," in Matthew Black and H. H. Rowley (eds.), Peake's Commentary on the Bible (London: Thomas Nelson, 1962), p. 541.
[^2] Philo, On the Giants 12-13. For the extent of Philo's advocacy of premortal existence, see David Winston, "Preexistence in Hellenic, Judaic, and Mormon Sources," in Truman G. Madsen, ed., Reflections on Mormonism (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1978), pp. 26-29.
[^3] Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, The Words of Joseph Smith (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), p. 367.
[^4] Xenophon, Anabasis 1.2.23.
[^5] Strabo, Geography 14.5.13 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^6] Ibid. 14.5.14.
[^7] Herbert Danby, trans., The Mishnah, Aboth 1:1.
[^8] Josephus, Jewish Antiquities 13:297.
[^9] "Saul" appears seventeen times in Acts, from its first introduction at 7:58 to its last appearance in 13:9, which is the first of the many appearances of "Paul" thereafter. "Saul" appears in no other New Testament book.
[^10] Danby, Mishnah, Aboth 5:22.
[^11] Danby, Mishnah, Sotah 9:15.
[^12] In Greek and Jewish cultures centering authority on middle age, "young man" easily moves from the teens to the years before about forty. Josephus uses the term of a young officer with junior authority. See William F. Arndt et al., Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979), neanias, where the editors survey usage and conclude the "young man" category spans "about the 24th to the 40th years." There is some control in Paul's case, for the chronological chart in the appendix shows that his church career lasted some thirty-six years after conversion, which could not be much after A.D. 33. Writing to Philemon in about A.D. 61, Paul called himself "aged" (Philem. 1:9).
[^13] Danby, Mishnah, Kiddushin 4:13.
[^14] Ibid., Aboth 5:21.
[^15] Ibid.
[^16] David O. McKay, Ancient Apostles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Sunday School Union, 1918), pp. 140-41.
[^17] There are three accounts of Paul's vision: Luke's narrative (Acts 9) and Paul's speeches on the temple steps (Acts 22) and before King Agrippa (Acts 26). On the reaction of Paul's companions, the Joseph Smith Translation superimposes Acts 22:9 on Acts 9:7, logically preferring the first person over the third person account. Paul's first person accounts are followed here. Minor conflict of detail is normal for historic reconstructions that preserve the integrity of their sources. Acts 9:7 indicates that Paul's companions "saw no man," though Acts 22:9 indicates that they were conscious of the light, which is not a contradiction. But these two verses conflict on whether the men with Paul heard a voice. A tempting parallel is John 12:28-29, where the astounding experience produced different reactions to God's voice in the temple. The conflict between Paul's companions standing (Acts 9:7) or falling to the earth in fear (Acts 26:14) might also be a case of individual response. Luke obviously used several sources, and his trustworthiness is enhanced by his unwillingness to smooth over these peripheral conflicts. All accounts agree in the great reality of the place and time of the vision, the basic message to Paul, and the incredible glory of the heavenly vision. Its physical effect of blinding Paul should sober anyone who thinks it can be easily explained away.
[^18] Danby, Mishnah, Makkoth 3:12-14.
[^19] See Bruce Metzger, "Antioch-on-the-Orontes," in David Noel Freedman and Edward F. Campbell, Jr., eds., Biblical Archaeologist Reader, vol. 2 (Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor Books, 1964), p. 316, where the basis for calculation is given. Fourth-century John Chrysostom (Homily on St. Ignatius 4) speaks of the difficulty of governing "a hundred, or even fifty men," adding that "so great a city" has a "citizenry" of two hundred thousand. A population estimate must add women, children, slaves, and aliens and take into account extensive suburbs. For the Jewish population, see Metzger, p. 324.
[^20] Josephus, Jewish War 17.43.45 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^21] As will be seen later, the council on circumcision of Acts 15 and the Jerusalem visit on Gentile requirements of Galatians 2 are different versions of the same episode. Since Galatians gives only Paul's first Jerusalem visit, three years after his conversion (Gal. 1:1), and no other until the council visit, fourteen years after that (Gal. 2:1), many scholars want to equate the latter with Paul's second Jerusalem visit in Acts, the famine visit with Barnabus as companion (Acts 11:29-30; 12:25). But Galatians is not attempting to give a full history; it is written to explain how the apostles all agreed on the circumcision question, making the Acts 15 council central to its point. Thus, in Galatians Paul mentions his first visit to Peter, making his point that he knew the gospel before that by revelation; then he naturally jumps to the next relevant episode for his purpose, the gathering to settle the requirements of the law for the Gentiles. The "famine visit" of Acts 11 is not relevant to Gentile requirements and is therefore omitted in Galatians 1:22. Paul says he "was unknown by face unto the churches of Judaea," but this is not talking about the whole time from his first visit with Peter until the Jerusalem council seventeen years afterward. In context it talks of the "Syria and Cilicia" ministries (Gal. 1:21). That is, Paul was so suddenly sent to Tarsus that he did not have time to be known by the Christian communities about Jerusalem. This does not preclude the famine visit some eight years later, or other visits, since being "unknown" refers to his early post-conversion years in the Tarsus area.
[^22] The King James phrase is unnecessarily vague here: "above fourteen years ago." The Greek text has a single preposition; thus all recent committee translations of 2 Corinthians 12:2 read simply, "fourteen years ago." (For dates, see appendix A.)
[^23] 23. Journal of Discourses 5:327, also cited in John A. Widtsoe, ed., Discourses of Brigham Young (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977), p. 330.
[^24] 24. Barrett, p. 711.
[^25] 25. Religion in America, 1981, Gallup Organization Report no. 184 (Jan. 1981), p. 32.
[^26] 26. Ibid., p. 39.
[^27] 27. Ibid.
[^28] 28. The 1968 figure was 98 percent. See Religion in America, 1971, Gallup Organization Report no. 70. Compare the 95 percent "yes" by U.S. teenagers to the question "Do You Believe in God or a universal spirit?" George Gallup, Jr., and David Poling, The Search for America's Faith (Nashville, Tenn.: Abingdon Press, 1980, App. A). Compare ibid., end of appendix, for those who pray to God, 92 percent in 1952 and 1965 and still 89 percent in 1978.
[^29] 29. Ibid.
[^30] 30. Religion in America, 1981, p. 53.
[^31] 31. C. K. Barrett, The New Testament Background: Selected Documents (New York: Harper and Row, 1961), p. 91.
[^32] 32. See ibid., pp. 61-75, for a sampling of Stoic and Epicurean writings.
[^33] 33. Frederick W. Shipley (trans.), Res Gestae Divi Augusti ("The Acts of Augustus," Loeb Classical Library) 5:26.
[^34] 34. Ibid., 2:13.
[^35] 35. Ibid., 2:12.
