Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul ( 1983)

2

Paul's Preparation: Fire on the Earth

"Before I formed you in the womb I knew you, before you were born I set you apart; I appointed you as a prophet to the nations" (Jer. 1:5, NIV). Paul, the former Pharisee, easily recalled God's words to Jeremiah, and so he used parallel language about his call from God, "who separated me from my mother's womb" (Gal. 1:15). That "separation" was Paul's life mission, related to his call to the Gentile mission. The Lord said to the prophets and teachers of the Church in Antioch, "Separate me Barnabus and Saul [Paul] for the work whereunto I have called them" (Acts 13:2). Several modern versions give a freer translation suggesting a premortal existence: God "set me apart before I was born" (Gal. 1:15, RSV). Christian interpreters do not have the vision of man's pre-earth life, so in their view Jeremiah before birth was merely "a thought in the mind of God." But Jewish and Christian traditions were far more literal. Philo lived in Paul's day and, like Paul, was a cultured Israelite in a Gentile city. This Alexandrian Jew said that souls "descended" into bodies and that the faithful would leave the earth and go "back to the place from whence they came." Joseph Smith boldly taught, "Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world, was ordained to that very purpose in the grand council of heaven before this world was." Much of Paul's language fits this restored concept of premortal life and calling.

"Fire on the earth" is the theme of Paul's early manhood. The Lord used this unfamiliar phrase (Luke 12:49) to describe the difficulty accepting his gospel, church, and values in the face of hostility from loved ones. "Do you think that I have come to give peace on earth? No, I tell you, but rather division" (Luke 12:51, RSV). We know little of the reaction of Paul's family to his conversion, but much of the reaction of his people. They treated him just as he treated Christians before he became one. At the exodus the Jewish religion and state were one, and corporal punishment continued in the later synagogues for many infractions of Jewish law. Paul was not yet converted when the Lord warned the Twelve before their mission to Israel, "They will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues" (Matt. 10:17). The Lord also prophesied that Jewish leaders would take Christian "prophets" in the synagogues and drive them "from city to city" (Matt. 23:34). That language well summarizes Paul's first two missionary journeys described in Acts.

Fiery conflict followed Paul not only in missionary labors but in Church leadership. Jews and Jewish converts, feeling betrayed by Paul's modification of their traditions, sought to undermine the leadership of the "apostle of the Gentiles" (Rom. 11:13). Finally, false accusations reached the state, which unjustly executed him. The great apostle was fervent, but for good reason: "Necessity is laid upon me; yea, woe is unto me, if I preach not the gospel" (1 Cor. 9:16). Paul cannot easily be understood without accepting the supernatural knowledge that he claimed. As he remarked, the life of ease was as available to him as to others, yet he chose to risk danger "every hour" (1 Cor. 15:30). Paul was not some distorted soul who thrived on conflict, for he penned sensitive lines on love and displayed constructive relationships with his friends in the faith and beyond. He faced outer conflict because of the inner fire of conviction. His sacrifices convincingly show the reality of his divine visions.

This devoted convert was trained both to know the Jewish community outside Israel and to move easily in Gentile society. His credentials gave him immediate avenues of communication, as shown by his statement at his arrest in the temple riot that he was "a Jew of Tarsus . . . a citizen of no mean city" (Acts 21:39). In Greek that is "no insignificant city," a label used in ancient literature for a place with distinguishing marks. Tarsus could boast of its size, commercial importance, and educational tradition. The largest city in its province, its fame compared well with the two dozen provincial centers of the empire. River and harbor developments gave Tarsus a sea trade, and it stood squarely on the east-west land route, which wound out of the nearby rock-walled canyon called the "Cilician Gates," the way through the Taurus Mountains. Xenophon, who, before Paul, marched east with a hired Greek army, labeled Tarsus "a large and prosperous city," [^1] and nothing altered that situation for centuries. Biographies of Paul comment on its "university," a misleading term, for ancient culture favored private schools and private tutors. Strabo, the geographer of Paul's world who knew the Near East well, commented that in Tarsus were "all kinds of schools of rhetoric." [^2] His educational ideal was clearly the ancient blending of philosophy, literature, and eloquence. It is tempting to associate Paul's verbal ability with such training, for Strabo comments on "that facility prevalent among the Tarsians whereby [one] could instantly speak offhand and unceasingly on any given subject." [^3] But Paul's speeches and writings are far from standard orations filled with flattery and classical allusions. The above environment simply influenced him in the same way that intelligent people are exposed to excellence in their culture. Paul no doubt heard able men in public and thus set a high standard of capability for himself in speech and writing. Since Tarsus exported educated teachers, this no doubt influenced Paul's preparatory schools and tutors. Paul's writing is correct, articulate, and informed.

In antiquity, educated people came from families able to pay for education. At the temple riot, the tribune who rescued Paul was stunned that Paul spoke Greek, which showed Paul's level in Jerusalem. Soon he was to be examined under the lash, but he cut that treatment short with the question, "Is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman, and uncondemned?" (Acts 22:25.) This immediately brought the commanding officer, who heard Paul insist, "I was free born" (Acts 22:28). How Paul's family acquired citizenship interests biographers, but there are no firm answers to this secondary issue. Likely someone had given Rome needed support in influence or money, which focuses on what citizenship tells about Paul and what it did for him. Like education, citizenship was a social distinction reaching down to the upper middle class in the first century. Citizenship protected Paul in his ministry, as we have just seen when Paul successfully demanded a fair hearing before punishment. Earlier in northern Greece he was beaten under protest but successfully demanded an official apology (Acts 16:37-39). Such confrontations suggest that Paul's effectiveness in any city stemmed partly from his confidence in fair protection of the law. Another feature of Roman citizenship is known to a generation that has seen the U.S. Supreme Court overturn local courts to uphold civil and criminal rights. Provincial governors could be brought to account for unfairness, and thus Paul was allowed an appeal to Rome after his Jerusalem arrest.

Discussing Tarsus and Roman citizenship is not a digression, since Paul would not have been Paul without their impact on his work. The same is true of his Jewish heritage. At his Jerusalem arrest he spoke Greek to the centurion and then turned to address the crowd "in the Hebrew tongue" (Acts 21:40). In subsequent speeches he defended himself as "a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee" (Acts 23:6) and called the Pharisees the "strictest" party in Judaism (Acts 26:5, NKJB). Recent committee translations agree on that term, which means "most exact" or "most careful" in this context. The Mishnah, the Jewish law written down about A.D. 200, preserves the thinking of the Pharisees, whose fundamental tradition was, "Be deliberate in judgment, raise up many disciples, and make a fence around the Law." [^4] Thus, Paul walked in the path of his father and of the fathers of his people, who sought to protect the Mosaic code, which was the central "Law." Josephus, a young Pharisee who lived at the time of Paul, explains, "The Pharisees had passed on to the people certain regulations handed down by former generations and not recorded in the Laws of Moses." [^5] The Mishnah summarizes these rules about rules, condensing and compacting them into some eight hundred pages in the standard English translation. The Pharisees studied definition, analogy of one commandment to another, and weight of authority of great rabbis and their schools. For Jesus Christ, the process had gone too far, as he accused the Pharisees of cluttering the meaning of God's greatest commandments: "Ye hold the tradition of men, as the washing of pots and cups, and many other such like things ye do. . . . Ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep your own tradition" (Mark 7:8-9). But the young Paul did not yet know the meaning of such words.

Paul leaves no doubt about his orthodox training: "Circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews; as touching the law, a Pharisee" (Philip. 3:5). His parents obviously had pride in their heritage, as shown by their naming him "Saul" after the first king of Israel, the most brilliant star of Benjamin. In Acts this is Paul's proper name before he gave his life to the Gentile missions. [^6] The Mishnah outlines the education of the orthodox boy, who began studying scripture at five and advanced Rabbinical interpretation at fifteen. [^7] Paul went from Tarsus to Jerusalem; when arrested there, he reviewed his training: "Born in Tarsus . . . yet brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, and taught according to the perfect manner of the law of the fathers" (Acts 22:3). Tarsus itself broadened Paul, for Jews of the dispersion knew many sincere people outside their faith. And in Jerusalem Paul studied with a rabbi whose character shows a combination of devotedness and breadth. Grandson of Hillel, whose teaching also combined these elements, he towers in the early Mishnah tradition: "When Rabban Gamaliel the Elder died, the glory of the Law ceased, and purity and abstinence died." [^8] And when the Sanhedrin was close to sentencing the apostles to death, "a Pharisee named Gamaliel" arose, "a doctor of the law, had in reputation among all people" (Acts 5:34). His advice was blunt—impostors will fall of their own weight, but religious leaders cannot risk fighting "against God" (Acts 5:39).

This event poses searching but unanswerable questions. Gamaliel's tolerance for Christian leaders was not long after the crucifixion. Was he also a member of the Sanhedrin that condemned Jesus? Since he surely heard Jesus sometime, had he been so shaken by Jesus' manhood that he entertained the possibility of godhood? An inner-circle Pharisee, he knew many resurrection stories behind the public testimony of Peter and John. And where was Paul during these events? And did he ask Gamaliel about his cautious tolerance of Christian leaders? Paul was born about the beginning of the Christian era, since Acts calls him a "young man" when Stephen was stoned about A.D. 33 (Acts 7:58). [^9] His formal study under Gamaliel would fall before A.D. 20, long before Jesus' public ministry began. Paul nowhere hints that he saw or heard the earthly Jesus. Perhaps he was pursuing family and business interests at Tarsus during the ministry of the Lord. Perhaps he was called to Jerusalem afterward for his religious commitment and skill in practical affairs. Was he nominated by a troubled Gamaliel?

Paul's credentials illuminate the debated question of his marriage. He is mislabeled a bachelor or chauvinist, for careful study of 1 Corinthians strongly suggests his marriage. There are three elements of this problem in Paul's early life: the Jewish ideal of marriage as a religious duty; Paul's obedience to every possible Jewish duty; Paul's acceptance into high Jewish councils. The last point is often stated as though Paul was a member of the highest Jewish council, the Sanhedrin, whose members supposedly were married. Yet the evidence for marriage of Sanhedrin members is the same as for any other successful Israelite—religious and cultural conformity. Wisdom and trustworthiness came only through marriage; in the time of the Mishnah "an unmarried man may not be a teacher of children." The Mishnah includes marriage in the life pattern of the male, who was fit "at eighteen for the bride chamber." No one could fault Paul for disobedience to any commandment, he insisted, "touching the righteousness which is in the law, blameless" (Philip. 3:6). In Paul's view, no one exceeded him in keeping every requirement, none of his "peers" or "equals of age," the key term in his autobiographical survey—"I advanced in Judaism beyond many of my own age among my people, so extremely zealous was I for the traditions of my fathers" (Gal. 1:14, RSV). Since he had done everything right in his religion up to that point, he must have been married.

Against accused Christians Paul gave his "voice," a Greek word meaning "vote," as modern translations recognize (Acts 26:10). But the full Sanhedrin would not supervise details of Christian persecutions, so Paul's vote is probably that of a trusted assistant in small executive sessions. As mentioned, he was then a "young man" (Acts 7:58), which must be put in the Jewish context of thirty for temple service and mature status in the Dead Sea community. The Mishnah lists the age of "twenty for pursuing [a calling]," an age when Paul might have terminated his Jerusalem studies and returned to Tarsus for business. The Mishnah continues with "thirty for authority," a point after which Paul might be called to Jerusalem to meet the Christian threat as thousands of Jews converted to Christianity after the Crucifixion (Acts 2:41; 4:4). But the "young man" reference contradicts the idea of Paul as an elder statesman; the Sanhedrin member would be middle aged on the Mishnah's maturity scale. There, a man is ready "at forty for discernment, at fifty for counsel, at sixty for to be an elder." [^10]

Paul represented the Sanhedrin's inner circle, as he said of his power as persecutor "in Jerusalem"—"and many of the saints did I shut up in prison, having received authority from the chief priests . . . and I punished them oft in every synagogue" (Acts 26:10-11). Years before, the Savior warned his first apostles of the misplaced zeal of oppressors: "The hour is coming when whoever kills you will think he is offering service to God" (John 16:2, RSV). That is just how Paul explains himself—he carefully concluded that duty required persecution of Jesus' disciples (Acts 26:9); out of "zeal" for God, he persecuted Christians (Philip. 3:6). He later obtained forgiveness, he said, because he had persecuted "ignorantly in unbelief" (1 Tim. 1:13). He was a formidable foe, using every tool except moderation (Gal. 1:13). He forced some to renounce their faith (Acts 26:11), but many firmly faced pain and punishment because of their inner certainty. Short of the death penalty, the Romans freely allowed Jewish councils the right to discipline as a sort of common law. This meant that Paul supervised investigation, interrogation, and sentencing. Of this last role, he says, "I imprisoned and beat" the believers "in every synagogue" (Acts 22:19). Moses had allowed a maximum of forty stripes (Deut. 25:1-3), and the Mishnah shows that such punishment was widely used for a variety of legal transgressions, including breaking vows. The Gospels also portray Jesus as close to stoning for blasphemy on more than one occasion, and Paul was an official observer at the unauthorized execution of Stephen, for the crowd took Stephen from the council "out of the city, and stoned him, and the witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man's feet, whose name was Saul" (Acts 7:58). Luke thus introduces Paul into the Christian story, significantly not with a vision, but with the persecution before the vision.

What visible effect did these experiences have on young Paul? Perhaps little, for his journey to Damascus to continue Christian punishment came afterward. But the inner story, if largely untold, is not to be avoided. Paul was a feeling, caring man. With intellectual certainty he faced men and women who wrote their spiritual certainty in discomfort, pain, and blood. At his first vision, Paul was told that it was hard for him "to kick against the pricks" (Acts 26:14), the last word referring to the sharp jab of the pointed stick against which balky animals fought. So Paul was resisting spiritual impressions prior to his Damascus vision. He had heard Stephen's testimony before his death: "Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God" (Acts 7:56). Saul was prepared not by the mere mechanics of emotional reversal, but by the direct example of Stephen's vision. Not yet digesting the significance of what he had seen, Paul continued "breathing out threatenings and slaughter" (Acts 9:1). He started for Damascus with written authority from the high priest to bring Jewish Christians back to Jerusalem for judgment, whether men or women (Acts 9:2). The 150-mile journey took about a week, and David O. McKay saw Paul's conscience weighing the correctness of his course and Paul reviewing his impressions of Stephen. Nearing Damascus at high noon, Paul saw the brilliant light, a celestial power not confined to Paul, for he said, "They that were with me saw indeed the light, and were afraid" (Acts 22:9). But only Paul was struck to the heart by the sight of the glorious Christ, and the core account of the message is preserved in Paul's words in Acts: "And I fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to me, 'Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting Me?' And I answered, 'Who are You, Lord?' And He said to me, 'I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom you are persecuting.' . . . And I said, 'What shall I do, Lord?' And the Lord said to me, 'Arise and go into Damascus, and there you will be told all things which are appointed for you to do.' And since I could not see for the glory of that light, being led by the hand of those who were with me, I came into Damascus" (Acts 22:7-11, NKJB).

All three accounts of Paul's vision make clear that he not only experienced the voice and the light, but that he saw the Lord. "I have appeared to you," the Lord said during the vision (Acts 26:16, NKJB). The first Acts account says the same, as Ananias gave Paul his blessing in the name of "the Lord Jesus, who appeared to you on the road as you came" (Acts 9:17, NKJB). And Paul heard Ananias saying that Paul was called to know God's will "and see the Just One, and hear the voice of his mouth" (Acts 22:14, NKJB). Like Joseph Smith, Paul did not tell all the details of this profound experience at any one time. Years later, in the situation where his Gentile ministry was in question, Paul recalled how the Lord also outlined his mission to the non-Jewish "nations": "But rise and stand upon your feet; for I have appeared to you for this purpose, to appoint you to serve and bear witness to the things in which you have seen me and to those in which I will appear to you, delivering you from the people and from the Gentiles—to whom I send you to open their eyes, that they may turn from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins and a place among those who are sanctified by faith in me" (Acts 26:16-18, RSV).

With such favor from the Lord, how did Paul relate to the existing Church? He did not resemble the revivalist, Bible-appointed or claiming to be God-appointed without affiliation with others earlier authorized by God. In Jesus' parable of the early and late workers, each group waited in the marketplace until the Lord called them to join the laborers already in the vineyard (Matt. 20:1-16). Although Paul talked personally with Christ, an independent revelation to his leader Ananias authorized the new convert's baptism and preaching. Christ did not first tell Paul to preach, but to go to his Church and get instruction. After Ananias laid his hands on Paul, healing his temporary blindness, Paul "was baptized" (Acts 9:18). Thus Paul was obedient to Christ's Church and its requirements. Soon he began to build up what he tried to tear down. Paul was then over thirty, and there lay before him three decades of labor, persecution, and at last martyrdom. Why did this brilliant and successful young Jew forsake the world and its rewards? All of his life he gave but one answer: "Have I not seen Jesus Christ, our Lord?" (1 Cor. 9:1).

The book of Acts highlights Paul's achievements, but one must piece together years of preparation before Christ's words would be fulfilled concerning his primary mission to "the Gentiles" (Acts 26:17). The Greek term ethnos is usually "Gentiles" in the plural, though often it is given its primary meaning of "nations"; occasionally it is translated as "heathen." Throughout the King James Old Testament these same terms translate the Hebrew goy. These English renditions reflect just one concept for ancient Christians and Jews—that of the non-Israelite peoples. Isaiah repeatedly spoke of Jehovah's strange work to enlighten "the nations." Paul would be a pathfinder in this extended drama, but the Lord tempered him first in the fires of conflict. Acts portrays the young Pharisee as eager and able, for "immediately" (Acts 9:20, RSV) he "preached Christ in the synagogues" (Acts 9:20). Acts pictures the work with the Gentiles unfolding after this. Paul's early missionary success brought such Jewish antagonism that he had to be let down over the Damascus wall at night to save his life. Some biographies romanticize Paul as meditating for a long period after conversion, but Acts leaves no room for this. Paul's days of quiet study were long over; he summed up his years after conversion: "I laboured more abundantly than they all" (1 Cor. 15:10). The meditation image comes from one phrase about Paul's post-conversion labors: "I went into Arabia, and returned again unto Damascus" (Gal. 1:17). But "Arabia" need only mean the environs of Damascus, which was possibly controlled by the Nabatean kingdom, roughly equivalent to the territory of Jordan today. No source mentions remote Arabia or mentions any other activity than proclaiming the gospel. Then, after "three years," Paul "went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days; but other of the apostles saw I none, save James, the Lord's brother" (Gal. 1:18-19). This was the first of many interviews with the brethren who had walked with the Lord. In the speeches of Acts and in 1 Corinthians, Paul gives many details of Jesus' last night with the apostles, of his trial, crucifixion, and resurrection. He knew all this long before any Gospel was written. Thus, Paul had the double strength of knowledge from Christ's revelations and from conversations with the earlier apostles. One could write a list of questions that Paul might have asked Peter in this first two weeks together; a good many of them were probably on Paul's lips.

Paul's meeting with Peter dramatizes the centralized leadership of the Church. Paul had labored years in an outlying area and then counseled with two of the three presiding apostles, the acknowledged "pillars" of the Church along with John (Gal. 2:9). Paul's forthrightness in Jerusalem took him to the edge of martyrdom, for he spoke "boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus, and disputed against the Grecians, but they went about to slay him" (Acts 9:29). This is clearly the same group that engineered Stephen's death (Acts 6:9). None of that mattered to Paul, but it mattered to the Lord and his apostles that Paul stay alive to testify outside of Israel. While Paul prayed in the temple, he again saw the Lord, who commanded: "Make haste and get out of Jerusalem quickly, for they will not receive your testimony concerning me" (Acts 22:18, NKJB). Even then Paul could not easily drop the logic of preaching to those who well knew his zeal for God, which explains why this second vision was necessary. Telling the Lord

how impressed the Jews would be with the change of the former persecutor, Paul was corrected with the command, "Depart: for I will send you far hence unto the Gentiles" (Acts 22:21). Yet the full Gentile missions were still years away, and the complete fulfillment of that prophecy would wait on Paul's growth through accepting the Lord's assignments. In the meantime, the "Ananias principle" was still at work, for the converted Jew still needed lessons on asking instead of telling the Lord. His temple vision did not show Paul where to go, but it prepared him for the inspired decision that Church leaders now gave him. Acts frequently calls presiding priesthood leaders "brethren," and in this first Jerusalem visit, they are "the apostles" that Paul first came to (Acts 9:27). Because these "brethren" knew the threats on Paul's life, "they brought him down to Caesarea, and sent him forth to Tarsus" (Acts 9:30). Paul's first three years of missionary labors had been under Damascus authorities, who were to tell Paul "all things which are appointed for you to do" (Acts 22:10, NKJB). Later, the apostles supervised Paul's further assignments, since they "sent him forth to Tarsus" (Acts 9:30). At the beginning and end of every major mission thereafter, Paul had contact with the Twelve. He was indeed a bright star shining throughout the Church, but he was nevertheless a part of the constellation of leaders. Paul's direction by God included direction through God's earthly priesthood authorities.

Paul's Recorded Visions

Estimated

Year (A.D.) Source Who or What Seen Purpose

33 Acts 9, 22, 26 Christ near Damascus Paul's conversion;

direction to go to

the Church

36 Acts 22:17-21 Christ in Jerusalem Direction to leave

Temple Jerusalem for Gentile

areas

43 2 Cor. 12:1-4 "Third heaven" and Comfort in

"Paradise" persecutions;

possibly confirmation

of call to

apostleship

49 Acts 16:9-10 Man from Macedonia Direction to preach

in northern Greece

50 Acts 18:9-10 Christ at Corinth Direction to remain

in southern Greece

58 Acts 23:11 Christ in Jerusalem Comfort in

fortress imprisonment;

direction for Roman

visit

60 Acts 27:23-24 An "angel of God" Promise of safety in

shipwreck;

preparation to stand

"before Caesar"

What did Paul do in his post-conversion years in Tarsus? The time span is known, and that he did missionary work is probable. Paul said that after his Jerusalem visit he "came into the regions of Syria and Cilicia" (Gal. 1:21). This fits the Tarsus stay and the Antioch ministry in Acts, since Cilicia and Syria were headed by these two cities. Paul later visited the Cilician churches (Acts 15:41), and their most likely establishment was during Paul's Tarsus stay. The chronological chart in the appendix shows that Paul was in Tarsus for up to five years, no doubt a period of faithful labor at his assignment, one of growth through untold sacrifices and persecutions. Paul's intense desire to share the gospel, which nearly brought his death at Jerusalem, surely continued powerfully in these years. Later, he summed up his life of danger and persecution to the Corinthians, reaching back to the Damascus years in his survey (2 Cor. 11:32-33). In Paul's list we can identify his stoning (Acts 14:19) and one beating (Acts 16:22-23), but the remaining ten torments are elsewhere unrecorded. Since Acts gives great detail on Paul after this period, some of these difficulties must have come at Tarsus and Antioch: "Five times I have received at the hands of the Jews the forty lashes less one; three times I have been beaten with rods; once I was stoned; three times I have been shipwrecked; a night and a day I have been adrift at sea" (2 Cor. 11:24-25, RSV). The instructions to the judges supplement the memory of the prisoner, for the Mishnah describes Jewish punishment. As mentioned earlier, the Old Testament maximum was forty stripes, and to avoid a mistake, thirty-nine were authorized. Paul would have received these lashes in the synagogue, since the Gospels mention this practice (Matt. 10:17). The Mishnah describes what Paul suffered:

How do they scourge him? They bind his two hands to a pillar on either side, and the minister of the synagogue lays hold on his garments . . . so that he bares his chest. A stone is set down behind him on which the minister of the synagogue stands with a strap of calf-hide in his hand, doubled and redoubled, and two [other] straps that rise and fall [are fastened] thereto. The handpiece of the strap is one handbreadth long and one handbreadth wide, and its end must reach to his navel. He gives him one-third of the stripes in front and two-thirds behind. And he may not strike him when he is standing or when he is sitting, but only when he is bending low . . . And he that smites, smites with his one hand with all his might. And the reader reads, "If thou wilt not observe to do . . . the Lord will make thy stripes wonderful and the stripes of thy seed . . ." [Deut. 28:58 ff.], and he returns again to the beginning of the passage. [^11]

Events now moved rapidly to fulfill Paul's destiny in the Church. He was transferred from Tarsus to Antioch because the apostles saw the need to supervise Gentile converts there. Strangely, Paul had contributed to the circumstances that brought this transfer, for those "scattered abroad upon the persecution that arose about Stephen" came to the areas adjoining Israel, and one city is named prominently, Antioch, capital of Syria, the province to which Judea was technically allied (Acts 11:19-20). Josephus tells of the huge Jewish colony in this metropolis, some three hundred and fifty miles north of Jerusalem. The same reasons that made it attractive to dispersing Jews brought in the dispersing Christians. As they arrived from Judea, they first preached "unto the Jews only" (Acts 11:19). But soon Greek-speaking Christians arrived at Antioch and contacted "the Grecians, preaching the Lord Jesus" (Acts 11:20). Such gospel expansion was first seen on a smaller scale in Samaria, where Philip had great success in baptisms. When news of widespread conversions came back, "the apostles which were at Jerusalem . . . sent unto them Peter and John" (Acts 8:14), which was all the more dramatic because Peter and John were two of the three "pillars" in the Council of Twelve. Their part in laying on hands for the Holy Ghost will be discussed later, but their role in determining how the gospel should extend to semi-Jews is significant here. The Samaritans believed in the Mosaic books, in circumcision and sacrifice, and their assimilation into the Church was managed by general authorities.

Similar procedures were now followed in distant Antioch. After the first Jewish preaching there, Greeks were reached, "and a great number believed, and turned unto the Lord" (Acts 11:21). News of this came to "the church which was in Jerusalem" (Acts 11:22), a phrase that does not stress the members of a congregation, for undoubtedly many congregations were there. "The church . . . in Jerusalem" implies the leaders who presided over the churches there and elsewhere. When Antioch representatives went to Jerusalem later for a policy decision, "the apostles and elders" were contacted (Acts 15:2). As a result of the Antioch preaching to Greeks, Barnabus was "sent" to Antioch by "the church which was in Jerusalem" (Acts 11:22). Barnabus, the devoted Jew from Cyprus (Acts 4:36-37), was obviously chosen as a man like Paul who knew Greek culture outside of Israel. On arriving at Antioch and finding things in order, he immediately traveled over one hundred miles west "to Tarsus to look for Saul" (Acts 11:25, RSV). One can imagine their reunion, for Barnabus had earlier taken Paul "to the apostles" in Jerusalem after the Damascus ministry (Acts 9:27). Now he came from the apostles with the commission to direct the work in Antioch. The intended parallel is clear—the man assigned to Tarsus by the apostles was now transferred to a new field by a trusted leader coming directly from the apostles. During Paul's first vision ten years before, the Lord outlined his mission to the Gentiles, but the assignment was gradually fulfilled as directed through the Church leaders.

Barnabus now brought Paul "to Antioch, and it came to pass that for a whole year they assembled with the church and taught many people" (Acts 11:26, NKJV). Since Jewish Christians at Antioch later objected to Paul baptizing Gentiles without ties to Judaism, Paul was first preaching mainly to Jews and the "God-fearers" or "devout persons" in the synagogues. Antioch's size is estimated as high as eight hundred thousand, with a guess of a Jewish population about 15 percent of that. So gospel expansion went from semi-Jews at Samaria to Jewish sympathizers at Antioch before Paul later preached to Gentiles without prior Jewish roots. Josephus describes the Jewish society at Antioch in which Paul and Barnabus moved:

The Jewish race, densely interspersed among the native populations of every portion of the world, is particularly numerous in Syria, where intermingling is due to the proximity of the two countries. But it was at Antioch that they specially congregated, partly owing to the greatness of that city, but mainly because the successors of King Antiochus had enabled them to live there in security. . . . Continuing to receive similar treatment from later monarchs, the Jewish colony grew in numbers, and their richly designed and costly offering formed a splendid ornament to the temple. Moreover, they were constantly attracting to their religious ceremonies multitudes of Greeks, and these they had in some measure incorporated with themselves. [^12]

The Antioch labors of Paul and Barnabus were interrupted after a year as a result of prophecy of famine and the assistance sent Jerusalem from the richer saints at Antioch, whose wealth parallels the Jewish society just described. One coming from Jerusalem with warning was Agabus, who later prophesied Paul's captivity on nearing the holy city. Church members sent welfare supplies "to the elders by the hands of Barnabus and Saul" (Acts 11:30). Acts shows its survey nature by simply noting that these two finished this service and returned to Antioch. Nothing is said of the seven-hundred-mile round trip, nothing of meeting with the presiding "elders" at Jerusalem, which they certainly did, nothing of plans discussed there for the expansion of the Gentile mission to Asia Minor, which took place immediately on returning. Was Luke obeying Paul's mandate of modesty in writing about his missionary leader? On the mission immediately following the Jerusalem return, Paul and Barnabus are twice called "apostles" (Acts 14:4; 14:14). The term occasionally preserves its general sense of "one sent" in nonformal New Testament references, so some have thought that Paul and Barnabus were only "messengers" and not members of the Twelve. But Luke uses apostle thirty-four other times in his Gospel and Acts, and every time this word designates the Twelve or its members. Indeed, his first mention seems to define what he means, since out of all Christ's "disciples," only twelve were called, and these were named "apostles" (Luke 6:13). And Paul certainly puts his office on a parity with the Twelve, speaking of those who were "apostles before me" (Gal. 1:17) and humbly calling himself "least of the apostles" after mentioning the Twelve (1 Cor. 15:9). His confident authority as "an apostle of Jesus Christ" in the openings of ten of fourteen letters matches the similar assertion of Peter beginning both of his preserved letters.

Because no apostolic ordination is preserved, some doubt that Paul was one of the Twelve. But Paul gave Timothy guidelines on conferring priesthood by the laying on of hands (1 Tim. 5:22), which shows a practice that Acts and the Letters do not need to detail. The book of Acts is a story of missionary labors, not primarily a record book of ordinances, as we shall see more plainly. Paul could have been ordained an apostle when Barnabus first came to Tarsus with his transfer to preside at Antioch, or when Barnabus and Paul visited Jerusalem with the welfare supplies before the Gentile mission to Asia Minor. And there are really more possibilities, in spite of Paul's listing only two visits to Jerusalem between his conversion and the Jerusalem Council seventeen years later. [^13] We must not ration Paul's Jerusalem trips as though there was some barrier to travel. The fact that he was shipwrecked three times in his early ministry shows how frequently he traveled by sea. We do know that Luke calls Paul an apostle, that the term is strange if Paul is not a member of the Twelve, and that there are clear opportunities for ordination in connection with Paul's Antioch ministry.

Perhaps the ultimate reward of Paul's life came about this time, a great vision that in itself showed God's approval. About A.D. 57 Paul looked back on this sacred experience "fourteen years ago," [^14] about A.D. 44, at the end of his Tarsus ministry or during his labors at Antioch. Significantly, this was just before Luke called Paul an apostle and just before the great Gentile missions began. Paul only mentioned the vision to shame the Corinthians into humility, trying to refute their ridicule of his leadership. This subject is prefaced by the apostle's willingness to match credential with credential by showing the shallowness of their boasting: "I will glory also. . . . I am bold also" (2 Cor. 11:18-21). Eleven verses follow, giving personal achievements and sacrifices, followed by, "I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord" (2 Cor. 12:1). Then Paul's "visions and revelations" follow, even though narrated with the modesty of third person, for he continued to comment on his own "abundance of the revelations" (2 Cor. 12:7). The point of this vision is how the Lord blessed Paul:

I know a man in Christ who fourteen years ago—whether in the body I do not know, or whether out of the body I do not know; God knows—such a one was caught up to the third heaven. And I know such a man—whether in the body or out of the body I do not know; God knows—how he was caught up into paradise and heard inexpressible words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter. (2 Cor. 12:2-4, NKJB.)

Paul had seen the Lord near Damascus, and publicly talked about his message. But 2 Corinthians tells of a vision beyond that in sacredness, since Paul was not permitted to repeat the "inexpressible words" given him. Paul's "third heaven" is the highest heaven, also called "paradise" here—the time and phraseology of seeing both is the same. As a young Pharisee, Paul turned away from the sophistication and materialism of his secular world. Then as a new Christian he also renounced false status, even in religion, for the true sacrifice of humility and diligent labor for the Lord. He spoke with authority to his world and so speaks through the Bible record today. Paul saw the resurrected Christ near Damascus, saw the same Lord three years later in the Jerusalem temple, and saw the celestial glory of God some eight years afterward. Not only was he strengthened by these for the crowning two decades of his life, but his revelations offer sure knowledge beyond the limitations of this world.

NOTES

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Compare the case of Silas, sent from Jerusalem with the apostles' decision on circumcision and substituting for Barnabas on Paul's second mission (Acts 15:27-40). But when Silas joined Paul in opening the two Thessalonian letters, he used the adapted name "Silvanus."
[^2] Strabo, Geography 14.6.3 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^3] From the settlement of Augustus just before Paul, Cyprus was a senatorial province and therefore ruled by a proconsul, an example of Luke's care and accuracy in political and geographical matters.
[^4] Those who think Mark was physically sick or homesick are underestimating the moral judgment that Paul made on this act, for he totally refused to take him on the next Gentile mission (Acts 15:38). Paul later forgave Mark, whose outlook no doubt broadened in following years. Later he was "profitable to me for the ministry" (2 Tim. 4:11), but the opposite was true when Paul faced a second Gentile mission and must have felt that Mark was too conservative for that work.
[^5] "Pay attention to" is my translation of prosecho, a strong word of mental concentration and conversion. Both the account of Philip at Samaria and of Lydia indicate that baptism was preached as part of acceptance of Christ. NKJB makes the language consistent in English, as it is in Greek. The Samaritans were baptized after they "heeded those things which Philip spoke" (Acts 8:6). And Lydia was baptized after she "heeded the things which were spoken of Paul" (Acts 16:14). "Preaching Jesus" is also preaching baptism, as Luke also makes clear on Pentecost (Acts 2:38) and with the Ethiopian eunuch (Acts 8:35-39).
[^6] F. F. Bruce, Commentary on the Book of the Acts (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Co., 1964), p. 354. For a survey of Paul in Athens, see Richard Lloyd Anderson, "Paul and the Athenian Intellectuals," Ensign, Feb. 1976, pp. 50-55.
[^7] Epicurus, Epistle to Menoeceus, cited in C. K. Barrett, The New Testament Background: Selected Documents (New York: Harper and Bros., 1961), p. 74.
[^8] For specific phrases, see Bruce, pp. 359-60.
[^9] Pausanias, Description of Greece 1.3.4 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^10] See appendix A for this inscription and application to dates in Paul's life.
[^11] Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, The Words of Joseph Smith (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), p. 108. Since spiritual powers are gifts from God, Acts uses "gift" of Cornelius's prebaptismal sign, one that all prepared converts experience in some degree. But the additional gift of the permanent right to receive the Holy Ghost is what the Prophet discusses, one Acts defines as given by the laying on of hands.
[^12] F. J. Foakes-Jackson, The Acts of the Apostles (New York: Harper and Bros., [1931]), p. 175.
[^13] G. W. H. Lampe, "Acts," in Matthew Black and H. H. Rowley, eds., Peake's Commentary on the Bible (London: Thomas Nelson and Sons, 1962), p. 796e.
[^14] Foakes-Jackson, p. 176.
