Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul ( 1983)

3

The Missionary Message in Acts

The Early Church did not produce "Meditations of the Apostles" or the "Philosophy of the Apostles," though many such books circulate about modern Christian leaders and thinkers. Luke's real title says much about the apostles' real message. The "Acts of the Apostles" suggests that their message is not only in their letters but also in their work. Christ sent not mystics but practical men of conviction with his gospel. And what they did is a clear definition of what they taught. Paul's fourteen letters would be isolated and abstract without Luke's sixteen chapters on Paul's deeds as an apostle. The letters briefly mention many doctrines and ordinances and rarely discuss the organization of the early Church. That is because they were written to believers who had seen all this. But the modern Christian, who never observed the early Church, may easily misread the letters. Could he turn time back and walk one week with Paul, he would understand Paul's hints and reminders. The book of Acts vividly turns time back. Its descriptions are the most effective definitions. No one should open a letter of Paul without first seeing the gospel in action in Acts.

Acts is the key to the letters in many other ways. Half the book is a biography of Paul as a missionary apostle. His first dozen years in the Church must be pieced together from isolated texts. After that, the modern biographer can move from detective work to digesting work, for Acts fully reports the next sixteen years. This detail begins with the first Gentile mission and ends with Paul's custody in Rome to be heard by Caesar's court. Thereafter, the apostle to the Gentiles lived only a handful of years, writing only three known letters in this final period. That means that the earlier eleven letters were written in the time when Acts gives Paul's full history. So there are background facts behind most of Paul's letters, many coming from Acts. This chapter will finish the survey of Paul's life with two goals in mind—understanding the general circumstances that throw light on Paul's letters, plus understanding what was taught in Church branches before Paul wrote them letters.

This last point needs emphasis. Reading Paul's words gives a false sense of completeness. He sometimes writes comprehensively on Christian doctrine—more formal letters like Ephesians and Hebrews are near that end of the spectrum. But Paul's typical letter is like a personal letter to a friend who doesn't need full explanations. After reexplaining the apostasy in one of his shortest letters, Paul asked why he needed to repeat himself: "Do you not remember that when I was still with you, I told you these things? (2 Thes. 2:5, NKJB.) Modern Christians get their doctrine from Paul's letters, but Paul did not write to explain Christ's gospel to later generations. Paul encouraged early Christians who already knew Christ's gospel. Thus, the letters and Acts each stress part of the whole. The letters contain little of the first message because they are written to those who have already believed and obeyed. Acts gives this first message—the first preaching that offered salvation through membership in Christ's Church. But since Acts is a missionary record, it says little of how members should perfect themselves. So the New Testament sequence is sound. Acts prefaces Paul's letters because it shows what the converts believed before reading Paul's letters; the letters complete Acts because they erect the superstructure resting on the first principles.

Acts vividly replays scene after scene of Paul's preaching. But Acts is also accurate, for its author was with Paul through a great many of these events. He writes "we" as a fellow missionary, this language first appearing in connection with events in about A.D. 49 as the missionaries first sailed to Greece (Acts 16:10). "We" then resumes about A.D. 58 as Paul returns to Jerusalem after two long and productive missions in the Greek cities of the homeland and Asia Minor (Acts 20:5, 13). This "we" language carries the author into Israel, where Paul was imprisoned two years, with the final "we" sections sketching Paul's exciting voyage and arrival in Rome about A.D. 61 (Acts 27:1; 28:16). Thus, the author of Acts shared Paul's missionary experiences through a dozen-year period. Though his book does not carry his name, the opening verses of Acts identify the writer by referring to his "former account" (Acts 1:1, NKJB); a comparison with the similar preface to the Gospel of Luke identifies Luke as the author. "When we came to Rome" (Acts 28:16) gives a correct impression, for Luke sends greetings in two Roman letters, one of them picturing Luke as "the beloved physician" (Col. 4:14.). Though obviously not trained in modern science, the best educated Greek physicians had a scientific attitude and a better grasp of anatomy than was possible in the Middle Ages. Thus, it is powerful testimony when Luke reports miraculous healings by Christ and his apostles. Luke's writing reflects quality education, for it is the most polished Greek of the New Testament. Luke insists that he investigated everything carefully; what he had not seen himself came from "eyewitnesses and ministers of the word," that is, the apostles who had walked with the Lord (Luke 1:2). Thus, Luke signals that he is a second-generation convert, and his Greek and Gentile interests signal that he is probably not a Jew. He was perhaps converted at Paul's missionary base of Antioch, since he begins to give details about Paul after the apostle came there.

Luke guides his readers through three missionary journeys of Paul, but numbering them first to third makes sense only if it is understood that Paul had been a Christian some twelve years before the "first mission." As we have seen, he had already done intense missionary work at Damascus, Jerusalem, Tarsus, and Antioch. Thus, the "first mission" is the first after Paul became an apostle, the first that Luke could give personal detail about, or simply the first Gentile mission. All these options have value, but we know that Luke sought to present the Gentile missions as a fulfillment of Christ's prophecy to the apostles before his ascension: "Ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth" (Acts 1:8). The first half of Acts tells how the original apostles extended the work through Judaea and Samaria, and its second half tells how Paul and his companions extended the work to the nations beyond. The chart on the next page outlines the times and locations of the three Gentile missions. They need not be fully detailed here—a full reading of Acts will accomplish that. But this chapter will focus on Paul's missionary doctrines in their proper settings, adding relevant parallels from the first apostles in the earlier part of Acts. Luke had a higher purpose than merely writing exciting narrative—he wrote to solidify Theophilus in "the certainty of those things in which you have been instructed" (Luke 1:4, NKJB), a purpose that clearly carried into Acts, the continuation of this work on Christian basics (Acts 1:1-2). Acts typically gives double examples of doctrines to show that they were preached both by Paul and by the original apostles.

All the apostles had the same message: "Whether it were I or they, so we preach, and so ye believed" (1 Cor. 15:11). Paul had just insisted that the Corinthians would not be saved if they disbelieved the gospel he preached to them (1 Cor. 15:1-2). In this letter Paul began to outline that gospel, but he stopped at the great doctrines of Christ to reconvert the Corinthians to the Resurrection. Paul was in harmony with Peter and those before: "I delivered unto you first of all that which I also received" (1 Cor. 15:3). He bore this first testimony of Christ to the Corinthians: "Christ died for our sins, according to the scriptures; and . . . he was buried, and . . . he rose again the third day, according to the scriptures" (1 Cor. 15:3-4). So two foundation doctrines were the atonement and the resurrection of Christ. But Paul gave more complete articles of faith in a letter not arguing the Resurrection so intently. In Hebrews he reminded the converts that they must never forget "the first principles of God's word" (Heb. 5:12, RSV). The Greek phrase reads literally, "the basics of the beginning of God's words." Paul lists them: "The foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God, of the doctrine of baptisms, and of laying on of hands; and of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment" (Heb. 6:1-2). These central missionary doctrines correlate with the first message to the Greeks at Corinth—Christ's resurrection appears in both, and his atonement discussed in Corinthians obviously relates closely to the "eternal judgment" mentioned in Hebrews. But Hebrews spells out the plan of forgiveness—exactly what Latter-day Saints know from modern revelation as the first principles of faith, repentance, baptism, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. Acts shows the same plan of salvation, not lying inert in pieces on the dissecting table but in action as a living whole. It is clear why Paul insisted that those sent by God would preach a single gospel: "If any man preach any other gospel unto you than that ye have received, let him be accursed" (Gal. 1:9).

Paul's Gentile Missions

Approximate Years How Begun Main Locations Main Companions

First mission, Revelation by the Spirit Cyprus and south Paul

45-47 after visit to central

Jerusalem: "Separate me Asia Minor Barnabus

Barnabus and

Saul for the work John Mark

whereunto I have

called them" (Acts 13:2)

Second mission, Visiting new churches with Mainland Greece Paul

49-52 the apostles' revelation on Silas

circumcision

(Acts 15:36; 16:4)—and Luke

then revelation

by vision: "Come over Timothy

into Macedonia,

and help us" (Acts 16:9)

Third mission, Invitation of Ephesian Roman province Paul

54-58 Jews, accepted of Asia

after mandatory Jerusalem (western Asia Timothy

visit (Acts Minor)

18:20-21); compare the Titus

earlier

revelation delaying Gaius

preaching in Asia

(Acts 16:6) Aristarchus

Roman Custody, Appeal to Caesar when House arrest Paul

61-63 life endangered at Rome Luke

(Acts 25:9-10) after Aristarchus

vision of Lord: Timothy

"you must bear witness

also at Rome"

Acts 23:11, NKJB)

In Paul's first mission, that gospel began to be preached to populations of non-Jews. The Christian leaders of Antioch assembled with Saul and Barnabas, appointed to preside over the work at Antioch. During their meeting, "the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them" (Acts 13:2). When did God call them to the Gentile mission beyond Antioch? The apostles sent Barnabas to preside there in the first place, and a man of his obedience and loyalty would not quit the assignment without similar direction. Significantly, he and Paul had just returned from taking the Antioch welfare supply to the Jerusalem "elders," a term that includes the apostles. Just as the Twelve had directed the extension of the Samaritan mission, just as they directed the extension of the Antioch mission to the Gentiles, so they are visible in the expansion of preaching to non-Jewish lands.

The regional leaders at Antioch helped Barnabas and Paul set apart the other, an interesting parallel to priesthood blessings today in which lesser authorities can assist in a blessing. Laying "their hands on them, they sent them away" (Acts 13:3). Acts gives just this instance of laying on of hands for Paul, but that is just the point—the writer draws on the experience of his readers to fill in like details in like circumstances. Paul reminded Timothy about the laying on of hands for authority (1 Tim. 4:14); though Timothy appears in Acts, his laying on of hands does not. But earlier Luke explained how the apostles delegated authority. It was felt that Jewish-Greek widows were slighted in the welfare distribution. So the apostles requested the appointment of "seven men of honest report" (Acts 6:3). These welfare assistants had to please the Greek element of the Jerusalem church. So their nomination was delegated to the "brethren," though direction came through the apostles, who also retained their right of approval when the seven men were "set before the apostles" prior to ordination (Acts 6:6). Then authority was given when the Twelve "prayed" and "laid their hands on them" (Acts 6:6). So Luke gave two examples of laying on of hands for authority in Acts, one from the first Twelve and one as Paul embarked on his first Gentile mission. Modern readers may wish for more documentation, but Luke was clearly satisfied with representative instances of a Church practice.

Paul and Barnabas next sailed the hundred miles to Cyprus. They took Barnabas's relative John Mark with them (Acts 13:5) and no doubt sought out contacts known to Barnabas, who was from Cyprus (Acts 4:36). They began in the largest city on the east side and then traveled another hundred miles through the island to New Paphos, the Roman capital on the west. This whole itinerary appears in two verses, which may have taken weeks or even months. Cyprus had a huge Jewish population, and initially at Salamis they sought out many congregations: "They preached the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews" (Acts 13:5). What did they preach? The careful reader of Acts need not wonder, for "the word of God" regularly means the missionary message, which Luke illustrates from time to time. For instance, soon after the account of Paul's leaving Cyprus, one finds the longest synagogue speech of Acts, after which Paul said he had declared "the word of God" (Acts 13:46). Luke presented examples, not microhistory. Repeated synagogue preaching on Cyprus takes up one sentence, but as the work began on the mainland, Luke traces synagogue preaching in twenty-eight careful verses. Then afterward, synagogue preaching in a dozen major cities is reduced once more to summary verses each time. This type of writing could work only in a church with a constant message, where the doctrines and practices did not vary.

Although the missionaries concentrated on Jewish congregations in eastern Cyprus, their western success was the conversion of the Roman governor. And Luke signals the transition by here introducing the Gentile name of the former Pharisee. He says simply that Saul is also Paul (Acts 13:9), and thereafter the Jewish name is not mentioned. Did the new name come in honor of the believing governor, Sergius Paulus? Perhaps, yet the source may simply be the similarity between "Saul" and "Paul." When the missionaries arrived in the provincial capital of New Paphos, they found a city known for its "harbor and well-built temples." Perhaps working first with the Jewish population, they were summoned by the "proconsul," a name that Luke gives in Greek, the proper title of the Cyprus governor (Acts 13:7, NKJB). Although ultimately Paul faced four provincial governors, Sergius Paulus alone appears as "prudent" and interested in hearing "the word of God" (Acts 13:7). His court magician, however, "opposed" the missionaries until Paul was moved to rebuke him by the power of the priesthood, prophesying that he would be blind "for a season" (Acts 13:11). The apostle who was led blind into Damascus knew well what he was saying. His closeness to the Lord is seen not only in visions but in miracles, as the chart in this chapter shows. The ability to stop the magician from his tirade against God's servants was like the power to cast out devils, which Christ promised to his priesthood holders (Mark 3:15; 16:17). The honest governor was humbled by this power, and he "believed, being astonished at the doctrine of the Lord" (Acts 13:12).

The second stage of this initial mission began after the missionaries sailed from Cyprus to the southern coast of Asia Minor. Before going far inland John Mark left them and "returned to Jerusalem" (Acts 13:13). His leaving at the outset of full Gentile preaching is no doubt related to his conservatism about it. [^1] Paul and Barnabas took the roads north from the coastland to Antioch in Pisidia, a hundred miles away. The mountains and broad valleys must have been picturesque, but the unescorted travelers would also have had to watch for danger. Such routes were mentioned in Paul's catalog of risks—"perils of waters, in perils of robbers . . . perils in the wilderness" (2 Cor. 11:26). Arriving at the Antioch in Asia Minor, Paul and Barnabas went to the synagogue on the Sabbath and were invited to speak as visiting brethren. Here, Luke gives the full synagogue preaching—as just noted, the most complete report in the book of Acts. The reader virtually joins the audience to hear the emotion-charged review of Israel's history and how Jesus fulfilled it as the Messiah. Paul stood to address all Israelites and God-fearing Gentiles present. He reviewed the call of Israel, its deliverance out of Egypt, the age of Kings, and the promise of the Messiah through the seed of King David. Then he called to mind John the Baptist as forerunner, reviewing his "baptism of repentance" and testimony that one greater would follow. Here we see how John had impressed the dispersion as well as Israelites in his land, a situation verified by Josephus naming John as one of the three Christian leaders in his history of the first century. Paul next reviewed Christ's unjust death under Pilate and testified that "God raised him from the dead," calling on the testimony of the first apostles as "his witnesses unto the people." Paul's conclusion was personal: "Through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins, and by him all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses" (Acts 13:38-39).

This central message has outlasted the hostility that it caused toward Paul and Barnabas, who were forced to leave Pisidian Antioch because of Jewish antagonism. This full example of preaching gives perspective on Paul's missionary message. It perfectly fits Paul's "first" doctrines at Corinth (1 Cor. 15:1-4). Paul there furnished names of those seeing Christ after the Resurrection (1 Cor. 15:5-7), and in the Pisidian synagogue he said that the Lord was seen by those who "came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem" (Acts 13:31). Paul preached Jesus as the Messiah to a Jewish congregation with faith in a Messiah. He had done the same from conversion, soon after which he "confounded the Jews who lived in Damascus by proving that Jesus was the Christ" (Acts 9:22, RSV). This is a critical point, for every synagogue speech in Acts has a form of the same message. But how can Luke be consistent in reporting Paul's offer of remission of sins through Christ in Acts 13:38 as against Peter's offer of remission of sins through repentance and baptism in Acts 2:38? Peter had preached on Christ at Pentecost, so both apostles agreed that forgiveness comes through Jesus' sacrifice. And Paul preached repentance through Christ, so that is not a conflict. Paul expected a change in thinking and action, though this was not technically mentioned in the synagogue. On the second journey in Athens he stressed that God "now commands all men everywhere to repent" (Acts 17:30, NKJB); ending the third journey, he summed up his message to Jew and Greek as "repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ" (Acts 20:21).

Thus, the apparent conflict between Paul at Pisidia and Peter on Pentecost is the latter's baptism "for the remission of sins" (Acts 2:38). Though Luke does not mention baptism during Paul's entire first journey, he stresses baptism on the second and third missions. Paul's message was consistent, but Luke features different parts of it on different missions. Whereas the "principles" of faith, repentance, baptism, and the laying on of hands were always the foundation (Heb. 6:1-3), Luke is selective in reporting them. He stresses Christ and faith in him on the first mission, makes baptism prominent in the second, and features the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost in the third.

In Acts Paul is not only preaching the gospel of Christ but establishing the Church of Christ. As he and Barnabas were forced to leave Pisidian Antioch, they left behind local branches: "The disciples were filled with joy, and with the Holy Ghost" (Acts 13:52). Disciple is a strong term, literally a "learner" in the sense of being a serious student or apprentice. Acts follows the Gospels in using this term for baptized members of the Christ's church. For instance, after Peter's call for repentance and baptism on Pentecost, "they that gladly received his word were baptized, and the same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls" (Acts 2:41). Afterward Luke summarized Church growth: "The number of the disciples was multiplied" (Acts 6:1)—his original description holds, for "disciples" came through baptism. Paul was likewise a "disciple" after conversion—on first coming to Jerusalem, he tried to "join himself to the disciples," but they feared him, doubting "that he was a disciple" (Acts 9:26). Paul had recently been baptized (Acts 9:18), later reviewing Ananias's challenge: "Arise and be baptized, and wash away your sins, calling on the name of the Lord" (Acts 22:16, NKJB). Thus, in Luke's record, baptism was required for discipleship, so Paul's baptisms are implied by "the disciples" who were left behind in the cities of the first mission (Acts 13:52).

After receiving threats of violence, Paul and Barnabas took the dusty road east of Pisidian Antioch, and eighty miles brought them to Iconium. In a few verses Acts summarizes the synagogue preaching, conversions, anger, threats, and again leaving under duress. Yet these events took a "long time" (Acts 14:3), an indication of how many details are left out of Acts. Arriving at nearby Lystra, the "apostles" (Acts 14:4) preached in an area dominated by the old pagan religion. Here a notable miracle took place. Long before Paul was converted, the Lord commanded the Twelve to take their first mission, combining the command to preach with the promise that they should "heal the sick" and "cast out devils" (Matt. 10:7-8). The seventy were given the same double command to preach and "heal the sick" (Luke 10:1-9). And every gospel closes with the Lord's command to the Twelve to take the gospel to the world, which implies that they would hold these priesthood powers. Christ's teaching follows this pattern in the close of Mark, where the Lord commanded the Twelve to preach and promised the signs following (Mark 16:15-18). But such incredible promises were not made to just any believers. These were believers with Christ's delegated priesthood. Paul's unusual spiritual gifts followed his special calling as a general authority. Seeing a cripple "who never had walked," Paul was inspired as Peter earlier at the temple gate. Paul was impressed that the lifelong Lystran cripple "had faith to be healed." So he firmly commanded, "Stand up straight on your feet." And the man "leaped and walked" (Acts 14:8-10, NKJB).

This event was a sign to believers, for unbelievers either misunderstood or misused the miracle. The superstitious populace tried to sacrifice to these visiting "gods," considering Barnabas Jupiter, since he was perhaps taller and more imposing. Paul was called Mercury "because he was the chief speaker" (Acts 14:12). The apostles prevented an idolatrous sacrifice by bearing a simple testimony of the true and living God, who, because of man's agency, had allowed superstitious religion (Acts 14:14-18). But soon they faced a crowd manipulated by angry Jews who followed their trail from earlier cities. Paul was indeed the more eloquent, for the crowd picked him to be stoned and dragged him out of the city presumably dead. But the Lord had again protected his servant in violence. And the next morning Paul left with Barnabas for Derbe, the farthest point of the first mission. Yet this final city was not the final scene of the mission. If conversion were salvation, following up of converts would not be necessary. The close of the first mission was revisiting, a process that Paul later repeated when he had opportunity. Obviously, he considered growth in the gospel as much a critical part of salvation as first belief. Years later he would write to the Ephesians that general and local priesthood offices were given "for the perfecting of the saints" (Eph. 4:12), a constant goal for Paul in addition to conversion. Such work could continue only by the general authority raising up local authority. Thus, at the risk of their lives, Paul and Barnabas returned to the cities of opposition and violence, "confirming the souls of the disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the faith, and that we must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God. And when they had ordained them elders in every church, and had prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord, on whom they believed" (Acts 14:22-23).

Thus Paul and Barnabas established branches of the Church of Christ in every city of their converts, returning to Antioch not with some sort of mailing list but after the bold achievement of organized local churches with priesthood leaders. The missionary message came through men approved by the Twelve. In turn the new believers were organized into branches of the Church in harmony with the Twelve.

But soon conflicts arose about Paul's first mission. On returning, Paul and Barnabas called the Antioch disciples into conference to report how God "had opened the door of faith unto the Gentiles" (Acts 14:27). They must have rejoiced at the news, for the missionaries continued laboring there for a "long time with the disciples" (Acts 14:28). But the first mission did not please "certain men which came down from Judaea," who insisted, "Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved" (Acts 15:1). This problem would always plague Paul and be a topic in many letters. So reading Paul requires clear understanding of it. The problem was not salvation by faith alone; it was not a question of freedom from gospel requirements and ordinances. Instead, it was a question of whether Gentile converts to Christianity had also to obey the law of Moses. As we have seen, the Gentile "disciples" had already been baptized and taught strictly to "continue in the faith" as a condition of salvation (Acts 14:22). But this did not satisfy Jewish Christians strictly observing the Law of Moses. Circumcision symbolized this issue, but Judaizers were talking about hundreds of obligations beyond circumcision. The orthodox Jews count 613 commandments in the five books of Moses, and the Rabbinical rules of the Mishnah multiply the commandments to thousands. So it is a gross simplification to see Paul advocating a gospel without rules. Instead, he opposed a tradition of too many rules.

The first debate at Antioch was whether Gentile converts had to be circumcised as well as baptized—whether they obligated themselves only to Christian rules or whether they were also obligated to Jewish law. The Antioch apostles argued vigorously against that additional burden, and after "no small dissension and disputation," it was decided that the leaders of each persuasion "should go up to Jerusalem unto the apostles and elders about this question" (Acts 15:2). Similar problems today in most churches have no solution—only an uncomfortable truce between conservatives and liberals or a split into two churches. The solution of the Early Church was to take the question to the inspired general authorities for an answer.

Luke's detailed report of the Jerusalem council is like his other detailed reports—representative of regular Church procedure. Luke opens the council room so we can see revelation in action as the "apostles and elders came together" to deliberate (Acts 15:6). Four spoke: Peter, Barnabas, Paul, and James. James proposed the solution and is therefore commonly credited with presiding over the council. But it was Peter who spoke first, an act of presidency, for he held "the keys of the kingdom of heaven" from Christ (Matt. 16:19). Commentators have tunnel vision who see James as council president; his name appears in Acts only once prior to this, whereas Peter's name appears fifty-seven times, beginning with leadership in naming a new apostle right after the ascension of Christ. One of the impressive marks of his authority was his receiving the revelation that the Gentiles should be admitted to the Church, an earlier step that he had to defend at length before the Jewish Christians (Acts 10, 11). And standing to open the Jerusalem council, Peter reviewed God's revelation to him about baptizing Cornelius, the Roman officer who was the first baptized Gentile. Why add to baptism, Peter argued—why "put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples"? He continued with the same reasoning Paul would develop in Romans and Galatians: "We believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved, even as they" (Acts 15:10-11). Peter stressed God's approval on Cornelius by the Holy Ghost falling upon him, and Barnabas and Paul next testified that the same happened to the Gentiles on their recent mission (Acts 15:12). Finally, James made his proposal, a logical step because his view would persuade Jewish Christians, for whom he later spoke when Paul returned again to Jerusalem (Acts 21:18-24). From this proposal came the decision that the Gentiles should obey only the moral law and also cooperate with dietary restrictions of their Jewish brothers and sisters.

The apostles' letter to Antioch was specific. The moral law was to avoid idolatry and adultery; Jewish conciliation took the form of abstaining from "blood, and from things strangled" (Acts 15:29), since this blood prohibition predated Moses (Gen. 9:4). The goal of all, including James, was not to "trouble" the converted Gentiles with Jewish requirements (Acts 15:19). But Jews were apparently free to live as many of their former requirements as they chose. The apostles' letter to Antioch underlined not only the decision, but how the decision was reached: "It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things" (Acts 15:28). Few Christians today see the implications of this powerful ruling of the Twelve. Conservatives today search the Bible for answers, but had the apostles done this, they would have required circumcision for the Gentiles, since it is commanded in the Bible. The apostles were inspired to go beyond the Bible, to reverse the lesser law given earlier and to extend the higher law through Christ. In other words, not past scripture but new revelation was the foundation of the Church of Christ. What guided the apostles was not the New Testament, for their acts created it. The Bible does not make the true church, but the true church makes the Bible. Past scriptures are a guide to truth, but living prophets give new scripture.

Paul's remaining missions round out the picture of the living gospel taught by the living Church. Biographies start the second mission with Paul's desire to visit "every city where we have preached the word of the Lord" (Acts 15:36), but the Jerusalem council is in the background. As Paul revisited these branches, he gave them the "decrees" of the "apostles and elders" (Acts 16:4). "Decree" mirrors Luke's Greek here, since he uses the term of the official edicts of the Roman emperor (Luke 2:1; Acts 17:7), which shows that the Twelve gave doctrine to the Church just as the centralized Roman government ruled the empire. Paul and Barnabas had returned to Antioch with Silas and Judas Barnabas, "leading men among the brethren" (Acts 15:22, NKJB). And Silas took Barnabas's place when the two former companions disagreed sharply over taking Barnabas's relative, Mark. The two added Luke and Timothy, the latter on the way in Lystra, where he and his family had probably been converted by Paul on the first mission. Since his family was part Jewish, Paul had him circumcised to avoid the charge that Christian Jews about him were disobedient to their heritage (Acts 16:1-3).

After visiting the first mission churches, the missionary group had a decision to make. The nearest populous area was Ephesus, chief city of the Roman province of Asia, on the coast two hundred miles west. But they "were forbidden of the Holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia" (Acts 16:6). In perspective, they were delayed in preaching there until they had done other things the Lord had in mind, for later the third mission was spent in Ephesus and its surrounding Asian province. But at this point they were inspired only on what not to do, for revelation often shines a small light in the dark before the whole problem is illuminated. Shifting northwest they finally arrived at the Aegean coast at Troas, where the next revelation awaited them. In a "vision" Paul saw the man of northern Greece appealing to him: "Come over into Macedonia, and help us" (Acts 16:9).

Without such direction, would the missionary group have ventured over a hundred miles of open sea to Greece? Disembarking on the coast, they proceeded ten miles inland to Philippi, a prosperous center settled heavily by Roman veterans. On the Sabbath the missionaries found the Jewish place of prayer (a term also meaning "synagogue") and reached the heart of the business-woman Lydia, who is called "devout toward God" (Acts 16:14, literal trans.). Acts says that this remarkable woman paid attention to "the things which were spoken by Paul" (Acts 16:14), and the result was Lydia being "baptized, and her household" (Acts 16:15). [^2] Luke also stresses the baptism of the jailor.

Paul's arrest came from commanding an evil spirit to depart from a possessed girl. This act enraged her masters, who stirred up a mob in the marketplace before the city officials. And they pleased the crowd by stripping and beating Paul and Silas, and by binding their feet in the inner cell of the jail. But God freed his servants through a terrifying earthquake. Since the jailor had been warned about their security, he assumed their escape and drew his sword for suicide when he failed to see them. But Paul called to the confused man, who felt the power of God in Paul's presence. The man's question is every man's question: "What must I do to be saved?" (Acts 16:30.) But the answer is regularly perverted through oversimplification; Protestant tracts, road signs, and sermonizing often quote part of Paul's answer: "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house" (Acts 16:31). "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ"? That was the beginning, not the end of the requirements for salvation. The next verse says that Paul taught the jailor and his household "the word of the Lord" (Acts 16:32), which in Acts always suggests the first principles and ordinances. And the following verse rounds out the answer to the jailor, who was taken "the same hour of the night . . . and was baptized, he and all his" (Acts 16:33). The question of salvation was as much answered by the act of baptism as by Paul's first words.

Paul next traveled to the Jewish synagogue in Thessalonica, where a branch of the Church was forged in persecution. That story forms the background to the Thessalonian letters. Moving west again, Paul faced the same circumstances of success and Jewish agitation at Berea. There, he decided to go to Athens, leaving Silas and Timothy in the area and perhaps leaving Luke, since "we" passages stop and do not resume until Paul later revisited northern Greece. The King James Version implies that Paul then traveled to Athens by land: "The brethren sent away Paul to go as it were to the sea" (Acts 17:14). But the traditional Greek here means "intention to go by sea." The logic of speed, convenience, and safety dictated that Paul sail the two hundred miles to Athens, a point reinforced by the urgency suggested when "they that conducted Paul" were told to return and tell Silas and Timothy to come as quickly as possible (Acts 17:15).

Athens was a spectacular, if temporary, stop. Modern translations add realism to Paul's visit to the center of classicism. The narrative breathes the spirit of Athenian life, as F. F. Bruce observes: "Classical students feel that they are on home ground, and the scene and the argument have all the appearance of authenticity." [^3] Paul was depressed to see a city overfilled with idols. The view is confirmed by other ancient travelers and by rich archaeological finds; there were temples, altars, public statues of the Olympians, and special images to lesser divinities at houses and roads. The ancient joke ran that it was easier to find a god than a man in Athens. Paul began in the synagogue with Jews and "the devout persons" (Acts 17:17) and then moved to the "market" (agora), now the broad excavated area lying below the Acropolis. It was then filled with buildings for government, commerce, entertainment, and worship. Chapter 1 of this book discussed Paul's confrontation with the Stoics and Epicureans, the latter believing that "when death comes, then we do not exist," and the former seeking duty in the face of a future that might perpetuate the human soul. [^4] Both operationally rejected the mythology of the gods, so they were confused by the apostle who rejected paganism but taught the strange physical resurrection. They brought him to "Areopagus" (Acts 17:19), which can be translated either the "hill of Ares" or as the proper name of the civic council that had met there in earlier centuries. In the King James translation, Paul stands "in the midst of Mars' hill" (Acts 17:22), but the Greek is still "Areopagus." So many modern translations add "council" or "meeting," since "in the midst of" prefacing the speech (Acts 17:22) is the same Greek construction for Paul leaving "from among them" at the end of the speech (Acts 17:33). Paul probably spoke to the Athenian governing body, which then met in the market and which would inquire into the possible harmfulness of the "new doctrine" that he taught (Acts 17:19).

Public Miracles through Paul

Jesus' Promises Powers Miracles through Paul

"In my name shall they cast Rebuking evil Blinding of Elymas the

out devils" magician (Acts 13:6-11)

(Mark 16:17) Casting out of evil spirit

from young woman at

Philippi (Acts 16:16-18)

Evil spirits cast out at

Ephesus (Acts 19:12)

"They shall speak with New tongues "I thank my God, I speak

new tongues" with tongues more than

ye all"

(Mark 16:17) (1 Cor. 14:18)

"They shall take up Protection "No harm" from viper's

serpents, and if they bite, though Paul

drink any deadly thing, "should have swollen,

it shall not hurt them" or fallen down dead

(Mark 16:18) suddenly" (Acts 28:3-6)

"They shall lay hands on Healing Healing of cripple at

the sick, and they shall Lystra (Acts 14:8-10)

recover" (Mark 16:18) Healing of diseases at

Ephesus (Acts 19:12)

Healing of Publius's

father from fever and

bleeding when Paul

"prayed and laid his

hands on him" (Acts

28:8)

"Others also, which had

diseases in the island,

came, and were healed"

(Acts 28:9)

This Athenian background is useful because Acts gives Paul's speech at length. Aside from Paul's later public defenses, Acts gives one long speech on each missionary journey, and their ideas and vocabulary have close relationships to Paul's letters. In addition to the typical Jewish speech in the Pisidian synagogue, the Athens speech adds Paul's typical words to educated Gentiles. Though delivered in Athens, it could be titled "Paul's Letter to the Stoic Philosophers," since he quoted their poets. [^5] When Strabo listed famous philosophers of Tarsus, most were Stoics, a pattern for the empire. Paul began with a local detail; in the city known for divine images, he discovered an altar dedicated to an "unknown god." A traveler in Paul's time also reported seeing "altars to the gods named unknown" in the Athenian harbor area. [^6] Paul used this theme as the cutting edge. Paganism was unsure of itself, realizing that there may be other deities still not placated. But Paul appealed to the sense of his educated audience. Temples symbolized pagan mythology, which was inherited from times of ignorance—times of "lack of knowledge," which God had "overlooked" (Acts 17:30, literal trans.). Stoicism and Epicureanism both denounced pagan superstition. But if they knew enough to criticize paganism, they were still ignorant of the true God and his revealed son. Paul appealed to the conscience of his audience as he warned of a coming day of accountability, proved by the mission of Christ and the reality that God had "raised him from the dead" (Acts 17:31). Paul's reasoning cuts as sharply through confusion today: without revelation men do not know the true God and his wishes for them. Surprisingly, some commentators see the Athens speech as an experiment in intellectualism, one abandoned as Paul taught the simple gospel again at Corinth. But the opposite was the case, for Paul diagnosed the shortcomings of intellectualism and challenged the Athenians to leave speculation for scripture.

Few converts are reported at Athens, but then Paul did not stay long. He probably planned it that way on his arrival, for he sent Silas and Timothy the message to come from northern Greece, and he had gone west to Corinth before they arrived. There, the ministry of belief in Christ was also the ministry of baptism, for synagogue ruler Crispus "believed on the Lord with all his house; and many of the Corinthians, hearing, believed and were baptized" (Acts 18:8). In fact, Paul later mentioned Crispus among those he remembered baptizing when he wrote to the Corinthians (1 Cor. 1:14). But Jewish conversions brought intense ill will; Paul was forced to testify plainly and to leave off preaching to Jews. Was he to leave Corinth at this point? He had left three cities in northern Greece in similar circumstances. But a vision of the Lord came in the midst of this genuine need, for there are no pointless miracles in Paul's ministry. The Lord commanded, "Do not be afraid, but speak, and do not keep silent; for I am with you, and no one will attack you to hurt you; for I have many people in this city" (Acts 18:9-10, NKJB). The prophecy came to pass. After Paul preached a year and a half, a new governor was appointed. This aristocratic Gallio scorned the Jews and upheld the Roman rights of Paul—an incident critical for dating Paul's Corinthian ministry because Gallio's name appears on an inscription. The Greek has Paul staying at Corinth "many days afterward" (Acts 18:18, literal trans.). The promise of protection and of rich harvest had been fulfilled. Paul then cut his hair, terminating his special "vow," perhaps one taken in solemn gratitude for the promise of the Lord in vision or for the fulfillment later when the tables were turned on his accusers. The Corinthian letters show how much leadership these new converts continued to need and how Paul insisted on the divine authority of his calling. Acts lays the background for the powerful Corinthian drama.

The third mission fulfilled Paul's hopes "to preach the word in Asia," whereas an earlier revelation had essentially said, "Not yet" (Acts 16:6-7). But after the second mission the time was ripe, and Paul's third mission in Acts powerfully illustrates the missionary message in its opening scene. On the way to Jerusalem after closing his Corinthian labors, Paul made a promise to return to the inquiring Jews at Ephesus. Months later he returned to find "about twelve" who were "disciples," a word clearly meaning baptized Christians in Acts, as we have seen. Paul's questions and their answers can be verbally diagrammed:

Question 1: Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed?

Answer 1: We have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost.

Question 2: Unto what then were ye baptized?

Answer 2: Unto John's baptism.

Paul's response: John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people that they should believe on him which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus.

Ordinances of Salvation in Acts

Ordinances Directed by First Apostles Directed by Paul

(Leaders baptized by John: (Baptized by Ananias:

John 1:35-42) Acts 9:18; 22:16)

Baptism Acts 2:38: Jews at Acts 16:15: Lydia and

Pentecost household

Acts 8:12: Samaritans Acts 16:33: Jailor and

Acts 8:38: Eunuch household

Acts 10:48: First Gentiles Acts 18:8: Corinthians

Acts 19:5: 12 "disciples"

Confirmation Acts 8:17: Samaritans Acts 19:6: 12 "disciples"

(gift of Holy

Ghost through

laying on of

hands)

Ordination or Acts 6:1-6: 7 assistants Acts 13:1-3: Paul and

setting apart the Twelve Barnabas

(authority

through laying

on of hands)

Sacrament of

the Lord's Acts 2:42, 46: Church at Acts 20:7, 11:Church

Supper Jerusalem after at Troas at Paul's

Pentecost farewell

These dozen were then rebaptized "in the name of the Lord Jesus," and "when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them; and they spake with tongues, and prophesied" (Acts 19:1-6).

Luke uses this impressive incident to make several doctrinal points. First, the laying on of hands is necessary for the gift of the Holy Ghost. In another case, Luke clearly makes imposition of hands a necessary and regular procedure. After Philip's baptisms, the Holy Ghost had "fallen upon none of them: only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus" (Acts 8:16). Even the proper baptism, Luke says in this parenthesis, will not bring the gift of the Holy Ghost until the completing ordinance is performed. Next, the apostles laid "their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost" (Acts 8:17). At a later time, the power of the Holy Ghost came upon Cornelius before baptism, but the Prophet Joseph Smith rightly stressed Cornelius's special circumstances as the first Gentile to be baptized. So the outpouring of the Spirit prior to his baptism was a sign of God's approval; had he not later "received the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands," Joseph Smith said, the power of the "Holy Ghost, which convinced him of the truth of God, would have left him." [^7] This distinction between the power and the gift is sound, for Jesus blessed the apostles, saying, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost" (John 20:22). In Joseph Smith's terms, they received the gift of, or right to receive, the Holy Ghost, but its spiritual force fell upon them later on the day of Pentecost (Acts 1:8, 2:4). It is true that Acts has only two examples of giving the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, but one example from Peter and one from Paul obviously show that the laying on of hands was part of the missionary message of both. Unlike the healings in Acts, there are no cases where this post-baptismal gift comes any other way (Acts 8:16).

These stories about Samaria and Ephesus are bound together by another cord. Simon the magician "saw that through laying on of the apostles' hands the Holy Ghost was given" and offered money for "this power" (Acts 8:18-19). This last word (exousia) could as easily be translated "authority," its regular meaning for Luke, who through this language shows the apostles with authority from God and Simon Magus without it. Luke made authority a major issue in Peter's giving of the Holy Ghost, so Paul's similar ministry must not be read without looking for true and false priesthood. The Ephesian "disciples" had to be rebaptized, which means that their first baptism was flawed, either in form or in authority. And at Ephesus, Luke highlights authority by telling about the Jewish magicians. Commanding an evil spirit to depart in the name of Jesus, they were ignored with the question, "Who are ye?" (Acts 19:15) Only a few verses before, Paul put a similar question to the dozen disciples: "Unto what then were ye baptized?" John's baptism had the same form as that of Jesus. So the issue of who had the right to baptize is raised a little before the associated issue of who had the right to cast out an evil spirit. In these cases, Paul represented God whereas others did not, just as Simon Magus earlier recognized that Peter had "power" that he did not.

A glance back at Paul's dialogue on page 59 will show that he treated the twelve Ephesians as Christians, asking if the Holy Ghost came when they "believed" (Acts 19:2). In the words of one commentator, such a phrase must mean "when you believed in Jesus." Many others agree that the same point is made by Luke's use of "disciple": "In Luke's writings this word used absolutely, always means Christians." Yet Paul asked the dozen "disciples" to be rebaptized, explaining that John the Baptist always taught belief "on him which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus." Paul's words about belief on Christ must mean more than accepting Christ; in the words of a good analyst, "this his hearers had already done." So what else from Christ should these "disciples" accept? Obviously, Paul as a true servant of Christ. In Jesus' words when the Twelve were first sent: "He who receives you receives me, and he who receives me receives him who sent me" (Matt. 10:40, NKJB). The confusion of asking believers to believe is solved by the fact that in Acts the true priesthood is shown with others waiting to counterfeit it. So at Ephesus Paul did not ask the dozen "disciples" to start to believe in Christ, but to accept Christ's true servants and their ordinances as the fulfillment of the work begun by John.

In Paul's final response, the first baptisms were deficient because John always promised the coming of the Christ. When we look at John's language in doing so, the Holy Ghost was an inseparable part of the promise, for three Gospels give the exact thought: the one coming afterward "shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire" (Matt. 3:11). Since ignorance of the Holy Ghost was ignorance of what John taught, the dozen at Ephesus certainly had not heard him or one understanding his message. Thus, Joseph Smith went to authority as the point of the rebaptism: "No, John did not baptize you, for he did his work right; and so Paul went and baptized them, for he knew what the true doctrine was, and he knew that John had not baptized them." [^8] Thus, Luke made a second point in both cases of laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. The outward ceremony might even be imitated, but God's power will follow only God's delegated priesthood. Watching Peter and John at Samaria was Simon Magus, who had previously overwhelmed the Samaritans with his religious charisma, but even he knew that he could not give the Holy Ghost on whomever he would without the apostles' ordination (Acts 8:19). And at Ephesus the same point is made through baptism: defective teaching proved defective authority. John had not baptized the dozen at Ephesus, and whoever did lacked legitimacy. Thus, the priesthood is contrasted with false authority but proved by God's sending the gifts of the Spirit when Paul rebaptized and laid on hands.

The baptisms at the beginning of the third mission were the firstfruits of hundreds more. Paul had built up the Church at Corinth, where ships came to and from Ephesus and its sister ports of Asia Minor. These coastal cities were economic outlets for Roman Asia, roughly the western third of Asia Minor. That province exceeded most in population and prosperity, as Cicero said a little before Paul: "Asia indeed is as wealthy as it is fertile, so that it easily exceeds all lands in the richness of soil, in the variety of products, in the extent of pastures, and in the number of its exports." Ephesus was a main political and religious center, and the Jewish community there probably learned of Paul's work while he was in Corinth, for they encouraged him to teach in their synagogue. Their interest lasted for three months after his return, a record in the book of Acts. When resistance and antagonism hardened, Paul next moved to a public hall, his daily forum and mission headquarters for two years (Acts 19:8-9). Paul would never have stayed this long without substantial harvest, which is indicated by the dramatic phrase that "all they which dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks" (Acts 19:10). Such wide exposure suggests widespread conversions, and the brief record of Ephesus bristles with clues on the numbers of conversions. A believers' bonfire was fed by astrological and magical books altogether worth 50,000 silver coins, each coin a day's wage for a common worker (Acts 19:19). Such a quantity could easily represent 5,000 who renounced superstition at conversion. And this momentum continued: "So mightily grew the word of God and prevailed" (Acts 19:20). The Ephesian stay closed with public protest led by idol makers, whose business was fading because converts ceased to worship in the great temple at Ephesus. The chief agitator shouted to the mob, "Throughout almost all Asia, this Paul has persuaded and turned away many people, saying that they are not gods which are made with hands" (Acts 19:26, NKJB). Nowhere else do we read of such impact.

Here Paul's view of the Church's future is highlighted—the paradox of greatest success and greatest pessimism. Here Acts fits the New Testament trend—the later the letter, the stronger the skepticism on the continuation of the true Church. And Paul's last letters are validated by Luke's report of Paul's farewell on his last mission. Paul's final letter combines the joy of celestial reunion with sadness about the future of God's work on earth. And so does Paul's last speech to the Church in Acts, the farewell to the Ephesian leaders. After the silversmiths' riot, Paul sailed to Greece to spend months in final visits to his converts as he traveled to Jerusalem with strong premonitions of captivity there. Returning by the Asian coast, he passed Ephesus under pressure of time, but stopped at the next large port and "sent to Ephesus, and called the elders of the church" (Acts 20:17). These must be "presiding elders," since Paul spoke to them of how the Holy Ghost had made them overseers (Acts 20:28). The last word here is the Greek episkopos, elsewhere translated "bishop." [^9] The speech to these priesthood leaders is similar to the Last Supper discourse of the Lord. It is the closing speech to the third mission. In Luke's record of the first two, there are examples of public preaching to Jews and also to educated Gentiles. But the end of the Asian mission illustrates Paul's personal views to Church leaders he was leaving.

Paul loved God's work and his converts more than his life. He reviewed his three years of labor at Ephesus, warning "every one night and day with tears" (Acts 20:31). A man who had built up the work so successfully would surely promise similar success to the local leaders with a tone of optimism for further growth and achievement. That would follow as a principle of successful leadership, and Paul was a successful leader. But he did none of this. The tears were not in thankfulness for new generations of Christians but in sadness in realizing that all that he had worked for would be spoiled. He bluntly warned of apostasy soon after his time: "For I know this, that after my departure savage wolves will come in among you, not sparing the flock; also from among yourselves men will rise up, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after themselves" (Acts 20:29-30, NKJB). "Perverse" literally means "turned around," the exact translation of Paul's Greek (diastrepho). Thus, Paul left the astounding testimony that local Christian leaders would reverse the apostle's doctrines. In the words of other translations, "distortion" would follow Paul's teaching of truth. Who would walk in Paul's steps? Not Christian leaders, he said; the successors of the apostles would be "savage wolves," words close to the Savior's portrayal of sheep who are really "ravenous wolves" (Matt. 7:15, NKJB). In both cases, only the appearance is Christian. Paul's point is that the Church itself will be corrupted. He does not say that part of the Church will remain faithful. He simply speaks of the factions of different disciples and leaves it at that. Paul expresses no hope for the continuation of the Church that he labored to create.

Paul's missionary work did not end with the third mission, for he lived another vigorous decade for the Lord. But Luke's detailed record of what he taught ends there, so the closing speech at Ephesus is Paul's last testament to the Church in Acts. That book carries on with the incredible Jerusalem-Rome odyssey, starting with the witness of the Holy Ghost "that bonds of afflictions" awaited him (Acts 20:23). On leaving the Ephesian elders, he already had plans "to go to Jerusalem, saying, After I have been there, I must also see Rome" (Acts 19:21). Did he know at that time that imprisonment would be the means of bringing his testimony to the leaders of his nation and of Rome itself? At Paul's conversion, the Lord told Ananias that Paul was "a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel" (Acts 9:15). He would defend his testimony before the Jewish Sanhedrin, governors, and King Agrippa, and would finally be brought before the imperial court. To Paul's credit, he never spoke on narrow legal issues but opened up the real source of conflict—visions and testimony of the Resurrection. After his arrest and first speeches at Jerusalem, Paul received his final known vision of the Lord, who commanded courage at the beginning of years of imprisonment, and prophesied, "As you have testified for me in Jerusalem, so you must bear witness also at Rome" (Acts 23:11, NKJB). This Roman imprisonment is the background of Paul's later letters. God's revelations had come to him in moments of deep trial with the assurance of the purpose in his persecution. But years of effort lay between each vision and its realization, a perspective to remember when reading Paul's teachings about "grace."

Paul wrote to those who had joined the Church of Christ through baptism and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. Protestants downgrade ordinances and the Church because the Bible is their source of doctrine. Acts shows that the Church created the letters, the Church led by the Twelve, led by revelation, centralized in leadership and with common doctrine and practices. The letters are generally snapshots of branches of the Church at given times with their special problems, but the functioning Church is found in the moving pictures of Acts. The most successful individual translator of the New Testament today is J. B. Phillips. He has a Church of England background and is scholarly in capacity but disdains scholasticism of the scriptures. As he finished translating Acts, he wrote in awe of what he had watched at close range; he was "profoundly stirred" by the Early Church, which indeed raises serious questions now:

Yet we cannot help feeling disturbed as well as moved, for this surely is the Church as it was meant to be. It is vigorous and flexible, for these are the days before it ever became fat and short of breath through prosperity, or musclebound by overorganization. These men did not make "acts of faith," they believed; they did not "say their prayers," they really prayed. They did not hold conferences on psychosomatic medicine, they simply healed the sick. . . . We in the modern Church have unquestionably lost something. Whether it is due to the atrophy of the quality which the New Testament calls "faith," whether it is due to a stifling churchiness, whether it is due to our sinful complacency over the scandal of a divided Church, or whatever the cause may be, very little of the modern Church could bear comparison with the spiritual drive, the genuine fellowship, and the gay unconquerable courage of the Young Church. [^10]

Phillips asks why churches do not have revelation today. The answer lies with God and his ways of working. He ignored the university and religious centers of Paul's day in favor of calling his servants anew from all walks of life. Latter-day Saints testify that the visions of Joseph Smith remarkably parallel Paul's in number and content—that the powers of the Early Church are now restored in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Its members will find inspiration and evidence in Paul's letters to the Early Church.

NOTES

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Compare the case of Silas, sent from Jerusalem with the apostles' decision on circumcision and substituting for Barnabas on Paul's second mission (Acts 15:27-40). But when Silas joined Paul in opening the two Thessalonian letters, he used the adapted name "Silvanus."
[^2] Strabo, Geography 14.6.3 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^3] From the settlement of Augustus just before Paul, Cyprus was a senatorial province and therefore ruled by a proconsul, an example of Luke's care and accuracy in political and geographical matters.
[^4] Those who think Mark was physically sick or homesick are underestimating the moral judgment that Paul made on this act, for he totally refused to take him on the next Gentile mission (Acts 15:38). Paul later forgave Mark, whose outlook no doubt broadened in following years. Later he was "profitable to me for the ministry" (2 Tim. 4:11), but the opposite was true when Paul faced a second Gentile mission and must have felt that Mark was too conservative for that work.
[^5] "Pay attention to" is my translation of prosecho, a strong word of mental concentration and conversion. Both the account of Philip at Samaria and of Lydia indicate that baptism was preached as part of acceptance of Christ. NKJB makes the language consistent in English, as it is in Greek. The Samaritans were baptized after they "heeded those things which Philip spoke" (Acts 8:6). And Lydia was baptized after she "heeded the things which were spoken of Paul" (Acts 16:14). "Preaching Jesus" is also preaching baptism, as Luke also makes clear on Pentecost (Acts 2:38) and with the Ethiopian eunuch (Acts 8:35-39).
[^6] F. F. Bruce, Commentary on the Book of the Acts (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Co., 1964), p. 354. For a survey of Paul in Athens, see Richard Lloyd Anderson, "Paul and the Athenian Intellectuals," Ensign, Feb. 1976, pp. 50-55.
[^7] Epicurus, Epistle to Menoeceus, cited in C. K. Barrett, The New Testament Background: Selected Documents (New York: Harper and Bros., 1961), p. 74.
[^8] For specific phrases, see Bruce, pp. 359-60.
[^9] Pausanias, Description of Greece 1.3.4 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^10] See appendix A for this inscription and application to dates in Paul's life.
