Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul ( 1983)

4

Early Letters to Converts

Paul's fourteen letters are arranged in the Bible in a rough order of length, but here they will be studied in their chronological order. Their basic sequence is quite clear, except for Hebrews, which will be grouped in chapter 6 with the great epistles on Christ. Translator J.B. Phillips printed his translation as "Letters to Young Churches," a title particularly apt for the Thessalonian letters studied here. These "Letters to Recent Converts" show an intense personal relationship, for Paul had been away from Thessalonica only a short time. But he was still in communication, writing about 250 miles away as messengers brought word of the personal and doctrinal struggles of the new members. Thus he taught Church doctrines and encouraged living by Christ's standards. Paul created relationships similar to the powerful ones that the Savior created while on earth. The opposite of distant abstractions, these letters reach out not only with the truth, but also with an intense desire that these converts live up to the truth.

1 THESSALONIANS

Profile

Sent from: Paul, at Corinth, joined by Timothy and Silvanus (Silas).

Sent to: Converts at Thessalonica, largest city in northern Greece.

Date: Probably early in A.D. 50. Purpose: To express gratitude for their faithfulness and give encouragement after Timothy and Silas brought word from them.

Main themes: The meaning of conversion; missionary leadership; Church standards of living; resurrection and Christ's coming.

Background

The City

Today, Thessalonica is the largest city in northern Greece, a busy port and manufacturing and marketing center with a population of nearly half a million. Similar economic forces made it a major business and political center in Paul's time, though the population was not as great. It was the capital of Roman administration in northern Greece, the province of Macedonia. And Strabo says that Thessalonica was "more populous than the other" Macedonian cities. It stretched below the coastal hills and had port-city characteristics that fit the mob scene in Acts, where some Jews struck back in resentment by stirring up "some of the evil men from the market-place" (Acts 17:5, NKJB). The market area or forum has now been discovered, with paved remains of ancient buildings lower than street level of the modern city. The major highway across Greece ran through Thessalonica; Strabo describes the Egnatian Road as starting from the ports opposite Italy and winding about five-hundred miles to the eastern side of Macedonia. Jews at such a major center would have had wealth and influence.

Church Members

Paul's first conversions at Thessalonica are briefly but impressively told in ten verses opening Acts 17. At Philippi, Paul and Silas had been beaten, jailed, and miraculously freed. After receiving a lame apology from the city fathers, they judged it better to let the Lord and his earthquake have the last word. So they left their new but determined converts and went west on the Egnatian road to Thessalonica. They might have stopped at other cities along this eighty-mile route, but obviously they aimed to do missionary work where the greatest number of people were. Luke, reporting patterns and standard practices of the early apostles, says that Paul went into the synagogue and preached "as his manner was" (Acts 17:2). Three Sabbaths of Paul's plain testimony was all that most of his fellow-Jews could tolerate. Nevertheless, Paul had converted "some of them" and also a large group of the seeking non-Jews that associated with the synagogues—"and of the devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief women not a few" (Acts 17:4). Such numerous conversions are similar to those made today, which include "not a few" women. Though that phrase and "a great multitude" can scarcely be defined, some minimum can be guessed at. The Thessalonian church was surely numbered in the hundreds. The predominance of Greeks among them is indicated in Paul's recollection of "how ye turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God" (1 Thes. 1:9).

Two missionary companions of Paul were probably from this harvest. At the Ephesian riot, the crowd seized "Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul's companions in travel" (Acts 19:29). And those escorting him to Jerusalem after the third journey were "of the Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus" (Acts 20:4). Aristarchus later went to Rome with Paul (Acts 27:2), where he joined those "of the circumcision" in sending greetings (Col. 4:10-11). But the convert pictured in Acts is Jason, who was perhaps wealthy enough to share a large house with the new branch. His home was the target of the violent demonstration instigated in anger by those resentful Jews. Failing to find the missionaries, the mob dragged Jason and "certain brethren" before the city magistrates (Acts 17:5-6). Luke's word here is "politarch"; though generally not a regular title for civic officials in the Roman Empire, it has turned up in about twenty inscriptions, many from Macedonia, including Thessalonica itself. [^1] These magistrates heard the accusation that Christians believed in Jesus as king, not Caesar, a distortion that Jesus answered before Pilate. Perhaps the Greek officials saw through this verbal fog as Jason explained his beliefs. In any event, they made Jason pledge property that could be forfeited—in case of guilt, or perhaps in case of further disturbance. Paul, Silas, and Timothy left their converts in these circumstances, no doubt considering it best to allow a cooling off period before returning. "As his manner was" applies to Paul's preaching at the outset (Acts 17:2), but it also suggests leaving elders set apart to preside over the new branch of the Church, which was done in every city on the first mission (Acts 14:23). Paul mentioned these local leaders in his letter asking the Thessalonians to recognize those who "are over you in the Lord and admonish you" (1 Thes. 5:12).

Reason for Writing

One may be misled by the King James Version notes at the end of every letter. These little postscripts are called "subscriptions" from the fact that copyists wrote them underneath or after the letters. But the sentence notes appear very late—their earliest form is fourth century, so they are merely scribes' opinions. Why Paul wrote any letter must be learned from reading that letter, related ones, and in many cases the book of Acts. The general reason for all of Paul's letters was his desire to keep his converts strong in the faith and to guide them in perfecting their lives. He wrote always as an apostle, a term of special authority, since its Greek meaning is "one sent." His first sentence generally identifies him as an "apostle" by divine appointment, or an "apostle of Jesus Christ." This is true in the openings of nine of his fourteen letters. The exceptions include Hebrews, Philippians, and Philemon, each of which have special reasons of caution or affection for not using "apostle" in the lead sentence. The others without this characteristic are the two Thessalonian letters, perhaps because Paul joined Silas and Timothy in the salutations of each, or more obviously, out of special affection. Yet Paul makes clear that "we might have been burdensome, as the apostles of Christ" (1 Thes. 2:6). So the Thessalonian letters give his authority, though not in the openings.

Does the phrase "apostles of Christ" include Silas? We have seen that Barnabas and Paul were called apostles on the first mission, after Barnabas came from the Twelve to direct the Antioch Gentiles. Silas likewise started the second mission after coming to Antioch from the Twelve with the Jerusalem council decision and could have been ordained an apostle.

The story of 1 Thessalonians is the story of what Paul did in the weeks after leaving the converts after Jason's mobbing. Slipping away at night, Paul and Silas left Thessalonica and went forty miles west to the next main city, Berea, where they entered the synagogue and made converts as they had done at Thessalonica. But Jewish enemies from that city followed the missionaries to cause trouble, and when the people at Berea were "stirred up" (Acts 17:13), Paul left for Athens, as surveyed in the previous chapter. He fully expected to return to Thessalonica from Berea, since he wrote that he would have returned before going to Athens, "but Satan hindered us" (1 Thes. 2:18). Paul did what he could to nurture the new converts in the unforeseen need to go two hundred and fifty miles away: "Silas and Timothy remained there" (Acts 17:14, NKJB), an Acts sentence referring to the general area of Berea. But Paul added a detail in writing, saying that he "thought it good to be left in Athens alone, and sent Timothy" to Thessalonica (1 Thes. 3:1-2, NKJB). Yet Paul's plan to send Timothy would logically be developed before leaving for Athens, avoiding the strange result of taking his companion to Athens only to send him back because he had not made up his mind before. Since Acts has Paul come to Athens alone and send for his companions, the best reconstruction is to have Paul plan to leave, sending Timothy to Thessalonica before departing from Berea, and probably keeping Silas at Berea. Thus, both sets of new converts would be supervised in Paul's absence.

As indicated earlier, Paul's stay in Athens was dramatic but not fruitful. Depressed at first by the city full of idols, he sent word back for "Silas and Timothy to come to him with all speed" (Acts 17:15, NKJB). But in the meantime he completed what he intended at Athens and went west fifty miles to Corinth, political and economic capital of southern Greece. There, Silas and Timothy arrived "from Macedonia" (Acts 18:5). Paul opens his first letter to the Thessalonian converts with gratitude that they are strong in the gospel. His concern shows how important following through is in all leadership in the Church and family. Timothy was sent "to establish you, and to comfort you concerning your faith" (1 Thes. 3:2, italics added). The italicized words are not strong enough in today's English—Timothy was to "strengthen" (sterizo) and to "encourage" (parakaleo). All Christian religions see the importance of faith, but Paul knew that without continuing leadership, faith could fail. So after assigning Timothy to build up faith, he was anxious to receive a report. He repeats his concern twice: he could "no longer forbear" (1 Thes. 3:1, 5, italics added) to wait at Athens without news. Again, the italicized word is traditional but inadequate; Paul says that he could no longer "endure" the suspense (stego). He worried that conversion would be pointless if they failed to follow through. But the two companions came from northern Greece with "good news of [their] faith" (1 Thes. 3:6, NKJB), at which point the apostle penned gratitude and further encouragement to strengthen that faith. Such circumstances show the incompleteness of mere belief in Christ. The sequence appears on the chart on the next page. (For a discussion of dating, see appendix A.)

Main Teachings

The Meaning of Conversion

"For our gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance" (1 Thes. 1:5). Recounting his preaching at Thessalonica, Paul also reviewed the courage of those receiving "the word in much affliction, with joy of the Holy Ghost" (1 Thes. 1:6). The blend of joy and persecution challenges all who are comfortably converted, for in Greece great spiritual power was generated in conflict. Paul said that the Thessalonians became his and the Lord's "followers," a term (mimetes) that specifically means "imitator" in Greek literature. Paul wrote with years of experience in facing antagonism, rejection, and violence. And the new Christians proved themselves worthy of such leaders and of Christ himself in making their love for the gospel first and what might happen to them secondary. Modern missionaries know many who reverse these priorities—converted but cowardly. Such decisions for the Lord are not easy, but the Saints' intense love for one another is increased by their suffering together for the high ideals of the kingdom. Paul alluded to the first persecutions of Peter and the early disciples after the Resurrection. The Thessalonians faced a similar trial by becoming "imitators" (the same word as above) of the Judean "churches"; they "suffered like things of your own countrymen, even as they have of the Jews" (1 Thes. 2:14). And this example powerfully aided Paul in his work in southern Greece, which he calls "Achaia," the technical name for that province. Thus in north and south, the Thessalonians' sacrifices declared the gospel without words (1 Thes. 1:7-9).

The Writing of First Thessalonians:

Background in Acts and the Letter

Acts 1 Thessalonians

17:10: "And the brethren immediately 2:17: "Being taken from you a short

sent away Paul and Silas by night time in presence"

unto Berea"

17:13-14: "But when the Jews of 2:18: "We would have come unto you,

Thessalonica . . . stirred up the even I Paul, once and again; but

people . . . the brethren sent away Satan hindered us"

Paul to go . . . to the sea"

17:14: "But both Silas and Timothy 3:1-2: "We thought it good to be

remained there" (NKJB) left at Athens alone"; Timothy sent

"to comfort you concerning your

faith"

17:15: Those conducting Paul 3:5: "When I could no longer endure

"brought him to Athens; and it, I sent to know your faith, lest

receiving a command for Silas and by some means the tempter had

Timothy to come to him with all tempted you, and our labor might be

speed, they departed" (NKJB) in vain" (NKJB)

18:1, 5: "Paul departed from 3:6-7: "But now that Timothy has

Athens, and came to Corinth. . . . come to us from you, and brought us

Silas and Timothy were come from good news of your faith . . . we

Macedonia" were comforted" (NKJB)

Missionary Leadership

Paul dedicated his life and then gave his life for the reality of his visions and the certainty of the life to come. His testimony rings true because he shares his inmost convictions that honest people must recognize. There is a close correlation between Paul's discourse in the Thessalonian synagogue in Acts and his sketch of his message and feelings in giving it. Reasoning out of the scriptures, Paul declared "that Christ must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead; and that this Jesus, whom I preach unto you, is Christ" (Acts 17:3). The angry mob searched for him because these words reached so many. In writing, Paul told the Thessalonians that he knew the cost of plain words because of his recent experience at Philippi, where he had been publicly beaten. But that did not make him more cautious, for at Thessalonica "we were bold in our God to speak unto you the gospel of God with much contention" (1 Thes. 2:2). His only fear was failing to fill a divine commission: "But just as we have been approved by God to be trusted with the gospel, so we speak, not as pleasing men, but God, who proves our hearts" (1 Thes. 2:4, literal trans.). When in Paul's life did he waver from that attitude? When did he ask odds of a world pouring out scorn and physical abuse? When did he show an ounce of self-doubt about his calling? Paul was a thinking, functioning, productive person. There can be no reasonable question about his sanity. So one studying him must face a life that points to the visions motivating and sustaining him. This feat was accomplished in a world where he and his fellow apostles could rarely meet to sustain each other. His leadership was the leadership of the Lord, who called and directed him. He knew that past persecutions would be repeated. "We told you before," he reminded the Thessalonians, "that we would suffer tribulation, just as it happened, and you know" (1 Thes. 3:4, NKJB). That was the apostles' calling, as the Savior told the original Twelve. Their total sincerity is written in their willing suffering for the truth.

Most of Paul's letters have substantial sections that are personal, not doctrinal. Paul was certainly capable of writing long letters on the vast gospel message, but his converts did not need a total diet of celestial truths as much as they needed a sustaining relationship with their file leader in the priesthood. In short, Paul's goal in writing the new members was brotherhood, not brilliance. This approach casts much light on what Jesus meant in telling and retelling Peter to feed his sheep. A little before that conversation after the Resurrection, Jesus simply said that the great evidence of the gospel is not logic but the inspired love that Church members have for one another: "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another" (John 13:35). Paul says so much about his gratitude for the wonderful news that the Thessalonians were still faithful; about half the letter speaks in some way to this point. Thus, 1 Thessalonians preserves valuable doctrine and an invaluable example. Paul's concern teaches today's leaders to communicate and in those communications to personally express the righteous feelings of their hearts. And Paul's concern was not just an occasional letter to those he led. He planned to revisit them when possible (1 Thes. 3:11), but while absent he prayed "night and day" for their progress in the faith (1 Thes. 3:10). Sincere love begets sincere prayers, so Church members were to "pray without ceasing" (1 Thes. 5:17) for themselves, their families, their brothers and sisters in the faith, and their leaders: "pray for us" (1 Thes. 5:25). Old and new scriptures command teaching one another, to which must be added helping one another and praying for one another.

Church Standards of Living

New Church members who "turned to God from idols" (1 Thes. 1:9) also turned from a worldly to a godly life. Midway through and closing 1 Thessalonians, Paul reminded them of the high standards of Christlike living. "The will of God" for Church members is their "sanctification" (1 Thes. 4:3), a term meaning "holiness" that will be explored in depth later. Step one toward that goal, Paul says, is to "abstain from fornication" (1 Thes. 4:3). Nine of Paul's fourteen letters have direct instruction on this subject, as did the apostles' letter that Gentile converts must "abstain . . . from fornication" (Acts 15:29). The term in Greek (porneia) refers to unlawful sexual intercourse for single or married people. Thus, the Early Church commanded sexual self-control. Man-made religion had no such standard, but the apostles taught God's way. Paul added the command that each use "his own vessel in sanctification and honor, not in passion of lust, like the Gentiles who do not know God" (1 Thes. 4:3-4, NKJB). Some modern translations substitute "wife" for "vessel," an inaccurate idea; the Greek means "vessel," a household jar or any equipment, its regular New Testament use. But a person can be the instrument of God—Paul was a "chosen vessel" (Acts 9:15). Thus, one's "vessel" is his person. Each body is a tool for its owner, who is commanded to control it righteously. One freer translation interprets Paul's thought in this way: "Each one of you must learn to gain mastery over his body" (1 Thes. 4:4, NEB).

Paul reminds the Thessalonians of a number of other gospel ideals: honesty, respect for other children of God, "brotherly love," forgiveness, self-reliance, helping the needy, and cultivating spiritual gifts. Like other letters, 1 Thessalonians closes with encouragement to seek good and to avoid every evil. But Paul did not attempt to catalog every duty, for their appointed leaders would be counselors and guides in their progress in gospel living. The Early Church was serious about the moral development of each convert, so it was also serious about the need of having and respecting priesthood leaders: "And we urge you, brethren, to recognize those who labor among you, and are over you in the Lord and admonish you, and to esteem them very highly in love for their work's sake" (1 Thes. 5:12-13, NKJB).

Resurrection and Christ's Coming

Before closing his letter, Paul answered a problem that the missionaries communicated from Thessalonica. It concerned deceased loved ones and their status in the Resurrection. Paul began by correcting any ignorance about those "which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope" (1 Thes. 4:13). This telling contrast of Christian faith and ancient agnosticism shows another higher standard preached by the missionaries. A little before Paul there was Catullus, a sophisticated and educated Italian poet, an example of the young man who had everything that his culture could offer. Writing verse to his lover "Lesbia," he sought for gentle pleasure now, for "When once our brief light sets, there is only the sleep of eternal night." But Paul told both the Thessalonians and Corinthians that Christ's sure resurrection meant that those who "sleep in Jesus will God bring with him" (1 Thes. 4:14). What is the place of dead loved ones at Christ's coming? Some form of this question was the Thessalonians' problem, for Paul's words translate, "For this we say to you by the word of the Lord, that we who are alive and remain until the coming of the Lord will by no means precede those those who are asleep" (1 Thes. 4:15, NKJB). Paul uses a common Greek verb (phthano) with the basic meaning of "be first." Thus, the King James Version uses an obsolete Latinism—the living "shall not prevent them which are asleep" means that the living shall not "come before" (pre [before] plus venio [come]) the dead.

In what way could the living "come before" or have a better status than the dead? There is no objective answer, but the logic of the question is revealing to Latter-day Saints, for no hint is given that the Thessalonians doubted the Resurrection—when the Corinthians later did, Paul wrote one of the longest and most passionate New Testament chapters on their inconsistencies. So the Thessalonians' worry about the status of their dead must not stem from doubt that they would be resurrected. Their worry must have been about how they would come forth. Paul goes on to speak of the glorious coming of the dead "in Christ" first, with those on earth afterward caught up to meet them. But who would seriously ask in what order the living or dead come forth on resurrection day, since they share eternal glory at nearly the same time? If the Thessalonians would not be worried about the Christian dead, what about the immense problem of their relatives who died before the gospel arrived? Would they come forth afterward, in the last resurrection? (1 Cor. 15:23-24.) We do not know their precise concerns, but this is the most logical area for their serious questions. In 1 Corinthians 15, baptism for the dead was associated closely with the Resurrection in Paul's mind, and the acceptance of the gospel by the dead may be suggested in 1 Thessalonians 4. Peter mentions preaching the gospel in the spirit prison (1 Pet. 3:18-20); Paul could refer to prior teachings that those not hearing of Christ on earth may hear after death and be "in Christ" by the time of the Resurrection.

No description exceeds Paul's of the dramatic moment of the glorious coming of the Lord. Here and in 1 Corinthians 15 is mentioned the piercing call of the "trump of God"; there is also the "voice of the archangel"—literally the mighty "ruling angel" (1 Thes. 4:16). [^2] Paul refuses to discuss the "times and the seasons" (1 Thes. 5:1), the same language the Lord used to tell the Twelve that it was not for them to know the timetable of the restoration of Israel and of his second coming (Acts 1:6-7). But Paul vividly outlines how unprepared the world will be when "the day of the Lord" bursts through mortal walls "as a thief in the night" (1 Thes. 5:2). Yet that brilliant day is not something to be feared, Paul assures his brothers and sisters, for "ye are . . . the children of the day" (1 Thes. 5:5), preparing for "salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us, that, whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him" (1 Thes. 5:9-10).

This last verse says that Paul does not know whether or not he or the Thessalonians will be alive at Christ's coming. Yet many commentators ignore this for the urgency of the earlier language: "We which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord" (1 Thes. 4:15). But that is only a manner of speaking, not prophecy, since Paul so plainly avoided speculating on when Christ would return. Describing the same scene later, Paul spoke of "they that are Christ's at his coming" (1 Cor. 15:23). Joseph Smith avoided any misleading impression by revising 1 Thes. 4:15 to read, "They who are alive at the coming of the Lord" (JST).

---
Notas:
[^1] Strabo, Geography 7.7.4 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^2] Ibid.
