Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul ( 1983)

2 THESSALONIANS

Profile

Sent from: Paul, at Corinth, joined by Timothy and Silvanus (Silas).

Sent to: New members at Thessalonica, largest city in northern Greece.

Date: Probably midyear in A.D. 50.

Purpose: To correct the belief that Christ would come soon and to motivate members not to use Christ's coming as an excuse for idleness.

Main themes: Christ's coming and judgment; the imminent apostasy; the commandment to work.

Background

The City

See the sketch under First Thessalonians.

Church Members

The Thessalonians' conversion and first communication with Paul was discussed under 1 Thessalonians. Why were they singled out for a second letter above the other two Macedonian churches? One answer is that the Thessalonians had problems that did not exist at Philippi or Berea, the other northern groups described in Acts. It is also possible that Paul was speaking to all those Saints through the Thessalonian letters, since Thessalonica lay between the other two and the traveling distance was not great either way. The Thessalonians lived in the commercial and political center of the province and were possibly the largest Macedonian church. Thus, Thessalonica may have been the stake center or location of regional Church authority in northern Greece. What Paul sent to Thessalonica was surely shared with the other two major churches in their area. Ships from this port city made regular trips to Corinthian harbors, the busiest in southern Greece, where Paul stayed to preach.

Reason for Writing

The Thessalonians had a doctrinal problem as well as a practical problem growing out of it. Silas and Timothy had joined Paul at Corinth (Acts 18:5), and Paul immediately sent his first letter back to the Thessalonians, perhaps by one of these companions. At some point word came back from the north that the Thessalonians were "shaken in mind" with the false idea that Christ would come in the very near future (2 Thes. 2:2). Paul wrote that they were "soon" or "quickly" shaken, so a short time had passed since Paul had been with them. Thus, Paul was still at Corinth, where he continued to preach for some two years (Acts 18:11, 18). From there he authored a letter of correction and instruction. Appendix A shows that Paul arrived at Corinth about the beginning of the year A.D. 50. He wrote 2 Thessalonians some time later, after several communications had gone back and forth between southern and northern Greece.

You must not be troubled, Paul insisted, "by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand" (2 Thes. 2:2). This very literal translation incorporates the Greek "as," which removes the responsibility for an idea away from the writer. Paul says that the idea of Christ's immediate coming is not his: "as if from us" (NKJB), "purporting" (RSV, NEB) or "supposed to have come from us" (NIV). But there are two possibilities. Paul does not deny writing a letter but denies writing a letter that says that the coming of the Lord is near. Some commentators imagine a forged letter, linking that idea with Paul's own signature at the end of 2 Thessalonians, his proof of authenticity "in every epistle" (2 Thes. 3:17). But instead of proving an earlier forged letter, these words show that Paul regularly signed to identify his views plainly. Indeed, Paul names a letter and two other options as the source of this notion of an imminent Second Coming. What was quoted above can be paraphrased: "Wherever you learned this false concept, it is wrong, whether from someone's prophecy [by spirit], or from someone's preaching [by word], or by letter misread to mean that such doctrine came from us." If Paul knew of a forged letter, he would likely have said so instead of generalizing about an atmosphere of excitement that included the use of his name. This sounds more like a false interpretation of 1 Thessalonians than a forged letter.

Paul earlier described Christ's coming in this way: "For when they say, 'Peace and safety!' then sudden destruction comes on them" (1 Thes. 5:3, NKJB). The Greek "sudden" (aiphnidios) basically means "unforeseen" or "unexpected." But "sudden" does not here mean "soon"—Paul had used no time estimate in teaching about Christ's appearance. Thus he wrote again to the Thessalonians to explain clearly that the apostasy would come first. But Paul worried about more than false ideas, for misconceptions breed wrong actions. In this case, Paul identified the problem while answering it: "For we hear that some of you are living in idleness, mere busybodies, not doing any work" (2 Thes. 3:11, RSV). In Greek there is a play on words between working (ergazomai) and working aimlessly (periergazomai), which some translations try to reproduce: "They are not busy; they are busybodies" (2 Thes. 3:11, NIV.)

Main Teachings

Christ's Coming and Judgment

The letter on Christ's second coming starts with a broad panorama of it, for Paul's message is not that the coming is unimportant but that certain events and preparations must precede it. Paul wrote that "the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ" (2 Thes. 1:7-8). Here the apostle sums up a basic doctrine linked in language and idea with the Savior's own testimony of it: "For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his works" (Matt. 16:27). The point of knowing of the coming of the Lord is to be ready for his judgment, whenever it occurs. That view contradicts the attitude of passive waiting criticized by Paul at the end of this letter. What works prepare one for judgment? At Athens Paul answered generally by declaring God's command to "all men every where to repent" before Christ "will judge the world in righteousness" (Acts 17:30-31). Jesus counseled the Twelve specifically after opening the future "when the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him" (Matt. 25:31). There on the Mount of Olives he emphasized feeding and clothing and fellowshipping. Paul's letters were all written to prepare the early Saints for judgment. The book of Romans, the great epistle on grace, also begins with a vivid picture of judgment and the need to prepare for it, later adding detailed instructions on Christian living. Paul weaves faith in and out of his Thessalonian letters, but always against the pattern of action. He prays that God will strengthen the Saints "in every good word and work" (2 Thes. 2:17) and makes them responsible to bring this about. Judgment implies freedom to make choices, so the goal of Paul's letters is stronger faith plus righteous action. Joseph Smith put that same burden on Latter-day Saints in teaching that the horizon of death should "prove as a warning to all men to deal justly before God and with all men—then we shall be clean in the day of judgment." [^1]

The Imminent Apostasy

Paul reviews the false belief that "the day of Christ is at hand" (2 Thes. 2:2). Replacing it with the truth, Paul insists that there must "come a falling away first" (2 Thes. 2:3, italics added). In Greek, "falling away" is apostasia, derived from "standing" and "away" in the sense of evading and opposing authority. Closely related is stasis, a central word in Greek history that often had the same meaning of standing alone in civil war. And Josephus uses the related apostasia to describe the Jewish uprising against Rome. [^2] Thus, modern translators have Paul speak of a "great revolt" (JB) or "rebellion" (RSV, NEB, NIV) that must precede Christ's coming. Paul, of course, means a religious departure, just as the Greek translation of the Old Testament uses apostasia for a hypothetical "rebellion" of all Israel against God (Josh. 22:22). In Paul's prophecy God is openly opposed by "that man of sin" (2 Thes. 2:3), so careful commentators do not treat the coming "apostasy" as just a minor thorn in the side of Christianity. A Roman Catholic translation has "mass apostasy" (NAB), and seasoned Protestant scholars talk of a "worldwide rebellion"; [^3] it is unmodified by Paul and therefore total: "By and large, the visible Church will forsake the true faith." [^4]

But Christian scholars do not think of Paul's prophecy as undermining Catholic or Protestant churches, because they generally view the prophecy as yet to be fulfilled just before Christ's coming. It is true that Paul foresaw Christ coming to end the worldwide apostasy (2 Thes. 2:8), but that does not prove that the apostasy was at a late hour in Christian history. Although Paul said the apostasy would come in its time (2 Thes. 2:6), he defined the time as beginning then, saying "The mystery of iniquity is already working" (2 Thes. 2:7, literal trans.). Paul wrote to get the Thessalonians to face their problems and quit daydreaming about the future. The Second Coming was not at hand; their real worry was the apostasy. Paul said that he had stood in their midst and "told you these things" (2 Thes. 2:5). Commentators regret that what Paul spoke personally about this has been lost. [^5] But what was important enough to explain in his first brief stay at Thessalonica would likely crop up again. And it did when Paul stood before the Ephesian elders to warn, "After my departure savage wolves will come in among you, not sparing the flock" (Acts 20:29, NKJB). Thus, Paul's typical speech about the coming apostasy was not about the distant future, but about dangers then threatening the Church: "Therefore watch, and remember that for three years I did not cease to warn everyone night and day with tears" (Acts 20:31, NKJB). What was vital at Ephesus must have been spoken at Thessalonica.

Paul's central symbol of the apostasy is the man of sin or lawlessness sitting "in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God" (2 Thes. 2:4). Pounds of pages have been written about this being the Jerusalem temple, but that would be destroyed within two decades and would have no one sitting in it. And what did that temple mean to the Greek Gentiles or even to apostles in terms of their own religion without Mosaic sacrifices? The real question is how Paul used the word temple in his writing. [^6] Almost always he used it figuratively—occasionally the body is a temple for God's Spirit, but usually the Church is the temple of God. The members ("ye," older plural English for the plural Greek) are "God's building" (1 Cor. 3:9), with Christ its foundation (1 Cor. 3:11), or, in summary, "the temple of God" (1 Cor. 3:16). Elsewhere Paul teaches about Christ as cornerstone, apostles as foundation, and members fitting into their places as a "holy temple in the Lord" (Eph. 2:21). And in one of his last letters, Paul still spoke of "the house of God, which is the church of the living God" (1 Tim. 3:15). Paul must define Paul, and his own words show that he was here referring to the Church.

The structure of the Church would remain, but the presence of God would depart. Paul warned at Ephesus that the false teachers would come from "your own selves"; leaders then hearing Paul would reverse the truth "to draw away disciples after them" (Acts 20:30). Thus, the Church would not disappear, but would be captured by the enemy. Who that enemy is need not be debated, for there is only one. Paul uses various terms that are appropriate names for Satan, the mastermind of evil. No wonder that John would soon say that the prophecy of the coming of "antichrist" was fulfilled, for "even now there are many antichrists. . . . They went out from us, but they were not of us" (1 Jn. 2:18-19). Despite centuries of theories about the identity of Paul's "Man of Sin," the New Testament leaders indicated no one but Satan with such power to oppose God.

Common sense demands that prophecies be integrated, not isolated, and the Lord's earlier words to the Twelve gave a sweep of events, of which Paul's concise sketch is part. Paul said the "lawless one" (2 Thes. 2:8, NKJB) would show "signs and lying wonders" (2 Thes. 2:9). And Jesus earlier said there would be "false Christs and false prophets" who would show "great signs and wonders," and that, if possible, "they shall deceive the very elect" (Matt. 24:24). Both surveyed the same era of apostasy, with the difference that Christ stressed the many under Satan's influence, while Paul stressed the source—the "lying wonders" would be "after the working of Satan" (2 Thes. 2:9). In Jesus' prediction, the era of apostasy would be preceded by the era of apostles. But they would be hated and killed (Matt. 24:9), and Jerusalem would be destroyed (Matt. 24:15-16). And right after these first-century events would come "great tribulation" (Matt. 24:21); then men would seek the true Christ in vain (Matt. 24:23) but find only false teachers and their false wonders (Matt. 24:24). Paul explains this transition between two eras more obscurely. Something "withholds," or more accurately in modern translations "restrains" (2 Thes. 2:6). In the next verse the same Greek term is translated as "lets," but this also means "restrains." [^7] In terms of Jesus' prophecy, the true apostles restrain or delay the coming of the false ones. But this insight is incidental to the great point of both prophecies—that the truth and true authority held by the apostles would disappear until God would once again show his power in the latter-day events surrounding the Second Coming.

The Commandment to Work

Paul closes 2 Thessalonians with words of command (2 Thes. 3:4), expressing strong feelings about the report that "some" were idly wasting their time, "working not at all" (2 Thes. 3:11). As mentioned, Paul opened the letter by stressing the moral responsibility to prepare for the Second Coming. He knew that lazy thinking brought lazy waiting for God to care for everything. But the Early Church taught a morality of money. Paul insists on the Lord's way in specific "commands" on working for a living. Such language elevates practical affairs to high ethical responsibility. One verbal parallel is the earlier language of the Ten Commandments, containing specific instructions on property in the commands not to steal (Ex. 20:15) and not to covet (Ex. 20:17). Paul spoke for the Early Church in explaining the duty to be industrious and shoulder one's share of the cost of life. It is part of the New Testament perspective of coming to earth for a purpose and therefore receiving time as a stewardship.

Paul's "commands" use the terms of Greek military and court orders. He gave the first one when preaching at Thessalonica: "This we commanded you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat" (2 Thes. 3:10). That bluntly states the ideal held up to new converts—not social seclusion but financial responsibility: "Aspire to lead a quiet life, to mind your own business, and to work with your own hands, as we commanded you, that you may walk properly toward those who are outsiders, and that you may lack nothing" (1 Thes. 4:11-12, NKJB). Self-reliance is so important that Paul later "commanded" the Thessalonians "in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ" to avoid the person who would not work for a living (2 Thes. 3:6). The traditional translation of "withdraw" is too strong, for Paul returned to the point, saying that the lazy person should not be treated as an "enemy" but admonished "as a brother" (2 Thes. 3:14-15). Church membership would not be withdrawn, but idlers were not worthy of full fellowship, partly to avoid the danger of others being drawn to an aimless life. Appealing directly to the offenders, Paul again used his authority: "We command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work, and eat their own bread" (2 Thes. 3:12).

Paul also taught by example in Thessalonica: "Nor did we eat anyone's bread free of charge, but worked with labor and toil night and day, that we might not be a burden to any of you" (2 Thes. 3:8, NKJB). This labor was going on while "we preached unto you the gospel of God" (1 Thes. 2:9). He wrote these letters while he still continued his tentmaking work at Corinth, for Acts describes it (Acts 18:1-3), and Paul vigorously told the Corinthians that he was never a financial burden to them (2 Cor. 11:9). Of course, he accepted the hospitality of Lydia at Philippi and gifts of support from time to time, for he knew how to receive as well as to give. But through his incredible example of working while teaching, he proved that he was on the Lord's errand of helping people spiritually, not profiting from them financially. [^8] This practice continued through the third mission at Ephesus, for Paul reviewed his time there with the eloquence of action: "I desired no one's silver or gold or clothing. You yourselves know that these hands served my needs and the needs of those with me. In everything I showed you that by thus laboring, you must help the weak and remember the words of the Lord Jesus. For he said, 'It is more blessed to give than to receive'" (Acts 20:33-35, literal trans.).

These words catch the impact of a principle spoken from the soul of one who had made it his own. They show that insistence on work was taught on the level of what each could do, for sustaining those in need was a core principle in Paul's philosophy and in the regular welfare contributions of the Early Church. "If any would not work, neither should he eat" (2 Thes. 3:10, italics added) is treated as a common motto by commentators, but it may well have been an operating rule measuring when to give help. It sounds like a curt formula, "No working, no eating," but the italicized "would" is a separate Greek verb, meaning "to desire" or "to want to." Paul is saying that one should not eat if he is unwilling to work; he is speaking to those who can but do not.

Administrative problems of welfare are later discussed in 1 Timothy 5. All these passages show that a church not concerned with the morality of earning and the charity of sharing does not have the full philosophy and program of the Early Church. Paul quoted a saying of Jesus that it is more blessed to give than to receive (Acts 20:35). Although Paul applied this to working with his hands, living that principle made him the great missionary that he was.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Strabo, Geography 7.7.4 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^2] Ibid.
[^3] See the summary in James Hope Moulton and George Milligan, The Vocabulary of the Greek Testament (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1980), p. 525. Compare William F. Arndt et al., Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979), p. 686.
[^4] Catullus 5:5-6: "cum semel occidit brevis lux, nox est perpetua una dormienda."
[^5] The only other "archangel" reference in the New Testament is to "Michael the archangel" (Jude 1:9). The equivalent Old Testament concept is "Michael the prince," who labors for Israel in the events just before the second resurrection (Dan. 12:1-2). Similarly, in modern revelation "Michael, mine archangel, shall sound his trump" before the second resurrection (D&C 29:26). He is "Michael, or Adam, the father of all, the prince of all, the ancient of days" (D&C 27:11).
[^6] The word translated "idleness" in the RSV is translated "disorderly" in the King James Version (ataktos). It fundamentally means "out of ranks" or "out of order" but was used in ancient apprenticeship contracts of not keeping a promise to work a certain number of days a year. George Milligan, St. Paul's Epistles to the Thessalonians (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1953), pp. 153-54.
[^7] Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, The Words of Joseph Smith (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), p. 113.
[^8] Josephus, Life of Josephus 43 (Loeb Classical Library).
