Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul ( 1983)

5

Letters of Reconversion

"Moreover, brethren, I declare to you the gospel which I preached to you . . . by which also you are saved, if you hold fast that word which I preached to you—unless you have believed in vain" (1 Cor. 15:1-2, NKJB). In these words Paul virtually wrote his own introduction to the Corinthian letters. The Saints at Corinth had believed, prospered, and divided, with parties opposing Paul and many doctrines he had taught. Because Paul had to correct so much, he wrote more to Corinth than to any other branch on record. The two Corinthian letters contain more than a fourth of the content of all fourteen of Paul's letters. They include much interaction—answers to letters, references to the faithfulness and unfaithfulness of the Saints, even quotations from skeptics and critics in connection with Paul's replies. Hence, these letters candidly picture a troubled branch of the Church and Paul's logical and spiritual convictions in response.

First Corinthians is Paul's most valuable letter of reconversion. His follow-up letter also has great personal and practical insights, but 1 Corinthians contains an incredible range of doctrine. Here we see the essence of the true Church in its revelation, inspired organization, and knowledge of the life to come. Although Galatians and Hebrews are also reconversion letters, they are more specialized. They are really deconversion letters against Jewish interpretations of Christ. But the Corinthian letters, particularly 1 Corinthians, cover Christ's mission plus a broad spectrum equaled by few of Paul's letters. So 1 Corinthians is treated in unusual detail because it furnishes unusual detail on Christian beliefs and practices. Most of what Paul taught in all the letters is set on larger foundations in 1 Corinthians. By thoroughly repreaching the gospel, Paul in 1 Corinthians gives special insight into what was commonly believed by the Church members to whom Paul's many special letters were written.

1 CORINTHIANS

Profile

Sent from: Paul, at Ephesus, joined by Sosthenes.

Sent to: Members at Corinth, provincial capital of southern Greece.

Date: Not long after the Passover, about A.D. 57.

Purpose: To correct dissension in that branch, to correct many wrong beliefs and actions, and to prepare them for Paul's future visit.

Main themes: Appeal for unity; revelation and man's wisdom; Paul's apostleship; sexual standards; marriage questions; true and false worship; Church organization and spiritual gifts; pure love; the Resurrection.

Background

The City

Paul's Corinth still stretches under Greek skies and looks down on the blue water of the Corinthian gulf. Some of its marble remains come from later periods of remodeling, but the site has not changed much, thanks to the resettlement of the modern village so that archaeologists could continue to unravel the past. Paul looked up at the Acrocorinth, the blocky mountain watching over the city, which in pre-Roman times was a nearly invincible fortress. The visitor today can walk into the small museum and see the stone block that sat over the doorway of the Jewish synagogue. Half of the letters are intact, reading "Synagogue of the Hebrews" in rough cuts that could easily date to Paul's time. Back in the main marketplace, he can look at the long stone platform that was probably where the new governor sat when Paul was accused before his tribunal.

When Corinth was alive, it flexed powerful muscles. Strabo said that it was "always great and wealthy." [^1] Rome made southern Greece into the province of Achaia and made Corinth its capital, as readers know from the Gallio incident in Acts. Trade passed to and from the southern section of Greece through a Corinthian funnel, and cargoes to and from Italy were regularly routed through Corinth in days when ships navigated near the shores rather than risked open sea. Thus, Paul was at a communications center while at Corinth and was accessible to Corinth in his Asia Minor stay afterward. The city was a few miles from the narrow passage where Mediterranean waters nearly turned the south into an island. This land bridge was about five miles wide, and today a straight-cut canal makes it unnecessary to ship around dangerous southern shores, saving miles of circuitous travel. In Paul's day cargoes and small ships were pulled across this isthmus. This symbolizes Corinth's prosperity, which Strabo said came because "it is situated on the isthmus and is master of two harbors, the one leading straight to Asia and the other to Italy." [^2]

This trade center was also a center of wickedness, as 1 Corinthians clearly shows. In its early success, the Greeks coined a verb "Corinthize," meaning to enjoy worldly pleasures. The big cities of the Roman Empire were like today's big cities in offering the best and the worst, though there was no general Christianity then to temper society. The Romans had destroyed Corinth in the Greek wars, but it was refounded a century before Paul with a strong Roman influence—first-century inscriptions are heavily Latin. Ancient sources picture a city with the vitality and seductiveness of the Chicago pictured by Carl Sandburg's poem. Immorality problems are more visible in 1 Corinthians than in any other letter of Paul except that to Rome itself. Plutarch attacked predatory bankers, and those from Corinth led the list. [^3] Yet the existence of bad society does not make all society bad. The Lord stood before Paul in vision and commanded him to stay and gather his people out of this worldly center. Because Corinth has so many parallels to any major modern city, what Paul wrote to the Corinthians has great relevance to Saints today.

Church Members

Acts 18 describes Paul's conversions at Corinth on the second mission. He bore plain testimony and left the synagogue when Silas and Timothy first came from Macedonia. Crispus, the "chief ruler of the synagogue" had been converted "with all his house" (Acts 18:8), and Paul baptized him (1 Cor. 1:14). The rich harvest followed in which "many of the Corinthians hearing believed, and were baptized" (Acts 18:8). Several gave possessions and time to the work. Justus was a devout Gentile who also left the synagogue and opened his neighboring home as a meeting place (Acts 18:7). Paul's missionary companion Erastus was apparently from Corinth. He was sent with Timothy back to Greece on the third mission (Acts 19:22) and remained at Corinth at the end (2 Tim. 4:20). Perhaps he was the official thought to be "treasurer [oikonomos] of the city" at Corinth, from which Paul sent Romans (Rom. 16:23, NKJB). An inscription at the large Corinthian theater mentions an Erastus that donated the pavement when he was aedile, a secondary civic office. It is tempting to see the same man in all of the above.

Paul also baptized two others. Gaius (1 Cor. 1:14) was perhaps the "host" when Paul later visited Corinth (Rom. 16:23). Paul also baptized "the household of Stephanas" (1 Cor. 1:16). The apostle insisted that they be recognized as "the firstfruits of Achaia, and that they have devoted themselves to the ministry of the saints" (1 Cor. 16:15, NKJB). If his family had shared service positions, Stephanas stands out as one with presiding authority in Corinth. For Paul uses the masculine pronoun next with these words—"so you may also be subject to such men and to each fellow-laborer and worker" (1 Cor. 16:16, literal trans.). Wherever there are adequate sources, local priesthood officers emerge, with Paul encouraging the Saints to support them. The character of the Corinthian branch can be appreciated only by reading the Corinthian letters. Some ridiculed Paul, promoted factions in their branch, aggressively dominated the meetings, and doubted major doctrine. Paul's patient but firm leadership is constant in his Corinthian letters. Here was a branch in need of strong local and general authorities.

Reason for Writing

First Corinthians was not the first letter to the Corinthians. Their earliest known problem is bluntly stated: "I wrote to you in my letter not to fellowship sexual transgressors" (1 Cor. 5:9, literal trans.). So problems of living gospel standards went along with problems of doctrine. One could expect as much from their worldly environment. When Paul first wrote to the Corinthians, he was probably at Ephesus, due east across the Aegean, for in Acts he left Corinth to visit Jerusalem and returned to Ephesus to begin the third mission. He was still there when writing 1 Corinthians, for he sent greetings from "the churches of Asia," the province of Ephesus; and he intended to "tarry" (epimeno) in Ephesus until Pentecost, after which he would visit the Greek churches (1 Cor. 16:5-8). (See appendix A for the date of these plans.) Paul received word from those sent by Chloe, evidently a woman of prominence, that there were factions in the Corinthian branch. Some were loyal to Paul and some to Cephas (Peter's Aramaic name; 1 Cor. 1:11-12; John 1:42). Peter had probably visited Corinth, since Paul talks about Peter's travels with his wife as being well known to the Corinthians (1 Cor. 9:5). A third group followed Apollos, the brilliant Jewish convert with Alexandrian polish, whose intense Corinthian missionary work is known (Acts 18:24-28, 19:1).

So there was deep dissension at Corinth, but it is important to see this lack of unity as really an authority problem. Is it an accident that most of the local leaders known at Corinth were then at Ephesus with Paul and joined to support his correction of the Corinthians? Apollos sent greetings but deflated his faction by staying to work with Paul in a clear showing of unity with the apostle (1 Cor. 16:12). Priscilla and Aquila, who had worked faithfully as missionaries with Paul before going to Ephesus, sent their greetings through Paul to Corinth (1 Cor. 16:19). The strange joining of Sosthenes with Paul in opening 1 Corinthians surely has some purpose. He is possibly the Jewish synagogue leader who was beaten by the anti-Semitic crowd when Paul was accused before the governor (Acts 18:17). Was he now converted and associated with Paul to show to the faction "of Cephas" that faithful Jewish converts should follow the apostle then in their region? Stephanas is identified in the above sketch of members, a leader to whom the Corinthians should "submit." He and two associates came to discuss Corinthian problems with Paul, for they were returning to the branch with Paul's command: "Give recognition to such men" (1 Cor. 16:18, RSV). Paul does not merely teach Christian unity in 1 Corinthians; unity must come through following local officers supervised by apostolic authority.

First Corinthians is a doctrinal gem, ranging through the ancient gospel with a scope unmatched by most of Paul's letters and equaled by only one or two. Were the Corinthians especially worthy of receiving such a letter? The opposite is the case, for the most faithful branches did not need reconversion. And 1 Corinthians is a letter detailing the basics that were disbelieved and giving testimony and evidence to bring the full truth again to the Corinthians. The letter is so specific because the Corinthians were so confused. One can hear Paul preaching in 1 Corinthians better than in any other place except Acts. He repreaches the Resurrection to doubters and repreaches sexual morality to those who had reverted to worldly ways. He takes modern readers into the meetings and homes of early Christians to correct their carelessness in eating meat of pagan sacrifice, not eating the Lord's Supper with reverence, and allowing zeal to run uncontrolled in open meetings. He answers doctrinal questions and shows that the ultimate answers to all these problems are true spirituality, respect for priesthood leaders, and Christlike love.

Main Teachings

Appeal for Unity

"Is Christ divided?" (1 Cor. 1:13.) That searching question demands a look at Christ's goal for his Church. Setting apostles over it (Matt. 18:17-19) and naming a presiding prophet in their midst (Matt. 16:18-19), the Lord trained them carefully in leadership and at the end prayed for them and all the believers they would direct:

And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come unto thee. Holy Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we are. . . . As thou hast sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the world. . . . Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word—that they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me (John 17:11, 18, 20-21).

As chapter 1 of this book shows, a minority in the world believes in Jesus Christ, and the wrangling of Christians has certainly contributed to skepticism in the message and mission of the Master. Indeed, if the energy spent attacking other Christians had been seriously spent on uniting and teaching non-Christians, Christ's goal would have been much further along—"that the world may believe that thou hast sent me." For Paul, it is self-evident that a divided Church violates Christ's will.

Christ commissioned preaching to the nations and envisioned the unity of all converts under the apostles, but the apostles faced the practical era of putting these plans into operation. In Paul's case, there is not a letter without mention of the ideal of unity. One striking thing about his letters is how often problems of dissension arise and how firm he is in not allowing separations into different Christian groups. A dozen major verses elsewhere match his plea to the Corinthians "that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment" (1 Cor. 1:10). Christian leaders have immersed themselves in the Bible and know this. Their public regret at the loss of unity is as common as Paul's frequent insistence on God's requirement of unity. The problem is widely admitted, but the solution evades all.

Yet Paul did not raise major questions without giving clear answers. The solution to the problems of factions discussed in chapter 1 of 1 Corinthians is the Church's inspired central leadership discussed in chapter 12. Paul's answer is not harmonious with official Protestantism, which divided from Rome because it perceived in the Roman church central authority without inspiration. Latter-day Saints are now asking the world if God cannot bring together what history divided. Christ's prayer for unity included a special prayer for the inspired central leaders who would direct that unity. Without Paul the branches constantly fragmented. It was his work to resolve conflict—to direct, teach, and correct. He did not ask the Corinthians to debate differences in a church council or ecumenical conference. Unity would come by harmony with the apostles' doctrine and leadership.

However, many Christians read the Bible without seeing the original Church of Christ in it. They sometimes explain away baptism because it is a church ceremony, sometimes using Paul's words: "For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel" (1 Cor. 1:17). In this explanation, one is saved by believing the preaching of Christ, but baptism is secondary and nonessential. But what happened at all the cities of Greece in Acts 16 and Acts 18? Upon belief, Lydia and the jailor were baptized at Philippi, and the Corinthians "believed, and were baptized." Early Christians did not profess Christ and treat baptism as optional; for them, baptism was the commanded method of showing belief. Paul seems to minimize baptism for one reason—the Corinthians were using his personal baptisms to promote their factions. In these circumstances he did not reduce the importance of baptism, but the importance of who baptized them: "I thank God that I baptized none of you, but . . ." (1 Cor. 1:14). He readily remembered Crispus and Gaius, then recalled Stephanas's household, and faded away with not remembering "whether I baptized any other" (1 Cor. 1:16). He obviously made the point that whom he baptized was insignificant, but it indeed mattered that the Corinthians were baptized. Later he reviewed how one achieved salvation through the true Church, and the first step was baptism: "For by one Spirit we were all baptized into one body—whether Jews or Greeks, whether slaves or free" (1 Cor. 12:13, NKJB). If there were no exceptions, baptism was not optional. And Paul, the enemy of useless religious requirements, would not have taught "all" a principle unessential to salvation.

As Paul explained his relationship with Apollos, he said they were co-workers on the same building, God's temple or Church. He added the image of farming: "I have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase" (1 Cor. 3:6). Thus "he who plants and he who waters are one" (1 Cor. 3:8, NKJB), a verbal construction identical to Jesus' language, "I and my Father are one" (John 10:30).

There is no more biblical reason for merging the Father and Son than for thinking that Paul and Apollos physically merged. In his prayer for unity, already quoted, Jesus equated the oneness of believers with the oneness of the Father and Son. And at the end of 1 Corinthians, Paul teaches the glorious resurrection of individuals; so like the believers, the Father and the Son exist in glory now as individuals. Otherwise Paul could not sensibly close his plea for unity with the verbal separation of the Father and Son: "and ye are Christ's; and Christ is God's" (1 Cor. 3:23). If the members of the Godhead have achieved such intimate cooperation as individuals, the challenge of family and Church members to do the same also seems possible.

Revelation and Man's Wisdom

Unity requires humility. Indeed, Jesus said that one entering the Kingdom must "humble himself as this little child" (Matt. 18:3-4). Paul sought to humble the Corinthians for their own good, as the arrogance of some led them to dictate to God instead of being taught by him. Pride is the opposite of humility—pride of status, pride of wealth, and pride of having all the answers. The apostle who used his talents and intellectuality for the Lord did not teach the glory of ignorance, but he showed that man's highest knowledge, without revelation, falls short of preparing him for eternity. "Christ, and him crucified" (1 Cor. 2:2) was the beginning of his message, which blended with "Christ and him resurrected," as Paul says in 1 Corinthians 15. Paul reviewed the human scoffing at this revelation in order to warn the Corinthians against their own feelings of superiority to revealed doctrines. Men of great success tend to be too smug to accept the gospel, Paul observed; in modern terms, the highly educated, the powerful in business or government, and those born to privilege did not generally accept the gospel (1 Cor. 1:26). Paul gave a Thessalonian-like review of how he came to Corinth, a picture seen well either through the synagogue testimony beginning in Acts 18 or through Paul's memories beginning in 1 Corinthians 2. Paul did not preach with the skill of human persuasion, but by the power of God's Spirit, "that your faith should not be in the wisdom of men but in the power of God" (1 Cor. 2:5, NKJB).

This is no small point. At the beginning of a long letter of instruction, Paul went back over the Corinthians' belief in his message. Their Greek philosophy taught no resurrection; their native religion did not feature an atonement and the call to obey the first principles. The gospel came by revelation and had to be validated by the witness within. Faith and reason ultimately harmonize, but human reason knows little of the eternal dimension that the gospel brings. Paul used Isaiah's verbal picture of God's power and kingdom, which will transcend what eyes have seen and ears have heard (Isa. 64:4). People instinctively explore and inquire, reaching beyond their limited world through books, newspapers, television, radio, conversations with visitors, and travel. Eternity and its requirements can be learned only through these heavenly counterparts: scriptures, prophets, revelations of the spirit, angels, and visions. So Paul as a living prophet reminded the Corinthians that they must seek for the Holy Ghost to raise them above the ignorance of arrogance. Regarding the things of eternity, he wrote, "God has revealed them unto us by His Spirit. For the Spirit searches all things, yes, the deep things of God" (1 Cor. 2:10, NKJB). The whisperings of eternity are near the one with the Spirit. God's reality and God's will for that person are within reach. Those seeking a higher way will find constant refreshment and challenge in Paul's review of the power of the Holy Ghost in the second half of 1 Corinthians 2.

Paul's Apostleship

Several times in 1 Corinthians 4, Paul calls his detractors "puffed up," a Greek word meaning just that, inflated ego, filled with pride. Later in his defense he states his position vigorously (1 Cor. 9:1): "Am I not an apostle? am I not free? have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord?" Paul answered accusations of exploiting the Corinthians for his own gain, his point being that any apostle had the right to be supported by the Church, though he had not used that right out of his love for the Corinthians. The power of his apostleship stands out, for his revealed calling was so sure that "necessity is laid upon me" (1 Cor. 9:16); willingly or unwillingly, he was responsible for a "dispensation" (1 Cor. 9:17), a powerful word of delegation translated "stewardship" in the Gospels. Paul asked the Corinthians to whom stewards were accountable. He noted that priesthood leaders are "the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God" (1 Cor. 4:1). The Corinthians, Paul said, had no right to judge him, for "He who judges me is the Lord" (1 Cor. 4:4, NKJB). In the Early Church men were appointed to low and high office by divine authority, and apostleship was delegated from God. The agent was responsible to the one who appointed him. Thus, backbiting could not diminish Paul's right to come and set affairs in order (1 Cor. 4:21): "Shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love in the spirit of meekness?"

Modern revelation teaches the balance between divine authority and common consent. After Joseph Smith's death, Brigham Young presented himself and the Twelve to the Church for sustaining, saying that the people had the right to accept or reject their leadership, but that the Twelve had authority and would, if necessary, raise up a people elsewhere. [^4] Yet Christ's priesthood is delegated with his example of forthright but unselfish leadership. Paul later taught that pure love is constant, and he refused to be rejected by those he was called to lead. Although he criticized them, they were literally "his children" (tekna); he was their father in the gospel (1 Cor. 4:14-15). Parents are often hurt by rebelliousness and lack of appreciation by their children, but in that role Paul did not complain. He listed inconvenience, strain, and danger constantly suffered to bring the gospel to new souls. If they rejected him, he would speak plainly but not cease to love. He personifies the role of the priesthood (and by implication motherhood) repeatedly outlined by Jesus—the higher the office, the more generous the sacrifice of time and concern (Luke 22:26).

Sexual Morality

No one exceeds Paul in being candidly positive about sexual love in marriage (1 Cor. 7:1-6). But Paul unites with all true prophets in restricting sexual intercourse to marriage. Nothing so quickly brands today's man-made prophet as his permissiveness on sexual relations. Some politicians frequently place popularity over principle, disguising their compromises with noble words. So do some religious leaders who ignore, explain away, or dispense with the commandment of chastity as given through Moses and repeated by Christ and Paul and Joseph Smith in modern revelation. Another form of religious avoidance is teaching a standard of morality but looking the other way. The Early Church countered serious sexual transgression with action. Paul was shocked to hear of a case of incest and simply said that local leaders should meet and deliver the offender to Satan and his powers of "destruction of the flesh" (1 Cor. 5:5). The chapter later clarifies that as excommunication of "that wicked person" (1 Cor. 5:13); and later in life Paul spoke of two whom he had "delivered unto Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme" (1 Tim. 1:20).

This last phrase is the point, for consequences are lessons. Which churches today have a court system for serious transgressions? Which churches by their actions teach cheap forgiveness and repeated sin? In a half-dozen major places, Paul lists the sins that will keep one out of God's kingdom if unrepented, whether before or after conversion. Included are the major sins of dishonesty and physically or verbally harming one's fellowmen. And such lists never fail to include sexual relations outside of marriage. If God will really exclude the unrepentant on that basis, how honest is a church with its members if it will not? The false prophet is one who teaches a false expectation. The integrity of the Early Church and the restored Church is shown in their discipline of immorality in wise but firm court decisions on membership. Anything less misrepresents the kingdom of God. "Do you not know that the unrighteous will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived" (1 Cor. 6:9, NKJB). Paul then gives two terms for unlawful sex between man and woman and two for homosexuality. The King James Version frankly translates these latter words "effeminate" and "abusers of themselves with mankind." The former does not refer to the tender qualities of woman that might well be shared by men, but means "soft" with the connotation of a male perverted to a female role with other men. And the second word is bluntly "men lying with men." The current propaganda of self-justification avoids Paul's words here and in Romans 1.

With the logic of Christ, Paul's sternest chapter on sexual sins is also the most hopeful about repentance. After discussing the above sins and others that bar one from the kingdom of God, Paul refers to the repentant, buried past: "And such were some of you; but you were washed, but you were sanctified, but you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus and by the Spirit of our God" (1 Cor. 6:11, NKJB). The purifying forgiveness of Christ and sanctifying power of the Holy Ghost came only after baptism and was retained only through a moral life. Yet the astounding power of the gospel provides the path up from the valley of darkness. The invitation of the gospel is not condemnation but change. If some Corinthians were guilty of serious sins, were they in the Lord's mind when he told Paul to labor there at length because he had "much people in this city" (Acts 18:10)? Paul's ministry at Corinth is a sober warning to avoid immorality and a serious motivation to repair the damage done by it. Paul's blunt words to the Saints expose the inconsistency of incontinency and set an eternal value on sexual purity: "Your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you" (1 Cor. 6:19).

Marriage Questions

Paul's discussion of marriage is incomplete and was written for special circumstances, and the controversial half on unmarried or engaged women is labeled as Paul's opinion, not as a "commandment of the Lord" (1 Cor. 7:25). Joseph Smith throws refreshing perspectives on the chapter that scholars should seriously consider. Most translations have Paul begin with the grim generalization, "It is good for a man not to touch a woman" (1 Cor. 7:1). This is a strange statement for a scripturalist who elsewhere relies on Genesis, which commands man to leave parents and be "one flesh" with his wife (Gen. 2:24), a passage cited by Christ himself (Matt. 19:5). But Joseph Smith's translation makes "not to touch a woman" part of the Corinthian's letter of inquiry and not Paul's answer. That rings true to other sentences in 1 Corinthians that translators surround with quotation marks. For Paul clearly quotes views and communications of others to refute them (for example, 1 Cor. 10:23, RSV, NEB, JB, NIV). In this case Paul's refutation would be the tender picture of married love in the next four verses, exactly reversing the mood of "not to touch a woman." That phrase and the whole chapter is prefaced by, "Now concerning the things whereof you wrote to me" (1 Cor. 7:1, NKJB), which simply means we have here some answers to unknown questions. Listening to only half of a conversation is frequently misleading. So it is better to outline key issues rather than give a false impression that the full chapter is well understood.

What does Paul think of marriage? The parties are free to choose to be married (1 Cor. 7:36), and marriage is righteous (1 Cor. 7:28). These verses add that duties of marriage may compete with serving the Lord, conflicting somewhat with the positive views of the family in Ephesians. The skepticism on widows remarrying (1 Cor. 7:39-40) is directly contradicted by the young widow's duty to marry and raise a family noted in 1 Tim. 5:14. So 1 Corinthians 7 seems to relate to special circumstances. Following Christ, Paul warns against easy divorce (1 Cor. 7:10-11). Throughout the chapter is a steady theme of loyalty to a married partner once that relationship is made.

Was Paul an example of celibacy? Chapter 2 of this book discussed the firm Jewish ideal of marriage and Paul's repeated claim that he failed in no religious duty. Thus, he must have been married as a young man. He gives himself as an example to the "unmarried and widows"—"it is good for them if they remain even as I am" (1 Cor. 7:8, NKJB). One tendency here is to see Paul as a widower, serving the Lord rather than remarrying. But another option is persuasive; he was using himself as an example of sexual self-control (1 Cor. 7:7). "With consent for a time" (1 Cor. 7:5) did he leave his wife to pursue a dangerous mission at Ephesus? Clement of Alexandria wrote about A.D. 200 and responsibly worked from earlier sources. He claimed knowledge of Paul's marriage, identifying his wife with the "yokefellow" of Philippians 4:3: "Paul himself does not hesitate in one of his letters to address his yokefellow, whom he did not take about with him in order to facilitate his mission." [^5] The apostles as a group were examples of both marriage and companionship in the ministry, for Paul said that he had "power to lead about a sister, a wife, as well as other apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas" (1 Cor. 9:5). That whole chapter argues that Paul could have required the Corinthians to support him but didn't. But Paul stresses his literal "authority" to ask for support for self and for wife. Would he renounce a right of support that was never a possibility? That passage really takes for granted Paul's marriage and the Corinthians' knowledge of it.

Was Paul giving regular rules for marriage? Paul discourages marriage only "for the present distress" (1 Cor. 7:26). Elsewhere in the Bible this last word is "necessity" (anagke). Paul next says that "the time is short" (1 Cor. 7:29), following with the conclusion that normal marriage relationships and business activity should be suspended. Commentators quickly leap to Paul's supposed belief that Christ's coming loomed on the horizon, which completely violates what he said on the subject in 2 Thessalonians 2. Yet Paul is certainly concerned about doing the Lord's work under a deadline, whether that deadline is coming persecution, coming apostasy, or just the "necessity" of facing the huge task of reaching so many with such small resources. The Joseph Smith Translation says simply that this "necessity" was missionary work, a situation that today would delay marriage for a time, an exception to the regular rule of the Church: "But I speak unto you who are called unto the ministry. For this I say, brethren, the time that remaineth is but short, that ye shall be sent forth into the ministry. Even they who have wives, shall be as though they had none; for ye are called and chosen to do the Lord's work" (1 Cor. 7:29,JST .

True and False Worship

Preserved among the "waste papers" of antiquity are invitations to private dinners, wedding feasts, and dining at pagan temples. [^6] All touched the daily life of the Corinthians, and church members had to decide on the morality of eating at the table of a god. Animals sacrificed to the "idol" were available for temple feasts with the surplus marketed for food. Paul partly agreed with Corinthian rationalizers—the gods were mythical, and the pagan priests offering sacrifices were powerless. Yet the principle of eating in pagan worship was wrong, even if the motivation was food, not worship. What kind of an example was being set, Paul asked, for the weaker brother? ( 1 Cor. 8:10.) After reviewing Israel's idolatry at the exodus from Egypt, Paul made the critical point that walking the borderline of any principle is not living the principle: "Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils: ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's table, and of the table of devils" (1 Cor. 10:21). At the other extreme was the surplus sacrifice that was sold in the market (the obsolete "shambles" of 1 Cor. 10:25). When commercially offered, that would be simple food and not a matter of conscience (1 Cor. 10:25-26). But the case was reversed if a person was invited to a private home and someone identified the food as "offered in sacrifice," for no Christian could consciously honor any god but the true one and his Son (1 Cor. 10:28). Temples of Zeus and Athena have long ceased to operate, but the temples of drinking, gambling, pornography, and questionable entertainment invite worshipers and visitors alike. "Partakers of the Lord's table" today must still avoid every "table of devils."

With their lack of judgment on idol worship, would some do better in Christian meetings? Paul opens Corinthian doors wide for the answer. The letter begins with their "divisions" based on cults of personality; then more "divisions" erupted in their most sacred worship, the commemoration of the Lord's Supper. Indeed, they mocked its purpose by gluttony, each one virtually eating "his own supper" (1 Cor. 11:21). Their greed is clear, whether it was gorging on the consecrated bread and wine or on a common meal held in connection with the ceremony. Paul's correction is also clear—church was not the place to satisfy physical appetite; the Saints should eat at home and wait patiently for each other and the Lord's spirit in the Christian meeting (1 Cor. 11:33-34). The sacrament of the Lord's Supper is a solemn moment, Paul insists, putting over his point by telling the story of Christ first establishing it (1 Cor. 11:23-26). The reader of the Gospels takes this for granted, but when Paul wrote this letter there were probably no Greek Gospels. His account is very close to Luke's record of Christ's blessing of the bread and wine (Luke 22:19-20). The Gospels of Mark and Luke were likely written a few years later, but 1 Corinthians reports specific facts about Christ's last instruction and his resurrection. This shows that the Gospels were based on carefully preserved data, which one would suspect, knowing the value of both truth and the memory of the Lord to the Early Christians.

But there is so much more here than the retelling of the Last Supper and the Corinthians' abuses. Paul gives the most detailed Biblical insight into the purpose of this ceremony. Those who ate and drank thoughtlessly were told what to think about: "But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup" (1 Cor. 11:28). Before taking these symbols, one is obligated to consider the Lord as well as whether one's life is in harmony with the Lord's will: "This do in remembrance of me" (Luke 22:19; 1 Cor. 11:24). But does Christ merely ask for adoration? At the Last Supper he solemnly challenged those who had partaken of the consecrated bread and wine: "If ye love me, keep my commandments" (John 14:15). One must not read Paul's Corinthian correction narrowly, for to "examine yourself" is a general teaching for all, not merely for the greedy offenders. The same is true of the warning not to eat and drink "unworthily" (1 Cor. 11:27). [^7] For Paul, the "cup of blessing" and the broken bread are visible signs of "communion" with Christ (1 Cor. 10:16). That term (koinonia) means a "common sharing" and is usually translated "fellowship." In the letters one has "fellowship" with heaven and with the Church if one's life is in order. There is a "fellowship" or "communion of the Holy Ghost" (2 Cor. 13:14), but it comes only "to them that obey" God (Acts 5:32). Paul states this general principle (2 Cor. 6:14): "And what communion hath light with darkness?" Thus, the sacrament of the Lord's Supper was a symbol of visible relationship to God through Christ, accompanied by self-examination of the worthiness of one's life. These simple but profound relationships characterized the Church after Pentecost, which faithfully continued "in the apostles' doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers" (Acts 2:42).

All of this means much to a Latter-day Saint, with the revealed sacrament prayer calling for remembrance through being called by the Lord's name, with the obligation to "keep his commandments," and with the eternal promise of his Spirit. [^8] Contemporary with the last books of the New Testament, a literate Roman governor examined Christians carefully and wrote the emperor that the central act of their worship was "a solemn oath . . . never to commit any fraud, theft or adultery." [^9] A few decades afterward, Christians prayed in the sacrament meetings "that we may be counted worthy, now that we have learned the truth, by our works also to live good lives and be keepers of the commandments, so that we may be saved with an everlasting salvation." Then just before the distribution of the bread and wine, a prayer of thanks was offered "for our being counted worthy to receive these things." [^10] From Paul through another century, the emphasis is the same as the restored ordinance—to "always remember him and keep his commandments which he has given them." [^11] Why do Christians today celebrate the sacrament of the Lord's Supper? One should ask his Protestant and Catholic friends. Many see a sacramental value without grasping the motivational value of gaining strength to lead a righteous life. Typical answers show a lack of focus, a tendency to participate in a mystical drama or share a ceremony without the covenant of obedience distinctly stressed in the Early Church. Here is another mark of the restored gospel with sobering obligations for believers in it.

Early Christian worship involved organization and participation. Standardized ceremonies today tend to create a passive Christian audience, but attending the Early Church was anything but a "spectator sport." Paul insisted that there be worship, not chaos. The difference came from priesthood leadership. In Paul's writings, we glimpse the common elements of meetings in several branches of the Church: "Quench not the spirit; despise not prophesyings" (1 Thes. 5:19-20). Where he had never been, Paul could mention prophecy, teaching, and exhortation (Rom. 12:6-8). An early Christian might speak by revelation, knowledge, prophecy, or teaching (1 Cor. 14:6). "Teaching" can also be translated "doctrine." Meetings also included psalms, the praise of God in poetry, sometimes set to music (1 Cor. 14:26); the use of psalms is emphasized in letters to Ephesus (5:19) and Colossae (2:16). And at Corinth Paul adds speaking in tongues and the interpretation of tongues (1 Cor. 14:26), listed as general gifts of the Spirit (1 Cor. 12:10) but discussed in no letter except 1 Corinthians. Paul's correction is long, matching the seriousness of their difficulties.

The first apostles spoke in tongues at Pentecost; pilgrims from over a dozen lands heard untaught Galileans speak "in our tongues the wonderful works of God" (Acts 2:11). Missionaries of the restored Church have reported the sudden gift of language or the miraculous temporary gift to communicate in a language never learned. Using a known language is the main purpose of the gift of tongues, Joseph Smith said: "preaching among those whose language is not understood, as on the day of Pentecost." [^12] This fits Paul's correction, for in 1 Corinthians 14 spirituality is equated with understanding. Some Saints at Corinth were speaking unknown tongues without interpretation, and in their ecstasy were speaking out of turn or simultaneously with others. Paul, the man of visions, said that he also excelled in speaking with tongues; "yet in the church I would rather speak five words with my understanding, that I may teach others also, than ten thousand words in a tongue" (1 Cor. 14:19, NKJB). The apostle sharply criticized uncontrolled sound and excitement. No one was to speak in tongues without an interpreter to give the message publicly; a few should speak, but only one at a time (1 Cor. 14:27-28). These rules were then rephrased to apply to anyone speaking by prophecy.

Thus, the meeting does not give a mystic display of power, but a rational message, transcending human reason but meshing with it. How many religious fakes trade on the unknown, straining to generate a climate of emotion without judgment? Jesus talked quietly with Nicodemus and reasoned with his disciples instead of overwhelming them. Then the Lord promised his apostles special gifts to further their missionary work: "They shall speak with new tongues" (Mark 16:17). In this spirit, the latter-day prophet Joseph Smith bluntly said, "It is not necessary for tongues to be taught to the church particularly, for any man that has the Holy Ghost can speak the things of God in his own tongue, as well as to speak in another, for faith comes not by signs but by hearing the word of God." [^13] The approaches of Joseph Smith and Paul would argue strongly for learning world languages to communicate the gospel, for conversion comes through understanding. But the modern Prophet reinforced Paul's caution to the Corinthians: "If any have a matter to reveal, let it be in your own tongue. Do not indulge too much in the gift of tongues, or the devil will take advantage of the innocent. You may speak in tongues for your own comfort, but I lay this down for a rule—that if anything is taught by the gift of tongues, it is not to be received for doctrine." [^14]

Are women more susceptible to emotionalism disguised as religion? Joseph Smith gave the above caution to the Relief Society, and Paul gave a rule for the sisters that seems harsher without knowing the context: "Let your women keep silence in the churches: for it is not permitted unto them to speak" (1 Cor. 14:34). This raises the double question of what Paul meant and what relevance it has today. Both issues are met by comparing chapter 11 with chapter 14. In the former, Paul insists that a woman ought not to "pray and prophesy" without being veiled (1 Cor. 11:5). This proves that women did participate in Christian meetings, which is also known through the names of several faithful, participating sisters mentioned in Acts and the letters. This suggests that Paul had a particular kind of speaking in mind in the later chapter. Some ask whether Corinthian women were interrupting meetings with questions. Or were they "speaking out" in the sense of "leading out," loudly correcting the presiding elder? The Joseph Smith Translation interprets "speak" in that official sense, saying that women were not permitted to "lead." That is certainly one thrust of the chapter, since men and women are both told to be silent whenever someone else is speaking (1 Cor. 14:28, 30). And just before mentioning women, Paul directed that the local authorities must manage both tongues and prophecy: "And the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets; for God is not the author of confusion, but of peace" (1 Cor. 14:32-33). Some things in Corinthians are culturally dated, for Greek women were particularly cloistered and seem to have moved beyond self-control in the new social freedom of the Early Church. So hair length and veiling in 1 Corinthians 11 seem to have little relevance today in everyday life, though faithful Latter-day Saints realize that some issues of dress may have renewed significance in temple worship. Symbolism is paralogical in that it suggests truth rather than defines it. Woman's mission has a depth far beyond her attractive appearance.

Church Organization and Spiritual Gifts

Good analysts have called 1 Corinthians 12 the "Constitution of the Church," for nothing in the New Testament better describes God's plan for Church structure and operation. Two-thirds of the chapter develops the comparison of the parts of the "body," the institution all "members" were baptized into (1 Cor. 12:12-13), and lists the officers that God has placed "in the church" (1 Cor. 12:28). Ephesians also calls the Church the body of Christ, with the understanding that Christ is the "head." This has nothing to do with Christ's resurrected body, which Paul also talks about in 1 Corinthians 15. In Paul's illustration, the organization of the Church would be lifeless without the inspiration of God's spirit. Thus 1 Corinthians 12 begins by surveying the power of the Holy Ghost within the Church.

Paul's mixing of priesthood offices with spiritual gifts is confusing unless one remembers the criticisms that Paul gave on speaking in tongues. Since "tongues" is one of many gifts mentioned in 1 Corinthians 12, Paul is obviously trying to extend Corinthian horizons on other spiritual gifts that they should seek. At the end of the chapter, these gifts of the spirit are mingled with priesthood offices, but in a sequence of priority, with the major priesthood functions listed first. Paul is clearly saying that Church leaders must direct the use of gifts in each branch of the Church. Modern revelation relists the spiritual gifts and makes Paul's point of supervision more directly: "And unto the bishop of the church, and unto such as God shall appoint and ordain to watch over the church and to be elders unto the church, are to have it given unto them to discern all those gifts lest there shall be any among you professing and yet be not of God. And it shall come to pass that he that asketh in Spirit shall receive in Spirit; that unto some it may be given to have all those gifts, that there may be a head, in order that every member may be profited thereby." [^15]

Christian leaders have traditionally compared spiritual gifts to watering a tree—they teach that only a young Christianity needed these special gifts to nourish growth. But the devout of all ages have never believed that explanation. For instance, Bible Protestants developed a vigorous Pentecostal movement in the United States from the beginning of this century. And at midcentury, international gatherings were seeking the "renewal of the Spirit" as they conferred on unity. More recently the "charismatic movement" has reached for personal gifts in the structured faiths, Catholic and Episcopalian. But God works in his own way and own time, and he has already restored the primitive gospel with its primitive gifts. After all twentieth century attempts, the full range of personal and public revelation of 1 Corinthians is impressively lacking. Yet the restoration of these gifts is found in the public history and the private journals of the Latter-day Saints. Joseph Smith bluntly said, "No man can receive the Holy Ghost without receiving revelations—the Holy Ghost is a revelator." [^16] The real charter for Christian gifts came from Christ, who promised certain powers of the Holy Ghost to the apostles at the Last Supper. As discussed in chapter 3 of this book, the Lord also associated spiritual signs with true preaching when he sent out the Twelve in his lifetime and in the Resurrection. Thus, Paul's spiritual panorama closely reflects Christ's promises, as well as documenting their complete fulfillment.

Paul's first spiritual gift stands independent of his list, perhaps because it is the essential gift for each Church member—no one "can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost" (1 Cor. 12:3). Christ promised that the Holy Ghost would come and "testify" of him (John 15:26). This reward of faith either brings one into the true Church or holds him there, for a lifetime of purposeful sacrifice cannot rest on guesswork. Paul no doubt assumed that one saying that Christ was the Lord would do so with knowledge, but Joseph Smith did not like a verbal loophole here; he thought it should read, "no man can know, etc." [^17] Modern revelation also emphasizes the gift of testimony at the head of the list: "To some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that he was crucified for the sins of the world" (D&C 46:13). Others rely on those who know, which should be seen in a dynamic sense of a learning stage in the gospel. These will also have eternal life "if they continue faithful" (D&C 46:14), which is virtually to say that continued faithfulness will bring a testimony, for no one enters the kingdom on borrowed light. [^18]

Paul's short list of spiritual powers stretches wide with possibilities. The Holy Ghost comes to each Church member, but with different results in each member's life. Such a reality makes meeting together all the more significant because all the gifts of the Saints come together when the Saints come together, teaching "one another the doctrine of the kingdom" (D&C 88:77). The gifts are grouped in pairs, with the exception of faith, one that supplements many others. Heading the list is the "word of wisdom" and the "word of knowledge" (1 Cor. 12:8), the capacity to teach, for "word" in 1 Corinthians is generally the expressed message, variously translated in the first two chapters of the letter as "utterance," "preaching," and "speech." In these same chapters, the knowledge and wisdom of man conflict with the gospel, but spiritual gifts include knowledge and wisdom higher than human logic. Gospel reason is still reason, but set in eternal perspective with eternal premises. Joseph Smith felt the point deeply when he gave this heartfelt comment: "Every word that proceedeth from the mouth of Jehovah has such an influence over the human mind—the logical mind—that it is convincing without other testimony; faith comes by hearing." [^19] Is it by accident that Paul lists faith right after the gifts of explaining the gospel? All the above is concisely summed up in modern revelation: "To another is given the word of knowledge, that all may be taught to be wise and to have knowledge" (D&C 46:18).

Paul lists gifts of healing and working of miracles after faith; Jesus also taught clearly that they do not come without faith. The apostle was not spinning theories, for the chart on Paul's miracles in chapter 3 of this book shows how much experience is behind these short comments. Tongues and their interpretation are last, as we have seen above, because they are least. And just before them are the more important gifts of prophecy and the "discerning of spirits" (1 Cor. 12:10), more important because Paul said so as he began to correct the excesses on tongues: "Desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophesy" (1 Cor. 14:1). Prophecy in the New Testament is normally discerning the future, as Jesus said of the Holy Ghost: "He will show you things to come" (John 16:13, literal trans.). God's Church is like responsible institutions in the professional and business world—it can capably advise because it is in touch with trends that will affect people in the future. Only the Holy Ghost can speak about what kind of future mankind will face and about what kind of people will succeed in the future. That is why the gift of "discerning of spirits" is verbally and logically linked to prophecy. There is a discerning of the validity of the gifts as a whole, or of a given prophecy (1 Cor. 14:29-30). But there is also a discernment of the motives and potential of individuals, and Paul calls this a form of prophecy. A nonmember might come into a meeting and hear the "prophecy" of several reveal the "secrets of his heart," at which he would know "that God is in you of a truth" (1 Cor. 14:25).

Jesus used that power repeatedly, as in his first telling Nathanael what kind of a person he was and afterward what he was doing just before they met (John 1:47-48). Being spiritually responsive, Nathanael at once knew that Jesus was "the King of Israel" (John 1:49). Latter-day Saint patriarchs are blessed with these powers, as are other priesthood holders who give personal blessings apart or in connection with ordinances of naming a child, confirmation, marriage, setting apart, ordination, or the laying on of hands for healing the sick. In 1946 I sat in the office of a new apostle named Spencer W. Kimball, who had been assigned to set apart about ten missionaries, of which I was one. After hearing a few blessings, I realized that he spoke appropriately to the different needs of each one, though he had not seen them before. "Learn a new word each day" was one of his inspired directions to me, instruction given to no other missionary in that group and given years before a career of teaching and writing was anticipated. And Elder Kimball's prophecies concerning missionary work were just as inspired, for they were fulfilled.

The body is incomplete without all its spiritual powers, Paul argues, and without all of its appointed officers. The foot by itself does not constitute the body (1 Cor. 12:15). Thus no church is the true Church of Christ without all the offices that Christ appointed in his Church. Excluding the mingled spiritual gifts, Paul lists these offices in this order: "First apostles, second prophets, third teachers, after that . . . helps, administrations" (1 Cor. 12:28, NKJB). Clear truth needs no verbal scaffolding to prop it up. And Paul plainly outlines the general and local levels of Church government. The overall point is that Christ's Church must be governed by inspired officials. Concerning prophets, modern churches have advanced many vague ideas, since Christianity has been deprived of prophets for centuries. Prophecy does not constitute an office by itself but is a common function of every office. Thus an apostle is also a prophet, just as the regional leaders at Antioch were called "certain prophets and teachers" (Acts 13:1), for they were both. Concerning "helps," there are parallels; but the commonsense question is, "Helpers of what?" Since the subject is organization and not welfare, the "helps" assisted those first named, the presiding apostles. Literal translations keep "helps," though the word could also be accurately translated "helpers" (RSV) or "assistants" (NAB). Concerning "governments," the final term, local authorities supplemented the general authorities. The term is clear—kubernesis, the quality held by the Greek kubernetes, in Acts the pilot or shipmaster of Paul's vessel (Acts 27:11). This and the equivalent Latin gubernator extended from seafaring to life, meaning a manager or director in political or business affairs. Modern translations use some form of "administrators" (RSV, NAB), "administrations," (NKJB), or even "good leaders" (JB).

Paul repeatedly asks how the body can survive if its parts are missing. Without apostles and without all the spiritual gifts, the Christian churches are strictly unconstitutional today. Like Paul's synagogues, they contain groups of the most sensitive and sincere seekers in today's wicked world. But honest Bible students must admit the discrepancy between the Early Church and modern Christianity. In the last century a competent and classical biblical scholar squarely faced this issue with the best explanation he could offer:

We have seen that according to the scriptural view the Church is a holy kingdom, established by God on earth, of which Christ is the invisible king—it is a divinely organized body, the members of which are knit together amongst themselves, and joined to Christ their head by the Holy Spirit, who dwells in and animates it. It is a spiritual but visible society of men united by constant succession to those who were personally united to the apostles, holding the same faith that the apostles held, administering the same sacraments, and like them forming separate, but only locally separate, assemblies, for the public worship of God. This is the Church according to the divine intention. But as God permits men to mar the perfection of his designs in their behalf, and as men have both corrupted the doctrines and broken the unity of the Church, we must not expect to see the Church of Holy Scripture actually existing in its perfection on earth. It is not to be found thus perfect, either in the collected fragments of Christendom, or still less in any one of those fragments; though it is possible that one of those fragments more than another may approach the scriptural and apostolic ideal which existed only until sin, heresy, and schism had time sufficiently to develop themselves to do their work. [^20]

Pure Love

First Corinthians 13 is the most moving chapter of the New Testament outside of Jesus' teachings, a fact that suggests its real source. Many non-Christians are inspired by it. Israeli statesman David Ben-Gurion was an intense student of the Old Testament prophets and was drawn to Paul; blending truth and humor, he told a reporter, "1 Cor. 13:1-13 ought to be in the Hebrew Bible—I asked the rabbis about this, but they said no." Like uplifting music, Paul's profound sentences can raise spiritual vision again and again. Like the Sermon on the Mount, it treats the disease, not the symptoms. In the latter category were the Corinthians' lack of unity, immorality, misuse of spiritual gifts, and disrespect for leaders. In the rest of 1 Corinthians, Paul answered questions and corrected attitudes logically, but 1 Corinthians opens a stunning vision of a world of pure love. One who understands even part of it has glimpsed the glory of the hereafter. In less than three hundred words Paul outlines the gospel priority of love, how to love, and the eternal power of love.

Realizing that they walked on sacred ground, the King James translators recognized the Christlike love of 1 Corinthians 13 and rendered it "charity." Since this is not a vivid word today, translators follow consistency and write "love" here as elsewhere. The Greek term is a powerful religious word for love, agape, which has generated some uninformed mythology. [^21] Jews and Christians preferred this term for love, since it was used less in Greek writing. The verb is agapao, which is almost always "love" in its 142 uses throughout the King James Bible. "Charity" is translated only from the noun agape; yet this is still translated "love" 86 times in the King James Bible and "charity" only 27 times, 9 of them in connection with 1 Corinthians 13. The word by itself does not elevate Paul's discussion of love. It is the other way around—Paul's high view of love elevates the word. But it is important to know that Paul's "charity" is the same Greek word used by Jesus for love. Otherwise, one would not necessarily correlate their teachings.

In the Book of Mormon, Moroni equates "charity" and profound love: "Charity is the pure love of Christ" (Moro. 7:47). Since Moroni's presentation is so similar to Paul's, skeptics cry fraud on the ground that Moroni postdates Paul by centuries. But deeply religious people will not quickly agree, since the Book of Mormon tells of a God powerful enough to reveal himself on two hemispheres instead of one. The Book of Mormon people were entitled to the special revelation of Christ and his finest message, the Sermon on the Mount, and they were entitled to the inspiration of the finest Christian teachings on love. And who is the ultimate source of such Christlike thoughts? Clement of Rome wrote to the Corinthians forty years after Paul and quoted Paul's words: "Love endures all things; love is long suffering in all things." [^22] Clement added eight other striking statements about love not known elsewhere. But Clement did this without using Paul's name. And talking of love earlier, Clement asked the Corinthians to remember "the words of the Lord Jesus which he spoke when he was teaching gentleness and longsuffering." Is this an unrecorded sermon in Christ's life? Part of Clement's following quotation from the Lord contains a striking term from 1 Corinthians 13: "As you are kind, so shall kindness be shown you." [^23] On the basis of this, respected scholars have wondered whether part of 1 Corinthians 13 might come from the earliest Christian record of Jesus' sayings. [^24]

Indeed, Jesus gave the same priority to love that 1 Corinthians 13 does. The Lord said that loving God and one's neighbors was the essence of "all the law and the prophets" (Matt. 22:36-40). Jesus also gave a distinguishing mark of the true church—having "love one to another" (John 13:35). After writing on spiritual gifts, Paul encouraged "the best gifts" and introduced love as "a more excellent way" (1 Cor. 12:31). The Greek phrase is more dramatic—translated literally as a way "immeasurably better." Then phrases of comparison rapidly follow; the main spiritual gifts again pass in review and are found wanting unless they lead one to deeper service in love. Tongues alone are as empty as the fading vibrations of the cymbal, which was sometimes used at noisy private parties. [^25] Paul adds prophecy, understanding mysteries, and moving mountains by faith—and even martyrdom and giving away one's property. Here is an astounding judgment: one can do all these things without love and not be accepted of God. The concept of love is not dramatic sacrifice but steady relationship. It is not a giant gift on a special occasion but the continued support of personal caring. Above all, it is not the theological achievement of becoming an information bank, but of steadily helping others up steep slopes.

As Paul moves from the priority of love to the actions of love, the significance of his approach must not be missed. "If ye love me, keep my commandments," Jesus said (John 14:15). Christ's measure of love is action. Doing is also the measure of loving in Paul's examples of love. But those who aspire to follow their steps must love enough to tell the truth. Jesus commanded a disciple who was wronged to go to his brother "and tell him his fault" (Matt. 18:15). And Paul added 1 Corinthians 13 to his letter that condemned the Corinthians' faults but was not faultfinding. The difference was Paul's absolute commitment to the Corinthians and his total faith that they could solve their problems. Out of this framework of love come the following descriptions of love.

Love "suffers long." "Suffers long" is a literal translation of the Greek word, which is translated "patience" in modern translations. Love has the confidence not to demand an immediate accounting, not to judge failure prematurely. Good manners reflect a willingness to take extra time in small things. The opposite of "suffering long" is to be quick-tempered or overanxious. The New Testament letters strongly emphasize the duty of "longsuffering" or patience.

Love "is kind." The main modern translations retain this interpretation, but it needs clarification. The root here is "useful," implying that love serves the needs of others, giving them "goodness," "gentleness," and "kindness," all King James Version translations of the equivalent noun (chrestotes). Paul elsewhere stresses God's goodness and kindness to men in saving them, and he is here asking people to deal in a similar way with each other.

Love "envies not." Modern translations have Paul prohibit either envy or jealousy, two words for the same evil. After twice illustrating positive concern for others, Paul adds a number of things a loving person will not do. Jealousy is personal frustration at another's success. It would restrict the growth of others to match the narrowness of the jealous. Caring parents emulate a caring God in helping their children to expand and develop.

Love "vaunteth not itself." The Greek term used in this description is not used elsewhere in the New Testament. It refers to being a braggart. Thus, modern translations tend toward describing love as "not boastful." Whereas jealousy is egotism turned inward, bragging is egotism turned outward. The opposite is Christlike generosity turned outward, the goodness and kindness identified above.

The Qualities of Love: 1 Corinthians 13:4-7

King James Version Personal Characteristics Literal Translation

Charity suffereth long Patience Love is patient

and is kind Kindness It is kind

charity envieth not Generosity Love is not jealous

charity vaunteth not Modesty Love is not boastful

itself

is not puffed up Humility nor conceited

doth not behave itself Self-control nor dishonorable

unseemly

seeketh not her own Unselfishness eeks not its own

interests

is not easily provoked Even temper nor is irritable

thinketh no evil Tolerance does not count up evil

rejoiceth not in Empathy does not rejoice in

iniquity, but unrighteousness but

rejoiceth in the truth rejoices with others

in the truth

beareth all things, Steady trust bears all things, trusts

believeth all things, all things, hopes all

hopeth all things, things, endures all

endureth all things things

Love "is not puffed up." "Puffed up" is the precise Greek meaning and metaphor. What is one called who has an inflated sense of importance? Translations give "arrogant," "conceited," "proud," and "snobbish." Paul earlier told the Corinthians, "Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up" (1 Cor. 8:1, RSV, NIV). Real achievements in building others bring the deepest satisfactions for self. The gratitude of others for pure love brings true importance that never fades: "Without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever" (D&C 121:46).

Love "does not behave itself unseemly." The best recent translations agree that love is not "rude," but that rendition settles for etiquette, not the morality of behavior. The Greek term is aschemoneo, literally meaning "to be disordered," the opposite of the New Testament euschemoneo word group, which refers to fitting, proper, or decent conduct. Thus, in his letter to the Romans, Paul commands the Saints to walk "properly" (Rom. 13:13, NKJB) or "decently" (Rom. 13:13, JB, NIV)—and there the contrast is to those who are drunken, immoral, and filled with "strife and envying." So these things are in Paul's mind for "unseemly," clearly a moral term. Love preserves integrity and righteousness and does not exploit and debase. "Love does no evil to its neighbor" (Rom. 13:10, literal trans.).

Love "seeks not her own." Translations only vary the words here, for Paul says literally that love does not "seek its own interests." In a word, love is unselfish. Counselors in human relations stress a good self-image; one cannot give to others without self-worth and self-respect. But such strong people have generally been loved by generous parents. Thus, the selfish may emotionally cripple those dependent on them with the constant message that they are not worth time and attention. Unselfishness generates emotional strength in an eternal dimension.

Love "is not easily provoked." Here Paul gives the opposite of his first quality, patience or long-suffering. The main translations agree in concept: love is not "irritable" (RSV), not quick to "take offense" (NEB, JB), not "easily angered" (NIV), or not "prone to anger" (NAB). Some who are successful in church and community have this private characteristic but excuse it as insignificant. But if love is the finest achievement of gospel living, one cannot live the gospel without changing abrasive irritability. Drummond painted "evil temper" in its true colors: "For embittering life, for breaking up communities, for destroying the most sacred relationships, for devastating homes, for withering up men and women, for taking the bloom off childhood; in short, for sheer, gratuitous, misery-producing power, this influence stands alone." [^26]

Love "thinks no evil." This translation is too abstract, for love exists in a social setting. Some interpreters think this refers to dwelling on injuries. But Paul's phrase closely repeats the Greek of Zechariah 8:17: "And let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbour." Thus people build themselves up by tearing down those around them. The narrow jealousies in Paul's other phrases yield the fruit of suspicion and false accusation. This is the opposite of trust, another word for love.

Love "rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth." What translations miss here is the social dimension of the second "rejoice"; it adds a prefix that is "rejoice with" (sugchairo) in its other New Testament appearances. If the worldly enjoy thinking and talking of evil, the Saints should delight together in the truth. To thus "rejoice together" is to be in harmony, to be free from suspicions and false accusations. "Rejoicing together" also takes place after forgiving others, a duty stressed by Christ and his prophets.

Love "bears," "believes," "hopes," and "endures all things." The main translations do not differ on the last three qualities, but are confused on the first. They should not be. In the first place, this is the recurrent speech pattern called chiasm, where two middle terms mean the same thing and the beginning and ending terms are basically the same. A second reason is clear by itself, for Paul's word means bearing up under pressure (1 Cor. 9:12) or being able to stand emotional tension (1 Thes. 3:1, 5). Thus "bearing up" and "enduring" are the negatives, and "believing" and "hoping" are the positives. As we have seen, Paul told the Corinthians that they might waver in their relationship with him, but that he was their father in the gospel and would never stop caring for them (1 Cor. 4:12, 14-15). Thus, pure love is steady love—it does not quit at insult or rejection.

The tragedy of many unloving people is that they only imagine they love. In truth they want to love but do not pay the price to move from wishful thinking to reality. As a good teacher, Paul confronts the Saints with their inconsistencies. The impatient jerk on a child, the harsh word to someone trying to assist, or the cold shoulder to a spouse all reveal a smallness of soul. Paul sketches gross egotism, but it is subtly disguised in appearing to care but being too busy, or in blaming others for not caring. Here Paul challenges believers to believe. He closes his panorama of the loving and unloving by asking for patience with human inconsistency and faith in divine possibility. One can remain cynical, as H. L. Mencken was when he remarked that love was the triumph of imagination over intelligence. [^27] But that is the point of the gospel, which gives a vision of what may be if imagination is put to work. Parents in tune with their divine calling know that eternal potential is wrapped up with their helpless and uncoordinated infant. Parents of resistant teenagers are wise if they remember that the potential is still there, and gospel brothers and sisters with this vision will do the same. The future is unlocked by pure love, which "believes" and "hopes all things."

Those who have unselfish love know that they work with the most powerful creative force in the universe. Paul's conclusion stresses the fragmentary nature of prophecy and knowledge. God gives or allows what is necessary for man's survival in being tested on this earth. Paul never doubts that he brings enough knowledge to prepare mankind for eternity, but in 1 Corinthians 13 he warns the Saints not to be overconfident in claiming all knowledge. In the King James Version, his words are, "We see through a glass darkly" (1 Cor. 13:12), which weakly translates Paul's Greek. The more literal translation "We look into a mirror with obscurity" was vivid in a culture with polished metal mirrors. For Paul, knowledge must be supplemented and revised, but love never fails (1 Cor. 13:8). The gospel experience of unselfish love is closer to eternity than anything else. It may be counterfeited by immorality and cheapened in superficial society. But genuine love is a taste of eternity. An unsophisticated child said, "I like people to love me—it makes me feel shiny." [^28] In the restored gospel, pure love is expressed in families, friendships, and righteous service; family relationships are sealed for eternity. Like Paul, Joseph Smith taught that pure love on earth would not change but be added upon: "That same sociality which exists among us here will exist among us there, only it will be coupled with eternal glory, which glory we do not now enjoy" (D&C 130:2).

The Resurrection

Human hopes never exploded with more power than in Paul's doctrinal climax of 1 Corinthians 15. Can the Resurrection be doubted? This chapter's brilliant beginning, middle sequences, and final completeness become vivid realities as one perceives its blending of prophecy and clear knowledge of the apostles. These truths can be ignored or ridiculed but not refuted, for here they come from an eyewitness who soberly reports personal knowledge and that of the Twelve. The fiery dawn of immortality glows in the triumphant words of the apostle. Who can be indifferent to the future that all will meet? What intelligent choice remains but to learn and prepare? Paul's rich explanations reveal how weakly modern Christian theologians understand the rich knowledge possessed by Paul.

"How do some among you say that there is no resurrection of the dead?" (1 Cor. 15:12, NKJB.) Paul's whole discussion centers around this clear question and one other. Reminding the Saints of the certainty of Christ's resurrection, he asks how one could believe in that without believing in the resurrection of mankind. Before the Gospels were written, Paul lists resurrection appearances to leading apostles, to all the apostles, and to "above five hundred brethren at once," most of whom were still alive (1 Cor. 15:6). These were not vague rumors, but virtual challenges to ask available people about their personal experiences. The Early Church knew firsthand from living witnesses. And one was Paul, who added last but not least that he had seen the Lord (1 Cor. 15:5-8). We are not "false witnesses," he insists (1 Cor. 15:15). He is not accusing the Corinthians of doubting Christ's resurrection, but jolting them with its reality for consistency's sake. That is the key to the chapter, for doctrines of salvation turn to jarring contradictions if they do not include the resurrection of mankind. If "there is no resurrection" (1 Cor. 15:12)—if "the dead rise not" (1 Cor. 15:15), then the central realities fail. And Paul lists them in order: (1) Christ's own resurrection (1 Cor. 15:13); (2) the apostles' integrity (1 Cor. 15:15); (3) forgiveness through Christ (1 Cor. 15:17); (4) the value of baptisms for the dead (1 Cor. 15:29); (5) the value of Paul's sacrifices and risks (1 Cor. 15:30-32). This perspective is critical in understanding baptism for the dead, for many commentators toss it aside as a local practice that Paul did not accept. Such an argument is simply nearsighted—the other four points on the above list are not only true but interlocked in Christ's plan of salvation. Baptism for the dead cannot be moved from its rightful relationship by skeptics' shrugs.

Paul started 1 Corinthians 15 with the testimony that "Christ died for our sins" (1 Cor. 15:3, also 17), but his real subject was the resurrection of mankind that must follow Christ's own resurrection: "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive" (1 Cor. 15:22). Thus there will be a general or universal resurrection, and death itself will disappear (1 Cor. 15:26). Thus Paul refutes the terrible thought that those who have "fallen asleep in Christ" might have perished (1 Cor. 15:18). But what of those who have "fallen asleep" without Christ? The universal resurrection must include them. Is this apparently missing group really missing? The powerful section on the general resurrection is prefaced by the category of those "fallen asleep in Christ" (1 Cor. 15:18) and concluded by concern over those dead for whom baptisms are being done (1 Cor. 15:29). Paul's thinking is strictly logical if he is saying that the universal resurrection will bring forth both believers and those dying as unbelievers, whose work was being done for them. The Resurrection is not universal unless that majority without Christ are resurrected. And the Resurrection is unjust unless the dead without Christ have the opportunity to accept him. Thus, baptism for the dead is not incidental to Paul's argument. Nor is it casually thrown into the chapter; everything else in 1 Corinthians 15 is strict and relevant truth. Peter's first letter shows that the Early Church knew a good deal about the gospel in the spirit world. (Appendix C discusses early Christian convictions about preaching to and baptizing for the dead.) Most of the recent translations change "baptized for the dead" to "baptized on behalf of the dead," supporting Joseph Smith's revelations on this subject.

"How are the dead raised up—and with what body do they come?" (1 Cor. 15:35.) This second question raises issues of the timing and kinds of resurrection. The plural here is scripturally necessary, for no one responsibly interprets Paul's three glories in 1 Corinthians 15 without correlating them with Paul's three heavens in 2 Corinthians 12. Also, Paul unites with John in teaching a resurrection of those that are "Christ's at his coming" and a final resurrection later (1 Cor. 15:23 and Rev. 20:6-13). Are not these two distinct "glories"? Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon puzzled over this problem in John 5:29, reasoning that various degrees of faithfulness should bring various rewards. And their resulting vision (D&C 76) became the basis of the detailed knowledge of the life to come held by Latter-day Saints. That revelation does not depend on Bible interpretations, though Paul's words contradict the traditional idea of a heaven and hell and support Joseph Smith's revelation of the three degrees of glory. So does a remarkable early Christian source. Irenaeus, bishop of Lyon, wrote about A.D. 170, often quoting his teacher Polycarp, who had seen John the Apostle. Apparently referring to this transmission of information, Irenaeus quotes "the elders, the disciples of the apostles," about distinct heavens in the hereafter. Such traditional information would not necessarily be accurate in detail, but that the Early Church believed in three heavens is striking:

As the elders say, then also shall they which have been deemed worthy of the abode in heaven go there, while others shall enjoy the delight of paradise, and others again shall possess the brightness of the city; for in every place the Savior shall be seen, according as they shall be worthy who see him. They say moreover that this is the distinction between the habitation of them that bring forth a hundred-fold, and them that bring forth sixty-fold, and them that bring forth thirty-fold; of whom the first shall be taken up into the heavens, and the second shall dwell in paradise, and the third shall inhabit the city; and that therefore our Lord has said, "in my Father's house are many mansions." [^29]

Paul pictured multiple glories in answering what kind of body could come forth in the Resurrection. Some scoffed, claiming that physical imperfections were inconsistent with a physical resurrection (1 Cor. 15:35). Paul's sharp answer was that the insignificant seed was left behind as the new crops flourished, a symbol of human change from mortality to "incorruptible" immortality. But there must be more than that simple metaphor, for Paul took time to develop the varieties of the harvest. The mortal planting stage is singular in his language ("body"), but the Resurrection yields "celestial bodies" and "bodies terrestrial." Since these adjectives usually mean "heavenly" and "earthly," some translations write that alone, suggesting that Paul is simply contrasting the sowed earthly bodies with the resurrected, heavenly bodies. But that causes a severe problem of definition. Generally in Paul, and in this chapter, "glory" is the stage of resurrection: "It is sown in dishonour; it is raised in glory" (1 Cor. 15:43). Thus "celestial" and "terrestrial," would be states of resurrected "glory" (1 Cor. 15:40), followed by comparisons of eternal brilliance: "There is one glory of the sun, another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for one star differs from another star in glory" (1 Cor. 15:41, NKJB). And the concluding sentence summarizes all these as future: "So also is the resurrection of the dead" (1 Cor. 15:42). Sun, moon, or stars are not images of "corruption" but of "glory." [^30]

Is the resurrection physical? Modern revelation plainly says so: "Every limb and joint shall be restored to its body" (Alma 40:23). But modern ministers have their doubts. One spokesman generalizes for his church but really speaks for liberal Christian ministers everywhere:

With a few exceptions, Presbyterians do not interpret the phrase in the Apostles' Creed, "the resurrection of the body," as meaning the physical body. Saint Paul writes: "Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God . . ." They understand "the resurrection of the body" as a reference to the spiritual body of the resurrection. Paul writes: "It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body." . . . Our Lord's sinless body . . . was transformed into a spiritual body. Saint John in his Gospel suggests that the resurrected body of Jesus for evidential purposes retained certain physical properties. [^31]

Thus "physical properties" are left behind as educated ministers now define resurrection. But their position is dangerously close to the Corinthian heresy that Paul was correcting. Jesus told Peter that "flesh and blood" had not revealed his knowledge of Christ (Matt. 16:17), and Paul told the Galatians that he did not confer "with flesh and blood" right after his conversion (Gal. 1:16). In both cases, the phrase is simply a metaphor for mortality. Thus Paul answered Corinthian scoffers by saying that the mortal, flesh-and-blood body would not come up in the Resurrection (1 Cor. 15:50). But as a "body" it retains its physical properties. Jesus contrasted his resurrected body to a spirit: "A spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have" (Luke 24:39). And instead of Christ being an "evidential" exception, Paul told the Corinthians and others that Christ was the example of the resurrection of mankind: "The second man is the Lord from heaven. . . . We shall also bear the image of the heavenly" (1 Cor. 15:47, 49).

Modern revelation gives many insights into the Resurrection. A "spiritual body" (1 Cor. 15:44; D&C 88:27) would better be called a "glorified body," for it is the mortal body perfected. "They who are of a celestial spirit shall receive the same body which was a natural body . . . and your glory shall be that glory by which your bodies are quickened" (D&C 88:28). The glorified frame will be flesh and bone, though not "flesh and blood" (mortal) for Joseph Smith repeatedly spoke "as one having authority," saying, "When our flesh is quickened by the spirit, there will be no blood in the tabernacles." [^32] All will "raise by the power of God, having the spirit of God in their bodies and not blood." [^33]

---
Notas:
[^1] Strabo, Geography 8.6.23 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^2] Ibid., 8.6.20.
[^3] Plutarch, On Borrowing 831A (Loeb Classical Library).
[^4] See the printed minutes in Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2nd ed. rev., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51) 7:233: "You cannot appoint a man at our head, but if you do want any other man or men to lead you, take them, and we will go our way to build up the kingdom in all the world."
[^5] Clement of Alexandria, Stromata ("Miscellanies") 3.6.74-76, also cited in Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History 3:30. Since the Greek text is the same, I have followed Kirsopp Lake's translation in the Loeb Classical Library, changing "wife" to the literal "yokefellow."
[^6] See examples in A. S. Hunt and C. C. Edgar, eds., Select Papyri, Non-Literary Papyri, Private Affairs (Loeb Classical Library) 1:401-3.
[^7] This is a general mandate for how one partakes, not a narrow critique of the "unworthy manner" in which Corinthians had partaken. There is a strong moral connotation of Paul's positive adverb for "worthy." To walk "worthily" of the Lord and his calling is simply to live gospel standards (1 Thes. 2:12; Eph. 4:1).
[^8] The words are quoted from the prayer on the bread, Doctrine and Covenants 20:77, and the ancient Book of Mormon record in Moroni 4:3. The following prayers for the wine simplify the language but no doubt are intended to compress the ideas stated in the first prayer.
[^9] Pliny, Letters 10:96 (Loeb Classical Library). The "oath" to live righteously was part of the worship service and was likely either the prayer blessing the bread and wine or the act of partaking itself. It translates sacramentum, from which the Christian word developed, meaning "an act making a binding oath."
[^10] Justin Martyr, First Apology 65. The translation is from the following with one change: Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson, Ante-Nicene Fathers, vol. 1 (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1956). I have translated politeuomai in the general sense instead of the overly literal "be a citizen."
[^11] Source given at n. 8 above.
[^12] Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, The Words of Joseph Smith (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), p. 3.
[^13] Ibid., pp. 3-4.
[^14] Ibid., p. 119.
[^15] Doctrine and Covenants 46:27-29, a revelation given soon after Joseph Smith arrived in Kirtland, Ohio. Early Kirtland strikingly resembles New Testament Corinth in intense faith together with aggressive attacks on the authority of Joseph Smith and Paul. In both cases counterfeit spirituality was identified and rebuked by these leaders. Partly with this experience in mind, Joseph Smith later said, "Every spirit or vision or singing is not of God. . . . Speak not in the gift of tongues without understanding it, or without interpretation. The Devil can speak in tongues." Ehat and Cook, p. 12.
[^16] Ibid., p. 256.
[^17] Ibid., p. 115.
[^18] Compare Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 9:279 (1862): "I say that the living oracles of God, or the spirit of revelation, must be in each and every individual, to know the plan of salvation and keep in the path that leads them to the presence of God."
[^19] Ehat and Cook, p. 237.
[^20] William Smith, Dictionary of the Bible, rev. H. B. Hackett (Cambridge, Mass.: Houghton, Mifflin and Co., 1887) 1:458.
[^21] "The Religious Newsmakers," The Herald (Provo, Utah), Jan. 3, 1972.
[^22] Christ used synonyms for agapao or agape, even in the resurrection questions to Peter about loving him (John 21:15-17). The more secular synonym of phileo was also used a couple of dozen times by Christ and Paul of pure love in relationship with God and fellowmen.
[^23] 1 Clement 49:5, Apostolic Fathers (Loeb Classical Library).
[^24] 1 Clement 13:1-2.
[^25] James Hope Moulton and George Milligan, The Vocabulary of the Greek Testament (Grand Rapids, Michigan: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1930), p. 692 (chresteuomai), citing Harnack.
[^26] Classical references to cymbals seem broader than the religious ceremonies indicated as likely by some commentators. Adolf Deissmann prints a letter about musical instruments, including cymbals, used during a sacrifice at a private feast, which Deissmann thinks might be broadened to the sacrificial dance there. He also notes the correlation in Jesus' details in the prodigal son parable. Note the "music and dancing" (Luke 15:25). Light from the Ancient East, trans. Lionel R. M. Strachan (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book House, 1978), pp. 164-66. One ancient mosaic shows musicians entering with flutes, percussion, and small cymbals. Instruments used in religious ceremonies were obviously available for other kinds of performances.
[^27] Henry Drummond, The Greatest Thing in the World (London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1890), p. 32.
[^28] See H. L. Mencken, Prejudices, First Series (New York, N. Y.: Octagon Books, 1976 rpt. 1919 ed.), chapter 16.
[^29] Llewelyn Miller, ed., What Is This Thing Called Love? (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1970), final page.
[^30] Irenaeus, Against Heresies 5.36.1-2, trans. J. B. Lightfoot. Compare Matt. 13:23.
[^31] Verbal accurateness appears in the names revealed to Joseph Smith for the three glories. The highest is the "celestial," which means "heavenly" in Greek and is the heaven proper where God dwells (D&C 76:92-94). The next is "terrestrial," which means "earthly" in Greek, and is the place for the "honorable men of the earth," who were indifferent to spiritual growth through faith in Christ (D&C 76:74-76). And the "telestial" or last degree of glory meshes with Paul's description of those in the second resurrection: "but each one in his own order: Christ the first-fruits; afterward those who are Christ's at his coming; then comes the end" (1 Cor. 15:23-24, NKJB). The italicized term is telos, meaning in this case the final resurrection. So those in the "telestial" glory have come up at the "end," for which they were delayed by lengthy preparation in overcoming their wickedness (D&C 76:103-6).
[^32] John S. Bonnell, "What Is a Presbyterian?" in Leo Rosten, ed., Religions of America (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1975), p. 205.
[^33] Ehat and Cook, p. 368; compare p. 255.
