Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul ( 1983)

2 CORINTHIANS

Profile

Sent from: Paul, in northern Greece, joined by Timothy.

Sent to: Members at Corinth, provincial capital of southern Greece.

Date: About A.D. 57, in the fall.

Purpose: To express joy on the repentance of many Corinthians, to warn others of discipline for rebellion, and to plan the welfare collection for the Jerusalem Saints.

Main themes: Christ's atonement; the principle of sacrifice; repentance; welfare contributions; priesthood authority; three heavens.

Background

The City

See the sketch above under 1 Corinthians.

Church Members

The discussion on the background of 1 Corinthians surveys the first conversions and known people of that branch of the Church. As a result of Paul's long mission there, many Greeks accepted the faith. So after the Acts 18 ministry, Paul characterized the Corinthians: "Ye know that ye were Gentiles, carried away unto these dumb idols, even as ye were led" (1 Cor. 12:2). Thus, there was a low percentage of Jewish converts, who had training in religion and discipline in the synagogue. This probably contributed to the instability and self-willed character of many members.

Reason for Writing

Paul had written 1 Corinthians in Ephesus before the early summer feast of Pentecost (1 Cor. 16:8). He then planned to visit Corinth later that year and spend the winter there (1 Cor. 16:6). Acts tells how these plans were fulfilled. Paul visited in Macedonia or northern Greece for some time (Acts 20:1-2), and then spent three months in Greece proper, apparently at Corinth. Since his return journey back through northern Greece coincided with the spring Passover feast (Acts 20:6), he did winter at Corinth. Second Corinthians went from Macedonia, as Paul learned from Titus the good news of Corinthian faith and loyalty (2 Cor. 7:5-6, 13). This letter was sent back with Titus and another unnamed brother well-known to the Corinthians (2 Cor. 8:16-18). The time was probably the fall of the same year in which Paul wrote 1 Corinthians, about six months before. This was probably A.D. 57. (Appendix A gives further details.)

When Paul set out for northern Greece, he closed his three-year mission in Ephesus (Acts 20:31) with definite plans. He had already sent Timothy and Erastus to prepare the Greek churches for his farewell visits (Acts 19:21-22), after which he would travel to Jerusalem. He was gathering welfare contributions. Prior to leaving Ephesus, Paul had written about preparing "the collection for the saints" before he came; then it would be taken on to Jerusalem (1 Cor. 16:1-2). Afterward, Paul wrote 2 Corinthians from Macedonia, giving further detailed instructions on this welfare project. Another purpose for writing was to heal his relationship with them before he arrived. At the beginning, he worried that the Corinthians had misread his motives, mentioning there and later, "I made you sorry with a letter" (2 Cor. 7:8). This could be a lost letter, although 1 Corinthians is harsh enough in places to qualify. That detail does not matter as much as seeing the unbending determination of Paul to speak the truth but to keep a good relationship with the Corinthians. He did not attempt to smooth over difficulties with superficial politeness. This second letter is a genuine second communication of gratitude that the first letter found its mark and that lives were changed. This combination of firmness and profound love for the Corinthians throws some commentators off guard. Since they cannot understand how the same letter can combine reproof and healing outreach, the Corinthian correspondence is often sliced into a number of letters. But this is purely artificial, for Jesus and Paul stood for love based on reality. Thus both criticism and concern can be given in the same communication. This is the case with 2 Corinthians, with an added factor. There were now two main groups in the branch, one of which had achieved the unity that Paul commanded, but the other stood defiant against him. So Paul's mood swings in the letter to match the two different groups addressed.

The mission of Titus must be reconstructed from 2 Corinthians. He left Ephesus after Timothy and Erastus, either carrying 1 Corinthians or being sent to represent Paul in working with the Corinthians. Paul expected a report north of Ephesus. The apostle left with a heavy heart because of persecution, probably the Ephesian riot and the unexpected pressure to leave (2 Cor. 1:8). As he traveled north to Troas, he was glad for the great missionary harvest but anxious because, as he said, "I found not Titus my brother." So he sailed for Macedonia with apprehension for the future (2 Cor. 2:13), a situation like his first voyage after the Troas vision called Paul to Macedonia. Now when he came to Macedonia, he had the joyful reunion with Titus mentioned in the opening paragraph above. Earlier, Paul had written 1 Thessalonians when his messengers reported their unity in the faith, and 2 Corinthians somewhat recapitulates these circumstances. Like 1 Thessalonians, 2 Corinthians is not a great doctrinal letter but an intense letter of relationship, a letter standing above all others in revealing Paul's feelings about the gospel and his converts.

The above events are straightforward and understandable, though 2 Corinthians discussions are complicated by confusion on some details. These problems seem to arise from Paul's marked skill in outlining alternatives and in reporting how the Corinthians had worried him. Keenly conscious of the ultimate authority of his apostleship, he waited for their repentance before coming: "I call God for a record upon my soul, that to spare you I came not as yet unto Corinth" (2 Cor. 1:23). For this reason, Paul made plans to come and then changed them—he would have come on a second visit but for very serious reasons abandoned that plan (2 Cor. 1:15-17). And at the end of 2 Corinthians, Paul says, "This is the third time I am coming to you" (2 Cor. 13:1). Yet this might only be the third time he planned to come, with overtones of shame that his second visit aborted because of their lack of repentance. Earlier he referred to "the third time I am ready to come to you" (2 Cor. 12:14). Acts relates only Paul's original missionary stay at Corinth and his revisit at the end of his Ephesian labors. But because 2 Corinthians has the above language, some scholars assume he made a second visit before that letter was written. On this evidence, it is speculative to say it happened, though the question is not of great significance either way.

Main Teachings

Christ's Atonement

Paul's earlier letters did not explain Christ's atonement, though it clearly is one of his core beliefs. Only when the Corinthians were confused did Paul remind them that he first preached that Christ "died for our sins" (1 Cor. 15:3). An English word stressing this phase of Christ's mission is "atonement," his sacrifice that overcame sin and placed mankind literally "at one" with God again. Though in the Book of Mormon that word often describes Christ's mission, the King James New Testament has but one appearance of "atonement" (Rom. 5:11). Yet the Greek noun and verb form appear in Romans and 2 Corinthians as "reconciliation" and "reconcile." These are expressive terms in English or Greek, meaning to restore an original relationship. That and the resurrection were the message when "the Son of God, Jesus Christ . . . was preached among you by us—by me, Silvanus, and Timothy" (2 Cor. 1:19, NKJB).

Thus the "light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God," dawned at Corinth (2 Cor. 4:4). In the Greek, "gospel" meant "good news" or "message of happiness," a concept with the same positive tones for man as "the great plan of happiness" referred to in the Book of Mormon (Alma 42:8). Christ's atonement made it so, and Paul was one of the "ministers of the new testament; not of the letter, but of the spirit" (2 Cor. 3:6).

"Testament" here is a Greek legal term (diatheke) for the binding promise of a will, but it was used in the Greek translation of the Old Testament for God's covenant with Israel. Thus, Paul's "new testament" is the Lord's new covenant with the Saints wherein their sins are forgiven through the atonement of Christ. And 2 Corinthians 3 takes its joyful tone not from the disappearance of divine commands but from the rejoicing of the believer that the "letter"—the searching by study and the multiplicity of Mosaic rules—had been replaced by Christ's atonement and gospel, in which "my yoke is easy, and my burden is light" (Matt. 11:30). The King James Version uses "covenant" and "testament" interchangeably as Paul teaches that the work of Christ fulfills the laws of Moses.

Although Christ's atonement is more visible in the next letters to be studied, 2 Corinthians 5 explains how it works. Latter-day Saints also know its striking doctrines in the great Book of Mormon chapters on the subject and in Doctrine and Covenants 19. Paul begins with the reality that the body will be laid down, bringing a time when the Saints are "absent from the body, and . . . present with the Lord" (2 Cor. 5:8). But they are accountable for their earthly actions, since in the future "all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body . . . whether it be good or bad" (2 Cor. 5:10). But the sins of those who have accepted Christ and his gospel are taken by him "who knew no sin" (2 Cor. 5:21)—for "one died for all" (2 Cor. 5:14). This concept builds to the magnificent testimony of God, who "reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ" (2 Cor. 5:18). This is the end of the "saved by grace" tract, but it was the beginning of Paul's life of gratitude, for 2 Corinthians 5 ignores passive Christianity and steps confidently along the path of responsible Christianity. The old sins and the old ways should be past for those who have accepted Christ's true gospel (2 Cor. 5:17); this comparison of the death of the old person and the vital new person meets readers of Romans, Ephesians, and Colossians. Yet Christ is not only Savior for the Saints, but he is also their example on the road to perfection, where they must carefully walk by the Spirit. Christ brought about the Atonement so that those accepting his gospel "should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again" (2 Cor. 5:15). Such a new life involves daily choices of self-control but is surrounded by the blessings of God.

Sacrifice

No one leads others to a higher level without experiencing unawareness, insensitivity, or even rejection from them. Few realize what it takes to help others until they also reach that higher level. How many children or students appreciate their parents and teachers before they become parents and teachers themselves? Christ and Paul both reveal the struggle to lead others spiritually, but there is a corresponding joy that is highlighted in 2 Corinthians: "For just as the sufferings of Christ flow over into our lives, so also through Christ our comfort overflows" (2 Cor. 1:5, NIV). Paul "boasts" in this letter, but only to remind his enemies of his credentials on knowing Judaism, suffering, and the visions of the Lord. He does not boast of the inner peace of the Spirit, but his inner composure emerges in 2 Corinthians as vividly as the sacrifices and hardships that he consciously reviews. This book quietly shows that God's rich blessings are sure when one performs his errands.

Paul needs no earthly status, for he is satisfied to hold heavenly treasures with other Saints in "earthen vessels," referring to the common pottery around him (2 Cor. 4:7). He validates Jesus' beatitudes, for in literally hungering and thirsting he is filled with the joy of the Spirit. Can one be "blessed" when persecuted? Paul answers that he is "troubled on every side, yet not distressed . . . persecuted, but not forsaken" (2 Cor. 4:8-9). Part of Paul's burden of sacrifice was risking danger—some of these persecutions were mentioned in the biographical chapters of this book. He wanted his Corinthian detractors to know his integrity by the measure of his discomfort and his risking his life for the gospel: whether the blows of being beaten, whether prisons, whether mobs (2 Cor. 6:5), whether fatigue, hunger, or physical discomfort (2 Cor. 11:27). But how easily he moves from such outer afflictions to anxiety over the Saints' righteousness and the criticisms of self-righteous Saints. After exposure to thieves on lonely roads, he was certain to be mobbed in the cities when he preached the gospel (2 Cor. 11:26). And after making converts, he was certain to meet problems from many and rebelliousness from some. After all perils "without," he assumed "the care of all the churches" (2 Cor. 11:28). Paul's longest letters express his deep concerns over serious problems: "For out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote unto you with many tears" (2 Cor. 2:4).

What parent, leader, or concerned friend has not had the same feelings? Even Jesus wept over unrepentant Jerusalem. Paul was not sacrificing for an institution but for people. The principle of sacrifice means discomfort in finding his missionary contacts, means facing any scorn in sharing the gospel, means care in leading converts through immaturity to godliness. His list of sacrifices seems inexhaustible. With this record of what one apostle gave for the kingdom, can one smugly think of going to Paul's glory without being able to turn off the television and talk with family members and fill Church assignments? Missionaries look back at the "happiest years of their lives" because they sacrificed for the Saints and for converts. Parents similarly look back at their busiest involvement with their families. Bishops and Relief Society presidents experience the same illogical combination of giving beyond their capacity and receiving unimagined joy. Latter-day Saints are deeply committed to the principle of sacrifice, and the above examples show that selflessness is not a burden but the essence of life's opportunity. Jesus said, "Whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it" (Matt. 16:25). Paul was in the midst of visible dangers and demanding travel when he wrote 2 Corinthians, but he could say that the "inward man is renewed day by day" (2 Cor. 4:16). And he gives a convincing glimpse of the Lord's resources and rewards that were deep wells of refreshment as he labored "by pureness, by knowledge, by longsuffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned" (2 Cor. 6:6).

Repentance

Speaking by the same inspiration that guided Paul, Joseph Smith took the above words and made them the yardstick of how all priesthood must be used (D&C 121:41-42). Every organization is a system of extended authority, and appointments are made to achieve the goals of that organization. Christ's church is also a system of extended authority, which is delegated to "bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). Since that process moves from imperfection toward perfection, repentance is critical. Since repentance involves knowing a better way, teaching is essential. And no leader can twist away from the hard truth that teaching involves criticism. Thus, Joseph Smith faced the "reproving" function of leadership, but strictly cautioned that its motive must be "love unfeigned"; its method must be "when moved upon by the Holy Ghost"; its result must always be "showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy" (D&C 121:43). Second Corinthians is Paul's "increase of love" afterward. This letter shows the anatomy of repentance and how one leader applied the inspired principle of steadfast love in his relationship with those he sought to help. This eternal principle is vital this hour to any Latter-day Saint leader, teacher, or parent.

The gospel seeks to alleviate guilt, not produce it. Confusion, misunderstanding, and sin all produce guilt. Christ's atonement illuminates dim human paths with the glow of assurance. Everyone is included in "God so loved the world" (John 3:16). Yet many things are implied in God's giving of his Son—not only the Atonement, but the missionary commission to spread the message and include all willing in Christ's Church. This does not mean handing people tracts and ignoring them thereafter. Paul's church was a system of caring, above all for spiritual welfare. Paul says that God set the example by "the riches of His goodness, forbearance, and longsuffering"—and that these qualities develop steadfast love, which "leads you to repentance" (Rom. 2:4, NKJB). Paul's Corinthian letters show him exercising just such concerned leadership to motivate the Corinthian Saints to repent.

Paul wrote his first letter not to wound, but "that ye might know the love which I have more abundantly unto you" (2 Cor. 2:4). He encouraged the Saints to "forgive . . . and comfort" an offender (2 Cor. 2:7); to "confirm your love toward him" (2 Cor. 2:8). Paul's "increase of love" was especially appropriate because the Corinthians had taken seriously Paul's letter and the leader sent to follow it up. The apostle's heart went out to them because of "the obedience of you all, how with fear and trembling ye received him" (2 Cor. 7:15). Thus, Paul's duty of confrontation had produced only temporary pain because lives were changed (2 Cor. 7:8). A slight modernization clarifies Paul's powerful explanation of this "first principle": "Now I rejoice, not that you were made sorry, but that your sorrow led to repentance. For you were made sorry in a godly manner, that you might suffer loss from us in nothing. For godly sorrow produces repentance to salvation, not to be regretted; but the sorrow of the world produces death" (2 Cor. 7:9-10, NKJB).

There is indeed the bitter pain of the results of sin in a person angry because he immaturely refuses to learn. "It is hard for you to kick against the goads" (Acts 26:14, NKJB), the Lord had told Paul at his conversion. But when one sincerely reaches to God for growth, he takes the pain of sin as a lesson. This "godly sorrow" brings repentance "not to be repented of" because it rests on true principles and never needs to be changed. But the "sorrow of the world" tends to death—in one sense the actions themselves must die because they are counterfeit. The eternal way is the only permanent way to happiness. Second Corinthians shows that those accepting Christ must still struggle for righteousness in their lives, that repentance is a constant, ongoing process necessary for exaltation. Christ's atonement provided hope and forgiveness for the Corinthians but did not relieve them of the personal struggles to develop in their ability to live Christ's principles. As in modern revelation, the measure of their repentance was both regret and change of behavior. One truly repenting of sins "will confess them and forsake them" (D&C 58:43). Repentance is no more restricted to the time of conversion than is faith, for both are lifelong principles of growth in the gospel. Confession of Christ merely opens the way to learn to serve him, another name for repentance.

Welfare Contributions

The welfare program of the Early Church was operating immediately after Christ's forty-day ministry. "Not many days" after the Lord ascended, the apostles rose in the power of the Spirit to bring thousands into the Church, and the believers "had all things in common, and sold their possessions and goods, and divided them among all, as anyone had need" (Acts 2:44-45, NKJB). The perspective of Acts corrects some books that speak of Paul "taking up a collection" for the Jerusalem poor in order to bind the Jewish and Greek segments of the Church. That result followed, but Greek contributions to Jerusalem were part of a program that continued from Pentecost, both in Jerusalem and Antioch. Considerable property was laid "at the apostles' feet," with distribution continuing on the basis of need (Acts 4:35). Management was delegated to seven ordained assistants when burdens grew and bad feelings developed among Jewish widows with Greek or Jerusalem roots (Acts 6:1-6). Soon Paul was converted, and Barnabas called him to Antioch; then the Saints there were inspired to send these two with "relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Judaea" (Acts 11:29).

Welfare policies set the stage for Paul's Gentile contribution. After their first mission, he and Barnabas traveled to the Jerusalem council, where the Gentiles were required only to live principles of morality and awareness of their Jewish brothers and sisters. Paul later reviewed how the "pillars" (Peter, James, and John) assigned Paul and Barnabas to Gentile missions, reserving their own attention for the Jewish work. But at that time the leaders requested from the Gentile apostles, "We should remember the poor" (Gal. 2:10). Perhaps this was done in many ways over the years, but 2 Corinthians highlights the known efforts of Paul to fulfill the above promise. These were underway at the end of the third mission, as 1 Corinthians laid plans "to bring your liberality unto Jerusalem" (1 Cor. 16:3). While in Asia Minor, Paul was still in touch with the Galatian churches of the first mission and asked them to support "the collection for the saints" (1 Cor. 16:1). Romans and Acts show how Paul followed through, with the aid of representatives from many branches of the Church, until he finally arrived at Jerusalem to meet James with "alms and offerings to my nation" (Acts 24:17, NKJB).

The story of the early welfare program is inspiring; in spite of long distances the Early Church was a brotherhood of love in action. Their convictions on giving and rules for giving are found in Paul's insightful chapters of 2 Thessalonians 3, 1 Timothy 5, and 2 Corinthians 8 and 9. In these last two chapters, Christ's second great commandment is so visible. Paul's encouragement to generous giving recalls other "golden rules" of the Lord: "It is more blessed to give than to receive" (Acts 20:35)—"Give, and it shall be given unto you" (Luke 6:38). So Paul stresses the example of the giving Savior, who gave his spiritual riches to raise mankind from spiritual poverty (2 Cor. 8:9). The principle of sacrifice is clear. Northern Greece had given out of "deep poverty" (2 Cor. 8:2), and Paul expected prosperous Corinth to fill the wants of Jerusalem from "your abundance" (2 Cor. 8:14). But rich blessings of sacrifice are promised in this version of the law of the harvest: lean givers will reap lean blessings, and rich givers will reap rich blessings (2 Cor. 9:6). Prosperity and wealth are resources by which the faithful might increase faith on the earth (2 Cor. 9:10-12). And what greater blessing for giving than the approval of God and his Son, who said, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me" (Matt. 25:40). Paul knows that relationship and promises its warmth to the generous: "For God loves a cheerful giver" (2 Cor. 9:7, NKJB). The quotation is adapted from the Greek translation of the Old Testament: "God blesses a cheerful man and a giver." From personal knowledge Paul changed the verb—such a person God loves.

Priesthood Authority

"For his letters . . . are weighty and powerful; but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech contemptible" (2 Cor. 10:10). Thus the defiant party continued to ridicule the apostle who waited for repentance by delaying confrontation. For the most part he had been rewarded, but now on the verge of coming, he warned his detractors. Just as his letters insisted on obedience, so "will we be also in deed when we are present" (2 Cor. 10:11). Indeed, he had "authority, which the Lord hath given us for edification, and not for your destruction" (2 Cor. 10:8). Hoping to reach the rebellious, Paul warned them that division and strife could not be tolerated. The Early Church was indeed one, and its priesthood leaders had the duty to excommunicate those who attacked the doctrine and leaders from within.

The defiant party was led by "false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ" (2 Cor. 11:13). They were Satan's "ministers . . . transformed as the ministers of righteousness" (2 Cor. 11:15). Paul describes his opponents without naming them and uses two other expressions that bluntly label these false leaders. Paul quickly reviews his sacrifices, sarcastically concluding that he is "a fool in glorying." But his opponents have forced this, "for in nothing am I behind the very chiefest apostles, though I be nothing" (2 Cor. 12:11). This does not refer to his fellow members of the Twelve, since it is too debasing. He argues that he can indeed meet the qualifications of his opponents by being nothing, which not so thinly says that they are nothing. The overdone adjective with "apostles" is ironic—they are literally "overgreat apostles" (huperlian). Interpreters now tend to see Paul matching ridicule with ridicule. If he is a weak apostle, those without authority to judge him are "super-apostles" (NAB, NIV). One of them is evidently the "thorn in the flesh" that Paul three times prayed would depart (2 Cor. 12:7). Many continue to assume that this is some sickness or affliction of Paul, one otherwise unknown in Acts and his letters. But the "thorn in the flesh" is personalized as "the messenger of Satan" (2 Cor. 12:7). Paul's triple prayer to have him removed precedes his "third time I am ready to come to you" (2 Cor. 12:14), making it quite possible that the apostle prayed for the humbling of the chief rebel every time he contemplated coming. The "thorns" of Moses (Num. 33:55) and Ezekiel (Ezek. 28:24) are the enemies of Israel.

But true signs did not follow false apostles, and Paul insists that in him the "signs of an apostle" came powerfully to Corinth (2 Cor. 12:12). His office is highlighted by exposing the "false apostles" (2 Cor. 11:13). The closing chapters of 2 Corinthians strikingly resemble 1 Corinthians 9 in vocabulary. There, Paul headlines his answer by writing "apostle" three times (1 Cor. 9:1-2, 5). Then he spontaneously mentions his "power" six times in the same argument. Only those with real power worry about its misuse, and Paul treated the Corinthians carefully, saying, "that I abuse not my power in the gospel" (1 Cor. 9:18). "Power" here is exousia, regularly translated "authority." That translation appears as Paul begins to warn the rival party of his "authority," given for "edification, and not for your destruction" (2 Cor. 10:8). Paul used the same phrase and the same word for authority in closing the letter, promising "sharpness" if he had to come and exert his "power" (2 Cor. 13:10). There were not only sins of belonging to dissenting factions but also sexual sins for which "many . . . have not repented" (2 Cor. 12:21). Thus, Paul wrote plainly that on coming "I will not spare" (2 Cor. 13:2). No one at Corinth would doubt that the office of apostle had the right to direct and supervise the whole Church.

Three Heavens

"The third heaven"? (2 Cor. 12:2.) Christian literature today knows no such terminology. In recent years several books have the title Heaven; Protestant and Catholic encyclopedia articles continue to use the singular instead of the plural. Yet if Paul is believed, there is more than one heaven. Although commentators soften the contradiction by explaining different states of joy in one heaven, Paul's "third heaven" erases that picture. True, Paul sometimes wrote "heaven" of the place where God dwells, but he used "heavens" twice as much. Paul normally used the plural, even though the King James Version sometimes writes the singular for the Greek plural. For Paul, Christ is exalted "far above all heavens" (Eph. 4:10). If Christ is literally "higher than the heavens" (Heb. 7:26), he is in the highest heaven.

So the "third heaven" is not unexpected in Paul's letters. Indeed, it would be expected by anyone reading 1 Corinthians 15 on the rich possibilities for resurrected bodies. Answering the scoffer who asked what kind of body there could be in the Resurrection, Paul said that there is unimagined variety as God brings forth the dead: "One glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: for one star differeth from another star in glory" (1 Cor. 15:41-42). Why don't more commentaries mesh the three glories in 1 Corinthians with the three heavens in 2 Corinthians? Instead, we meet strange comparisons to apocryphal books where imagination runs to mythical schemes of seven or twelve heavens. Speculation is unnecessary, for Paul once talks of three glories and once of three heavens. Not only do the two Corinthian letters correlate, but the second adds the critical fact that his knowledge came not from opinion but from a mighty vision.

Was this vision Paul's? This question was concisely answered at the end of chapter 2. There, the meaning of his prefacing words was surveyed: "I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord" (2 Cor. 12:1). Paul actually linked that thought to the material just before, since chapter divisions are modern. The reader of 2 Corinthians knows that the apostle answered challengers by a long section asking whether anyone could meet his record of sacrifices for the gospel. This takes the entire second half of 2 Corinthians 11, starting with the necessity of having to boast: "Seeing that many glory after the flesh, I will glory also" (2 Cor. 11:18). And then Paul lists his trials in the first person, commenting that such things are best for boasting "if I must needs glory" (2 Cor. 11:30). But for his detractors, the real question is whether Paul represents God, so he is forced to tell how God guided him, prefacing that with the apology that literally says it is not fitting or appropriate to boast about visions (2 Cor. 12:1). But, of course, he must in order to confront his critics. The prefacing verse still speaks of "me"; Paul follows with the vision about a "man in Christ" and resumes with concern for his own humility—"Lest I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of the revelations" (1 Cor. 12:7). Someone else's vision would not answer Paul's Corinthian scoffers, and he personally ends with the "abundance" of his contact with the Lord. The "man in Christ" who saw the glories of the third heaven was clearly Paul.

What did Paul see? "Such a one was caught up to the third heaven. . . . Caught up into paradise and heard inexpressible words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter" (2 Cor. 12:2-4, NKJB). Although Paul and Luke tell of several visions, no other contains the unique language of being "caught up." So the third heaven and paradise merge as the same experience. Paul uses "paradise" of the place of God's throne, as did John (Rev. 2:7) and Joseph Smith on occasion (D&C 77:2). Paul dates the "third heaven" experience "fourteen years ago" and does not give new circumstances for seeing "paradise," another reason for seeing these parallel terms as describing the same experience. Moreover, both "third heaven" and "paradise" are introduced by the same language of "whether in the body or out of the body I do not know, God knows" (2 Cor. 12:3, NKJB). None of Paul's other visions carry such words of awe before them. Paul shares the bare reality of the most sacred event of his life.

This last point shows that the "third heaven" is the highest heaven. By the time Paul wrote 2 Corinthians, he had received three other known visions of the Lord: his first vision near Damascus, his temple vision three years after his conversion (Acts 22:17-21), and the vision directing him to stay at Corinth (Acts 18:9-10). In each of these, the words of the Lord are given in some detail. But Paul did not talk about the vision of the third heaven; he said that it was "not lawful" to talk about it (2 Cor. 12:4). So seeing the "third heaven" was more sacred than his other visions of Christ. And why did he pick this vision above all others to share with the Corinthians? Obviously because nothing else in his life matched it, and his detractors could not name another vision like it. So the vision of transcending sacredness must be of the highest heaven. Latter-day Saints commonly refer to the "first degree of glory" as the highest, and Paul makes the "third heaven" the highest, the place where God dwells. Since no heaven exists above it, Paul clearly accepted just three heavens from the sure knowledge of his most sacred revelation.

As discussed in studying 1 Corinthians 15, the earliest Christian "elders" taught the doctrine of three heavens in the hereafter, a knowledge restored by Joseph Smith in his sweeping vision recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 76. Paul's three guarded verses on his "inexpressible" revelation are doctrinally close to the 119 verses given to the Prophet. Joseph Smith was authorized to outline the future for the benefit of the latter-day world, though, like Paul, he was commanded not to record all things (D&C 76:44-47, 114-16). Apparently Paul's detailed knowledge of the three heavens went to the grave with him. Thus, churches based only on the Bible can say little about the hereafter unless they trust to imagination rather than revelation. The views in one Protestant church are typical of today's confusion: "Ideas range from a nebulous, indefinable existence to a definite place, like a city of golden streets." [^1] Yet Christian leaders say less and less on just what mankind must prepare for. One characterizes the situation: "We suffer from a silence in the pulpit on the subject of heaven." [^2] Paul shows that God's plan includes the three glories of the hereafter. If not in modern revelation, where else will such knowledge be found?

NOTES

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Strabo, Geography 8.6.23 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^2] Ibid., 8.6.20.
