Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul ( 1983)

6

Letters Preaching Christ

Most letters of Paul emphasize Christ, but the three grouped here were written with an intensity and sustained teaching about the Lord that sets them apart. It is useful to group them topically because the dates of Galatians and Hebrews can be debated. Yet Romans appears here in probable order. It was written soon after 2 Corinthians to prepare the Roman Saints for Paul's stay at Rome, during which time he wrote the imprisonment letters discussed in the next chapter. Hebrews probably belongs to that group in time of writing, and Galatians' style argues strongly that it was written near the time of Romans. These three together explain the limitations of Jewish laws of salvation and show how Christ's sacrifice made possible the personal remission of sins.

The Protestant Reformation was erected on the foundation of Romans and Galatians. Luther stressed them, and tracts on salvation through Christ take most of their quotations from these books. These letters of Paul show the strengths of great depth but also limitations of little breadth. With Hebrews, they were written to counter a Jewish interpretation of the gospel. The theology of the letter to the Romans is not Paul's theology, but only a part of it. The atonement of Christ is the marvelous foundation of the gospel, but not the whole gospel. Belief in Jesus Christ does not save without obedience to Jesus Christ. When studied as a whole, Romans and Galatians clearly say that. And the truths about Jesus Christ do not bring salvation without the ordinances administered by the Church of Jesus Christ. Hebrews opens that issue dramatically in discussing Jesus' authority as High Priest over his Church.

GALATIANS

Profile

Sent from: Paul, probably in Greece before traveling to Jerusalem, joined by "all the brethren with me."

Sent to: Members at Galatia, the converts of the first mission.

Date: Probably written about the same time as Romans, A.D. 58.

Purpose: To correct false teachings that circumcision and the law of Moses were necessary for salvation.

Main themes: The gospel and revelation; justification by faith; moral laws of the gospel.

Background

The Location

As Paul returned to Jerusalem with the large welfare collection for the Jerusalem Saints, he surrounded himself with representatives from each Gentile missionary area in which he had worked. In reverse order of the missions, there were two from Asia, three from Greece, and two from the central Asia Minor cities of the first mission: Gaius of Derbe and Timothy (Acts 20:4). Timothy was from Derbe's neighboring city Lystra (Acts 16:1). And Paul had told the Corinthians that he was in touch with "the churches of Galatia" for their welfare contribution (1 Cor. 16:1). Without much question, Gaius and Timothy were used to communicate with their own area, as the other welfare representatives of the churches were. Thus "Galatia" in the Corinthian letter includes two of the prominent cities of Paul's first missionary journey. Indeed, one possibility for Paul hearing disquieting news from Galatia would be when the welfare representatives brought contributions from these cities at the end of the third missionary journey. Since Paul personalizes all other letters, Galatians stands out in adding an unnamed group sending the letter: "all the brethren with me" (Gal. 1:2, literal trans.). The reference makes no sense unless the Galatians knew some or all of these associates. Paul called new converts to assist him, so the Galatians would not ordinarily know all his missionary companions. But this situation was reversed at the end of the third journey when Paul sent details of how the Galatian welfare contribution would be sent to him and forwarded to Jerusalem.

Meticulous scholars have sought another Galatian location. They point to northern Asia Minor as the incoming land of the earlier migration of Gauls, who gave their name to the Galatian heartland. That may be so, but no one disputes that some cities of the first mission were in the Roman province of Galatia, which included central Asia Minor. Paul might write specifically to Derbe and Lystra, where his representatives had come from, and properly use Galatia. Or Galatia could include surrounding cities and still be a fairly accurate generalization. Luke's story of missionary work never describes Paul's preaching in northern Galatia but has this sequence: (1) conversions at Iconium, Lystra, and Derbe during the first mission, with presiding elders left over organized branches; (2) revisiting Derbe and Lystra during the second mission with the Jerusalem Council decision—this seems to be summarized as traveling "throughout Phrygia and the region of Galatia" (Acts 16:6); (3) revisiting "the country of Galatia and Phrygia in order, strengthening all the disciples" (Acts 18:23)—this took place on the third mission as Paul traveled through Asia Minor on the way to Ephesus. Luke is a clear writer and normally just mentions revisits to areas of preaching already described. Thus, he defines "Galatia" for his readers as the group of inland cities Paul reached on his first mission. Specific references in both letters and Acts refer to the cities of southern Galatia. Acts shows how carefully Paul followed through with them, and the letter shows how the apostle continued to use every opportunity to educate them in the gospel.

Church Members

Besides the men mentioned above, only Timothy's family is profiled in Acts 16 and 2 Timothy 1. So the missionary journey in Acts 13 and 14 and the Galatian letter are the sources for understanding these Church branches. Many Gentile converts are reported in Acts, and Paul recalled that they turned to the true God after serving those "which by nature are no gods" (Gal. 4:8). Intense Jewish opposition drove Paul out of Antioch, Iconium, and Lystra, and it is known from Josephus that this area had strong Jewish populations. This throws light on the chief problem of Galatians—whether Gentile converts should be circumcised. In fact, Paul had Timothy circumcised because of Jewish suspicion that he would be a lukewarm Jew in a divided home: "Because of the Jews which were in those quarters, for they knew all that his father was a Greek" (Acts 16:3). As time went on, there were probably conversions of orthodox Jews who could not deny that Jesus was the Messiah but could not adapt to the church rule relieving Gentile converts from living Old Testament rules. Jews and Christian Jews were also in contact with Jerusalem through the regular pilgrimages there to the main feasts. The Antioch experience was probably repeated as those returning from Judaea taught a stricter rule: "Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved" (Acts 15:1).

Paul reminded the Galatians how they received him "as an angel of God, even as Christ Jesus"—if possible "ye would have plucked out your own eyes, and have given them to me" (Gal. 4:14-15). And this acceptance came in spite of "how through infirmity of the flesh I preached the gospel unto you at the first" (Gal. 4:13). Biographers leap to drama, in this case too quickly to the "thorn in the flesh" (2 Cor. 12:7) to conclude that Paul labored under the handicap of chronic sickness, malaria, or any number of other guesses. But part of the foundation disappears, as already discussed, when 2 Corinthians 12:7 really talks of Paul's main opponent instead of sickness. Likewise in Galatians, "infirmity" is a term (astheneia) that Paul normally uses for human frailty, not sickness; "weakness" in 1 Corinthians 2:3 is the mortal "fear" and "trembling" of an imperfect person preaching a perfect message. If one is determined to look for physical disability, Paul was stoned and left for dead at Lystra, which was one reason he could remind the Galatians that his sacrifice for them was beyond reproach: "I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus" (Gal. 6:17). They had been fiercely loyal to the apostles in the trials "at the first" (Gal. 4:13), which suggests some time lapse and continued faithfulness. The apostle could thus challenge them with the question, "Have ye suffered so many things in vain?" (Gal. 3:4.)

Reason for Writing

Paul aimed at a narrow target in writing Galatians: those burdening the Gentile converts with circumcision and its covenant of living Jewish rules. An ancient word used by Paul and Josephus is useful—these were "Judaizers." The threat to the Galatian churches is clear from the letter, but the manner of Paul's defense as clearly suggests that the Judaizers used the leaders of the Church against him. Such claims are cheaply made but harder to back up. When Church leaders sent their decision to Antioch after the Jerusalem Council, they noted similar rumors but denied them: "Certain which went out from us have troubled you . . . saying, Ye must be circumcised, and keep the law: to whom we gave no such commandment" (Acts 15:24). This clearing of the record not only showed their position on circumcision but also revealed the pattern of misrepresenting their position. Paul's defensiveness in Galatians 1 cannot be understood without knowing that he is correcting such a problem.

"Who has cast a spell upon you?" That is Paul's question as he moves to preach Christ over the old covenant (Gal. 3:1, literal trans.). The "foolish Galatians" are afflicted by those "that desire to be under the law" (Gal. 4:21). This is specifically the Law of Moses, for the Judaizers "constrain you to be circumcised," and Paul accuses them of wanting to please Jews living around them to avoid persecution (Gal. 6:12). Many had begun to obey the ceremonies of the Jewish calendar: "Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years" (Gal. 4:10).

All of the above is most important in using Galatians, for it speaks to the narrow issue of false doctrine more precisely than does any other letter Paul wrote. A refutation of a single misconception is not a good source for perspective on the whole gospel. We have truth, powerfully presented, but not the whole truth. Readers should think about their reactions under the emotions of arguing against a false position. Paul can oversimplify in correcting extreme Jewish Christians. Galatians is a sharp and precise tool but created for a narrow purpose. Paul here explains the power of Christ's atonement but not all the remaining doctrines that relate to it.

No other letter of Paul has so much agreement on authenticity and so little on dating. Scholars multiply theories here, but there are important guidelines. One is the organization and style of Romans and Galatians. Midway through chapter 2, Galatians discusses the inadequacy of the Mosaic law and the need to accept Christ through baptism (Gal. 3:27). It closes with the moral duties of the Saints. Paul is too creative to make any letter the duplicate of another, but Romans follows the same format: it discusses the shortcomings of the Mosaic law, becoming Christ's through baptism (Rom. 6:3-5), and closes with the moral duties of the Saints. No two letters of Paul resemble each other so closely in content and argument. Then there are impressive phrases unique to the two: the Golden Rule as the sum of Christian duty (Gal. 5:14, Rom. 13:9) and the language of the Saints' adoption, using the Aramaic word in "crying, Abba, Father" (Gal. 4:4-7; Rom. 8:14-17). Such similarities argue for nearness in the times of their writing. As will be seen, Romans was clearly written in southern Greece as Paul was on his way to Jerusalem with the welfare contribution. His premonitions of persecution were strong, for he said that "all" of his converts "shall see my face no more" (Acts 20:25). He could not interrupt taking funds and Church representatives to Jerusalem. Had he received news of the Galatians' defection at such a time, the frustrated tone of that letter would follow. His only chance of helping would be a strong rebuke, though he really desired "to be present with you now" (Gal. 4:20).

Whatever the date of Galatians, the average Bible reader would recognize the correlation between the Jerusalem Council of Acts 15 and Paul's conference with Church leaders on his Gentile gospel in Galatians 2. Some scholars spin theories here, insisting that the Galatian conference does not give the conclusion of the Jerusalem Council decision—and Paul would have told the Galatians specifically of that decision if the Jerusalem Council had been already held. But this argument comes from modern armchair scholarship. The decision of the Twelve was taken to the Galatian churches by Paul (Acts 16:4-5), and if his converts had weakened in spite of knowing that, why should it be requoted? Galatians would give supplementary information in the obviously short time that Paul could write. The following discussion will show the close resemblance between the Acts 15 and the Galatians 2 councils. Since they so clearly refer to the same event, Galatians must have been written after that council and Paul's first revisit to Galatia. The Galatians accepted the council decision from Paul about A.D. 50, and one would assume some time would have passed afterward for their radical change of mind. Stylistic correlations discussed above suggest how much later Galatians was probably written—about the same time as Romans, A.D. 58.

Main Teachings

The Gospel and Revelation

Paul opened 1 Corinthians by condemning divisions in Christ's Church, and he opens Galatians by condemning changes in Christ's gospel. To paraphrase his Ephesians summary: one Lord, one Church, and one doctrine (Eph. 4:5). Most thoughtful people are impressed by young Joseph Smith's search for God, for he was puzzled by various faiths and opposing teachings before praying and finding the answer by revelation. How else can one get an answer? Contradictory doctrines have started the same way conflicting churches started—through new interpretations of the Bible. People are creative enough to produce unending differences, but who except God can say which of the hundreds of ways will please God? So Paul links the true gospel with revelation. His credentials are not those of a Pharisee, finely studying the issues. His credentials are those of a prophet relaying God's will. There is but one gospel, and neither mortal nor angel must contradict its truth (Gal. 1:8), for "I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ" (Gal. 1:12).

This general principle had special relevance to the Galatians. Paul first used it to deny the gospel of circumcision, and afterward he stressed that the council had settled the question by revelation.

Paul vigorously develops the first point by denying need of an apostle to instruct him, for he had preached in power for three years before meeting Peter and James. Many Protestants see an indication of individualism here: "Paul recognizes no college of apostles above him, only Christ and the gospel." [^1] But that confuses knowledge with authority. Furthermore, Paul is not opposing the Jerusalem apostles but the Judaizers' reports about the Jerusalem apostles. As noted in the Galatian introduction above, the Twelve pointed out that men had misrepresented their views on circumcision (Acts 15:24). Corinthian attempts to divide Peter and Paul (1 Cor. 1:12) were countered as Paul insisted that he and the other apostles preached the same gospel (1 Cor. 15:11). And in Galatians the leading apostles gave Paul "the right hands of fellowship" (Gal. 2:9), meaning specifically that they agreed with his procedure on his Gentile missions.

In the obviously urgent circumstances of writing, Paul had no choice but to undercut those clearly misusing the authority of the apostles "of the circumcision" (Gal. 2:8). Peter had no doubt visited Corinth (1 Cor. 9:5), and his name had been exploited there. In Galatia his name was also being exploited. In a day of poor communication, Paul made a "no matter what" argument. He could have produced letters from the chief apostles in several months, but he came to the point by insisting that even if Peter or an angel would support circumcision, that position was wrong because it was contrary to the "revelation of Jesus Christ" (Gal. 1:8, 12). Paul was not downgrading priesthood leaders; he was bluntly saying that the revelation must guide all priesthood leaders alike. Thus chapter 1 has the "even if" tone that only seems to set Paul above the Twelve; but chapter 2 is the sober appeal to the fact that Paul met with the Twelve. Thus, Galatians discloses Church order in keeping with Paul's powerful insistence on the leadership of the Twelve in 1 Corinthians 12 and Ephesians 4. Indeed, Paul valued the earthly knowledge of Christ from Peter and James; in Jewish synagogues Paul quoted their testimony of the Resurrection (Acts 13:31), as he did in his writing (1 Cor. 15:5, 7). Paul's fifteen days with Peter three years after his conversion is a symbol of correlation and supervision, not isolation (Gal. 1:18).

Galatians next reviews the only Jerusalem meeting detailed in the letters, and the point-by-point description of Acts is strikingly similar. In both, the occasion was reviewing the Gentiles accepting the gospel without Jewish rules; the location and participants are the same; circumcision was central in each, with the approval by general authorities of the "gospel of the uncircumcision" (Gal. 2:7). In both accounts Paul and Barnabas return to Antioch afterward. As noted above, close comparison is necessary because some scholars theorize that the Acts-Galatians councils are two different meetings. But the New Testament demands a single meeting. Luke narrates the Jerusalem Council as the necessary outgrowth of the first full preaching to the Gentiles. It was not needed before that, and its decision effectively settled the issue of circumcision of the Gentiles. Paul's point is just that—after the council, all should know better. Both sources have an air of urgency before the meetings, and an air of finality afterward. Acts and Galatians mesh well in view of Paul summarizing in 10 verses what Luke takes 30 to cover. Thus, Galatians should not be required to give full details. [^2]

At the Jerusalem Council Paul "communicated unto them that gospel which I preach among the Gentiles" (Gal. 2:2, italics added); the italicized word (anatithemi) means to "lay before," and it implies "the added idea that the person to whom a thing is referred is asked for his opinion." [^3] Thus, Paul wanted the "pillars," Peter, James, and John, to evaluate his procedure of not circumcising the Gentile converts. The "right hands of fellowship" (Gal. 2:9) signified a ruling that Paul's methods were acceptable. Other agreements between the two records appear in outline:

Acts 15 Galatians 2

"They determined that Paul "I went up again to Jerusalem

and Barnabas . . . should go with Barnabas, and took

up to Jerusalem" (v. 2). Titus" (v. 1).

"They were received of the "I . . . communicated unto

church, and of the apostles them that gospel which I

and elders, and they declared preach among the Gentiles,

all things that God had done but privately to them which

with them" (v. 4). were of reputation" (v. 2).

Certain believing Pharisees Certain "false brethren"

insisted "that it was needful to sought to compel Titus "to be

circumcise them" (v. 5). circumcised," but Paul abso-

l utely refused (vv. 3-5).

The Twelve sent Paul and Peter, James and John "gave

Barnabas back to Antioch to me and Barnabas the right

with their decision and a letter hands of fellowship, that we

to "the brethren which are of should go to the Gentiles" (v.

the Gentiles in Antioch and 9, NKJB). Paul and Barnabas

Syria and Cilicia" (v. 23 ff). went to Antioch (vv. 11-13).

Revelation is the main point of Galatians 1 and the obvious reason for narrating the Jerusalem Council in Galatians 2. Paul sets the stage by emphasizing, "I went up by revelation" (Gal. 2:2). Of course, Acts 15:28 says specifically that the decision was made as "it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us." If Paul did not consider the decision of the "pillars" made by revelation, how could he blame Peter for coming to Antioch and not eating with the Gentiles? There Peter first ate with them—an act in keeping with the dietary harmony of Jew and Gentile recommended by the Jerusalem Council (Acts 15:29). But some came to Antioch from James, which caused Peter to withdraw from Gentile tables. Paul reacted strongly and confronted Peter, who in Paul's judgment was not acting "according to the truth of the gospel" (Gal. 2:14). But Peter no doubt had his side of the story. Fear may not have been his motive, and Paul may have acted prematurely. Paul admits that the mission of the "pillars" was to the Jews (Gal. 2:9). If intense Jewish converts reacted negatively to the council decision, James and Peter may have sought a transition delay to convince the stubborn. If Peter labored to bring this about, Paul may have pushed conformity to the council's ruling ahead of its time. Paul evidently retold the story because the Judaizers used the episode to give the impression that Peter agreed with them. The incident is instructive in showing two strong leaders agreeing on a principle that came by revelation but applying it with different timing. Paul does not say that Peter permanently separated himself from the Gentiles. These candid examples show how revelation came after deep searching. Paul reviewed them, of course, to show that Church leaders stood with him in teaching salvation through the revealed gospel, not through the Mosaic law.

Justification by Faith

Justification by faith is really salvation through Christ. Galatians gives Paul's main concept, though Romans uses the words "save" and "salvation." Latter-day Saints know that there are degrees of salvation, so these terms could logically refer to salvation from death. That is part of Christ's work as Savior in 1 Corinthians 15, where Paul vividly pictures the resurrection of all through Christ. But that is a partial salvation in the case of those not entering God's kingdom in eternity. Full salvation is receiving the highest degree of glory. Full salvation is receiving the first resurrection and entering Christ's kingdom. Full salvation reverses the effects of sin and purifies one to stand in God's presence. Ancient and modern scriptures generally apply "salvation" to entering God's presence. The Prophet Joseph Smith was told to seek for "everlasting salvation in the kingdom of God" (D&C 6:3), to be "saved in the kingdom of God, which is the greatest of all the gifts of God; for there is no gift greater than the gift of salvation" (D&C 6:13). Paul consistently uses "salvation" in the same sense—those rejecting the gospel are still resurrected, but "the gospel of Christ . . . is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth" (Rom. 1:16). Since Paul powerfully taught salvation by faith in Christ, he is talking about how mankind may obtain full salvation, or salvation from sin.

What is justification by faith? Galatians answers like a clear trumpet call: "We have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law: for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified" (Gal. 2:16). What does it mean to be justified? Peter and John do not use this word in the New Testament writings, though they use the concept. Luke uses it in the ordinary sense when the lawyer tried to save face in questioning Jesus: he was "willing to justify himself" (Luke 10:29). This questioner was trying to avoid the judgment of his audience. But God deals with eternal realities. The Greeks used "justify" of judges giving a decision of innocence, so Paul testifies that God through Christ holds his children guiltless. So to "justify" is to award forgiveness through Christ's sacrifice. One is justified when his sins are canceled through Christ's atonement. Luke traveled with Paul and recorded his synagogue speech saying that Christ brought about "forgiveness" or literally "remission of sins," and the same idea was repeated with different words: "By him all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses" (Acts 13:38-39).

This simple and assuring concept must not be obscured with theological theories. Justification is forgiveness. Paul simply teaches that through Christ sins are forgiven and not through Moses' laws. As noted, Paul's definition is: "By the works of the law shall no flesh be justified" (Gal. 2:16). What law? Many Protestants insist that Paul condemned all law as alien to justification through Christ: "Law condemns; it cannot justify. Ritual acts and good works offered as the basis of salvation destroy grace." [^4] But it is irresponsible to jump from Paul's criticism of Jewish law to a supposed criticism of all law. What precedes the Galatians 2 theme of justification apart from the "works of the law"? The Jerusalem Council on circumcision and Paul's rebuke of Peter for following Jewish rules of eating. Paul follows his theme of justification by Galatians 3, a spirited historic argument that reviews God's acceptance of Abraham through faith long before "the law, which was four hundred and thirty years after" (Gal. 3:17). No letter of Paul preaches justification apart from law more powerfully than Galatians, but no letter of Paul so clearly equates "the law" with the law of Moses. The best New Testament dictionary notes how many times "law" means "law of Moses" in Paul; the term "can almost come to mean (Jewish) religion. [^5] Because Galatians is shorter than Romans, it states justification without law more directly. Justification is plainly salvation through Christ's gospel instead of legalistic Judaism.

Two Types of Salvation through Christ

Salvation from Death Salvation from Sin

General salvation Individual salvation

Resurrection Exaltation

Obtained by all Obtained by some

Different glories in the Resurrection The celestial glory

Wicked receive the Last Resurrection The First Resurrection

Obtained through Christ's sacrifice Obtained through Christ's

sacrifice

Confession of Christ finally required Faith in Christ required

Unrepentant evil works bring Good works required

suffering

Saving ordinances not required Saving ordinances required

—Doctrine and Covenants 76

What did justification through Christ mean to Paul? Classical Protestantism asserts the deceptive opposition of grace versus law. But Paul is the measure of the true historical opposites that he encountered. The young Pharisee had labored for years in study. Lamplight flickered upon his manuscripts in Tarsus and at Jerusalem. Was the living God in books of history? The vision near Damascus shed a divine brilliance on all his study of scripture. The real opposites of new and old in Paul's life were love of the personal Christ versus plodding reasoning about past texts; obedience to new revelation versus the Rabbinic rules about the Mosaic rules; simplification of divine laws versus proliferation of man-made laws; the purification covenant of baptism versus daily ritual purifications; God's central moral obligations versus man's ceremonial observances that confused the central commandments. When the Mishnah was written down not long after Paul, it had sixty-three chapters containing five thousand to ten thousand rules on what a righteous Jew could and could not do. Paul was liberated from an oppressive religious system by his faith in Christ. Justification without the law was a judgment on the extreme elements of his Judaic life. The true contrasts between the old and new were simplification versus complexity and personal love of the Lord versus endless conformity to detail—in short, the new law and the new covenant over the old. The central justification passage in Galatians disagrees not with the "law" but the "works of the law" (Gal. 2:16), and Paul clearly had in mind Jewish ceremonialism in writing the phrase. Neither Galatians nor Romans is really philosophical, but practical, evaluating what is historically present, not abstract ideas. The contrast is not total grace over all law, but experience with a particular law that could not "have given life" (Gal. 3:21) versus the divine Lawgiver who sacrificed his life: "I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me" (Gal. 2:20).

Basic Protestantism follows a logic not supported by Galatians. Since justification comes through faith in Christ, actions and divine ordinances are theoretically irrelevant: "If people could be saved by obeying or fulfilling ritual requirements, they would be saving themselves. Lutherans believe that only God can save us." [^6] But Jesus commanded baptism (Mark 16:15-16), and the apostles required it to obtain a "remission of sins" (Acts 2:38). The fundamental Protestant believes he has already obtained this by accepting Christ, so usually baptism is seen as "an outward sign of an inward grace." That is, forgiveness is already given, making baptism a righteous gesture but not a requirement for adults. For instance, over one hundred Protestant ministers of Utah were polled, and 72 percent agreed that "those who reject Christ will suffer everlasting punishment." But of these only 20 percent agreed that "baptism is essential for salvation." [^7] But Paul did not reason in this fashion. One's justification through Christ required accepting Christ and his commandments: "For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus; for as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ" (Gal. 3:26-27). Paul did not argue the necessity of baptism because he was writing to Saints who had already been baptized. In Acts, Paul showed that baptism was essential to salvation by regularly requiring it. And according to Galatians, Paul did not consider that a person had "put on Christ" without baptism. Thus, the forgiveness of sins offered through Christ was accepted and made operational through baptism. [^8]

Moral Laws of the Gospel

Are daily acts irrelevant to justification by faith? Protestant theology comes perilously close to saying so. The following story will illustrate the difference between Latter-day Saint and extreme Protestant thinking. In the second world war, a Protestant minister and a very young serviceman in the U.S. Navy were engaged in a cordial conversation in Memphis, Tennessee. The minister discovered that the serviceman (this author) was a Latter-day Saint and asked, "What do Mormons believe one must do to be saved?" The serviceman quickly thought of the war around him that many were losing, the war against unrighteousness; he also thought of the minister as an ally in making people more Christlike. So assuming their common commitment to Christ, he answered, "We believe that we must live a good life." The response of the minister? Seething anger, beginning with "You could not have given me a worse answer." The serviceman kept calm and asked questions as the minister raged in defense of salvation through faith without any responsibility for righteous acts. The final question put to him: "Do you mean to say that one can commit adultery and murder and still be saved if he has confessed Christ beforehand?" The minister's answer: "That's exactly what I mean."

If this statement is shocking, it is simply blunter than explanations that pad some Protestant logic with abstract terms. Many ordinary Protestants would be deeply troubled by belief in Christ without belief in his moral laws, and many ministers are more balanced than this Memphis crusader. Yet he gave the core Protestant interpretation of Galatians and Romans. It is based on misunderstanding Paul's command: "Stand fast therefore in the liberty with which Christ has made us free, and do not be entangled again with a yoke of bondage" (Gal. 5:1, NKJB). But "liberty" here is measured against the "yoke" of the law of Moses—what Peter called the "yoke. . . which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear" (Acts 15:10). This world knows no liberty without law; in science, for example, exact requirements are the avenue for new discoveries and new possibilities. The God who controls the physical world through law would not ignore law in saving his children. Nothing more clearly solves this puzzle than the Book of Mormon teaching that Christ met the demands of the law of justice, enabling God to exercise mercy (Alma 42:14-15). In other words, God respects law enough to require his Son to meet the penalties of law in order to save mankind. Then does he ignore law in their personal lives after that? The object of all intelligent penal systems is to rehabilitate the criminal by effectively teaching him not to repeat his crime. Is God careless of the acts of his children who accept Christ? Protestant theory sees Galatians as teaching "the adequacy of faith without works as man's proper response to the work of Christ." [^9] In this theory, God motivates the believer to good works, but human agency, decision, and self-control are irrelevant to that process:

According to Protestant doctrine, justification is by faith alone without any merit deriving from any good work of the recipient either before or after justification. Justification is on the basis of good works—the good works of Jesus Christ. But the benefits of his redemptive work are received by the believer who has no merit of his own to contribute. Nothing which he ever does, even after justification, merits anything; because nothing which he does is ever perfectly good. That is, nothing which he does proceeds from a perfectly good motive, is directed perfectly according to the good standard, and is aimed perfectly at the glory of God. Nothing short of this is truly good. Since no justified person in this life ever does anything which meets such standards, he does no meritorious good work. Therefore, he never has any merit to claim which in any way supplements the merit of Christ. [^10]

But if law and obedience to it has disappeared in Galatians, why does Paul command the Galatian Saints to bear "one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ" (Gal. 6:2)? As surely as any Jewish rule, this is a rule, a Christian rule, even if it does go straighter to the heart of religion than thousands of regulations on ritual purity. Does the believer have license to ignore the commands of his Savior? Paul consistently teaches both freedom from past rules and obedience to the teachings of Christ and the apostles: "If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit" (Gal. 5:25). The italicized term means for Paul what the believer actually does in his daily life. Walking in the spirit does not mean to avoid daily life but to carefully control it by spiritual goals and the added strength of the Holy Ghost. Over thirty times Paul used "walk" in this sense: "Walk worthy of God, who called you into his kingdom and glory" (1 Thes. 2:12, literal trans.). Will one enter that kingdom if he ignores the command to walk worthily? Paul told the Thessalonians how "to walk and to please God," measuring this by the "commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus" (1 Thes. 4:1-2). Paul asked the Galatians to "walk in the Spirit" (Gal. 5:25) in the same way, for in that chapter and the next he weaves in commandments as examples of their Christian duty. It was Jesus who equated commandments with walking in the Spirit. He had promised the Holy Ghost, "whom the world cannot receive" without meeting this condition: "If ye love me, keep my commandments" (John 14:15-17). Both the Lord of the Gospels and the Tarsus apostle gave inspired commandments to those justified by faith: "Whosoever . . . shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven" (Matt. 5:19).

Paul's language in Galatians shows that the Saints knew the positive commandments, though the negative ones there are most striking. They yet believed in Christ, but added to his teaching, so Paul warned, "You have fallen from grace" (Gal. 5:4, NKJB). If that happened by performing unauthorized religious practices, it could more easily happen through open wickedness. That is Paul's specific warning to Galatian branches of the Church full of rebellion and conflict: "Now the works of the flesh are evident, which are these: adultery, fornication, uncleanness, licentiousness, idolatry, sorcery, hatred, contention, jealousy, anger, selfish ambition, dissensions, factions, envy, murders, drunkenness, revelry, and the like; of which I tell you before, just as I have also told you in time past, that those who practice such things will not inherit the kingdom of God" (Gal. 5:19-21, NKJB.) [^11]

Several of the ten commandments are here, reiterated when Paul teaches elsewhere of sins that will keep people out of God's kingdom. Are these to be commandments in the Old Testament but not in the New Testament? What is the distinction between the moral imperatives of the prophets and the conditions of obtaining God's kingdom in Paul? If the Galatians abused their liberty by violating these standards, they would have broken God's laws and would suffer the stated penalty. One is playing with words to deny that the above requirements are Christian laws. "Thou shalt not" is as plainly written in Paul's letters as in Moses' tablets.

Protestant theory wrestles with the answer: "Although Paul has said that we cannot by 'doing' inherit the kingdom of God . . . yet he strongly asserts here that by 'doing' we can bar ourselves from that kingdom." [^12] Thus, the Protestant premise forces a "paradox," and some solve it by claiming that those doing such things "thereby show themselves to be without the transforming gift of faith." [^13] That answer has some truth, but its fallacy is the effective denial of man's agency. Christian theologians define justification by faith in terms of accepting Christ's grace at conversion, but the spiritual growth in Christian virtue afterward is termed sanctification. Of great significance to Latter-day Saints, the word will be fully discussed later. The question here is the post-conversion life of the committed Christian. Paul warned the Galatians to avoid a dozen and a half serious sins. But Protestant analysis rejects that conclusion because it holds that God's children cannot share in responsibility for their own salvation: "In classical Protestantism, sanctification like justification is by grace alone through faith alone. No works of ours contribute anything to it." [^14] In that theology, forgiveness first comes "through faith alone apart from works"; next, works are inspired in the faithful by God's Spirit: "Yet such works performed, as well as the faith out of which they spring, make no contribution to the soul's justification, but they are to be regarded as declarative evidences of a man's acceptance in the sight of God." [^15] This leads to the idea that God arbitrarily saves those whom he will.

In summary, core Protestantism teaches that faith alone saves, that afterward God works in the believer to show the fruits of faith, but that the believers "make no contribution" to their salvation by a Christian life. In this major Christian view, "we are compelled to recognize our passivity." [^16] But if the early Saints did not labor with God in their own salvation, why did Paul speak ten thousand words on living up to God's standards? His letters are not attempts to convert them to Christ but exhortations to make their lives worthy of their commitment to Christ. And they are a farce if readers then and now can do nothing toward their salvation. Obviously this theory violates the common sense of many Protestants. One only has to read the signs in front of North American churches to know that ministers exhort their members to a better life. Practical Protestantism acts as if men and women are free agents. More significantly, members of churches today seek to live up to their Christian commitment. In the United States some 75 percent rate themselves as living a "very Christian life." [^17] That can be defined in terms of what is done or what is avoided, and 50 percent on this survey rated the following characteristics of a person living a "very un-Christian life" in this order: "Selfish, self-centered; does not seek or follow the will of God; unconcerned, uncaring; indulges in immoral conduct." [^18] People are taught by Bible reading and spiritual impressions that Paul's list of serious sins are indeed to be avoided. Paul, of course, spoke of unrepentant transgressions, for the true gospel holds out hope, not despair. Nevertheless, it also requires individual responsibility from those who covenant with the Lord in the waters of baptism. Their lives must rise above the serious sins on Paul's list. That is why Latter-day Saint worthiness interviews deal with the sins Paul mentions.

The believers' works are a part of their salvation, for Paul closed Galatians by the challenge to work and thus receive the eternal reward: "And let us not be weary in well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not" (Gal. 6:9). The condition is literally "If we don't give out," meaning not to allow oneself to "faint" in the heat of the day. The labor is literally "doing good," and clear connotations of determined action are seen in the translations: "If we do not slacken our efforts" (NEB); "If we don't give up the struggle" (JB); "If we do not give up" (NIV). What is "well doing"? Revelation gives God's standards, his laws. Christ's atonement does suspend cause and effect to bring mercy to all who fully accept him. But the "law of Christ" (Gal. 6:2) then requires a higher life. Growth through the Atonement is not passively relying on the omnipresent Savior of theology, but on the divine person who taught new laws to his disciples on the mount. His beatitudes were conditions of receiving blessings, and he inspired a modern prophet to restate that principle: "When we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated" (D&C 130:21). This restores perspective to Paul, who closed his "charter of Christian liberty" with the believer's "law of the harvest": "For he that sows to his flesh shall of the flesh reap destruction; but he that sows to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap everlasting life" (Gal. 6:8, literal trans.).

---
Notas:
[^1] Strabo, Geography 8.6.23 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^2] Ibid., 8.6.20.
[^3] Plutarch, On Borrowing 831A (Loeb Classical Library).
[^4] See the printed minutes in Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2nd ed. rev., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51) 7:233: "You cannot appoint a man at our head, but if you do want any other man or men to lead you, take them, and we will go our way to build up the kingdom in all the world."
[^5] Clement of Alexandria, Stromata ("Miscellanies") 3.6.74-76, also cited in Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History 3:30. Since the Greek text is the same, I have followed Kirsopp Lake's translation in the Loeb Classical Library, changing "wife" to the literal "yokefellow."
[^6] See examples in A. S. Hunt and C. C. Edgar, eds., Select Papyri, Non-Literary Papyri, Private Affairs (Loeb Classical Library) 1:401-3.
[^7] This is a general mandate for how one partakes, not a narrow critique of the "unworthy manner" in which Corinthians had partaken. There is a strong moral connotation of Paul's positive adverb for "worthy." To walk "worthily" of the Lord and his calling is simply to live gospel standards (1 Thes. 2:12; Eph. 4:1).
[^8] The words are quoted from the prayer on the bread, Doctrine and Covenants 20:77, and the ancient Book of Mormon record in Moroni 4:3. The following prayers for the wine simplify the language but no doubt are intended to compress the ideas stated in the first prayer.
[^9] Pliny, Letters 10:96 (Loeb Classical Library). The "oath" to live righteously was part of the worship service and was likely either the prayer blessing the bread and wine or the act of partaking itself. It translates sacramentum, from which the Christian word developed, meaning "an act making a binding oath."
[^10] Justin Martyr, First Apology 65. The translation is from the following with one change: Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson, Ante-Nicene Fathers, vol. 1 (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1956). I have translated politeuomai in the general sense instead of the overly literal "be a citizen."
[^11] Source given at n. 8 above.
[^12] Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, The Words of Joseph Smith (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), p. 3.
[^13] Ibid., pp. 3-4.
[^14] Ibid., p. 119.
[^15] Doctrine and Covenants 46:27-29, a revelation given soon after Joseph Smith arrived in Kirtland, Ohio. Early Kirtland strikingly resembles New Testament Corinth in intense faith together with aggressive attacks on the authority of Joseph Smith and Paul. In both cases counterfeit spirituality was identified and rebuked by these leaders. Partly with this experience in mind, Joseph Smith later said, "Every spirit or vision or singing is not of God. . . . Speak not in the gift of tongues without understanding it, or without interpretation. The Devil can speak in tongues." Ehat and Cook, p. 12.
[^16] Ibid., p. 256.
[^17] Ibid., p. 115.
[^18] Compare Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 9:279 (1862): "I say that the living oracles of God, or the spirit of revelation, must be in each and every individual, to know the plan of salvation and keep in the path that leads them to the presence of God."
