Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul ( 1983)

ROMANS

Profile

Sent from: Paul, at Corinth.

Sent to: "All . . . in Rome . . . called to be saints."

Date: Probably early in A. D. 58.

Purpose: To prepare the Roman members for his intended visit and to refute false teachings of the Judaizers.

Main themes: God's patience and judgment; justification by faith; the baptismal covenant; conditional election; moral laws of the gospel.

Background

The City

Perhaps a million people were interlocked in Rome, city of the emperor, the aristocracy, and the masses. Augustus could claim that he found a city of brick and changed it to marble. [^1] This boast had merit, for he left behind an astounding list of temples and public buildings that he built and repaired. [^2] Political and geographical center of the empire, Rome had long attracted Paul as a culminating missionary opportunity. He wrote to the Saints that he had desired "these many years to come unto you" (Rom. 15:23). The Italian Juvenal lived in Rome a few years after Paul and sketched the people of the city with slashing satire. The rich are carried by in sedan chairs, while the poor elbow each other through cluttered streets. Rome is wicked but on the move with projects and ideas—an international city and a melting pot. In Juvenal's overdone complaints, one can scarcely find a Roman in Rome. Greeks were everywhere, and one famous jibe referred to Antioch's river: "For long the Syrian Orontes has flown into the Tiber." [^3] And the Jews? They are also unwelcome realities in Roman satire.

Many sources report the extensive Jewish colony in Rome in the first century. Grateful to Julius Caesar for favor, the Jews were conspicuous at his funeral: "A throng of foreigners went about lamenting, each after the fashion of his country, above all the Jews." [^4] There was an attempted expulsion of the Jews under Tiberius, [^5] and another under Claudius, just before Paul came to Corinth, for he met the missionary couple Priscilla and Aquila, "lately come from Italy . . . because that Claudius had commanded all Jews to depart from Rome" (Acts 18:2). The imperial historian Suetonius seems to refer to Christ in a garbled way in mentioning this decree of Claudius: "Since the Jews constantly made disturbances at the instigation of Chrestus, he expelled them from Rome." [^6] This intimately fits the Acts picture of angry Jewish demonstrations against Christians. But another good Roman source suggests that Claudius's edict was modified somewhat because of the Jews' great numbers: "As for the Jews, who had again increased so greatly that by reason of their multitude it would have been hard without raising a tumult to bar them from the city, he did not drive them out, but ordered them, while continuing their traditional mode of life, not to hold meetings." [^7] The decree was temporary, but its various reports give invaluable glimpses of the impact of the gospel in Rome and of the strength of the Jewish community there. Paul had reason to fear the effect of the Judaizers as he wrote Romans.

Church Members

Was the Roman branch of the Church the largest to which Paul wrote? Romans has the longest list of greetings to individuals of any letter. Part of this is Paul's desire to cultivate friendships in an important place to be visited. The fact that he knew so many shows the effective communication network of the Early Church. The faith of the Saints at the world capital was "spoken of throughout the whole world" (Rom. 1:8; also 16:19). Although Paul had not yet been there, he had no doubt met travelers and members from Rome, to whom he sent greetings. Before Paul was converted, Jewish visitors heard the apostles at Pentecost (Acts 2:10), a process of investigation open thereafter at the three annual feasts that drew pilgrims from the world. When such contacts grew to conversions or when missionaries first visited Rome is not known. Now the apostle to the Gentiles sought to visit the Gentile political center, to build up the Church "even as among other Gentiles" (Rom. 1:13).

Romans 16 sends greetings to twenty-eight individuals in Rome, about a fourth of which were women. Families and Church circles were also included. And Paul sent greetings from nine members in Greece. Although identities are mostly obscure, these names show the intense personal relationships that Christ's gospel produced. Paul's letters shared eternal ideas, but his personal messages show the effective fellowship of the Church. Even the brother who wrote the letter for Paul felt at liberty to add his greetings "in the Lord" (Rom. 16:22). The same was true with Timothy, Paul's fellow laborer, who would visit Rome with Paul (Rom. 16:21). Sisterhood is indicated by Paul's recommendation of the bearer of the letter, called "a servant of the church which is at Cenchrea" (Rom. 16:1). Reference to her town, a little south of Corinth, helps establish Paul's location in writing Romans, but her Greek title of diakonos is intriguing. Because this is the word sometimes translated "deacon" in the Bible, several translations want to make Phebe a "deaconess." This is not warranted, since that office is known only at a later period of Christian history, and since Paul often employs the term in the general sense of "servant," rendered "minister" in the King James Bible. When Paul used the term of himself (as in Col. 1:23), he spoke of his role of service, not his office. Phebe may or may not have had an official calling in the Church; in either event she had helped many, and Paul also (Rom. 16:1-2).

Of the remaining names, two pairs require comment. Greetings are sent to "Andronicus and Junia, my kinsmen, and my fellowprisoners, who are of note among the apostles, who also were in Christ before me" (Rom. 16:7). "Kinsmen" no doubt means that they were Jewish, since Paul used that word of four others in Romans 16 (compare Rom. 9:3). Some argue that they were apostles, a forced interpretation for two otherwise obscure Saints at Rome. Paul apparently means to say that they were converted early, had sacrificed for the gospel, and thus were respected by the apostles. Paul claimed special fellowship from his imprisonment at Philippi. The other two names are important in understanding Paul's confidence in writing to Rome. As noted above, Aquila and his wife Priscilla had "lately come from Italy" when the Emperor Claudius had expelled the Jews "from Rome" (Acts 18:2). They were strong missionaries, for they had convinced Apollos that he had only part of the truth (Acts 18:26). Paul found them so valuable that he brought them to Ephesus (Acts 18:18), from which place they sent greetings (1 Cor. 16:19). Afterward they were free to return to Rome, where Paul sent regards to these fellow laborers who had risked their lives for him (Rom. 16:3-4). Did Paul send them to Rome to survey the situation when he first left Ephesus? They had shared their knowledge of Jewish-Christian tensions at Rome when they labored with Paul on two missionary journeys after their expulsion. They probably kept in contact with the Saints there when they were away; there was a church "in their house" after returning to Rome (Rom. 16:5). Paul could write Romans to a group he had never seen in full confidence of the common brotherhood and Christian unity of belief. But he also wrote with special knowledge of the problems at Rome he had learned of from Priscilla and Aquila.

Reason for Writing

Paul's priorities had delayed his coming to Rome. He explained that God had blessed his ministry by "mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit of God; so that from Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum, I have fully preached the gospel of Christ" (Rom. 15:19). This was his spiritual and physical description of his missionary journeys, stretching from Israel to the western coast of Greece. This work of years prevented his "coming to you" (Rom. 15:22; also 1:13). Paul's situation then is very clear, since 1 Corinthians, 2 Corinthians, and Romans form a sequence, spaced a few months apart. The first was written as Paul planned to come on his farewell visit to Greece, and the second when Paul wrote from the north to have the welfare contribution ready to take to Jerusalem. In writing Romans he could report that northern and southern Greece had contributed their money: "For it hath pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor saints which are at Jerusalem" (Rom. 15:26). At this point, Paul was about to leave: "But now I am going to Jerusalem to minister to the saints" (Rom. 15:25, NKJB). All of this ties in intimately with the Acts return after the third journey, down to the premonition of trouble in Jerusalem both in Romans (Rom. 15:30-31) and in the farewell speech at Miletus (Acts 20:22-23). But when Paul wrote Romans, he was still in southern Greece, for the letter was sent with Phebe, the faithful sister from Corinth's southern port, Cenchrea (Rom. 16:1). Thus Paul's host Gaius (Rom. 16:23) is apparently his early convert of Corinth (1 Cor. 1:14). Since Paul hurried to return to Jerusalem for the spring feast of Pentecost (Acts 20:16), Romans was probably written early in A.D. 58 before Passover (Acts 20:6).

The above discussions of Rome and the Roman members stress the Jewish population and Jewish-Christian problems. To review, Acts 18:2 mentions that Christians Priscilla and Aquila had to leave Rome because of the decree of Claudius against the Jews, and the Roman historian Suetonius indicates that continual Jewish disturbances against Christians were the cause. [^8] Thus, Paul wrote Romans in full awareness of Jewish pressure on the Roman converts. Paul devoted ten chapters out of sixteen to the relationship of the Jewish law to the Christian gospel, so he was clearly apprehensive on the point. As discussed, Galatians correlates with Romans in topic and style, making likely an association in time. Romans mainly reasons against the Judaizers, and it seems to relate to the anxiety expressed in Galatians, which should be dated at or not long before the time of the writing of Romans. The latter is a more positive refutation of Judaism than is Galatians, but it is nevertheless a refutation. The Jews were intensely preoccupied with ceremonial detail, whereas the modern world has a hard time finding any standards of religion. Thus, the background of Romans suggests a caution on the modern relevance of all its reasoning about Jewish religion. Paul's powerful testimony of Christ is timeless, but his arguments against the overobedient people must not be misunderstood by underobedient, secular cultures today.

Main Teachings

God's Patience and Judgment

Does God exist? Evidence for him is not in the fact that the majority of human beings accept a higher power but in the fact that sensitive people must take the question seriously. Intellectual proofs of God are impressive, but more impressive is the quest for God that continues in human hearts. Our spirits respond to God because they are of his spirit. In words of modern revelation, the planets and stars speed on their appointed paths, and anyone seeing their glory sees "God moving in his majesty and power" (D&C 88:47). Yet the skeptic retorts, "Why is there cruelty and suffering in this world, if it is ruled by an almighty power?" The answer is the necessity for the agency of mankind. Modern revelation has perspective here that traditional Christian theology lacks. God does not create and dictate; he organizes and delegates. A Latter-day Saint convert watched his fellow German soldiers turn to atheism in the midst of destructive war. Before hearing of the Restoration, he simply answered in his heart, "God did not start the war—Hitler did." Paul begins Romans by discussing the majesty of God and the degradations of life by willful mortals.

God formed the earth and its opportunities, but men have invented false gods, false values, and false relationships. Paul regrets the horrible misuse of the physical body by which people dishonor themselves, seeking pleasure and the "lusts of their own hearts" (Rom. 1:24). One contrasts the powerful challenge of the Lord to be "pure in heart" (Matt. 5:8). Nor is Paul hesitant to face sexual perversion. His blunt criticism of homosexuality (Rom. 1:26-27) repeats what he said on that subject when listing serious sins in 1 Corinthians 6. Roman satirists also mentioned the gross homosexuality there in the first century, so Paul gives an inspired warning against actual evils. He moves to survey human ingratitude in action with a list of sins longer than that in Galatians 5. There members were told that such things would keep them from the kingdom of God; here Paul says those doing these things are "worthy of death" (Rom. 1:32). But Paul was not talking of criminal punishment, since society tolerated most of the sins he listed; his point was that God would not tolerate them. "Death" in Paul's letters implies Satan's power and at times equates with John's vision of the wicked receiving a "second death" (Rev. 20:6), a banishment from God's presence at the future judgment. So "worthy of death" (Rom. 1:32) means that the kingdom of God is closed to those guilty of serious sins without repentance. Paul gives a list of sins that is more than a catalog of the evils in the Roman world—it is a solemn warning to Saints to live above the world's standards. In the King James Version, Paul's list is introduced by an archaic word: the rebellious do "those things which are not convenient" (Rom. 1:28, italics added). But the italicized term is clear only in Greek or older English. It refers to those things not "fitting" or "correct." These are the listed sins of aggression, immorality, and dishonesty (Rom. 1:29-31). Their common denominator is selfishness.

Romans 2 explores the moral duties of member and nonmember, Gentile, and Jew. Paul underlines a principle of Old and New Testaments: "There is no respect of persons with God" (Rom. 2:11). Protestant commentators tend to interpret this negatively—that all will be equally condemned by sin, making justification through Christ the only avenue of salvation. Paul no doubt means that but also says much more, for there was positive Gentile achievement because of "the law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness" (Rom. 2:15). Thus "the Gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the things contained in the law" (Rom. 2:14). What things? Certainly not the temple rituals of Jerusalem or the purification rituals that they do not practice. The Gentiles were obeying the moral laws of God because those were written in their consciences. And the Gentiles were accepted by God because of these works; the "righteousness" of the moral law was "counted for circumcision" (Rom. 2:26), a symbol of their acceptance as the new covenant people. And Paul argues that the Jew who violated this moral law was inferior to the Gentile who kept his covenant of conscience by his righteous actions. At the end of Romans 2, Paul seems to contrast inner attitude and outer conformity, but he really means ritual righteousness as against moral righteousness, for Paul has described the moral Gentile as one obedient "inwardly" (Rom. 2:29). Paul is clearly stating the Old Testament principle as still true: "To obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams" (1 Sam. 15:22).

It is too easy to see Romans 2 as limited to Gentile society, although Paul mingles member and nonmember together as being judged by the same standard. A check on what Paul says here is 2 Corinthians 5, where Corinthian members were told: "We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ"; the measure is what we have "done, whether it be good or bad" (2 Cor. 5:10). The Lord said that he would then "reward every man according to his works" (Matt. 16:27), the same thing that John saw in vision of the righteous and unrighteous (Rev. 12:12-13). And Paul precisely agrees, for God "will render to every man according to his deeds" (Rom. 2:6). Some simplistically think that justification will come through Christ's atonement and condemnation by works or deeds. They ask, "How can men be saved if works count but works fall short?" But it is not up to theologians to say what is impossible with God, for the scriptures clearly teach forgiveness through the Atonement and the believers' responsibility of works. If they really take that responsibility, extreme sins will not be committed or repeated, and the rest will be minimized. God knows the heart and knows what he expects of each individual. When Paul tells the Romans that there is judgment "according to his deeds," the word "deeds" is ergon, translated in the King James Version 152 times as "work" or "works" and 22 times as "deed" or "deeds." Paul next applies this judgment to the Saints and to those who "do not obey the truth" (Rom. 2:8). Those who do obey will receive "immortality" and "eternal life" by "patient continuation in well doing" (Rom. 2:7), which in Greek is literally "by endurance in good work." And the cause and effect are repeated: "glory" and "honor" come "to everyone who works what is good" (Rom. 2:10, NKJB). Accepting Christ's atonement brings forgiveness, but obtaining exaltation requires continued good works.

When is it too late to repent and prepare for judgment? Paul answers that God is rich in "goodness and forbearance and longsuffering"—that these qualities must lead a person "to repentance" (Rom. 2:4). In simple terms, God waits for man to see the point of life before bringing about the judgment. Modern revelation teaches that people are sent to earth with agency and with time to develop. Peter taught the same thing, which raises the fascinating possibility that he had read Romans on this point. "The longsuffering of our Lord is salvation," said the chief apostle, "as also our beloved brother Paul, according to the wisdom given to him, has written to you" (2 Pet. 3:15, NKJB). The only place where Paul applies "longsuffering" to God is in Romans. This colors Peter's evaluation that Paul's letters contain things "hard to be understood" (2 Pet. 3:16); indeed, Romans is a special problem because of Paul's long explanations. To return to the point of God's "longsuffering," God delegates and waits. In this he is the greatest example for men and women who supervise others, in church, in the practical world, and especially in families. Paul stressed Christ's longsuffering to him, waiting for the persecutor to be led to the truth. "Longsuffering" became an important ideal for Paul in dealing with others because the Lord had treated him so. God's children are led to repentance by teaching and also by waiting until they are ready for teaching, as ancient (2 Tim. 4:2) and modern (D&C 121:41) revelations say. Neither the judgment nor this waiting for change would make sense without confidence in the individual light of conscience, to which ancient (Rom. 1:20; 2:15) and modern (D&C 84:45-46) revelations testify.

Justification by Faith

Romans is the epistle of grace through faith in Christ. It leads all New Testament books in the number of times that the words grace and faith are used. As modern revelation says, "Justification through the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is just and true" (D&C 20:30). The problem is how to blend this center of the gospel with the other revealed doctrines. The first step in properly understanding justification is understanding Paul's terminology, partly covered in Galatians because Paul preaches the same message there. It was seen that salvation for Paul is not merely resurrection but exaltation with God in eternity, that justification is quite simply forgiveness of sins through Christ, that law usually means the Mosaic law. The remaining word of difficulty is grace, which has become a theological abstraction because it is not used in everyday speech. This word (charis) was used in classical Greek to refer to the attitude or action "on the part of the doer" of "kindness, good will" or "favor." [^9] In addition to this general meaning, the standard Greek dictionary adds the concrete meanings of a favor or a kindness done, or even thanks returned. Thus, grace relates to the core principle of love, God's kindness in leading his children back to him—God's favor in sending his dear Son to atone for their sins. God's grace is not spiritual substance; it is his spiritual generosity.

The slogans of the Protestant reformation were the Latin phrases sola scriptura, sola fides, sola gratia: "scripture alone, faith alone, grace alone." Thus, any discussion of justifying grace is really the question of whether it brings salvation by itself. Such a doctrine arose as an extreme reaction to extreme religious practices. Martin Luther was a committed monk who sought God's favor through repetitious works of fasting, prayer, and rituals. Continual penance and veneration of relics were ways of appeasing the terrifying God who demanded so much: "I had no confidence that my merit would assauge him." Yet Paul gave Luther warm hope in these cold performances. Luther reflected on the Old Testament phrase of Romans 1:17: "The just shall live by faith." In Luther's mind the loving Savior replaced the austere medieval judge of the "day of wrath." Luther explained his change: "Faith leads you in and opens up God's heart and will, that you should see pure grace and overflowing love. This it is to behold God in faith that you should look upon his fatherly, friendly heart, in which there is no anger nor ungraciousness." [^10]

Righteous parents know the tension between love and rules, for out of love they establish wise rules to protect their children and to foster their growth. But does our Heavenly Parent require merely the acceptance of his love? Luther thought so, for as a translator he added a powerful modifier to Paul's affirmation of salvation through faith: "Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith alone, without the deeds of the law" (Rom. 3:28). The italicized term does not appear in English translations nor in the Greek original, though its German equivalent allein has been in Protestant Bibles since Luther. What is the difference between salvation by grace alone and salvation by grace? In the one case, God's grace operates to save mankind through faith by itself. In the other case, God's grace operates to rescue them as they show faith by their own serious efforts. Truckloads of tracts have been distributed to Latter-day Saints in an attempt to prove that the latter view is wrong. These are composed with tunnel vision because they have a narrow range of quotations, using little else than Romans, Galatians, and Ephesians. Indeed, Luther said that these three books—with 1 Peter, John's Gospel, and 1 John, would "teach everything you need to know for your salvation, even if you were never to see or hear any other book or hear any other teaching." [^11] Thus, oversimplification goes beyond a Bible sufficient for salvation to only six books of the Bible as sufficient for salvation. But is 20 percent of the New Testament the scripture God wants men to read? And is grace alone the intended gospel of Christ? William Temple stands for this minimal Protestant tradition in summarizing, "The only thing of my very own which I can contribute to my redemption is the sin from which I need to be redeemed." [^12]

Romans 3 through Romans 5 powerfully support forgiveness through grace and faith, but these three chapters are only 20 percent of the teaching portion of Romans. The value of good works is only suggested there. But the necessity of baptism and righteous works afterward is discussed in Romans 6 and Romans 8, and the Christian commandments reach through Romans 12 beyond Romans 14. Thus, the 20 percent on grace is matched by over 30 percent on works. In this perspective, Protestant theology is not so much wrong as half right, akin to taking the oxygen out of the basic formula for water that requires two parts of hydrogen and one part oxygen. When preaching grace, Paul says that more is to follow. He asks, "Do we then make void the law through faith?" Definitely not, he answers, "we establish the law" (Rom. 3:31). This is not a metaphor, since Paul reasoned in Galatians that the law of Moses was inferior (Gal. 3:17) and at the end wrote of the "law of Christ," associating it with the Christian commands of morality and how to care for others. Roman's early chapters on grace (3-5) must not obscure the closing chapters of Christian commands (12-14). "We establish the law" (Rom. 3:31) is the bridge between these two principles.

So the Romans chapters on justification by faith must be read in connection with the entire book, and they give intense insights into Christ's atonement. Romans 4 focuses on Abraham and is extremely close to Galatians 3, where Paul reasons from Abraham's belief in God, "and he counted it to him for righteousness" (Gen. 15:6). Thus, the patriarch's faith brought him acceptance long before the law of Moses, the same point of Romans 4 with the same Genesis quotation. Throughout that chapter one reads that righteousness was "reckoned," "counted," or "imputed," to Abraham, a parallel of how the believer obtains forgiveness. All these words come from one Greek term meaning "to consider" or "to count up," and they simply say that God will accept the believer as righteous because of his faith. Nothing in this chapter adds to the simple message of forgiveness through grace. How does forgiveness happen? No one can fully merit salvation without Christ: "For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God" (Rom. 3:23). So Christ brought the "redemption" (Rom. 3:24). Scattered through Paul's epistles, this word comes from roots meaning "buying back," used of property but also of ransoming people who were captives or slaves. Thus, in his image Christ paid the purchase price to free believers from their sins. Christ also gave his blood as a "propitiation" (Rom. 3:25). The equivalent verb form had a long Greek usage as sacrificing to bring favor of a god or to restore harmony in a human relationship. Thus, Christ's innocent sacrifice restored believers to harmony with God. And as in 2 Corinthians, Paul adds another strong term of restoring personal relationships: "We were reconciled to God by the death of his Son" (Rom. 5:10).

Joseph Smith deeply agreed. His earliest First Vision account has a moving assurance of forgiveness of sins through Christ. The Joseph Smith Translation changed Romans 3:24 to "being justified only by his grace" and Romans 3:28 to being "justified by faith alone." The italicized words are verbally like Luther's change but with a clear doctrinal difference—Joseph Smith taught that forgiveness (justification) came through Christ alone but that retaining this marvelous blessing was dependent on the actions of men and women. That is clear from the Joseph Smith Translation formula for full salvation in Romans 4:16: "Therefore ye are justified of faith and works, through grace." Whether from modern revelation, the Book of Mormon, or from Paul, the logic of the atonement of Christ is awesome. But Paul stresses a personal love for the Lord that is critical in understanding grace.

The young Saul was raised to grapple with the standards of "the strictest sect of our religion" (Acts 26:5, NKJB); he studied complex rules that the Pharisees had developed for at least a century. But could such a system bring peace with God? Paul answers no in his short spiritual autobiography. His vain struggle to become perfect through the law starts in the past tense; he was vanquished by "sin, taking occasion by the commandment" (Rom. 7:11). The Joseph Smith Translation generally keeps Paul's failures with the law in the past tense. For Joseph Smith, Paul expressed the inability to keep Jewish law prior to conversion. How was the gospel different? The sheer quantity of thousands of rules for memorization and performance is one main difference. But another reason permeates the first half of Romans—personal gratitude from the apostle whose letters are a testimony of grace. This persecutor was not worthy of a vision by mortal standards, yet God "called me by his grace" (Gal. 1:15). What he preached for all was especially true for him; grace was first freely given by God (Rom. 5:15-16). And what was his reaction to Christ's free gift?

Too many see Christ's atonement in static terms at this point. The gift is given, bringing the joy of gratitude. But what about the responsibilities of gratitude? Does one ever receive a gift without moral obligation? Does the Christian remain the polite child expressing verbal thanks only, or does he develop the maturity to show gratitude in action? The issue is whether God considers salvation complete when the grace of forgiveness comes into the human soul, or whether that is the starting point. Preachers of the "decision for Christ" make salvation a choice of a moment, but all of Paul's letters explain a process of perfecting oneself through Christ after forgiveness. Grace for Paul was justification plus motivation: "His grace which was bestowed upon me was not in vain; but I laboured more abundantly than they all: yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me" (1 Cor. 15:10). Some view Paul as automatically working by God's grace, but he used "labor," a word of conscientious efforts. After diligently preaching and courageously facing persecution, he took credit for his sacrifices in 2 Corinthians 11. For Paul the first stage of salvation was realizing and receiving the precious gift of a relationship with God through Christ. That is too often held out as the end, so that church meetings are places for rejoicing of the believers. But for Paul the relationship with God was the beginning of the second stage of progression through service. At his life's end, Paul looked back as a driving runner to say, "I have finished my course" (2 Tim. 4:7). This completed his autobiography of grace, which was linked to his most intense efforts. This illustration of what grace meant to Paul must fit his doctrine in Romans. There he does not teach that grace replaces effort for salvation. It was his gratitude for grace, "the love of Christ," which steeled him to face "persecution" and "peril" (Rom. 8:35).

Paul described how justification by faith operates. Romans 5:1-5 makes it the first in a series of steps leading to the full "love of God." Protestant commentaries tend to pass this quickly, labeling the steps as "fruits of faith." But they are meant to be distinct stages in the believer's spiritual development, in growth to full salvation. For this reason 2 Peter 1:5-8 has been justly called a "ladder of salvation," and the opening verses of James and of Romans 5 show identical thinking. All these sources start with faith and show that it must be tested to be accepted by God. Paul's first rung on the ladder is "being justified by faith," which is the condition of "this grace wherein we stand" (Rom. 5:1-2). But that commitment leads to the testing of faith through "tribulations" (Rom. 5:3), a process that Paul taught as inevitable (Acts 14:22). The word for "tribulations" simply means "difficulties"; it is also translated "afflictions" or "troubles" in the New Testament. Paul says that determined faith subjected to such trials will bring about "patience," a weak translation today (Rom. 5:3). This word is the Greek hupomone, literally "holding up under [stress]." Modern translations favor either "perseverance" or "endurance" here. And this endurance of faith brings "experience," a word (dokime) that literally means a "tested condition." It is rendered "tested virtue" (NAB) but more frequently "character" (RSV, NIV, NKJB). Thus, the final reward of tested faith is a character worthy of sure hope in "the love of God . . . in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us" (Rom. 5:5).

Thus, Romans establishes a progression for the full favor of God: first grace and justification through faith, followed by trials, followed by endurance, followed by a tested character. It is fiction to say that people go through such processes without using their total resolve, resources, and powers of decision. As real Gethsemanes come, only prayer and inspiration from God will bring the victory. Only gratitude to the atoning Lord can give meaning to the constant struggle. The Book of Mormon teaches that "it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do" (2 Ne. 25:23). It is also true that God's offer of grace through Christ is incomplete until men and women grow by acting upon it. Paul's chain of progression means that the rich gift is of no benefit without every believer's total diligence in making use of it. Thus, both faith and works are required for full salvation. In his most sweeping revelation, Joseph Smith saw that those in the celestial kingdom were "just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant" (D&C 76:69). But they also had to "overcome by faith" (D&C 76:53). Salvation by grace could more clearly be entitled "called by grace," for the reward is dependent on a righteous life motivated by love for Christ.

The Baptismal Covenant

Paul came into the Church with the challenge, "Arise and be baptized, and wash away your sins, calling on the name of the Lord" (Acts 22:16, NKJB). And the Book of Acts begins with the doctrine that belief and repentance make possible baptism for the "remission of sins" (Acts 2:38). Thus, baptism affects the past life of the person coming into the Church. Does it have an effect upon his future life? Paul is really asking that question in the opening of Romans 6: "Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound?" His answer is to look to the purpose of baptism. It is like the death and burial of Christ, which clearly shows that immersion was then the method of baptism. Even the rationalizers of infant baptism admit that from this plain comparison. But the form of baptism was incidental to the purpose of baptism that Paul explained by his comparison. Christ had laid down a broken body to come gloriously from the tomb, just as the believer must bury his past sins in water and come out to a new life of purity and righteousness. "Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life" (Rom. 6:4).

How does such reasoning apply to newly born infants who are baptized and cannot promise to live a good life? Roman Catholics and large Protestant churches are forced to that question, for they make up the majority of Christians who baptize babies. They explain that baptism is induction into the Christian community or that baptism is the symbolic equivalent of circumcision, a sign of God's calling of a new people. But scriptural authority is lacking for these arguments; baptism in Romans expresses a personal covenant of righteousness. A vocal Protestant minority insists on "believers' baptism," relating the ceremony specifically to repentance. The New Testament knows no baptism except that which follows sincere faith and repentance. Paul said in Galatians that faith preceded the baptism by which sincere believers "have put on Christ" (Gal. 3:27). In Romans 6 Paul said that baptism was tied to using grace righteously. Since "remission of sins" of Acts is the same thing as the "justification" of Romans, baptism is the means of partaking of the grace of forgiveness. Baptism is a physical commitment to "walk in newness of life" (Rom. 6:4)—the tangible demonstration of determination "that henceforth we should not serve sin" (Rom. 6:6).

If so many Christians have changed these scriptural purposes, Latter-day Saints should appreciate the restoration of baptism as an adult covenant of righteousness. The Book of Mormon stresses baptism as a "covenant" with God to serve him and keep his commandments, so that he may pour out his Spirit more abundantly upon the baptized disciple (Mosiah 18:10). Joseph Smith taught baptism only for those "willing to take upon them the name of Jesus Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end" (D&C 20:37). The purpose of baptism in Romans 6 and modern revelation is the same—it is a solemn promise not to sin. The Biblical history of Israel shows that God did not lightly regard the breaking of covenants. Romans 6 is not an exultant chapter on the joy of grace, but a severe warning about wrong decisions after baptism. And what prophet ever gave commandments without penalties attached? Paul required action consistent with baptism, showing that he valued baptism as part of the process of salvation.

Protestant theology has generally been uneasy about either accepting or rejecting works as relevant to salvation. As discussed in connection with Galatians, basic Reformation theory excludes works, but the attempt to keep them away from the front door simply means that they knock loudly at the back entrance. No self-criticism had more impact than that of Deitrich Bonhoeffer, a Lutheran minister who in 1945 courageously gave his life for opposition to Hitler. He had written on the unchristian carelessness that often came from assuming that "grace alone does everything." He called that "cheap grace, the grace which amounts to the justification of sin without the justification of the repentant sinner who departs from sin and from whom sin departs." [^13] Billy Graham repeated Bonhoeffer's phrases in evaluating conservative Protestants: "Too often we have tended toward superficiality—an overemphasis on easy-believism or experience rather than on true discipleship. We have sometimes offered cheap grace and cheap conversions without genuine repentance." [^14] But Reformation ideology tends to produce that result. It teaches that faith is "the only channel of justification," which "means quite literally that all works are excluded. . . . If our salvation is to remain a matter of grace alone, by faith alone, this prohibition extends no less to what are called post-regeneration works." This view holds that what is done after conversion to Christ cannot have "meritorious value" but only "evidential value." [^15] Protestant leaders think that works in Christ do not help to merit salvation but are only proof that salvation has come. In early battles against medieval superstitions, "Luther had so insisted that man is incapable of contributing to his salvation as to make easy the inference that moral effort is pointless." [^16] Luther wanted to allow but not count the works of morality and brotherhood, summarizing: "Good works do not make a good man, but a good man does good works." [^17]

The real criticism of such reasoning is that it is fiction. Dependable people know that their acts are important, for they control them. Religious people who have successfully struggled will not believe that their daily choices mean nothing for salvation. When that is taught, radical Protestantism deserves the caricature of teaching a decision for Christ and ignoring ten thousand others. Years of labors for the Lord bring about the tested character of Romans 5:1-5. And at the root is the disciple's daily input of willpower. That term is heresy to theology because it implies selfwill instead of God's will. But can there not be an inspired will in the Saint who has repented of his sins through faith, purified himself through baptism, received the gift of the Holy Ghost by the appointed laying on of hands, and has then sought inspiration and strength to serve God? This is the apostolic program from Pentecost onward in Acts, and a correct interpretation of the letters must harmonize with it. To say that a "good man does good works" is naive, for good works come only by exerting spiritual power in action. Paul puts his verbs in the imperative form, the language of command, as he counsels the Roman Saints to achieve the "newness of life" after baptism: "Therefore do not let sin reign in your mortal body, that you should obey it in its lusts. And do not present your members as instruments of unrighteousness to sin, but present yourselves to God as being alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness to God" (Rom. 6:12-13, NKJB).

Is Paul not expecting self-control and personal choice from the Romans in their post-baptismal conduct? And do such critical choices not count for salvation? In the background is Jesus' overriding command, "If you love me, keep my commandments" (John 14:15, NKJB). In the background is Jesus' explanation of righteousness in the Sermon on the Mount, ending by his commending "whoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them" (Matt. 7:24, NKJB). Protestant theory says that actions do not count for salvation but are the fruits of salvation. But after Jesus said that true disciples would bring forth those fruits, he insisted that those only confessing him to be Christ would not enter heaven, but "he who does the will of my Father who is in heaven" (Matt. 7:21, NKJB). Every one of these statements of Christ presuppose that any believer may choose wrong actions; thus, his good actions are part of his eternal salvation. Otherwise, the commands of the Savior and of his apostles are meaningless observations. Paul's letters are confusing theory without admitting that salvation comes through two causes: God's initiative and man's agency in responding.

Paul's "law of the harvest" told the Galatian members that one could sow "to his flesh" or sow "to the Spirit," with the reward of "life everlasting" (Gal. 6:8). And in Romans this same option is given after discussing the "newness of life" after baptism: "For to be carnally minded is death; but to be spiritually minded is life and peace" (Rom. 8:6). In Greek "carnally minded" is literally "the mind of the Spirit." Thus, the choices in Romans are the same as in Galatians. There is also the same reward, for Galatians' "life everlasting" equates with the eternity implied in Romans' "life." Being "spiritually minded" does not come automatically by justification but through honest toil for the fruits. And the general purpose of Romans is the same as Paul's other letters—to encourage Church members to develop lives worthy of their beliefs. Of course, there is the help of the Spirit, but this does not supplant the agency of men and women. As explained at the close of Galatians, to walk "after the Spirit" (Rom. 8:4) is to keep the commandments and be worthy of the guidance of the Holy Ghost. Eternal life will come to those who "through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body" (Rom. 8:13). "Mortify" is a simple Greek word meaning "put to death," so Paul is asking the Roman saints to destroy their evil works as a condition of living in God's kingdom. Here is a sequence to be met again in Colossians: in Romans 6:3-5 Paul reviews the covenant of a new life through baptism, he requires the death of evil practices in Romans 8:13, and he details commands for righteousness in three full chapters near the end of the book. The components of salvation through Christ are not finished until the end of Paul's long, dictated letter.

Conditional Election

Why did the Jews lose God's favor? Commentators say that is Paul's topic in Romans 9 through Romans 11. But he also discusses the fall of Judaism for the benefit of Gentiles, so the question is really, "What can be learned from God's rejection of his people?" These chapters digress from the subject of personal salvation and yet throw great light on it. They begin with the Jewish apostle's deep love "for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh" (Rom. 9:3). Some of the best Christian minds have misread God's calling of Israel, and the harsh doctrine of predestination is the result. The proof texts mostly come from Romans 9, but Joseph Smith correctly linked that chapter to the message of the following ones: "The whole of the chapter had reference to the priesthood and the house of Israel, and unconditional election of individuals to eternal life was not taught by the apostles. God did elect or predestinate that all those who would be saved should be saved in Christ Jesus, and through obedience to the gospel. But he passes over no man's sins, but visits them with correction, and if his children will not repent of their sins, he will discard them." [^18]

Predestine is used only four times in the King James Bible, and predestination not at all. That word can better be understood in discussing Ephesians, but the doctrine as expressed through "election" is central to Romans 9 through Romans 11. Joseph Smith rightly says that Paul discusses the calling of Israel, not of individuals. Whereas Israel received the covenant and revelation of the Old Testament, it forfeited that relationship for a time by not accepting the new revelations. Paul is pained to admit it, for his "prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved" (Rom. 10:1). The former Pharisee knows the strength of their "zeal for God" and their weakness of not accepting the Messiah: "For they . . . seeking to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted to the righteousness of God. For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to everyone who believes" (Rom. 10:2-4, NKJB). John the Baptist had challenged Jews not to see their relationship with God on the superficial level of descent from Abraham. Paul does the same, indirectly suggesting that Ishmael was a son of Abraham but did not inherit his promises; then Paul names Esau as a son of Jacob who did not inherit his promises. Paul's point is that the promise had then passed over Abraham's descendants to rest for a time upon the Gentiles. They had not merited God's call from the point of view of earth life, but Latter-day Saints have the added perspective of the premortal existence in understanding God's choices. The methodical reformer John Calvin lacked this understanding and mistakenly extended Jewish and Gentile election to individual salvation: "By predestination we mean the eternal decree of God, by which he determined with himself whatever he wished to happen with regard to every man. All are not created on equal terms, but some are preordained to eternal life, others to eternal damnation. And accordingly, as each has been created for one or other of these ends, we say that he has been predestinated to life or to death." [^19]

This negation of human agency is argued strongly from two examples. Paul never comes to Calvinist conclusions, but the Calvinists argue that Paul's views on Esau and Pharaoh teach predestination. In both cases one must look at notes in Bible verses to see when Paul is quoting the Old Testament. While Jacob and Esau were in the womb, Rebekah was told, "The elder shall serve the younger" (Gen. 25:23). Through this example Paul told the Jews that God could shift the birthright from them to the Gentiles. He simply said that God made the "election . . . not of works but of Him who calls," for the children were unborn and had not "done any good or evil" (Romans 9:11, NKJB). Calvin argued that "no good works are taken into account . . . there being nothing in them, either past or future, to conciliate his favor." [^20] On this view, God did not select by foreseeing the works of Jacob or Esau in life, though Paul does not rule that out. And on Calvin's view no works preceded their birth. But two centuries after Paul, the Christian scholar Origen believed otherwise, saying that Jacob must have been "beloved by God, according to the deserts of his previous life, so as to deserve to be preferred before his brother." [^21]

This doctrine of premortal existence can be clearly traced to orthodox Jewish and Christian sources in Paul's time, as will be seen in studying Ephesians and Titus. So Origen's explanation must be considered. Indeed, Romans mentions the premortal existence of the righteous and suggests their worthiness by saying that God "prepared beforehand for glory even us whom he has called" (Rom. 9:23-24, NKJB). This means that Calvin developed his doctrine too narrowly. Paul simply insists on God's right to choose Jacob, without probing into why he made that choice. The story of Jacob and Esau is but a parable about God preferring Gentiles over Jews, and we have seen that Gentile election came after the apostasy of the Jews (Rom. 10:3-4). Paul's argument is from precedent and is limited by what Genesis and Exodus said. Thus, the examples of Esau and Pharaoh are not likely to include Paul's full perspective. A dozen verses from the Old Testament alternate with Paul's comments in Romans 9 as he makes a "from your own scriptures" presentation. So all comments on Pharaoh come straight out of Exodus—his being raised up to show God's power, with Paul's remark that God hardens "whom he will" (Rom. 9:17-18, NKJB). Since Paul never elsewhere uses "harden" in this way, he is obviously using the language of Exodus to convince his "kinsmen." [^22] "And unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews" (1 Cor. 9:20). No writing of Paul better illustrates this principle than this section of Romans.

Paul's argument emphasizes the responsibility of the Jews in rejecting the preaching of Christ. Jew and Gentile are both loved and accepted by God if they will only "call upon him" (Rom. 10:12). So the rejection of Israel is based on Israel's rejection of the Lord's messengers. They preach in power: "Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God" (Rom. 10:17, NKJB). And "the word of God" here means more than quoting scripture, as Joseph Smith stated in commenting on this verse: "Faith comes by hearing the word of God through the testimony of the servants of God—that testimony is always attended by the spirit of prophecy and revelation." [^23] The "apostle of the Gentiles" (Rom. 11:13) moved through the basics of finding the true gospel: belief is based on hearing, which is based on those preaching the message, and they cannot preach "except they be sent" (Rom. 10:15). As in Corinthians, the true gospel comes with the authority of the true church. Paul conditions salvation on openly confessing "the Lord Jesus" and deeply believing that God "raised him from the dead" (Rom. 10:9). Some quote that verse to prove that belief alone brings salvation. But in Acts the missionary apostle required his believing converts to be baptized, and he wrote about belief and salvation here after writing Romans 6:3-5 on God's requirement to live up to the baptismal covenant.

The crescendo of Paul's treatment of election is also the crescendo of stressing agency. Election appears only seven times in the New Testament, and four of these appearances are in Romans. Calvinist theology gives the word a misleading ring of finality: "It assures the believer of his eternal security. . . . If he is in grace now he is in grace forever." [^24] But Paul uses election as a term of God's conditional selection. It is equivalent to the verb call, which in Paul generally refers to conversion with the implied period afterward of testing for faithfulness. Calling and election refer to gospel opportunity, not to God's final determination, which for Jesus, Paul, and John the Revelator comes on the day of judgment.

Israel was originally Jacob's name, and before birth he was given the "election . . . not of works," identified as the "call" of God (Rom. 9:11). And Paul noted in the Church a "remnant" of Israel "according to the election of grace," also defined as not of works (Rom. 11:5-7). But Jacob's original call was also the call of his descendants; it was made before they lived on earth. Election is without earthly works because calls are by definition prior to the task for which the call is made. Paul testifies that "Israel shall be saved," showing that the "election" or "calling of God" will not fail (Rom. 11:26-29). But that is prophecy, not predetermination. For most of Israel then had temporarily failed, suffering "blindness in part . . . until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in" (Rom. 11:25). God had not given them an election for all time that would not diminish. And why did they in large part fail? Paul answers with the image of the Jewish branches of the olive tree. They were removed "because of unbelief" (Rom. 11:20). Then the Gentile branches were grafted to the tree, but their agency to stand or fall was exactly that of Israel: "Toward you, goodness, if you continue in his goodness. Otherwise you also will be cut off" (Rom. 11:22, NKJB).

Moral Laws of the Gospel

The greatest epistle on grace is also the greatest epistle on keeping God's commandments. The magnificent close of the teaching portion of Romans beats out a sharp staccato of Christian duties. Some fifty commandments follow the challenge of being "transformed by the renewing of your mind" (Rom. 12:2). These detailed instructions fill three and a half chapters, after which Paul closes the letter by sharing his plans and greetings. No Pauline letter has as many rules of righteousness. The apostle is intent on upgrading the conduct of those Church members who have accepted Christ through baptism. These closing chapters are the capstone of this letter of grace and certainly are not intended as incidental to eternal life. Salvation may be defined in terms of theory, or in terms of the steps of what to do. Just as actions speak louder than words in real life, the actions that Paul required speak louder than interpretations of his theology.

Vital discipleship is paralyzed by the philosophy that Christ did all, that "we have no ability to win his grace or favor." [^25] An example is a survey a few years ago identifying Lutherans of the Missouri Synod and the Southern Baptists as the most conservative Protestant bodies in the United States. In these groups 97 percent of the members said that "belief in Jesus Christ as Savior" was "absolutely necessary" for salvation. [^26] Then these same individuals were asked whether "doing good for others" was "absolutely necessary" for salvation, and only 38 percent of the Lutherans and 29 percent of the above Baptists agreed. Thus, the majority of each group saw no contribution of service as necessary to salvation. They were also asked whether salvation depended on "loving thy neighbor," a more ambiguous question because "loving" can be an attitude instead of an activity. Yet only 51 percent of the Lutherans and 41 percent of the Baptists said that "loving thy neighbor" was "absolutely necessary" to being saved. [^27] Christ said that "the law and the prophets" were summed up in loving one's neighbor (Matt. 7:12). Yet huge groups of committed Christians feel that God does not require belief in the Golden Rule or practical service applying it. But the closing teaching section of Romans jars that conclusion, for of about fifty commandments, at least a fourth pertain to loving and helping one's neighbor. Indeed, Paul repeats as binding the Savior's statement just quoted, saying that "any other commandment" is "summed up" in the rule of loving one's neighbor as self (Rom. 13:9, NKJB).

Paul's use of this highlight of the Sermon on the Mount is the clue to his message at the end of Romans. The thought of most of the beatitudes is found in Romans 12. The thrust of that chapter follows the closing challenge of Matthew 5 to return good for evil and to actively bless those who hate us. That is exactly Paul's message: "Overcome evil with good" (Rom. 12:21). Paul does not quote Jesus, but his ideas are exact applications of Jesus' principles. It should be recognized that Romans 12 through the beginning of Romans 15 is the Sermon on the Mount of the epistles. Paul should be seen, like Jesus, not coming to "destroy the law, or the prophets . . . but to fulfil" (Matt. 5:17). That should be clear from Paul's command to live five of the ten commandments (Rom. 13:9). Rather than revoking them, Jesus taught what it meant to keep them in the opening chapter of the Sermon on the Mount. Paul's epistle of grace also stresses them as Christian law, as do the modern revelations of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Can we forget the Lord who challenged the rich young ruler to "keep the commandments" if he would enter into eternal life? (Matt. 19:17.) When asked which ones, Christ gave (Matt. 19:18-19) nearly the exact words of Paul in summing up the commandments to the Romans (Rom. 13:9). Members of the Early Church were growing and developing through obedience. As discussed, baptism brought them to "newness of life . . . that henceforth we should not serve sin" (Rom. 6:4, 6). That was the ideal, but the reality was to be won on the moral battlefields of their lives as Christians. Paul wrote Romans to lead them to avoid every sin and to "yield your members servants to righteousness unto holiness" (Rom. 6:19). This post-baptismal command was restated as a preface to the moral laws of the gospel: "Present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God" (Rom. 12:1). The next verse set the goal of membership in the Church and of every command that followed: moral transformation and renewal. Neither Christ nor Paul had a single offer of salvation but a program of growth to salvation. Jesus personified it in instructing, encouraging, and correcting his disciples. With most of his ministry spent in these activities, was he not contributing to salvation? And Paul's work as Christ's apostle was also training the Saints in living the gospel.

Paul insists on the power of prayer and of humility before God. He links his main theme of genuine love to actions of helping and to the self-control of sexual purity. Even civil obedience and the duty of paying taxes are parts of citizenship in God's kingdom. Romans opens with recognition of the spiritual conscience in all people; it closes with the appeal to live a life that will be recognized as righteous. Paul commands to do "honest" things (Rom. 12:17) and to walk "honestly" (Rom. 13:13), but these terms are used in the older English sense of "honorable" and "honorably," basically the meaning of the Greek. Thus, Paul's version of the Sermon on the Mount carries the Master's theme: "Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven" (Matt. 5:16).

---
Notas:
[^1] Samuel J. Mikolaski, "Galatians," in D. Guthrie et al., New Bible Commentary, Revised (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1970), p. 1092.
[^2] Paul saw Peter three years after Paul's conversion, and fourteen years later he went up to Jerusalem again (Gal. 1:18, 2:1). But Acts has a second visit to Jerusalem that is omitted; logically it should have been, since it was for the purpose of carrying welfare supplies (Acts 11: 29-30) and had no bearing on the circumcision question that Paul was arguing in his highly spontaneous letter to the Galatians.
[^3] William F. Arndt et al., Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, 2d ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979), p. 62.
[^4] Mikolaski, p. 1091.
[^5] Arndt et al., p. 542.
[^6] G. Elson Ruff, "What Is a Lutheran?" in Leo Rosten, Religions of America (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1975), p. 161.
[^7] Milton V. Backman, Jr., American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), p. 480, citing a 1969 survey. Compare John S. Bonnell, "What Is a Presbyterian?" in Rosten, p. 203: "While baptism is urgently recommended in the Presbyterian Church, and while its omission is regarded as a grave fault, it is not held to be necessary for salvation."
[^8] Acts speaks of "remission" or "forgiveness" for sins. Both of these words translate the same Greek term. Peter declared remission of sins through Christ to the Sanhedrin (Acts 5:31), though a little earlier he had invited believers to be baptized "for the remission of sins" (Acts 2:38). Peter also declared to Cornelius, "Whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins" (Acts 10:43), but he immediately afterward baptized him. This is very close to Paul's actions with the Philippian jailor, telling him first that salvation would come through belief in Christ, but baptizing him immediately after. Paul also preached remission of sins through belief in Christ in Pisidian Antioch (Acts 13:38). Luke is not contradictory in this double association of remission of sins with belief in Christ and also with baptism. Both conditions must be met to receive the benefit. Christ's atonement makes forgiveness possible, but he sets the conditions of receiving it, namely baptism and living up to the baptismal covenant. Thus, Galatians intimately fits into the practices of Peter and Paul in Acts—"putting on Christ" through the double process of faith and baptism (Gal. 3:26-27).
[^9] Mikolaski, p. 1089.
[^10] John H. Gerstner, "Good Works," in Everett F. Harrison et al., eds., Baker's Dictionary of Theology (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book House, 1960), p. 254.
[^11] This translation fairly accurately states Paul's Greek terms in present language, though I have made two changes: "anger" replaces "outbursts of wrath"; "factions" replaces "heresies," which can relate to ideas only.
[^12] R. A. Cole, Epistle of Paul to the Galatians (London: Tyndale Press, 1965), p. 164.
[^13] Ibid.
[^14] P. S. Watson, "Sanctification," in Alan Richardson, ed., Dictionary of Christian Theology (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1969), p. 303.
[^15] H. D. McDonald, "Justification by Faith," in Carl Henry, ed., Basic Christian Doctrines (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1962), p. 214.
[^16] John Murray, "Sanctification," in ibid., p. 231.
[^17] Emerging Trends, vol. 4, no. 2 (March 1982), p. 1. (Published by Princeton Religious Research Center, Princeton, N.J.)
[^18] Ibid., p. 2.
[^19] Suetonius, Augustus 28:3 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^20] Res Gestae Divi Augusti (Loeb Classical Library), particularly the end summary but also references throughout.
[^21] Juvenal, Satires 3:62: "jampridem Syrus in Tiberium defluxit Orontes."
[^22] Suetonius, Julius 84:5.
[^23] Josephus, Jewish Antiquities 18:83-84 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^24] Suetonius, Claudius 25:4.
[^25] Dio Cassius, Roman History 60:6 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^26] See note 24 above.
[^27] Henry George Liddell and Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, rev. Henry Stuart Jones (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1953), pp. 1978-79.
