Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul ( 1983)

HEBREWS

Profile

Sent from: Paul, in Italy and probably at Rome.

Sent to: "The Hebrews," possibly those who helped Paul in the Judean imprisonment.

Date: Possibly A. D. 62.

Purpose: To warn Jewish Christians against falling from the faith and to reconvince them that Christ and his gospel are above the law of Moses.

Main themes: Christ's authority and mission; faithfulness and first principles; Melchizedek priesthood; Christ's atonement; faith and endurance.

Background

Reason for Writing

The title goes back to the earliest Greek manuscripts: "To the Hebrews." And the contents have intricate arguments about Jewish law and the temple rituals. Who were these Jews who first read this letter? The answer must come from the letter itself, since no information on the circumstances of writing is in Acts or early Christian sources. Endurance in trial and faithfulness in temptation are the watchwords expressed throughout chapters 2-6 and chapters 10-12. Like the Corinthians, the Hebrews had to go back and relearn the "first principles" at a time when their gospel growth should have been advanced (Heb. 5:12-14). They were "dull of hearing" (Heb. 5:11), which shows that Paul had particular information that worried him. What were their problems? One was living the gospel, a problem common to most branches of the Church in the letters. But the long arguments of reconversion center around Jewish ritual. The Hebrews overstressed the Levitical priesthood that operated the temple and the daily sacrifices that were superseded by Christ's great sacrifice. Chapters 7 through 10 are written for Jews who did not believe that Christ's coming outdated temple sacrifice. After the third journey Paul returned to Jerusalem and shared in temple sacrifice to show that he respected his Hebrew heritage (Acts 20). But it was another thing to believe that sacrifices were part of Christ's gospel, the Jewish heresy that this book combats.

Though scholars disagree on the origin of Hebrews, many see it as written prior to A.D. 70 because that year the temple was destroyed, and arguments against continuing sacrifice would have no point after that date. The present tenses of chapters 7 through 10 give the impression that the priests are then sacrificing, and the long arguments against ceremonies logically suggest a present threat rather than a past problem. Jesus predicted the destruction of the temple (Matt 24; Mark 13; Luke 21), and some hint of it is probable if Hebrews had postdated the Roman assault. These inferences place the letter within Paul's lifetime, which closed just before the temple was destroyed. And there are further clues that point to his Roman imprisonment described at the end of Acts.

After Paul's third journey he returned to Jerusalem, to be arrested and held for trial for two years; Acts closes as he waits another two years for trial under house arrest. The four letters that easily fit into his Roman custody will be studied next. In one of these Paul closes with "remember my bonds" (Col. 4:18), which is similar to the flashback recalling how the Hebrews "had compassion of me in my bonds" (Heb. 10:34). Manuscripts divide here between "my bonds" or "the prisoners," but the majority of texts have "my bonds." This fits the circumstances of Paul's loose custody in Caesarea in A.D. 58 through 60, when the governor commanded the guard to "forbid none of his acquaintance to minister" to Paul (Acts 24:23). Hebrews was probably written at Rome, because greetings are sent from the Saints "of Italy" (Heb. 13:24). [^1] This places the book after about A.D. 61, for until Paul's appeal to Caesar, he had not yet been in Rome. Possibly in his Roman imprisonment Paul wrote to correct the Jewish branch at Caesarea, where he earlier had been imprisoned, addressing the general problems of the Jewish Christians. They should "recall the former days in which, after you were illuminated, you endured a great struggle with sufferings" (Heb. 10:32, NKJB).

Authorship Evaluation

Hebrews has the same manuscript credentials as other letters of Paul, but its distinctive nature produced unnecessary skepticism among ancient and modern scholars. Yet trends are not necessarily truths. Of all the arguments against authorship, style is the most easily misused. The Gettysburg address is remarkably unlike most of Lincoln's speeches but of course was authored and delivered by him. With such cautions against prejudging, the evidence on Paul's authorship can be examined. At first glance, Hebrews must come from an early Christian leader, for it is quoted in the letter called 1 Clement, written by Clement, the bishop of Rome, about A.D. 96. This is one of several subapostolic books, mostly from bishops who had some personal knowledge of the apostles and who quoted them for authority in their arguments. Clement writes of "Jesus Christ, the high priest of our offerings" in these words: "Who, being the brightness of his majesty, is by so much greater than angels, as he has inherited a more excellent name." [^2] This clear use of Hebrews 1:3-4 omits phrases but runs in strict sequence with ten exact Greek words, the remaining four being synonyms of those in that passage.

Clement's quotation shows that Hebrews was in existence and circulating by the close of the first century. That fits into its probable writing prior to the destruction of the temple in A.D. 70, as discussed above. But Clement's use of Hebrews says something more. With the exception of some quotations from the Gospels and Acts, all of Clement's New Testament quotations come from letters attributed to apostles. Hebrews is used in several places in 1 Clement because it had apostolic authority. And in the first Christian centuries, no other apostle but Paul was named in connection with it. The most dramatic proof of that is the modern discovery of the Chester Beatty Papyri, which contain portions of most books of the New Testament. The most precious jewel in this find was a nearly complete copy of Paul's letters, the oldest known. This was written in book, not scroll, form. All the letters that Paul wrote to churches are found in this collection except for 2 Thessalonians, which obviously fits in the remaining pages known to have existed prior to destruction of the first and last pages of the manuscript. Not only is Hebrews in this ancient book, but it is in a place that shows that it was considered a letter of Paul when this document was written about A.D. 175. Paul's church epistles appear there in rough order of length as follows: Romans, Hebrews, 1 Corinthians, 2 Corinthians, Ephesians, Galatians, Philippians, Colossians, and 1 Thessalonians. Commenting on the location of Hebrews in this manuscript, Kenyon said, "Its present position is a proof of the high importance assigned to it, and of the unquestioning acceptance of its Pauline authorship." [^3]

Since Hebrews was widely considered one of Paul's letters a century after his death, why is there any doubt? As noted above, the essential answer is the style of the letter. The most obvious problem here may be the most superficial one: opening without the name of Paul in the text. Most modern books and many ancient ones do the same, with the author identified on a title page or a heading. The Chester Beatty Papyri do just that by listing Hebrews as the second item in Paul's letters. So the book is certainly by an identified author, though it lacks Paul's name in its opening. At its end, Hebrews mentions Timothy, whose name appears only in Acts in connection with Paul and in eleven of Paul's letters. "Grace be with you all" ends Hebrews, and this phraseology closes every other letter of Paul—it does not close other New Testament letters. Paul's other letters begin with phrasing on grace and peace from the Father and the Son; Hebrews differs in wording but begins with the testimony of the Father and the Son. Hebrews is the one letter addressed to the Jews by the apostle called to the Gentiles—perhaps Paul's consciousness of transcending his normal assignment caused the absence of his name, apostleship, and authority in the letter to the Hebrews.

Must the most creative writer of the New Testament fit one literary mold? Scholars dash off informal letters and also labor over elegantly worded papers of logical symmetry. Paul was capable of this careful testament of faith to his nation as well as of the spontaneous, often dictated language in the majority of his letters. Thoughts and expressions characteristic of him are prominent in the personalized final chapters of Hebrews. Other New Testament writers do not use the comparisons of the church to the body (Heb. 13:3) and of enduring in an athletic contest (Heb. 12:1). Yet these are found throughout Paul's letters. Being fed milk is a positive beginning of growth for Peter (1 Pet. 2:2), but Paul uses the metaphor to shame those weakening in the faith (1 Cor. 3:1-2), the same viewpoint as in Hebrews (Heb. 5:12-14). In explaining justification by faith, Paul favors Habakkuk 2:4—"The just shall live by his faith"—quoting it in Romans 1:17 and in Galatians 3:11. It is quoted one other time in the New Testament as Hebrews 10:38 introduces the great chapter on faith. No one stressed that principle more than did Paul, and Hebrews 11 is the greatest chapter in the New Testament on that subject. But what about sentence structure and vocabulary? Those elements follow from the subject and the occasion; since Paul wrote to the Hebrews formally and only once, natural differences would appear. Indeed, stylistic differences are regularly exaggerated, for many words in Hebrews are distinctively Pauline. [^4]

The earliest information about Hebrews supports Paul's authorship. Origen, the brilliant Christian scholar who lived from about A.D. 185 to 253, furnished an irresistible quotation that some use as the last word: "But who wrote the epistle, in truth God knows." But that statement only represents Origen's judgment on the style of the penman, for he was convinced that "the thoughts are the apostle's," coming from a disciple's "short notes of what his master said." Yet Origen admitted that the historical tradition upheld Paul's authorship: "For not without reason have the men of old time handed it down as Paul's." [^5] Origen's teacher was the educated Clement of Alexandria, who lived about A.D. 150 to 215. Clement in turn relied on a source, "the blessed elder," apparently his Christian teacher Pantaenus, who flourished earlier in the second century. Thus, the following views of Clement and his teacher reflect the early conviction that Paul wrote Hebrews; their views are preserved by the later church historian Eusebius, who quoted Clement of Alexandria:

And as for the Epistle to the Hebrews he says indeed that it is Paul's, but that it was written for Hebrews in the Hebrew tongue, and that Luke, having carefully translated it, published it for the Greeks. Hence, as a result of this translation, the same complexion of style is found in this epistle and in the Acts. . . . Then lower down he adds: "But now, as the blessed elder used to say, since the Lord, being the apostle of the Almighty, was sent to the Hebrews, Paul, through modesty, since he had been sent to the Gentiles, does not inscribe himself as an apostle of the Hebrews, both to give due deference to the Lord and because he wrote to the Hebrews also out of his abundance, being a preacher and apostle of the Gentiles." [^6]

It is logical that Paul would write to the Hebrews in their literary language, but Clement may have assumed translation on the narrow basis of style. What is important is that he and his teacher represent the informed conviction that Hebrews came from Paul, for they gave this view at the time when the scribe of the Chester Beatty Papyri copied Hebrews as second in its collection of Paul's letters. Thus, there is a substantial second-century conviction of Paul's authorship. On the level of inspired reaction to style and message, Joseph Smith did not claim formal revelation on the subject but consistently referred to Paul as the author.

Main Teachings

Christ's Authority and Mission

Eternal realities are unfolded in the beginning of Hebrews, and they are based on historical realities. For Paul proclaims salvation that "first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him" (Heb. 2:3). Paul heard these eyewitnesses of the Lord, and he adds that God also testified through healings, miracles, and "gifts of the Holy Ghost" that followed the Lord of the Gospels and his apostles of Acts (Heb. 2:4). Paul had experienced these signs following but focused on how the gospel came before his conversion. If God had spoken, what kind of God was he? Most large Christian churches have formal statements defining the Holy Trinity, but their principle adjectives are not found in Paul's great testimonies of the Father and the Son. In fact, the creeds speak of a triune God, not of one glorious being in the shape of another. Paul opens Hebrews with the Father sending the Son, who is the "brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person" (Heb. 1:3, italics added). The italicized words translate the Greek charakter, the ancestor of the English character, which roughly approximates Paul's meaning.

Christ is the "character" of God's being, the apostle says. This term meant the "mark" of an engraving tool—in physical terms a "stamped likeness" or "an exact reproduction." Thus, Christ is not the Father, but he is stamped with his divinity and exact form. And this is not in some mystic sense of sharing the same soul, for man in his distinctiveness from God is also said to be in God's "character" in early Christian literature. Clement of Rome wrote about A.D. 96 and said that God formed man in the "likeness of his own image." In the opening of Hebrews Christ is clearly distinct from God, standing "on the right hand of the Majesty on high" (Heb. 1:3). Commentators too smugly say that "no literal location is intended." Yet the mother of James and John had a location in mind when she wanted them to sit at Christ's right and left hand in eternity (Matt. 20:21-23). But Christian scholars believe that "God has no physical right hand or material throne where the ascended Christ sits beside Him." They interpret the "right hand" as merely descriptive of status or power, but how do they draw the line between explaining and explaining away? Stephen saw Christ at the right hand of God (Acts 7:55-56), as did Joseph Smith in 1820 in the First Vision. A half dozen times Paul speaks of Christ at the right hand of the Father and never hints at less than literalism.

As separate from God, Christ fulfilled a unique mission. He is God's son and God's "heir," the creator of worlds (Heb. 1:2); he is the power "upholding all things," who "brought about the cleansing of our sins" (Heb. 1:3, literal trans.). For a time he descended below angels that he "might taste death for everyone" (Heb. 2:9, NKJB). Using a form of the word of priestly sacrifice in Romans 3:25, Paul pictures Jesus as the High Priest making "propitiation for the sins of the people" (Heb. 2:17, NKJB). Thus, Hebrews opens to attest the Atonement and never moves far from this subject. Obviously the Jewish converts needed the powerful message of forgiveness through Christ instead of their purification rites. With their faith in Jehovah and his angels, they had apparently assimilated Christ into their religious system as a part but not the center. The opening two chapters of Hebrews give ten Old Testament quotations in a row on the superiority of the Son to angels. The Psalmist said that man on earth was "a little lower than the angels" (Heb. 2:7), and Christ came to share the human condition (Heb. 2:11) to raise all to celestial fellowship. The point of this reasoning is Christ's descending to lift all—the point of the Old Testament quotations is the superiority of the Son to all angels. The appearances of Moses and Elijah to Christ and to Joseph Smith are part of the evidence that angels are righteous men in postmortal glory. In authority they function under Christ, and those worthy in this life will not be lower than angels in eternity—Paul reminded the Corinthians, "We shall judge angels" (1 Cor. 6:3).

Another Jewish problem is refuted in Hebrews. Paul opened Corinthians by regretting that Christ was a "stumbling-block" to Israel because "the Jews require a sign" (1 Cor. 1:22-23). The disciples on the Emmaeus road had difficulty believing in a slain Messiah, since they looked to the prophets' words of the victorious Messiah of the day of judgment (Luke 24:20-21). So Hebrews probes the suffering mission of Christ and what it means to those who follow him. Christ is the "captain" of our salvation (Heb. 2:10) and the "author" of our faith (Heb. 12:2)—these are different renditions of a word meaning leader, founder, or originator. Thus Christ, who brought the plan of salvation, was made "perfect through sufferings" (Heb. 2:10). This theme is resumed with the same wording in Hebrews 5:8-9: the "Son . . . learned . . . obedience by the things which he suffered" and thus was "made perfect." That is the first half of the message about Christ, for his earthly life was outwardly a defeat but really a personal victory. Jews who might stumble at his suffering must know that he filled the Father's assignment and thus completed his Godhood. Since the perfecting of the Messiah through suffering is identical in Hebrews 2:10 and Hebrews 5:8, the Joseph Smith Translation note identifying the latter with Melchizedek must not be taken superficially. "Standing alone . . . this footnote gives an erroneous impression"; the verse refers to Christ, since "Melchizedek was a prototype of Christ."

What benefit could come from a suffering Savior? For many years Paul probably faced that question of ridicule or confusion. His answer is that a suffering Savior knows us better and is better known by us. Having learned obedience through mortal trials, Christ can be trusted totally to lead "all them that obey him" to "eternal salvation" (Heb. 5:9). In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse speaks of Christ alone. The Savior does not call from a distant height but from a little ahead on the rocky path that his disciples climb: "For we do not have a High Priest who cannot sympathize with our weaknesses, but was in all points tempted as we are, yet without sin" (Heb. 4:15, NKJB). Jesus was once on this earth, fully felt its pressures, and met its challenges. He not only died for the sins of all but lived as the example for all. Could anyone believe that perfection is attainable unless someone had attained it? And could anyone have confidence in divine mercy unless the Lord knew personally the terrible realities of life? "For in that he himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to aid those who are tempted" (Heb. 2:18, NKJB). This knowledge is behind Paul's assurance that others have faced the temptation that any person is called to face—that God "will not allow you to be tempted" beyond your ability to bear it (1 Cor. 10:13, NKJB).

Faithfulness and First Principles

"Well done," the Lord told the "good and faithful servant" (Matt. 25:21, 23). This approval was given to those productive enough to double the five or two talents given to them. In this and other parables Jesus taught that faith is shown only by being faithful, the major personal message in Hebrews. In bold strokes Paul puts forth the example of Jesus, "the Apostle and High Priest of our profession" (Heb. 3:1). "Profession" is used in the sense of what doctrines one "professes," and the better rendering is "confession." The point is that salvation comes not by professing or confessing Christ but by following through on one's commitment to Christ and his gospel: "Let us hold fast our profession" (Heb. 4:14). Christ showed the way because he was "faithful to him that appointed him" (Heb. 3:2). We shall share his kingdom "if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end" (Heb. 3:6). Paul repeats this last phrase, for it is his theme: literally "steadfast unto the end" (Heb. 3:14).

Like many New Testament letters, Hebrews is a message about crossroads. "If" permeates its teaching. As discussed in Romans, the natural branches of Israel were broken off God's olive tree because of "unbelief" (Rom. 11:20, 23). Paul takes up this theme again in Hebrews, warning the Hebrews not to fail in discipleship as Israel once failed to follow Moses—then the reward was lost "because of unbelief" (Heb. 3:19). The greatness of the ancient revelation is suggested by the language, "Unto us was the gospel preached, as well as unto them" (Heb. 4:2). There is little on this subject in the New Testament except Galatians 3:8, which says God "preached before the gospel unto Abraham." These passages may indicate the general message or revelation of God instead of the full gospel of Christ. Modern revelation shows that higher priesthood and ordinances predating Moses were offered ancient Israel through Moses, but that they "hardened their hearts" and received only lesser laws (D&C 84:19-25). The Jewish converts were well aware of the rebellion against Moses, which made effective Paul's warning on not taking the wrong spiritual road. Christ is the author of eternal salvation only to "them that obey him" (Heb. 5:9).

When many Corinthians doubted, Paul had to restate "the gospel which I preached unto you" (1 Cor. 15:1). When the Hebrews wavered, he had to declare again "the first principles of the oracles of God" (Heb. 5:12). Since "oracles" is ambiguous English, readers should know that it translates a specific term for "revealed words" or "scriptures." Thus, Paul was literally outlining their need to hear "the central principles of the beginning of God's words" (Heb. 5:12, literal trans.) And Paul's list of first principles is soon given, headed by nearly the same label: "The word of the beginning of Christ" (Heb. 6:1, literal trans.). In other words, Paul is reteaching the basis of their conversion, or in the King James phrase, "the principles of the doctrine of Christ" (Heb. 6:1). The above literal translations show that these principles were first in the two senses of being of first importance and also being taught first in sequence. Thus, Hebrews turns the clock back to the fundamental doctrines all converts accepted.

What does Paul mean by "leaving" (Heb. 6:1) these first principles? Certainly he does not mean to leave behind "faith toward God" (Heb. 6:1), for he spends a whole chapter on its necessity later (Heb. 11). Since the manuscripts here do not vary, Paul may have intended to "leave off discussing them," or he might have loosely referred to going beyond and mastering further gospel lessons. In the latter case, the first principles could not be ignored any more than the alphabet is set aside in further study: "The first principles of Christian truth are basic to every stage of development and are no less essential at the end than they are at the beginning." [^7] Joseph Smith agreed but preferred to revise an ambiguous meaning rather than to philosophize about it: "'Leaving the principle of the doctrine of Christ.' If a man leave the principles of the doctrine of Christ, how can he be saved in the principles? A contradiction—I don't believe it. I will render it therefore, 'not leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, etc.'" [^8]

Paul's "first principles" agree with Peter's preaching on the day of Pentecost. Peter preached the Messiahship and resurrection of Jesus; to those who had faith to inquire, he answered, "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost" (Acts 2:38). Paul's "first principles" so closely correspond to Peter's that one must define the other:

Peter on Pentecost Paul in Hebrews

Jesus' Messiahship "eternal judgment"

Jesus' resurrection "resurrection of the dead"

Implied faith of converts "faith toward God"

"repent" "repentance from dead works"

"be baptized" "the doctrine of baptisms"

"the gift of the Holy Ghost" "laying on of hands"

The content about Christ is very similar in these accounts, though expressed in different words. In Acts and the letters, accepting Jesus as Messiah was accepting the forgiveness of sins through him, and his resurrection. His Messiahship also meant that he was mankind's judge, as shown in speeches of jesus in the Gospels and of the apostles in Acts. These general professions of faith in Christ correlate. But the striking correlations in the above lists are what Latter-day Saints call the "first principles and ordinances of the gospel." Faith and repentance are obvious first steps, since without believing, one does not repent nor accept any ordinances at all. But on the two ordinances, commentators exhibit considerable confusion. "The doctrine of baptisms" comes out as "ablutions" (RSV) or "cleansing rites" (NEB). Fortunately, the rest of the recognized committee translations have the stability to retain "baptisms." The Greek baptismos here is not the normal New Testament word for baptism, and refers to Jewish washings in Mark 7, but several early manuscripts of Colossians 2:12 have no problem using it for Christian baptism. Though it refers to Jewish washings later in Hebrews 9:10, Josephus uses it of John's baptism. [^9] All this merely shows that the word can be used of Christian baptism and Jewish cleansing rites. To think that Paul intended the latter in a list of basic Christian requirements is to scramble logic. On Pentecost, Peter insisted on baptism after repentance, which is clearly parallel to Paul's "doctrine of baptisms." [^10]

Paul's second ordinance is the "laying on of hands," which has produced a spectrum of speculation among commentators. But comparison with Peter's Pentecostal preaching shows that the purpose of baptism was remission of sins to prepare the convert for the "gift of the Holy Ghost" (Acts 2:38). And as earlier discussed, Acts clearly identifies that gift with the laying on of hands in the cases of Peter (Acts 8:14-20) and Paul (Acts 19:1-6). Thus, the laying on of hands that followed baptism was not the ceremony for priesthood ordination or for healing the sick. Paul's sequencing of teachings "of the beginning" shows that the "laying on of hands" is what converts received after baptism, namely, for the gift of the Holy Ghost. Paul says right afterward that the end product of the "first principles" was to be made "partakers of the Holy Ghost" (Heb. 6:4). More commentators do not see this because Christian churches have not preserved this ceremony of the Early Church. In many Protestant churches, such a "confirmation" only inducts an older child into the church some years after his infant baptism, and receiving the Holy Ghost is not mentioned. Other Protestant churches omit such a laying on of hands altogether. And even Roman Catholic theology teaches that the Holy Ghost comes through all ordinances, thus diminishing the importance of confirmation; it teaches that although confirmation is obligatory on a practical level, it "is not strictly necessary for salvation." [^11] Nevertheless Paul listed confirmation on the same level of importance with faith, repentance, and baptism.

These first principles are steps to the plateau bathed in the rays of God's inspiration. Through the Holy Ghost, those who walk there may taste "the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come" (Heb. 6:5). But with that special knowledge, they have special obligations. It is hard for commentators to envision how one so enlightened could rebel. But Satan is real and seeks to turn anyone back who is determined to rise out of his darkness. His tool is ego, for the gifts of God can be perverted for selfish purposes. Spiritual gifts must not be turned to gain "the things of this world" and the "honors of men" (D&C 121:35). One possessed by such goals might knowingly oppose God's work simply because of overriding personal ambition. Satan took that path of rebellion in the premortal life, and he seeks to infect the able with that spirit. So Paul says that if the fully enlightened fall, they risk not being able to return through repentance (Heb. 6:4-6). This is what John called the "sin unto death" (1 Jn. 5:16). It is "mysterious" to many scholars, [^12] but modern revelation brings knowledge that those committing this sin allow themselves "through the power of the devil to be overcome, and to deny the truth and defy my power" (D&C 76:31). Like Satan, one has to rise high to fall below the power of forgiveness. Only one especially favored with spiritual certainty can rebel against God with knowledge of what he is doing. In Joseph Smith's words, "He has got to say that the sun does not shine while he sees it; he has got to deny Jesus Christ when the heavens are open to him." [^13] This is the problem of the spiritually brilliant, but Paul reminds the Hebrews that most Saints have the problem of qualifying for full salvation through "diligence" (Heb. 6:11). The meaning of faith in Hebrews 11 is clearly forecast by the faithfulness of Abraham. Faith and revelation did not save him, for he "obtained the promise" only in living righteously (Heb. 6:15). And what was the key to his faithfulness? It was his "patience" (Heb. 6:12), the fact that he "patiently endured" (Heb. 6:15). These words are the noun and verb form of long-suffering. Full salvation does not come by pushing spiritual buttons, but through persistent and faithful gospel living.

Melchizedek Priesthood

Hebrews powerfully contrasts the "high priest taken from among men" (Heb. 5:1) with Christ as the "high priest" over the Church (Heb. 5:5). Commentaries extol the Lord as the only high priest, but that is contradictory on its face, since he is "called of God an high priest after the order of Melchisedec" (Heb. 5:10). This phrase comes from Psalm 110, and Paul applies "the order of Melchizedek" to Christ a half-dozen times in his discussion. If named after Melchizedek, this priesthood is obviously not unique to Christ—at least one mortal and one divine being held it. Many Protestants see priesthood as part of the Mosaic era, now superseded by the covenant of grace. But the "everlasting covenant" made with Abraham before Moses (Gen. 17:7-19) also contained "the covenant of an everlasting priesthood" (Num. 25:13; also Ex. 40:15). Although Moses referred to ancient Israel as a "kingdom of priests" (Ex. 19:6), Peter applied Moses' phrases to the Early Church: "a royal priesthood, an holy nation" (1 Pet. 2:9). And this was not a metaphor, for Christ's revelation to John speaks of the faithful as "priests of God and of Christ" in eternity (Rev. 20:6). Christ's true church had his priesthood.

Since Paul uses Jewish comparisons to reconvert the Hebrews, the Christian priesthood is not discussed directly. In Paul's day there was one Jewish high priest at a time, appointed by civil authority for a term or replaced at death (Heb. 7:23). Those released still had the name, though not the presiding office (Acts 4:6). Early Church sources sometimes use priest and high priest for Christian local and general authorities. Except in the book of Revelation, the New Testament does not use these terms of Christian priesthood. Whether or not the Early Church had the full range of priesthood offices, 1 Corinthians 12 and Ephesians 4 list more than are found in the traditional churches. The major source for priesthood ordination by the laying on of hands is quite naturally in the only detailed administrative letter of the New Testament. There Paul directs Timothy to appoint bishops and deacons but to "lay hands suddenly on no man" (1 Tim. 5:22). Obviously, he was to receive God's revelation before choosing, just as Hebrews indicates.

Paul introduces Christ's priesthood with the core principle of how true priesthood is obtained: no man takes "this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron" (Heb. 5:4). That early time preceded the political domination of the high priest's office. Paul's bridge arches from Aaron to Christ, reinforced by the same method of delegation of authority. Modern revelation gives the proper name of the higher priesthood: "the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God" (D&C 107:3). This means that Christ is the source of appointments; God gave his Son authority before the Creation. Aaron is a parallel for Christ, and Aaron is a specific model for priesthood delegation to men. Aaron was called by revelation, since God told Moses to appoint Aaron and his sons to the "priest's office" (Ex. 28:1); then Moses used the physical ceremony of consecration by anointing, which was anciently associated with the laying on of hands (Ex. 28:41), and Josephus added that the people "acquiesced in the divine selection." [^14] This procedure was soon duplicated when Joshua succeeded Moses as the Prophet to Israel. God spoke to Moses, commanding the appointment of "Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is the spirit"; but to give authority Moses "laid his hands upon him," which was done "before all the congregation," strongly suggesting their approval (Num. 27:18-23).

Since he used Aaron's example, Paul considered Moses' ordinations relevant to New Testament priesthood. One sees why, as the three steps of Moses were repeated by the apostles as they ordained others. Readers of Acts remember that the Twelve had a problem concerning fair distribution of daily food for the Greek widows of Jerusalem. Partly because sympathetic men were required for this task, the apostles delegated the nomination of welfare supervisors to "brethren," probably those of Gentile background. Yet the apostles retained supervision, for these seven assistants were brought to the Twelve, who "prayed and laid their hands upon them" (Acts 6:6, RSV, NEB, JB, NIV). Common consent also appears and is implied for the full proceedings: "The saying pleased the whole multitude" (Acts 6:5). Thus being "called of God, as was Aaron" (Heb. 5:4) was an operating reality in both testaments, despite the Protestant theory of "priesthood of the believers." Three steps are regularly discernible: the revealed call, group approval, and the laying on of hands.

What does Paul mean by "the priesthood being changed"? (Heb. 7:12.) Delegating authority was not changed. The methods of delegation were not changed. But a higher priesthood was given. Here Paul's purpose structured what he wrote. The Hebrew converts were impressed by the Old Testament, so Paul talked of Christ's priesthood because that was prophetically documented: "Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek" (Ps. 110:4). Since Acts and the letters mention many priesthood offices, priesthood is not solely possessed by Christ. But Paul's argument is simple—if the Levitical Priesthood is superseded by the Melchizedek Priesthood, the ceremonies of the Levitical Priesthood are also superseded (Heb. 7:11). But what is Melchizedek Priesthood? Hebrews poses problems that scholars admit cannot be answered without more information. And now a new Dead Sea Scroll fragment makes it harder to argue that Melchizedek Priesthood is limited to Christ, for Melchizedek appears as a prominent latter-day figure, Elijah-like, with a continuing role in ushering in the day of "good tidings . . . unto Zion" (Isa. 52:7). But he is not alone; Satan, called Belial (2 Cor. 6:15), will be opposed by him and those in "his lot": "the heritage of Melchizedek . . . who will restore them. . . . And he will proclaim release . . . for all sons of [light and] men [of the l]ot of Mel[chi]zedek . . . a year of good favor for Melchize[dek] . . . and the holy ones of God for a re[ig]n of judgment. . . . And Melchizedek shall exact the ven[ge]ance of the jud[g]ments of God [from the hand of Be]lial and from the hand(s) of all [the spirits of] his [lot]." [^15]

Who was Melchizedek, and why was a priesthood named after him? His sole historical mention brings Abraham to pay tithes to him as one of greater status. Melchizedek is the "king of Salem . . . priest of the most high God" (Gen. 14:18). Philo, Paul's Jewish contemporary, called Melchizedek "the high priest (megas hiereus) of the most high God." [^16] These brief references in Genesis and Psalms 110 "are sufficient to indicate that he is a figure of unusual significance." [^17] The growing literature about Melchizedek proves both his importance and the frustration of researchers on not knowing more. A recent study concluded after nearly two hundred pages: "We are no closer than when we began to knowing anything of real substance about a historical figure named Melchizedek." [^18] So light can be shed only by new discovery or new revelation. And Latter-day Saints offer what no one else does—new information on the person and the priesthood of Melchizedek.

Joseph Smith added a major source in translating the Book of Mormon, which gave Jewish traditions on Melchizedek, who lived in a wicked generation but "exercised mighty faith" and "did preach repentance unto his people" (Alma 13:18). This is like Noah, who appears only as an inspired ark-builder in Genesis, but Peter knew enough about him to call him a "preacher of righteousness" (2 Pet. 2:5). Through his preaching Melchizedek "did establish peace in the land in his days" (Alma 13:18). [^19] When Joseph Smith made his inspired review of Genesis, he added more striking information. Melchizedek showed his great faith "when a child" through miracles: "And thus, having been approved of God, he was ordained an high priest after the order of the covenant which God made with Enoch, it being after the order of the Son of God; which order came, not by man, nor the will of man; neither by father nor mother; neither by beginning of days nor end of years; but of God" (Gen. 14:27-28,JST . And the Joseph Smith Translation continues with the miraculous signs that followed this high ancient priesthood. Such revealed background explains the modern revelation on the name of the priesthood; Melchizedek substitutes for the name of the divine Christ "because Melchizedek was such a great high priest" ( D&C 107:2). This was the priesthood of the favored patriarchs. Melchizedek "received it through the lineage of his fathers," going back to Abel, who "received the priesthood by the commandments of God, by the hand of his father Adam" (D&C 84:14, 16).

Was Melchizedek "without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life"? (Heb. 7:3.) In a variety of places Joseph Smith applies this phrase not to the person of Melchizedek, but to his priesthood: "For this Melchizedek was ordained a priest after the order of the Son of God, which order was without . . . descent" (Heb. 7:3,JST . The commentaries uniformly explain Hebrews' phrases as a mere symbolic argument from Genesis, where no antecedents or successors of Melchizedek are given. [^20] But Paul's words are too striking to be set aside: like the Son of God, Melchizedek "remains a priest forever" ( Heb. 7:3, NAB, NEB, JB). Of course, the point is to lead up to Christ's eternal priesthood, but what does the Melchizedek analogy mean? Hebrews speaks of an eternal priesthood for Melchizedek. The only sure definitions are descriptions of how they apply. Christ's eternal priesthood continued after death when he visited and preached to the spirits in prison (1 Pet. 3:18-20). But the Early Church believed the same about its priesthood holders, as shown by the respected work from the brother of the Roman bishop mid-second century: "These apostles and teachers, who preached the name of the Son of God, having fallen asleep in the power and faith of the Son of God, preached also to those who had fallen asleep before them." [^21] Christ's servants also had delegated authority to be used in eternity. Most discussions of Hebrews 7 are too abstract, for they do not start from the reality that the Early Church possessed offices that were not of the Levitical or Aaronic Priesthood. "The priesthood being changed" (Heb. 7:12) was a fact for Christ's Church as well as for Christ.

Since Latter-day Saints testify of the return of the lost Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods, they will naturally draw fire from the religious establishment. Modern priesthood does not come from debatable scriptural interpretation, but from the physical appearances of John the Baptist, restoring the lesser Aaronic Priesthood, and then from Peter, James, and John, restoring the Melchizedek Priesthood. [^22] Slashing tracts tell us that the Church cannot have Aaronic Priesthood because Paul said it had been "changed" (Heb. 7:12). But Paul's argument is based on the irrelevance of the sacrificial temple, as explained in Hebrews' following chapters. Aaronic sacrificial functions were changed, but in the Restoration, God assigned practical functions and basic ordinances to this priesthood—indeed changed, but continuing, fulfilling the "everlasting priesthood" promises to Aaron's house.

The attacking tracts also tell us that Latter-day Saints cannot have Melchizedek Priesthood because Paul speaks of the "unchangeable priesthood" of Christ (Heb. 7:24). With superficial learning, they claim that the adjective aparabatos here means "untransferrable." In this theory, Christ could not delegate to others. Thayer's very inadequate Greek lexicon did take that position in 1889. Yet the recent committee translations all give the idea of Christ holding a "permanent" or "perpetual," not "untransferrable," priesthood. The evidence solidly sustains this position. Ancient papyri provide "a very strong case against the rendering 'not transferable.'" [^23] As far as ancient literature, Hebrews 7:24 is often "interpreted without a successor," but that meaning "is found nowhere else" and "rather has the sense permanent, unchangeable." [^24] These are the clear views of the standard tools on word meanings, with no dissenting minority. Careful readers might have known that, since Paul is never far from his Psalms text that Christ is a "priest for ever" (Heb. 7:21), meaning that he will never lose his priesthood. Thus, "continually" (Heb. 7:3) and "forever" (Heb. 7:28, NKJB) give the same thought as the "unchangeable priesthood" (Heb. 7:24). Interpreters restrict Melchizedek Priesthood to Christ, but Paul does not. And Hebrews 7 fits the clear system in Acts and in Paul's letters describing priesthood authority transferred by the laying on of hands. The Bible is deeply consistent with a restored Melchizedek Priesthood.

Christ's Atonement

What does Hebrews add to Paul's preaching of the Atonement in early Romans and 2 Corinthians 5? The answer is dimension and depth, the same thing found in Book of Mormon and Doctrine and Covenants insights. Scriptural testimonies of the Atonement establish the main truth that sins are forgiven through Christ, but different prophets clarify why this is so. These explanations are spokes fixed to the revealed fact of the Atonement. An apt analogy is electricity—few can explain it fully, but all can operate the switches that give its benefits. From chapter 7:25 to chapter 10:21, Hebrews adds its witness to the necessity of Christ's power in man's quest for eternal success. Most seek earthly success, but many fail to seek salvation because they are ignorant of their need for it. Yet the light of mortal life will dim equally for those who seek salvation and for those who do not. The self-sufficient must sometime learn that eternal progress is not possible without the Savior and his servants.

Romans testified that Christ was "at the right hand of God" making "intercession for us" (Rom. 8:34; also v. 27). And Hebrews unfolds the Atonement with the same picture of the Lord "on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens" (Heb. 8:1), living in eternity "to make intercession for them" (Heb. 7:25). Here is Christ the Advocate, one who walked unscorched through mortal fires. The Advocate is literally the Father's Counselor, who from personal understanding petitions for mercy for mortals. The Petitioner asks not through mere pleading, but because he can boldly certify that he has paid the price of sin. The great truths of modern revelation show why Christ is an effective advocate, for he satisfied justice (Alma 42:14-15) and in trembling pain "suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent" (D&C 19:16). God is playing celestial games if the Advocate is not a separate person from the Father, for the Romans-Hebrews verb for making intercession is an ancient legal term for appealing to another for aid. The same is true of the 1 Timothy-Hebrews noun "mediator." In both English and Greek the concept is "middleman," meaning a third person standing between two parties to bring them together. Paul said that the Law of Moses came through that ancient mediator (Gal. 3:19). And Hebrews speaks of the "Mediator"—greater because he is the "mediator of a better covenant" (Heb. 8:6; also 9:15 and 12:24). Thus, Christ literally intervenes between the Father and mankind to produce harmony. He does more than seek peace and understanding—he pays the price necessary to bring forgiveness. He is the contributing Mediator, the effectual Savior.

Jeremiah foretold that God would make "a new covenant" with Israel (Jer. 31:31). As 2 Corinthians 3, Hebrews proclaims the fulfillment through Christ. Jeremiah used the clearest Hebrew word for "covenant," which Paul translated by the Greek diatheke—so that term should mean "covenant" in his letters. It does generally, though it is translated "covenant" only twenty times and "testament" thirteen times in the King James Version. In the latter case, the Joseph Smith Translation changed several cases of "testament" to "covenant" in Hebrews 9, including Paul's argument, "For where a testament is, there must also of necessity be the death of the testator" (Heb. 9:16). Scholars see Paul making use of the secular meaning of diatheke here; although it was used in the Greek translation of the Old Testament to mean covenant, it nevertheless was the regular word for will. Perhaps stimulated by using "inheritance" just before (Heb. 9:15), [^25] Paul made the human analogy that the testator, the maker of the will, had to die for the will or testament to be in force. This comment was based on the double usage. In Elder Bruce R. McConkie's words, "Paul uses both the legal and the gospel definition of terms and teaches that it is through Christ's death that gifts are willed to men." [^26]

In his translation Joseph Smith stresses Christ as the offering for remission of sins. Hebrews' intense imagery features the prefiguring Old Testament sacrifices. There is the solemn Day of Atonement, when through offerings Israel became "clean from all . . . sins before the Lord" (Lev. 16:30). Paul stated the major principle of sacrificial forgiveness: there is "no remission" without "shedding of blood" (Heb. 9:22). When the "new covenant" would come, Jeremiah prophesied, God would "forgive their iniquity" and would "remember their sin no more" (Jer. 31:34). Paul quoted that promise (Heb. 10:17), explaining that Christ made this possible. God's people were first established through the sprinkling of "the blood of the covenant," symbolic of their obedience to God's laws and rites (Ex. 24:8). Paul quoted those historic words of Moses (Heb. 9:20). Jesus had also mirrored them for the meaning of his sacrifice: "For this is my blood of the new covenant [diatheke], which is shed for many for the remission of sins" (Matt. 26:28, literal trans.).

Beyond analogy is Christ's agony, which gave forgiveness to all who join his covenant and its restoration in latter days. As the pure sacrificial offering, Christ was beyond sin; thus, he gave for sin what sin could not rightfully claim. As the perfect high priest, he gave himself as the perfect offering. He was "holy, innocent, spotless, set apart from sinners" (Heb. 7:26, literal trans.). He took on himself our blame, though "without spot"—or literally "blameless" (Heb. 9:14). Thus, his culminating sacrifice superseded the daily sacrifices. That is the point of Paul's long arguments—repeated altar slayings were no longer necessary, for Christ died "once" for sins to bring forgiveness to all. That thought and number is restated over a half-dozen times in about three chapters, revealing Paul's core message. Christ "offered one sacrifice for sins for ever" (Heb. 10:12). Roman Catholicism walks a tightrope here. Its theologians agree that the real Christ could be offered once, but the Mass outwardly perpetuates the Old Testament system of sacrifice:

In this divine sacrifice which is celebrated in the Mass is contained and immolated in an unbloody manner the same Christ who once offered Himself in a bloody manner on the altar of the cross . . . . This is truly propitiatory and has this effect. . . . For, appeased by this sacrifice, the Lord grants the grace and gift of penitence and pardons even the gravest crimes and sins. For the victim is one and the same, the same now offering by the ministry of priests who then offered Himself on the cross, the manner alone of offering being different. [^27]

Paul concludes his argument on forgiveness through Christ not with an exhortation to repeat his sacrifice, but with commands to be worthy of it. The bread and wine were taken in "remembrance," publicly showing commitment to him (1 Cor. 11:25-26). But the ceremonial reenactment of Christ's death is not documented in the Early Church. Instead, Paul challenges his readers to accept forgiveness through Christ and to retain it by progress in the righteous life. Paul preached "remission of sins" to the Jews in Pisidian Antioch on the first mission, but that came to the converts in Acts through baptism. Likewise, his letters of Romans, 1 Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians, Colossians, and Titus all stress the righteous life based on the baptismal covenant. Hebrews did the same in asking for renewed faith, "having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water" (Heb. 10:22). The forepart of that instruction is a metaphor for the cleansing of all Israel, which came by sprinkling of blood to the whole people. It particularly used the prophetic image of sprinkling "clean water" to bring "a new heart . . . and a new spirit" (Ezek. 36:25-26). This figure from the Old Testament has nothing to do with Christian baptism. But "our bodies washed with pure water" is Christian baptism, since the above letters command the righteous life after referring to being clean through that ordinance. This is not Old Testament symbolism, since only the sacrificing priests washed in the giant basin before the temple, a comparison too restricted for general application. True to the format of Romans, Galatians, and other letters, Paul preached Christ first, mentioned baptism, and also preached the works that Christ requires.

Faith and Endurance

No group stresses the power of faith more than do the Latter-day Saints. Their publications from the beginning have asked why modern faith should not recreate the ancient miracles. Indeed, Hebrews 11 could be rewritten with great men and women of the Restoration who match Paul's summary of courageous trials and miraculous blessings. Hebrews 11 surveys great faith in action, and the chapter is a treasure to Latter-day Saints, who powerfully show the same fruits of faith. In Paul or modern revelation, salvation is not static but expanding. Salvation is growth toward God, the attaining of Christlike attributes. If eternal life involves progress, it must constantly involve faith to envision what may be. Thus, the first organized teaching materials of the Restoration were the "Lectures on Faith," which opened with faith as "the first principle in revealed religion, and the foundation of all righteousness"; "faith is . . . the principle of action in all intelligent beings." [^28]

Theologians scorn the pragmatic approach to faith on the ground that divine faith is unique because it is "infused" by God. Protestants holding this basic position often add predestination as a companion because they feel that man's agency has little or nothing to do with faith. Latter-day Saints often say that faith is a gift from God but mean something far different. For instance, James E. Talmage stresses that "even faith is preceded by sincerity of disposition and humility of soul." [^29] In other words, men and women must consciously choose to be worthy of every gift of God. The scriptures actually say little about faith as a gift of God, but they say much on the Holy Ghost as God's main gift. And in that case Peter tied receiving the Holy Ghost to worthiness, since it comes "to them that obey [God]" (Acts 5:32). Jesus always praised righteous acts and taught strict accountability for moral choices. This issue makes Latter-day Saints distinctive. They believe with other Christians that faith is at the center of receiving exaltation through Christ. But they do not believe that sacramental grace will bring righteousness apart from willpower, nor do they believe that the primary will to righteousness is from God. In a word, they fully accept individual agency and exaltation through cooperation with God. That view does not diminish the marvelous gifts of God, nor does it debase the human personality. Traditional Protestantism insists that "faith is God-given, and is itself the animating principle from which love and good works spontaneously spring"—otherwise one must taste the forbidden fruit of "man's contribution to his own salvation" or betray the Reformation by reviving "the doctrine of human merit." [^30]

The gospel of positive thinking falls far short of the gospel of Jesus Christ but nevertheless employs a true principle of faith as spiritual willpower. Jesus criticized those of little faith, and each person can do much to increase faith. In performing physical miracles, Christ never rewarded the doubter. And Paul says that no blessing will ever come from God without faith: "Without faith it is impossible to please him"—because one coming "to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him" (Heb. 11:6, italics added). The italicized word means literally "one who pays wages" and indeed pictures a God responding to the sincere motives and efforts of his children. The highest form of faith is that which seeks God, and saving faith is that with Christ as the object. These are gospel uses of the sweeping principle of faith, which Paul defines at the beginning of his survey of what faith has accomplished.

"Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen" (Heb. 11:1). The main points from a shelf of commentaries are in the footnotes to the Latter-day Saint edition of the King James Bible. Translations favor "assurance" for "substance," because the Greek term means "foundation" or "reality." [^31] Through faith one acts on realities that are not present. Paul's second idea parallels the first—faith operates like evidence to make one sure of things not seen. The Gentile apostle used the word faith forty times in Romans and thirty-two times in Hebrews, the two books in the New Testament that lead all others in using this term. Paul alone describes how faith works, and he gives occasional definitions; these, of course, throw light on his Hebrews' definition. In this earth we "walk by faith, not by sight" (2 Cor. 5:7) because the great realities are beyond this life. Faith perceives these "things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal" (2 Cor. 4:18). Since the gospel teaches how to prepare for eternity, faith points to the future. It is synonymous with hope: "For we are saved by hope: but hope that is seen is not hope. . . . But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it" (Rom. 8:24-25). The key to Paul's definition in Hebrews 12:1 is the confidence of faith plus what it looks to: "Things hoped for . . . things not seen."

But what is the difference between blind confidence and faith? That is one of the lessons each person was sent to earth to learn. What is the difference between a workable or fanciful plan in business or engineering? As it unfolds, there are indications and trends. In religious faith, the Holy Ghost is the source of spiritual confirmations, and the Savior promised finding by seeking (Matt. 7:7-8). Blind confidence in an untruth is shown by the Book of Mormon analogy of the infertile seed that no amount of good treatment can make grow (Alma 32:21-43). Operational faith is the focus of the scriptures—knowing the plan of salvation to prepare for an eternal future. Thus, faith is not primarily an intellectual but a creative process. Paul signals that at the outset of Hebrews 11 by an example of the divine use of faith: "Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear" (Heb. 11:3). A bridge or a building is drawn in detail before a beam or board is erected. Reality comes after the creative vision. So faith lies behind all actions, linking the inner image with working power to bring it about.

The divine act of creation leads Paul's long list of great results from faith. And it blends with the great sacrifices that faith inspired. Did faith make such deeds automatic? Is God-infused faith the basic principle from which "good works spontaneously spring"? [^32] That phrasing contradicts profound human experience, for significant actions come from both planning and courageous follow-through. "Spontaneously" hardly describes the sustained spiritual choices that ignore persecution for the truth. Abraham was the model for faith in Romans and Galatians, and he is the central example of faith in Hebrews. He first appears in Hebrews 6 to show the double formula for salvation as Paul asks the Hebrews to become "followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the promises" (Heb. 6:12). "Patience" here is the spiritually sturdy word "endurance" (hupomone), already discussed in connection with grace in Romans. Paul leaves no doubt about a second condition for God's approval; after Abraham's faith in God's "promise," Abraham "obtained the promise" only "after he had patiently endured" (Heb. 6:15). Here the last words are literally "after long-suffering."

When Hebrews 11 resumes this subject, the same testing of faith appears for Abraham. He was "called" by revelation but proved his faith because he "obeyed" (Heb. 11:8). Abraham's faith was "tried" in the case of Isaac (Heb. 11:17). Here Hebrews brings together Romans and James, something that Luther treated as impossible. In Romans Paul quoted the Genesis record that Abraham "believed in the Lord; and he counted it to him for righteousness" (Gen. 15:6). But this verse and Paul's explanation have an important context. The childless patriarch had just been told that his descendants would be as innumerable as the stars, and he had the faith to believe that revelation. In a general sense Paul denies that Abraham was "justified by works" (Rom. 4:2), as he speaks of the patriarch's trust in that particular revelation: though aged, he doubted not "the promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in faith" (Rom. 4:20). But did Paul think that God's blessings would continue if Abraham had disobeyed afterward? As just noted, Hebrews says that the "promise" was obtained by Abraham's "endurance" and "long-suffering," his works which followed faith. Whereas justification tends to be unitary in Protestant theology, it comes in two stages in Paul's thought, even in Romans. God's initial approval comes when a prophet or convert responds with undoubting faith, but final approval is strictly conditioned on the successful testing of that faith. The first approval of Abraham appears powerfully in Romans 4, whereas the testing of Abraham's faith appears in Hebrews 11. James speaks bluntly of this second stage in saying that Abraham was "justified by works, when he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar" (James 2:21). Hebrews uses the identical example of the test of faith (Heb. 11:17). Since Romans 4 talks strictly about Abraham's call before Isaac's birth, the beginning of Romans 5 fits Hebrews by teaching the testing of faith.

As seen in discussing Romans 5, that chapter begins with Paul's "ladder of salvation": after faith come trials; trials met successfully bring endurance; endurance results in a tested character. That major theme appeared early in Hebrews—Christ learned obedience through suffering and thus became "the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him" (Heb. 5:8-9). And stress on "endurance" introduces and concludes the great chapter on faith in Hebrews. Reviewing his early theme (Heb. 4:14), Paul insists that "confession" or "profession of our faith" is not enough (Heb. 10:23). It must mature into "love and to good works" (Heb. 10:24). Repeating the warning of Hebrews 6 against the unpardonable sin, Paul calls to mind the converts' early testing, when "you endured a great struggle with sufferings" (Heb. 10:32, NKJB). They indeed had faith, but they would not receive "the promise" without something else—"you have need of endurance" (Heb. 10:36, NKJB). Here again is the moral quality of persistence (hupomone), usually translated "patience" in the King James Version. This quality enabled Jesus to face his detractors and the cross itself (Heb. 12:2-3); with his determination in mind, Paul exhorted, "Let us run with endurance the race that is set before us" (Heb. 12:1, NKJB). Thus, the great epistles of faith are also great epistles about endurance, for none will win the contest by faith alone.

Hebrews calls everyone to faithfulness who has sealed his faith and repentance through authorized baptism and received the Holy Ghost by the "laying on of hands" (Heb. 6:1-3). Without watchfulness the Saints could "fall short of the grace of God" (Heb. 12:15, NKJB), a warning so critical that it is repeated in modern revelation (D&C 20:32-34). Like most letters of Paul, Hebrews closes by asking for worthiness for salvation, not by a single act but by an active lifetime of keeping God's commandments. If good works spontaneously spring from faith, Paul would not command them again in every letter. Only determined faith in Christ will bring about good works; only the faith of sustained effort will bring salvation. Thus, Hebrews closes by stressing self-control and service to God and fellowmen. Sexual relations are honorable only in marriage (Heb. 13:4). Selfishness must be eliminated by avoiding covetousness (Heb. 13:5) and by showing the gospel love that all the apostles emphasized (Heb. 13:1). Twice Paul asks the Hebrews to obey their priesthood leaders (Heb. 13:7, 17), for Christ's words come through the apostles and those appointed by them. There was indeed a new priesthood in the new Israel of the Early Church. And like the summation of the Sermon on the Mount, the point of hearing is action, for Paul prays that God will "make you perfect in every good work to do his will" (Heb. 13:21).

Ancient Israel stood on holy ground near the mount of God's presence, and Paul's imagery speaks of present spiritual powers through the historical events of Exodus 19. Then God said of his people, "Israel is my son, even my firstborn" (Ex. 4:22). The "church of the firstborn" (Heb. 12:23) uses the plural in that last term, showing that the faithful Saints will be beloved in heaven just as is the Son, for whom firstborn is generally reserved in the New Testament. [^33] Christ's favored status is exclusive, but not his sonship, for he told Mary that he ascended "unto my Father, and your Father" (John 20:17). Just as Romans and Galatians teach the fatherhood of God, so Hebrews shows the relationship of mankind to "the Father of spirits" (Heb. 12:9). He trains his children to spiritual maturity through challenges and difficulties. The restored gospel teaches the reality of Paul's testimony that men and women are God's "offspring" (Acts 17:28). Like Jesus, our heritage is in heaven, if we will learn in faith and live to be worthy of it.

NOTES

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Samuel J. Mikolaski, "Galatians," in D. Guthrie et al., New Bible Commentary, Revised (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1970), p. 1092.
[^2] Paul saw Peter three years after Paul's conversion, and fourteen years later he went up to Jerusalem again (Gal. 1:18, 2:1). But Acts has a second visit to Jerusalem that is omitted; logically it should have been, since it was for the purpose of carrying welfare supplies (Acts 11: 29-30) and had no bearing on the circumcision question that Paul was arguing in his highly spontaneous letter to the Galatians.
[^3] William F. Arndt et al., Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, 2d ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979), p. 62.
[^4] Mikolaski, p. 1091.
[^5] Arndt et al., p. 542.
[^6] G. Elson Ruff, "What Is a Lutheran?" in Leo Rosten, Religions of America (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1975), p. 161.
[^7] Milton V. Backman, Jr., American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), p. 480, citing a 1969 survey. Compare John S. Bonnell, "What Is a Presbyterian?" in Rosten, p. 203: "While baptism is urgently recommended in the Presbyterian Church, and while its omission is regarded as a grave fault, it is not held to be necessary for salvation."
[^8] Acts speaks of "remission" or "forgiveness" for sins. Both of these words translate the same Greek term. Peter declared remission of sins through Christ to the Sanhedrin (Acts 5:31), though a little earlier he had invited believers to be baptized "for the remission of sins" (Acts 2:38). Peter also declared to Cornelius, "Whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins" (Acts 10:43), but he immediately afterward baptized him. This is very close to Paul's actions with the Philippian jailor, telling him first that salvation would come through belief in Christ, but baptizing him immediately after. Paul also preached remission of sins through belief in Christ in Pisidian Antioch (Acts 13:38). Luke is not contradictory in this double association of remission of sins with belief in Christ and also with baptism. Both conditions must be met to receive the benefit. Christ's atonement makes forgiveness possible, but he sets the conditions of receiving it, namely baptism and living up to the baptismal covenant. Thus, Galatians intimately fits into the practices of Peter and Paul in Acts—"putting on Christ" through the double process of faith and baptism (Gal. 3:26-27).
[^9] Mikolaski, p. 1089.
[^10] John H. Gerstner, "Good Works," in Everett F. Harrison et al., eds., Baker's Dictionary of Theology (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book House, 1960), p. 254.
[^11] This translation fairly accurately states Paul's Greek terms in present language, though I have made two changes: "anger" replaces "outbursts of wrath"; "factions" replaces "heresies," which can relate to ideas only.
[^12] R. A. Cole, Epistle of Paul to the Galatians (London: Tyndale Press, 1965), p. 164.
[^13] Ibid.
[^14] P. S. Watson, "Sanctification," in Alan Richardson, ed., Dictionary of Christian Theology (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1969), p. 303.
[^15] H. D. McDonald, "Justification by Faith," in Carl Henry, ed., Basic Christian Doctrines (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1962), p. 214.
[^16] John Murray, "Sanctification," in ibid., p. 231.
[^17] Emerging Trends, vol. 4, no. 2 (March 1982), p. 1. (Published by Princeton Religious Research Center, Princeton, N.J.)
[^18] Ibid., p. 2.
[^19] Suetonius, Augustus 28:3 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^20] Res Gestae Divi Augusti (Loeb Classical Library), particularly the end summary but also references throughout.
[^21] Juvenal, Satires 3:62: "jampridem Syrus in Tiberium defluxit Orontes."
[^22] Suetonius, Julius 84:5.
[^23] Josephus, Jewish Antiquities 18:83-84 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^24] Suetonius, Claudius 25:4.
[^25] Dio Cassius, Roman History 60:6 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^26] See note 24 above.
[^27] Henry George Liddell and Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, rev. Henry Stuart Jones (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1953), pp. 1978-79.
[^28] Quoted in Roland H. Bainton, Here I Stand (New York: Abingdon-Cokesbury Press, 1950), p. 65.
[^29] Martin Luther, Preface to the New Testament, cited in John Dillenberger, Martin Luther: Selections from his Writings (Garden City, New York: Anchor Books, 1961), p. 19.
[^30] William Temple, cited in McDonald, "Justification by Faith," p. 213.
[^31] Dietrich Bonhoeffer, The Cost of Discipleship (New York: Macmillan Co., 1963), p. 47.
[^32] "Candid Conversation with the Evangelist," Christianity Today, July 17, 1981, p. 19.
[^33] McDonald, "Justification by Faith," p. 217.
