Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul ( 1983)

7

Roman Imprisonment Letters

Paul's later letters fall into a basic order, with the close of Acts as a beginning point. The record of Paul's missions ended at Acts 20, with Paul's moving farewell to the Ephesian leaders. Then Paul was on his way to Jerusalem with the welfare contribution in 2 Corinthians and Romans, as briefly discussed at the end of chapter 3 of this book. Acts 13 through 20 furnish eight chapters of good detail on Paul's missionary message. But the final eight chapters of Acts cover Paul's arrest in Jerusalem and his four years in custody while waiting for release, so they include more events and less doctrine. They are surveyed here for background of Paul's going to Rome and the circumstances of his writing the first Roman imprisonment letters. Retelling the full Acts story here is unnecessary, since Acts does that so well. Yet it is important to review doctrinal highlights of the close of Acts, with an outline of how Paul came to Rome in order to understand the letters from Rome.

Acts and Romans highlight Paul's inspired worries about returning to Jerusalem. He was obligated to deliver the all-important collection from the Greek Saints, yet the voice of the Spirit told him of imprisonment ahead, and of what else he did not know. Agabus, who prophesied an earlier famine, met Paul after he landed at Caesarea. He bound himself with Paul's belt as a symbol that its owner would meet a similar fate, but Paul answered that he had considered that already: "I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus" (Acts 21:13). As Paul left Caesarea for the central hills, who would have expected him to return soon as a prisoner under military guard? In Jerusalem Paul met with James, the only apostle then there, and James counseled Paul to soften Jewish prejudice by accompanying some men in purification rituals in the temple. The principled Paul saw in this no basic conflict with his Christianity. As a Christian, he believed in the reality of God's past revelations to Israel, though he considered temple sacrifices not essential to salvation. Since Jews from Ephesus had seen Paul with a Gentile from their city, they angrily accused Paul in the temple of bringing a Gentile there. The inscription has been found that stood at the gates within the broad court of the Gentiles. Just as Josephus says, it forbids any Gentile to proceed past the separating wall of the inner enclosure: "Whoever is caught will have himself to blame for his death, which will follow." [^1]

The shouts went up that Paul had "brought Greeks" into the temple and had "polluted this holy place" (Acts 21:28). In the menacing mob, whatever Paul said was unheard as he was pushed through the outer gate and given the first blows of an intended deadly beating. But the Roman garrison was trained to stop such riots before they spread, and they moved fast enough to save the apostle's life. Fortunately for Paul, he had been assaulted in the temple, for the Roman fortress Antonia loomed above the temple on the north with watchtowers high enough to see the first disturbance. The tribune in charge gathered a force and their centurions, who were named for commanding a hundred each. Rushing down in full battle gear on the crowd, they rescued Paul but chained him as their prisoner. Ascending the steps back into the fortress, Paul asked the tribune for the privilege of speaking. Impressed with Paul's assurance and skill at Greek, he allowed it, perhaps thinking the crowd had mistaken his identity. So the apostle in chains turned to address his countrymen in their own language.

What should Paul say? With a clever and conciliatory explanation, would he not be freed to continue to do the Lord's work? Yet Paul did not think of his safety but of his opportunity to explain the Lord's work. His goal was to move the Jewish crowd with the simple story of his divine call. "We saw" was Paul's basic claim when he had argued the Resurrection in 1 Corinthians 15, the same approach used by other apostles in their speeches and letters. Through the rest of Paul's imprisonment in Acts, he never defended himself without making divine revelation central to his argument. So on the temple steps he bore fervent testimony of his first vision (Acts 22:1-11). The next day he was called before the Sanhedrin, the council that condemned Christ and earlier threatened Peter and John. Paul neatly divided his accusers by insisting that he was a Pharisee and was accused for believing in the Resurrection (Acts 23:6). The Pharisees admitted that they should not "fight against God" if a supernatural being had appeared (Acts 23:9). Biographies commend Paul for a good tactic, but the strategy was incidental to his constant stress on the Resurrection and revelation as the core of his message. Since the more worldly Sadducees were skeptical of continuing revelation, Paul was defended just as Gamaliel once defended Peter and John. Though probably dead now, this teacher of Paul represented an open-minded point of view that shows that the apostle labored against Jewish prejudice, not against the inner nature of the Jewish religion.

The Roman commanding officer ordered Paul back to the fortress. At first he ordered him examined by the force of the whip, but Paul claimed his rights against this as a Roman citizen. Obligated to protect him, the tribune learned from Paul's nephew that forty men had sworn to kill Paul when the Sanhedrin assembled to hear him again. So senior officers were commanded to assemble seventy horsemen and four hundred foot soldiers, and they escorted Paul out of Jerusalem. Halfway the cavalry proceeded alone with Paul mounted among them; their leader carried the tribune's letter explaining why Paul was accused but under Roman law was not "worthy of death or of bonds" (Acts 23:29). The governor soon determined that for himself by hearing Paul and the Jewish leaders. Paul denied that he had violated law, but again he insisted that prejudice came from his belief in revelation and the Resurrection. The governor suspended decision. Although Luke suggests that he wanted a bribe, the political realities also forced a stalemate. He could not release Paul without enraging the leaders of the people he was governing; nor could he condemn Paul, since he had the rights of a Roman citizen. Two years Paul waited (Acts 24:27), with full visiting privileges (Acts 24:23). On one occasion he was heard by the governor and the governor's wife, who was of the Herodian line, and Paul shattered that official's self-composure by his plain words on righteousness and the day of judgment. A new governor arrived and wanted to take Paul to Jerusalem to settle the question of his guilt. But when first arrested, Paul received a vision of the Lord, who prophesied that Paul would testify of him in Rome (Acts 23:11). So when his life was threatened with the plan to go to Jerusalem, Paul appealed to Caesar (Acts 25:10-11).

Once King Aretas sought Paul's life in Damascus (2 Cor. 11:32), but now King Agrippa came to the governor's hearing and helped structure the report to the Roman emperor. The Lord's prophecy twenty-five years earlier was now being fulfilled, for he told Ananias that Paul would stand before kings (Acts 9:15). Thus, Paul's arrest gave him greater missionary opportunities. His appeal brought together subordinates of the governor Festus and of King Agrippa, and Paul was given a final chance to explain his position for the report that would accompany him to Rome. But Paul's defense shows that he was far more interested in testifying as an apostle than in proving his innocence. Roman administrators were notoriously practical, and all judges look at specific legal issues. So Festus could not contain himself as he heard the incredible story of Christ appearing and Paul's plain outline of the gospel: "Paul, you are mad; your great learning is turning you mad" (Acts 26:24, RSV). But Paul turned to the Herodian king, asking Agrippa if he did not know personally of the Christian church and if he did not believe in the prophets. Traditional interpretations here have King Agrippa confess near-belief, but most translations now see him squirming at the thought, trying to avoid Paul's directness: "In a short time you are persuading me to become a Christian" (Acts 26:28, literal trans.). Paul's answer helps to determine whether Agrippa was serious or sarcastic, for Paul did not commend his faith but took his answer as ambiguous: "Both in a short time and a long one, I would pray God that not only you but all those hearing me today would become just as I am, except for these bonds" (Acts 26:29, literal trans.). [^2]

In the eyes of God, Paul's judges were also on trial. And so are the readers of the record of Paul's testimony in Acts. Joseph Smith spoke strictly the doctrine of Christ and of Paul in saying, "Every word that proceedeth from the mouth of Jehovah has such an influence over the human mind, the logical mind, that it is convincing without other testimony—faith cometh by hearing." [^3] Paul's testimony before Agrippa recapitulated the foundation doctrines of 1 Corinthians 15 and Hebrews 6: "That Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise from the dead" (Acts 26:23). Paul's speeches in Acts are as significant as his letters. He told Agrippa that Christ commanded him to preach the gospel—to bring "forgiveness of sins" to the Gentiles, that they have an inheritance with those "sanctified by faith that is in me" (Acts 26:18). At the same time, Paul taught that such blessings were only for believers who would "repent and turn to God, and do works worthy of their repentance" (Acts 26:20, literal trans.). One work of repentance in Acts is baptism—and post-baptismal duties are spelled out in Paul's letters.

The Lord's prophecy about going to Rome was about to be fulfilled. In the custody of Julius, an honorable centurion, Paul set sail by transport ships, a dangerously eventful journey of nearly two thousand miles. They left the massive harbor of Caesarea, which was artifically thrown out from a straight, sandy coast by means of massive foundation blocks, making sea walls and supporting the harbor installations. They left late in the year, for the October Feast of Tabernacles was past and "sailing was now dangerous" (Acts 27:9). What follows equals any ancient literature in detail and adventure. Their transport was a "ship of Alexandria" (Acts 27:6), an authentic glimpse of the Alexandrian grainships, which were the supply line for Rome's bread. The "we" passages of Acts 27 and 28 show that Luke accompanied Paul to Rome, as did the fellow-missionary Aristarchus (Acts 27:2). Paul's warning not to risk the late season was ignored, and the ship ran uncontrolled before a deadly storm between Crete and Malta. Cresting waves and wet clouds were their main scenery for two weeks, but near the end Paul declared the assuring message that an angel had appeared to him to confirm that he would be "brought before Caesar" and that the company of the ship would be safe (Acts 27:24). That message probably saved Paul's life, for as the ship grounded the soldiers feared punishment if Paul escaped, and they intended to kill him. But the centurion Julius ordered him spared. The ship had been intentionally beached and broke up in the waves as its passengers and crew made way to shore, some on floating wreckage.

While waiting for the sailing season to resume, Paul took up a ministry in Malta for three months. It began with a dramatic sign of priesthood protection. Drying out after the shipwreck, the ever-active Paul was bitten by a poisonous snake while putting wood on the fire. But there was no harmful effect. That winter Paul performed miracles of healing, including curing the father of the prominent Publius of a feverish infection (Acts 28:8-9). Since Paul was still under arrest, it is not clear how much active preaching he did. In early spring the party of missionaries and escorting soldiers boarded another grain ship. They passed Sicily and in a few days reached Puteoli on the Bay of Naples. Paul would have seen a busy harbor; Seneca gave a first-century picture of Alexandrian mail boats arriving there, with nearly the whole city hurrying to the docks for news and excitement. [^4] Paul's week-long stay with Saints at Puteoli enabled news of his arrival to precede him to Rome, so Roman "brethren" came some forty miles from the city to meet the apostle and accompany his party to Rome. They traveled up the Appian Way, looking at the tombs of the great and the wealthy on either side of the highway near the capital. The city swarmed as they entered the suburbs. Every man had his reason for coming to Rome, and for Paul it was not a political center but a collection of God's children needing the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Rome was the city of temples and tenements. Near Paul's time the encyclopedist Pliny boasted that "there has been no city in the whole world that could be compared to Rome in magnitude." He backed up his claim by the statistics of a dozen-mile circumference of the walls surrounding the seven hills and of some sixty miles of roadways within the city. [^5] As appendix A indicates, Paul probably arrived in this world center in A.D. 61. Soon after his arrival, he called Jewish leaders to him to avoid misunderstanding; this led to a meeting where Paul preached the gospel. The length of his stay matched his Caesarean imprisonment: "He remained two whole years at his own expense and received all who came to him, preaching the kingdom of God and teaching the things concerning Jesus Christ, unhindered, with complete freedom" (Acts 28:30-31, literal trans.). Here Acts makes an important distinction between Paul's imprisonment in Caesarea, where his friends visited him (Acts 24:23), and the above custody in Rome, where he had unlimited opportunities to preach. These are his only known extended times in prison. Philippians has distinct Roman references and a description of the successful preaching of Paul there. The Roman evidence in Colossians and Philemon is not as clear, but a successful preaching ministry is alluded to in Colossians (Col. 4:2-4) that far better matches the Roman than the Caesarean imprisonment. Moreover, the slave mentioned in Philemon would more easily catch a ship to Rome, the center of commerce, than to out-of-the-way Caesarea, where a runaway would be more visible.

Paul's "bonds" are mentioned in the four letters written to Philemon, Colossians, Ephesians, and Philippians. The first three letters have an intimate relationship to each other, as a glance at the accompanying chart shows. These were carried by the same persons, and two contain greetings by the same persons—these three were written at the same time. Colossians and Ephesians blend with the fourth letter, Philippians, in teaching the relationship of the Father and the Son as well as in fitting the circumstances of Roman preaching in Acts. The passages on Godhead, Christ's obedience, and imprisonment in Hebrews also make it a possible prison letter of this time. But 2 Timothy, the final prison letter, speaks a grimmer language and fits a later imprisonment. No matter what their place of origin, Ephesians and Colossians are clearly tied together in situation, and they integrate in message with Philippians. These three early prison letters stress doctrine, are moderate in length, and spend more time stating the positive gospel of Christ than in criticizing false doctrines. With Philemon, they give a picture of Paul at a mature stage of spirituality. Like Joseph Smith in Nauvoo, he is filled with love of the Saints and with insight on the majesty of God and the broad scope of God's work.

Interrelationships of Paul's "Prison Letters"

Inter-relationships Colossians Philemon

"Bonds" Col. 4:18 Philem. 1:10,

Persons Mark Mark

sending Aristarchus Aristarchus

greetings Jesus-Justus

Epaphras Epaphras

Luke Luke

Demas Demas

(4:10-14) (1:23-24)

Letter Tychicus

carriers Onesimus (4:7, 9) Onesimus (1:10-12)

Local "To Archippus: Take "To . . . Archippus, our

leader heed to the ministry fellowsoldier, and to

addressed which you have received the church in your

in the Lord" (4:17, NKJB) house" (1:2, NKJB)

Roman Aristarchus and Luke Aristarchus and Luke

references send greeting—they send greeting—they

traveled to Rome with traveled to Rome with

Paul Paul

Stylistic Christ the head of the

Parallels body, the image of God,

ruling all (1:13-18)

Advice to husbands,

wives, children, fathers,

slaves, masters (3:18-4:1)

Interrelationships of Paul's "Prison Letters"

Ephesians Philippians

Eph. 6:20 Philip. 1:7, 13-16

"The brethren which are

with me" (4:21)

Tychicus (6:21) Epaphroditus

(2:25—compare 4:18)

"Caesar's household"

(4:22)—"palace" (1:13) or

"praetorian guard" (1:13, RSV)

Christ the head of the Christ the form of God,

body, ruling all ruling all (2:5-9)

(1:17-23)

Advice to husbands,

wives, children,

fathers, slaves,

masters (5:24-6:9)

PHILEMON

Profile

Sent from: Paul, probably at Rome, joined by Timothy.

Sent to: Philemon, a wealthy Christian living in Colossae, in west central Asia Minor.

Date: About A.D. 61.

Purpose: To ask forgiveness for the runaway slave Onesimus.

Main theme: Forgiveness and just relationships.

Background

Reason for Writing

The touching story of the slave Onesimus is contained in Paul's short letter to Philemon, his master, with further hints about them in the accompanying letter to Colossae. Paul honored the returning slave by naming him as the joint carrier of the letter to the Colossians, in which he called him "a faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you" (Col. 4:9). So the master Philemon lived at Colossae also. Being a slaveholder suggests that he was wealthy, as does the natural reading of "the church in your house" (Philem. 1:2, NKJB). Evidently Philemon had a home that could accommodate Church meetings, which is part of the picture of Philemon's "love and faith . . . toward the Lord Jesus and toward all the saints" (Philem. 1:5, NKJB). Paul commends Philemon's works, which have refreshed the Saints (Philem. 1:7). The King James Version translates "bowels" here from the Greek term referring to inner organs, so modern translations generally use the current idiom "heart" instead of that older English preference for inner emotions. The above glimpses complete what is known about Philemon, except that Paul converted him. This is clear from Philemon owing his "own self" to Paul (Philem. 1:19). Colossae was within the orbit of Paul's missionary influence and possible visits when "all they which dwelt in Asia" heard the word of the Lord from Ephesus (Acts 19:10). Although Paul says that he cared for those who had not seen him in that area (Col. 2:1), still others might have seen him.

Paul had also converted Onesimus, "whom I have begotten in my bonds" (Philem. 1:10). Such language is used only of his converts (1 Cor. 4:15). Onesimus had indeed wronged his master (Philem. 1:18) but providentially had "ministered unto [Paul] in the bonds of the gospel" (Philem. 1:13). If Philemon had lost for Paul's gain, now Paul was reluctantly returning Onesimus for restitution to Philemon. Paul plays on the name Onesimus, which means "profitable"; with another adjective Paul says Onesimus had not been useful to Philemon but now was useful to both his master and the Church leader (Philem. 1:11). Certainly he had run away. Some think he could not have made his way to Rome, but shipping was easily available to a worker or stowaway. Had he been frustrated by the huge and heartless city? Perhaps rebuffed and hungry, he sought out Christians, since he knew their brotherhood firsthand from the Christian household of Philemon. If he did not seek out Paul, possibly Christians learned his story and notified Paul. Paul clearly taught, converted, and fellow-shipped. But Paul was legally obligated to send him back to Philemon. Like Timothy, Onesimus is called Paul's "son," probably an indication of his youth. Some fifty years later a senior bishop traveled through Asia and wrote to commend the Ephesians on their Bishop Onesimus, "a man of inexpressible love." [^6] Whether or not this is the same person, Paul's letter stands for gospel outreach that breaks down worldly barriers.

Main Teachings

Forgiveness and Just Relationships

Sincere repentance certainly involves righting the wrong, giving satisfaction to the person sinned against. And when that is done, the major duty shifts to the person wronged. Revelation warns the person sinned against to overcome his resentment through forgiveness: "He that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord; for there remaineth in him the greater sin" (D&C 64:9). This is the principle dramatized by Jesus in the parable of the unforgiving servant (Matt. 18:21-35), and Paul's letter calls on Philemon to forgive. Paul and Onesimus did their duty to return Philemon's "property." But Paul makes perfectly clear that the master legally owns only the slave's service, not his person. This tension between mortal law and God's higher morality makes this short letter a fascinating challenge to complacency. For it highlights the duty of every believer in God to respect every child of God, of whatever age, sex, race, or social or economic level. The letter to Philemon admits the wrongdoing of the runaway slave but guards against the further sin of the master in how he takes him back. In short, the letter is really about potential offenses to others from those who have been in the right.

Slavery was a reality in Paul's world. Cruel war had produced heartless enslavement of enemies, but Paul was on the high end of the social spectrum with the privilege of Roman citizenship. This meant that he was personally untouched by slavery and could have comfortably ignored it. But his Christian convictions did not allow that, for several of his letters command righteous treatment of slaves. Nevertheless, the legal system supported slavery as an institution. The population of larger cities may have been 33 percent slaves. [^7] Their percentage empire-wide would have been less, perhaps 20 percent. Their use would move up from the harsh assignment to mines, to agriculture, to factories or business, to domestic duty, and domestic slaves were often virtually family members. Onesimus may have worked in the household or with crops or flocks. The ancient ways of dealing with farm slaves are shown in the de Agricultura of Cato the Elder, an incredibly unfeeling manual explaining how to treat slaves as animals in order to maximize profit. Fortunately Paul's century was more enlightened on the whole, for public opinion and the influence of philosophy gave the slave dignity as a human being. Grave monuments tell of slaves set free and marrying into patron families. So there were human and economic trends toward tempering harsh bondage, but Augustus's legislation restricted the number of emancipations that could be made at a slave-owner's death. His successors in the first and second centuries moved slowly but surely to give slaves legal rights against cruel and unusual treatment. [^8]

What were Philemon's options when Onesimus returned? Merely probing them shows why Paul protected his new convert with letters to Philemon and to the Colossian branch of the Church. The Roman philosopher-statesman Seneca was Paul's age and describes domestic slavery. He caricatures the aristocratic glutton whose slaves must virtually stand at attention while he eats, since their accidental coughs or sneezes merit beatings. [^9] Seneca has a higher standard, admitting that in treatment of slaves "we Romans are exceptionally arrogant, harsh, and insulting." [^10] But Seneca's higher standard still fell far short of verbal courtesy: "You are entirely right in not wishing to be feared by your slaves, and in lashing them merely with the tongue." [^11] And these are glimpses of ordinary operations, not the punishment of a returning fugitive. The fragments of preserved laws on the subject show Paul's legal duty to send Onesimus back: "Anyone who has hidden a runaway slave is guilty of theft." There were legal options to report to authorities or to return "to the owners." The process of formal return hints at how masters might treat returning slaves: "Carefully guarding them may even include chaining them up." [^12] Second-century laws prevented owners from killing their slaves, but first-century masters seem to have been free to inflict almost anything to break a slave from deserting.

"Do not torment him," the senator Pliny wrote a friend, asking for leniency for an offending household servant. "Make some concession to his youth, his tears, and to your own kind heart." [^13] Such an appeal is admirable but superficial when comparing that request for human decency with Paul's bold testimony of equality: "[Onesimus] departed for a while for this purpose, that you might receive him forever, no longer as a slave but more than a slave, as a beloved brother" (Philem. 1:15-16, NKJB). Such a request would not work unless Philemon really believed in eternal brotherhood. So Paul labors deftly but plainly for Philemon's conversion to that principle. He writes with the obvious goal of softening Philemon's heart, for the spirit of 1 Corinthians 13 is the spirit of this short letter. There, love leads out with faith and confidence in the right. So Paul simply tells Philemon that he knows that he will treat Onesimus fairly: "Although in Christ I have full freedom to command what is fitting, through love I prefer to encourage you" (Philem. 1:8-9, literal trans.). At this point the apostle with authority reverses the image by referring to himself as aged and in chains—setting aside for the moment any intimidation of Philemon and pointing out that he has converted both the slave and master and loves them equally in the Lord. Paul indeed put the burden of what to do on Philemon's conscience: "Trusting your obedience, I wrote you, knowing that you will do even more than I say" (Philem. 1:21, literal trans.). But what has Paul really asked of Philemon? Nothing directly. But without question he expects the runaway to be treated consistently with Christian brotherhood. And he approves the most liberal forgiveness that Philemon might consider—even to freeing the slave turned brother.

The realism of Paul's approach is as impressive as his recognition of Philemon's agency. Tyranny does not flourish in an atmosphere of honest counsel. By also addressing the letter to Philemon's associates, the apostle took a step to prevent a rash decision (Philem. 1:2). The woman Apphia is obviously Philemon's wife, and the "fellowsoldier" Archippus is the same one who has just received a "ministry . . . in the Lord" (Col. 4:17). So he has some official Church position—possibly he is Philemon's bishop. And accountability does not end until Paul's personal review. He will come and stay with Philemon upon his release from prison (Philem. 1:22) and will personally pay whatever the slave owes and cannot pay, a hint that Onesimus possibly stole money to aid his escape. The lawful master must himself decide on permissible options, though laws would not give such fearful power to individuals today. Through all this is the principle of answerable agency.

Paul's language in the accompanying Colossian letter is blunt on what the gospel requires: "Give unto your servants that which is just and equal," for there is a master of all "in heaven" (Col. 4:1). "Servant" in the King James Version is the same word translated "slave" in the modern translations of Philemon, clearly defined by Onesimus's status. In the scriptures all Saints are bond servants of God, with overtones of God as their rightful master. But a just relationship results from his laws, not from the whims of an arbitrary master. So "slave" is too harsh a translation for most New Testament passages. The apostles' teaching of this just relationship with God and fellowmen injected a powerful force for change into society. Christ, Peter, and Paul obeyed civil law but taught a higher morality. They were moral but not political revolutionaries, for the Early Church made every effort to support Jewish and Roman government while preparing men for the ultimate kingdom of God. In other words, they reformed the minds and souls of individuals instead of angrily demonstrating against unalterable policies. Church members today live under forms of government that permit change and under those that do not. Like Paul in the case of ancient slavery, they can afford to be patient while teaching eternal truth: "Christianity did not insist upon the actual liberation of the slave, but it did insist that he must no longer be regarded as a mere chattel. This in the long run meant the abolition of slavery." [^14]

---
Notas:
[^1] Samuel J. Mikolaski, "Galatians," in D. Guthrie et al., New Bible Commentary, Revised (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1970), p. 1092.
[^2] Paul saw Peter three years after Paul's conversion, and fourteen years later he went up to Jerusalem again (Gal. 1:18, 2:1). But Acts has a second visit to Jerusalem that is omitted; logically it should have been, since it was for the purpose of carrying welfare supplies (Acts 11: 29-30) and had no bearing on the circumcision question that Paul was arguing in his highly spontaneous letter to the Galatians.
[^3] William F. Arndt et al., Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, 2d ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979), p. 62.
[^4] Mikolaski, p. 1091.
[^5] Arndt et al., p. 542.
[^6] G. Elson Ruff, "What Is a Lutheran?" in Leo Rosten, Religions of America (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1975), p. 161.
[^7] Milton V. Backman, Jr., American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), p. 480, citing a 1969 survey. Compare John S. Bonnell, "What Is a Presbyterian?" in Rosten, p. 203: "While baptism is urgently recommended in the Presbyterian Church, and while its omission is regarded as a grave fault, it is not held to be necessary for salvation."
[^8] Acts speaks of "remission" or "forgiveness" for sins. Both of these words translate the same Greek term. Peter declared remission of sins through Christ to the Sanhedrin (Acts 5:31), though a little earlier he had invited believers to be baptized "for the remission of sins" (Acts 2:38). Peter also declared to Cornelius, "Whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins" (Acts 10:43), but he immediately afterward baptized him. This is very close to Paul's actions with the Philippian jailor, telling him first that salvation would come through belief in Christ, but baptizing him immediately after. Paul also preached remission of sins through belief in Christ in Pisidian Antioch (Acts 13:38). Luke is not contradictory in this double association of remission of sins with belief in Christ and also with baptism. Both conditions must be met to receive the benefit. Christ's atonement makes forgiveness possible, but he sets the conditions of receiving it, namely baptism and living up to the baptismal covenant. Thus, Galatians intimately fits into the practices of Peter and Paul in Acts—"putting on Christ" through the double process of faith and baptism (Gal. 3:26-27).
[^9] Mikolaski, p. 1089.
[^10] John H. Gerstner, "Good Works," in Everett F. Harrison et al., eds., Baker's Dictionary of Theology (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book House, 1960), p. 254.
[^11] This translation fairly accurately states Paul's Greek terms in present language, though I have made two changes: "anger" replaces "outbursts of wrath"; "factions" replaces "heresies," which can relate to ideas only.
[^12] R. A. Cole, Epistle of Paul to the Galatians (London: Tyndale Press, 1965), p. 164.
[^13] Ibid.
[^14] P. S. Watson, "Sanctification," in Alan Richardson, ed., Dictionary of Christian Theology (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1969), p. 303.
