Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul ( 1983)

COLOSSIANS

Profile

Sent from: Paul, probably at Rome, joined by Timothy.

Sent to: Members at Colossae, in west central Asia Minor.

Date: About A.D. 61.

Purpose: To strengthen the branch on the return of Onesimus and to correct the false doctrine of "worshipping of angels."

Main themes: The Godhead; errors about Christ, days, and diet; developing celestial qualities.

Background

The City

Colossae lay in a high valley with mountain scenery resembling the arid west of the United States. A hundred miles east of Ephesus, it was mentioned on Xenophon's famous march from the coast and up the Meander River to the tributary basin of the Lycus River. Colossae was "prosperous and large," partly because it was on the east-west trade route. [^1] Christianity later marched the hundred miles from the coast to Colossae, for Paul was at Ephesus and reached "all Asia" with the gospel message (Acts 19:26). The regional economy depended not only on trade but also on grazing lands that supported the wool industry in Colossae and in nearby Laodicea. The geographer Strabo reported of Paul's time, "The country around Laodicea produces sheep that are excellent, not only for the softness of their wool . . . but also for its raven-black color, so that the Laodiceans derive splendid revenue from it, as do the neighboring Colossians from the color [of wool] which bears the same name." [^2]

Hierapolis and these two cities formed a triangle with sides about ten miles long. In writing to Colossae, Paul also named "them that are in Laodicea, and them in Hierapolis" (Col. 4:13). Substantial ruins of the latter city are spread out around its well-preserved stone theater. It was built adjacent to massive hot springs that attracted religious and recreational pilgrims. But Laodicea was the major city of the area in Paul's day. Just before Paul, Strabo wrote that Laodicea "grew large in our time and in that of our fathers." That geographer paid tribute to its "fertile territory" and the private wealth of some of its citizens. [^3] Its ruins, including its theater, are badly deteriorated, but Laodicea's stone-strewn area is massive. Although Hierapolis is merely mentioned in Paul's Colossian letter, Laodicea is prominent, probably reflecting the size of the Church in that large city. Laodicea was possibly the regional center of Church administration. Three decades later John sent his letter to Laodicea as the most important branch of the Church in that area.

Reason for Writing

A letter to Colossae was certainly part of sending Onesimus back there, but another problem was serious enough to demand a separate letter of correction. How did Paul learn of this situation? Philemon's letter closes with a greeting from "Epaphras, my fellowprisoner in Christ Jesus" (Philem. 1:23). This is probably a way of honoring this man who was well known at Colossae; he was assisting Paul in prison, just as the returning Onesimus had done. Colossians also names Epaphras, "who is one of you, a servant of Christ" (Col. 4:12). The Colossians had "learned" the gospel from "Epaphras our dear fellowservant, who is for you a faithful minister of Christ" (Col. 1:7). Since he had "declared unto us your love in the Spirit" (Col. 1:8), Paul's knowledge of the current problems of that area came through this missionary with their interest at heart. And Paul apparently wanted them to know that negative information was relayed for their benefit, since Epaphras has a "great zeal for you, and them that are in Laodicea, and them in Hierapolis" (Col. 4:13). Only the letter to Colossians survives, but the lost Laodicean letter must have also included correction. That nearby branch probably had as many members as that at Colossae and was likely affected by the same false teaching.

What was the "Colossian heresy"? Biographies and commentaries discuss it but add little more than Colossians itself discloses. Some were debasing Christ's divinity and role in the Godhead, for chapter 2 refutes those who fail to hold Christ as "the Head" (Col. 2:19), whereas chapter 1 has Paul's most sustained testimony of the divinity and power of the Son. There is little contemporary religious information, but the writings of John went to the same locality some forty years later. They definitely show deviations from the gospel like those Paul criticized in his Colossian letter. The parallel with 1 Corinthians is striking, for Paul's inspired resurrection chapter answered their doubts on the Resurrection, just as Paul's powerful survey of Christ's mission corrected Colossian confusion. And Paul may have known more firsthand than is apparent. Some seven years earlier he had started his third mission by taking the land route from Antioch to Ephesus, visiting central Asia Minor (Acts 18:23) and going west from there through "the upper regions" (Acts 19:1, NKJB). This is clearly the east-west route through the Lycus River valley and the three cities under discussion. Paul expresses his intense concern for the Colossians "and for them at Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in the flesh" (Col. 2:1). To some people that means that he had never seen the Colossians and Laodiceans, but his earlier journey through their area suggests the opposite—that he was worried about those from each city that he had met and also about those later coverted who had never seen him. Since Colossians 2:1 introduces Paul's refutation of the false teachings on Christ, it virtually identifies the heresy at both Colossae and Laodicea.

This last point is one strong reason for rejecting the insipid twenty apocryphal verses that pose as Paul's letter to the Laodiceans. [^4] The real one existed once, for Paul obviously sent it with the messengers delivering letters to Philemon and Colossae: "When this epistle is read among you, cause that it be read also in the church of the Laodiceans; and that ye likewise read the epistle from Laodicea" (Col. 4:16). What truth is lost in this lost letter? The "Colossian heresy" was no doubt an area heresy, so both letters must have combined to correct it. [^5] Colossians stresses the bodily reality of Christ. Was Laodiceans suppressed because it bluntly spoke of the physicalness of the Godhead? This doctrine of the Early Church soon disappeared in the verbiage of Christian councils that legislated God's nature. But the imitation letter of the Laodiceans corrects nothing and has no distinct message. Scholars consistently reject it because it is a "worthless patching together of Pauline passages and phrases, mainly from the Epistle to the Philippians." [^6] But what if the real Laodiceans or the real 1 Corinthians someday came to light? Then creeds and Christians would be wrong in seeing the Bible as the whole revelation of God. And if the historical collection of apostles' letters is not complete, are there new revelations that God wishes to give today? Modern revelation testifies both to the truth of past revelation and also to its unfinished nature.

Main Teachings

The Godhead

Later philosophical ages produced the Christian creeds about God and Christ, but first was the age of the prophets. Peter, Paul, and John wrote and spoke the simpler language of experience; an example is Paul's moving testimony of the Father and Son opening Colossians. Yet orthodox Christians look more to councils than to scripture to explain what they worship. The first four legislative gatherings recognized as binding were called by emperors between the fourth and sixth centuries. And a major church historian summarizes their importance: "On account of their authority Pope Gregory the Great compared the first four councils to the four gospels, because they formulated the basic dogmas of the Church—the Trinity and the Incarnation." [^7] Admittedly, the real source of the trinitarian doctrine is the Council of Nicaea, a gathering of some 318 bishops convened by Constantine. The narrow issue there was whether Christ was similar to or the same as the Father, and the latter option was decided and enforced. [^8]

From a Latter-day Saint point of view, the Reformation did not fully reform, since major Protestant groups rely on councils instead of the plain testimonies of the apostles. An example of such a council decision is the basic Lutheran confession: "We unanimously hold and teach, in accordance with the decree of the Council of Nicaea, that there is one divine essence, which is called and which is truly God, and that there are three persons in this one divine essence, equal in power and alike eternal: God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Spirit." [^9] The English Reformation has the same theological continuity with Catholicism on the question of God. Indeed, the Methodist Church, which set out to reform the Church of England, adopted the first article of Anglican belief on God with minor verbal changes: "There is but one living and true God, everlasting, without body or parts. . . . And in the unity of this Godhead there are three persons, of one substance, power, and eternity—the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost." [^10] Since Jews believe strictly in one God, they are monotheists, a term formed from Greek roots of "one only" (monos) and "god" (theos). Are Christians monotheists? Orthodox creeds start to say so, and then modify their language by fitting in other Godhead members. Traditional Christianity is philosophically monotheistic, since "three" is combined with "unity" to make the blended concept of Trinity. On the other hand, Latter-day Saints are not really trinitarians but tritheists, for they bluntly hold to the individuality of each person of the Godhead. Joseph Smith saw the Father and the Son as "two Personages" in his First Vision (JS-H 1:17) and in the vision of the three degrees of glory (D&C 76:20-23). Just before his martyrdom Joseph Smith publicly reviewed the separate individuals in the Godhead and concluded, "These three constitute three distinct personages and three Gods." [^11] Indeed, Joseph Smith severed any tie with traditional theology by announcing that Christ revealed at the outset that the "creeds were an abomination in his sight" (JS-H 1:19).

Paul consistently separates the Father and the Son verbally, as in the beginning of Colossians: "Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ" (Col. 1:2). This same phrase begins all the other letters of Paul except Hebrews, which opens with its own powerful summary of the distinct members of the Godhead. Colossians also gives thanks "to God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ" (1:3). In addition to such sharp distinction in wording, Paul divides the functions or operations of the Father and the Son. This is clear in Colossians 1:12-22, which is abstracted on the accompanying chart. Christ is God's "firstborn," a term that Colossians explains—Christ is above all earthly and heavenly beings in seniority and authority. Paul's message is that the Son has been given preeminence under the Father. He is also invested with authority as head of the Church (Col. 1:18); under the Father he brings redemption (Col. 1:14); under the Father he is the agent of creation (Col. 1:16); he is also the "firstborn from the dead" (Col. 1:18). So the Father participates with the Son on the level of supervision but not action; the above phrases represent unique activities of Christ's own mission. In Colossians Christ also sits "on the right hand of God" (3:1), just as he does in Hebrews (1:3) and in Romans (8:34). Paul's clear words about the Lord inspire confidence that they have no hidden meanings but are the face-value summaries of Christ's role in carrying out the Father's plans.

The true doctrines about Christ in Colossians 1 correct the false doctrines specifically refuted in Colossians 2. Christ's true position is twofold: his incomparable assignments from the Father, which have just been surveyed, and his material reality as divine Son of God. In John's Gospel the preexistent "Word," who made the world, "was made flesh, and dwelt among us" (John 1:14). Likewise Paul testifies that Jesus—walking in mortality or resurrected in eternity—is "the image of the invisible God" (Col. 1:15). Paul's Greek term for "image" (eikon) indicates a visible likeness and is used of Caesar's picture on coins (Matt. 22:20). Thus, Paul is saying that the Father and the Son are physically distinct but have the same appearance. The same word appears in the Greek Genesis when God creates man "in his own image" (Gen. 1:27). In terms of authority and status, no human can begin to approach Christ, but in terms of outward form, there is no basic difference. The Father, his beloved Son, and the children of God on this earth all have the same "image." Theologians deliteralize plain words, assuring their readers that creation in "the image of God . . . relates to his moral nature." [^12] But that sweeping assumption contradicts scriptures teaching that mortals do not yet have the moral image of God and that many will never attain it. But both Christ and human beings have the physical appearance of God, so the Father has form, shape, and a glorified body.

Paul's Testimonies of Christ and His Mission

Colossians 1:13-17 Hebrews 1:1-3, 6

God has "translated us into the God has "spoken unto us by his Son"

kingdom of the Son of his love"

(NKJB)

"in whom we have redemption, . . . "who . . . by himself purged our sins"

the forgiveness of sins"

"who is the image of the "who being the brightness of his glory,

invisible God" and the express image of his person"

"the firstborn of every creature" "appointed heir of all things . . . the

firstborn" (NKJB)

"for by him were all things "by whom also he made the worlds"

created"

"and by him all things consist" "upholding all things by the word of

his power"

—Adapted from Francis W. Beare, "Colossians," The Interpreter's Bible (New York: Abingdon Press, 1955) 11:162

Catholic and Protestant theology vigorously denies this view. No church council legislated God out of material existence, but Christian philosophers early equated having a body with limiting God or humanizing his glory. Thus, in creeds or Christian explanations, "the Church teaches that God is an infinitely perfect spiritual being who has no body or spatial dimensions." [^13] One contradicting this is seen as unsophisticated, holding an "anthropomorphic" view. This word combines the Greek for man (anthropos) and form (morphe); it describes the belief that God has a manlike form. Christian thinkers close their minds to this possibility: "Anthropomorphism, unless it were poetic symbolism, would violate all the principles of theological propriety which have been established since the Middle Ages"; this because it would attribute "human nature" to God. [^14] But God attributed human nature to himself by sending his Son to live with villagers who thought he was merely the carpenter's son. And when Philip asked Christ to let him see the Father, the Lord asked his apostle to look at him, not as a matter of identity but of similarity (John 14:6-9). That is the repeated theme of the Gospel of John from the beginning to the Last Supper. Paul declared the "unknown God" to the Athenians by teaching that he became known through Christ's resurrection (Acts 17:23, 31). In writing "the image of the invisible God" (Col. 1:15), Paul was not stressing "invisible" as much as he was Christ's "image"—the Father become visible through the Son. "Invisible" has English connotations of "not able to be seen," though it simply negates "seen" and would better be rendered "unseen." The Father is "unseen" by mortals now but is seen by those who dwell with him, and he was seen by chosen prophets to whom he has appeared.

Paul emphasizes that Christ as a divine person was physical. Paul drives the point home because of the false doctrines about Christ. Through "the body of his flesh" came the great atonement for sins and the means of the Saints' perfection (Col. 1:22). Now resurrected, Christ has "all fulness" dwelling in him (Col. 1:19). This statement is not philosophical, but anthropomorphic. Paul was certain that Christ existed in his resurrected form, since "God . . . raised him from the dead" (Col. 2:12) and since he was physically present "on the right hand of God" (Col. 3:1). Confirmed by 1 Corinthians 15 and Philippians 3, Paul's Colossian testimony is that Christ's mortal form was outwardly the same as his resurrected state—there is not a hint that he might have set aside that glorious body, which is the "image of the unseen God" (Col. 1:15, JB). Yet 84 percent of a Utah sampling of Protestant ministers agreed that "God is an immaterial Being without form or bodily parts." [^15] This cannot be true if Christ revealed God. Nor can it be true if the physical, resurrected Christ is a part of the Godhead. By the authority of modern revelation, Joseph Smith solemnly declared, "That which is without body or parts is nothing. There is no other God in heaven but that God who has flesh and bones." [^16]

Errors about Christ, Days, and Diet

Paul had given the Colossians the "more excellent way" (1 Cor. 12:31) before criticizing false views in Colossians 2. Here are some specifics of their revised doctrine, though their conceptions are not stated fully enough to bring agreement on what the "Colossian heresy" was. Yet there is a way through the maze of empty generalizations—the striking similarity of late New Testament heresy with that criticized by Paul in Colossians. Their beliefs added Jewish ceremonialism to the gospel, in some way dethroned Christ, and also explained away the divinity of his physical person. This last point is hardly understood by the average writer on Colossians. Some thirty-five years later the apostle John wrote to the same area of Asia, warning seven branches of the Church of false teachers in their midst. Common errors had spread throughout western Asia Minor. Writing to Philadelphia, sixty miles from Colossae, John warned against those "which say they are Jews, and are not" (Rev. 3:9). Other churches received the same warning and also warnings against "idolatry" of Balaam and Jezebel, both of whom sought to lead Israel from worshipping the true God. Colossians 2 also combines Jewish heresy with concern for false teachings about Christ. Not long after Revelation, John wrote letters to this area, specifying what he meant by "idolatry." Only one confessing "that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God" (1 Jn. 4:2), a caution repeated to reveal a major sickness in the Church (2 Jn. 1:7). This is a proved historical situation, for the letters of Ignatius were written soon after this and also show that some in every Asian area were denying the physicalness of Christ. [^17]

Since the debate on Christ's flesh was raging in the area a few decades after Paul, it is not to be ignored in understanding his Colossian warning, particularly when 1 Timothy was soon sent to the area representative in Asia to warn against the same problems mentioned by John. Christian commentators do not face Colossians as rebuking those explaining away the physicalness of the second member of the Godhead. The tendency was there for the same reason that some Corinthians ridiculed the bodily resurrection. Since God surpasses the human moral and intellectual level, many seek to define his person as different from the human form. At the end of the first century, the Early Church was besieged by those teaching that Christ's divinity had not been contaminated by earthly elements. In Colossians Paul opposes this point of view. They are being robbed of their heritage: "Beware lest anyone take you captive through philosophy and empty deceit, according to the tradition of men, according to the basic principles of the world, and not according to Christ" (Col. 2:8, NKJB). [^18] Right afterward Paul names the two misconceptions of Christ that he is correcting. The first: "For in Him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily" (Col. 2:9, NKJB). Many commentators sidestep the italicized term by claiming that it can mean "essentially" or "really." But Paul used somatikos, formed from soma, the Greek word for "body," which Paul uses equally for man's earthly body and Christ's resurrected body. Thus, Paul testifies that Christ possesses godhood physically.

Paul adds his second correction: Christ "is the head of every authority and power" (Col. 2:10, literal trans.). Paul explains by building on his earlier testimony of Christ as the "head of the body, the church" (Col. 1:18). But false teachers added the "worshipping of angels," inventing things they had "not seen," which took away their true "head," Jesus Christ (Col. 2:18-19). Medieval Christianity added angels to intercede for mortals, whose lowly condition did not allow them to approach God. As will be seen in the next chapter, some first-century Christians taught the more radical doctrine that the physical creation was an inferior act of a lower divinity. And they added angels or divinities above the Old Testament creator. Paul fought such heresies at Colossae, for Christ's authority as the true creator was being challenged as well as his physical reality. Paul raised the standard of revealed Christianity—of believing in Christ as the only head and mediator under the Father—of believing in the physicalness of Christ, having the form of the Father.

Finally, the rituals of the Colossian heresy are a reminder that more extreme is not necessarily more religious. Little children graduate from the invariability of many rules to understand the principles behind those rules. That is why Paul warned the Galatians not to revert to the law that was "added because of transgressions" (Gal. 3:19). Just as some Colossians believed in additional holy beings, they also added Jewish dietary rules and rigid days of worship. The Early Church could obviously set its own day of rest without being tied to Jewish practices of the past. So the faithful were told to oppose legalism: "Therefore let no one judge you in food or in drink, or regarding a festival or a new moon or sabbaths" (Col. 2:16, NKJB). "Food" correctly changes the King James Version "meat," which was meant in the older English sense of any kind of food. This is obvious in the Hebrews warning against technical Jewish practices: "Meats and drinks, and divers washings, and carnal ordinances" (Heb. 9:10)—what is not drink is "meat," simply food in general in the Greek behind these English renderings.

Is such instruction relevant today? Proper diet is determined by common sense, nutritional science, and revelation in the case of the modern Word of Wisdom. But it is arrogance or ignorance to pursue hearsay theories and hobbies on what to eat and drink. Paul opposes overdone notions on this subject in a half-dozen epistles. Modern food fads frequently stem from religious fanaticism or desires for power over other people, certainly the motives behind the Colossian perversions of days and diet. But the gospel means renouncing mere theories of men, Paul reminded the Colossians, asking why they would subject themselves to "regulations—'Do not touch, do not taste, do not handle'" (Col. 2:20-21, NKJB). All major committee translations enclose these last phrases in quotation marks, since it is obvious that Paul here summarized the preaching of his opponents. Joseph Smith added words of explanation to make the same point of avoiding the "commandments of men, who teach you to touch not, taste not, handle not" (Col. 2:21,JST .

Developing Celestial Qualities

After correcting the unfaithful, Paul instructs the faithful: "Set your mind on things above, not on things on the earth" ( Col. 3:2, NKJB). The goal is to live a celestial life, to prepare to be with God. This is not achieved by mere conversion or even baptism but is a process that builds on the foundation of the first principles. Just as clearly as Hebrews 6, Colossians calls the members to progress in their righteousness. The oldest members in their branch had been in the Church about seven years when Paul wrote his message of growth in the faith. His challenge came in the Romans metaphor of the death of the old life and creation of the new:

Therefore we were buried with him by baptism into death, that just as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life (Rom. 6:4, NKJB).

Buried with him in baptism, in which you also were raised with him through faith in the working of God, who has raised him from the dead (Col. 2:12, NKJB).

This death-resurrection comparison continues throughout Romans and Colossians. "If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above" (Col. 3:1). Developing that theme, Paul commands, "Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth" (Col. 3:5), the same message stated earlier as "mortify the deeds of the body" (Rom. 8:13). "Mortify" appears only these two times in the King James Version; it was formed from the Latin word for death (mors) and translates Greek that means "to put to death." So Paul is asking for the obliteration of earthly ways through repentance continuing after baptism. Through conversion these new members had taken the road to salvation, but years afterward they still needed instructions on replacing old qualities with new ones. Paul's letters to members were to help them qualify for salvation. Any other view demeans the time and attention he gave them. Romans 6 and Colossians 3 teach that the new person is created through baptism plus years of gospel growth afterward. If exaltation were automatic with conversion, there would be only letters of congratulation on salvation, not Paul's regular instructions on the higher life that God requires for his kingdom.

A number of Paul's letters list the most serious sins in God's sight, with plain warnings of risking the loss of salvation without firm repentance. But here the apostle tends to use the past tense, showing that active Saints were generally meeting these minimum gospel standards. Like the Corinthians (1 Cor. 6:11), the Colossians are told that they once lived worldly lives (Col. 3:7) but had "put off" the old, unspiritual personality (Col. 3:8-9). But post-baptismal reality emerges from comparing the death of the old and the birth of the new. The decision of faith may terminate evil acts in a dramatic way, but living the new ways of the kingdom presents the challenge of learning new habits. So Paul's clear goal for the Colossians is to be "fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God" (Col. 1:10). They will know God better not by a multitude of facts but in proportion to their good works. Just as faith can bring good works, good works open new vistas of faith.

A prominent psychologist claimed that it is easier to act oneself into a new way of thinking than to think oneself into a new way of acting. In reality, both thoughts and actions are tools to produce a new character, which is the overall purpose of Paul's instruction. Several letters stress "putting on" the new person, but in Colossians Paul emphasized the moral development of the new personality, "which is being renewed in knowledge after the image of its Creator" (Col. 3:10, RSV). Paul uses the Greek tense of repeated instead of single action. Thus nonliteral translations try to capture the idea of continued striving. The new person in Christ is "being constantly renewed" (NEB); "you have put on a new self which will progress toward true knowledge the more it is renewed in the image of its Creator" (JB). Here is the true teaching of the moral image, for Paul asks the Saints to use God's character as the model for their growth. They already have his physical image but have not yet reached the perfection of his personality. Earthly parents create the physical bodies of their children, but children's personalities emerge as a second stage of creation as they mature. The gospel similarly asks those created in the physical image of God to become Godlike, or Christlike, in character. This is Paul's teaching of the new person in Christ.

What positive qualities must the growing Saint develop? Colossians gives a pointed answer, a valuable statement of priority to accompany the more detailed answer of Ephesians to the same question. In Colossians Paul focuses on love as the main frontier of living after controlling anger, sexual drives, and dishonesty (Col. 3:5-9). Colossians' contribution is like that of 1 Corinthians 13; both value love as the highest Christian achievement but also go into detail on the qualities of pure love. First Corinthians 13 is virtually poetic in describing the characteristics of love, but Colossians 3 summarizes what a person does who possesses Christlike love: "Put on tender mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering; bearing with one another, and forgiving one another, if anyone has a complaint against another; even as Christ forgave you, so you do also. And above all these things put on love (agape), which is the bond of perfection" (Col. 3:12-14, NKJB).

The apostle is not here defining words but describing a loving attitude carried into life. One forgiven through Christ's gospel has received divine kindness that requires looking at others in a new light. Love is the end product, the one concept that can sum up all instructions on how to treat others. In 1 Corinthians 13 and Colossians 3:12-14, kindness, meekness, longsuffering, and the willingness to forgive are all aspects of love. In both places the King James translators preferred "charity," though the Greek agape is generally translated "love" in that version (including its four other uses in Colossians) and should be correlated with the many other teachings of Paul and Christ using the same word.

Nothing in Christianity forbids the natural right of self-defense when life and safety are threatened. But exceptional actions to preserve life are wrong in daily affairs. Although outright force is generally absent from ordinary relationships, many constantly wage war with others by subtle social weapons of aggression, exploitation, and raw competition. One converted to the gospel knows that God's work is to "bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). Whoever loves God will love his children, and whoever sees his fellow beings on earth through God's eyes will seek to build them up through encouragement. Thus, Paul's ideals of personal meekness and humility are not some form of self-abasement—his self-image was far from inadequate. He is asking confident people to rein in competitive reflexes and to build and encourage others. If the restored Church would apply these ideals of love, the result would not be suppressed personalities with false modesty. On the contrary, there would be vital people on fire with honest appreciation from those that they have personally recognized and encouraged. Just as Paul asks the Ephesians to put on the armor of virtuous qualities, he asks the Colossians to put on the clothing of righteous treatment of others. The "bond of perfection" is love (Col. 3:14, NKJB), "bond" meaning the uniting principle that ties all together, gathering kindness and forbearance and willingness to forgive into a consistent set of actions motivated by honest concern for the eternal welfare of others. And both Colossians and Ephesians place the family at the center of one's circle of concern.

---
Notas:
[^1] Samuel J. Mikolaski, "Galatians," in D. Guthrie et al., New Bible Commentary, Revised (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1970), p. 1092.
[^2] Paul saw Peter three years after Paul's conversion, and fourteen years later he went up to Jerusalem again (Gal. 1:18, 2:1). But Acts has a second visit to Jerusalem that is omitted; logically it should have been, since it was for the purpose of carrying welfare supplies (Acts 11: 29-30) and had no bearing on the circumcision question that Paul was arguing in his highly spontaneous letter to the Galatians.
[^3] William F. Arndt et al., Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, 2d ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979), p. 62.
[^4] Mikolaski, p. 1091.
[^5] Arndt et al., p. 542.
[^6] G. Elson Ruff, "What Is a Lutheran?" in Leo Rosten, Religions of America (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1975), p. 161.
[^7] Milton V. Backman, Jr., American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), p. 480, citing a 1969 survey. Compare John S. Bonnell, "What Is a Presbyterian?" in Rosten, p. 203: "While baptism is urgently recommended in the Presbyterian Church, and while its omission is regarded as a grave fault, it is not held to be necessary for salvation."
[^8] Acts speaks of "remission" or "forgiveness" for sins. Both of these words translate the same Greek term. Peter declared remission of sins through Christ to the Sanhedrin (Acts 5:31), though a little earlier he had invited believers to be baptized "for the remission of sins" (Acts 2:38). Peter also declared to Cornelius, "Whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins" (Acts 10:43), but he immediately afterward baptized him. This is very close to Paul's actions with the Philippian jailor, telling him first that salvation would come through belief in Christ, but baptizing him immediately after. Paul also preached remission of sins through belief in Christ in Pisidian Antioch (Acts 13:38). Luke is not contradictory in this double association of remission of sins with belief in Christ and also with baptism. Both conditions must be met to receive the benefit. Christ's atonement makes forgiveness possible, but he sets the conditions of receiving it, namely baptism and living up to the baptismal covenant. Thus, Galatians intimately fits into the practices of Peter and Paul in Acts—"putting on Christ" through the double process of faith and baptism (Gal. 3:26-27).
[^9] Mikolaski, p. 1089.
[^10] John H. Gerstner, "Good Works," in Everett F. Harrison et al., eds., Baker's Dictionary of Theology (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book House, 1960), p. 254.
[^11] This translation fairly accurately states Paul's Greek terms in present language, though I have made two changes: "anger" replaces "outbursts of wrath"; "factions" replaces "heresies," which can relate to ideas only.
[^12] R. A. Cole, Epistle of Paul to the Galatians (London: Tyndale Press, 1965), p. 164.
[^13] Ibid.
[^14] P. S. Watson, "Sanctification," in Alan Richardson, ed., Dictionary of Christian Theology (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1969), p. 303.
[^15] H. D. McDonald, "Justification by Faith," in Carl Henry, ed., Basic Christian Doctrines (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1962), p. 214.
[^16] John Murray, "Sanctification," in ibid., p. 231.
[^17] Emerging Trends, vol. 4, no. 2 (March 1982), p. 1. (Published by Princeton Religious Research Center, Princeton, N.J.)
[^18] Ibid., p. 2.
