Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul ( 1983)

EPHESIANS

Profile

Sent from: Paul, probably at Rome.

Sent to: Members at Ephesus, chief commercial city in the Roman province of Asia.

Date: About A.D. 61.

Purpose: To strengthen the Saints with a doctrinal review of the gospel.

Main themes: Pre-earth life and foreordination; the last dispensation; grace and works; church organization; "perfecting of the saints"; family life.

Background

The City

Paul's messengers from Rome evidently landed at Ephesus on their way up to the Colossian area with letters. The cities on the western coast of Asia Minor were heavily Greek because of earlier migrations across the Aegean, and they were wealthy both in money and in religious tradition. On his third mission Paul picked populous Ephesus as the hub for spreading the gospel through the province of Asia, discussed at the end of chapter 3. The geographer Strabo called Ephesus the greatest "emporium" or trade center of Roman Asia, which comprised the western third of Asia Minor. Ephesus was a third-magnitude city, its population estimated at as large as a quarter of a million. Today it stretches in magnificent ruins from its silted-up harbor across flats and coastal hills. Acts 19 tells the story of Paul's mission there with geographical precision. The muddy Cayster River had moved the harbor miles away from the older city. In the first-century, Strabo commented on its "advantageous situation" for sea trade but ominously describes the river channel to the sea as dangerously shallow. There would be concern over the continued economic vitality of Ephesus, making the missionaries' inroads on pagan temple worship all the more threatening.

The riot in Acts 19 arose from the business loss of the image makers for the temple of Artemis or Diana. Mingling concern for profits with more noble civic pride, the silversmiths feared that the temple's "magnificence should be destroyed," since "all Asia and the world" worshipped Artemis (Acts 19:27). This shrine had long been famous and was generally listed as one of the seven wonders of the world. About the time Paul preached in Ephesus, Pliny the Elder described the massive sanctuary: "The length of the temple overall is 425 feet, and its breadth 225 feet. There are 127 columns . . . 60 feet in height." [^1] Archaeology generally confirmed those dimensions for the base platform ascending to the temple proper. Those who defended their fertility goddess rushed to the great theater, which today rises in a colossal semicircle. It probably overflowed its 25,000 capacity as shouting citizens cried their loyalty to Artemis, who is pictured on their coins. Such opposition was vivid evidence of the great success of Paul's missionary administration in his three years of labor there.

Reason for Writing

Though Colossians suggests details of Paul's prison preaching, in Ephesians he asks supporting prayers to help him speak boldly, for he is a gospel "ambassador in bonds" (Eph. 6:19-20). Paul must have been in Rome; this was discussed at the beginning of this chapter. He was under close guard and chained at least part of the time, for the Greek word for "chain" is used in the above passage. Yet Paul regards his circumstances as a great opportunity to teach; he is providentially "the prisoner of the Lord" (Eph. 4:1; also 3:1). The chart at the beginning of this chapter shows that Ephesians went with the same messengers that carried the letters to the area of Colossae, and the phraseology in Colossians and Ephesians is remarkably similar. So these letters were clearly sent at the same time, with Ephesians delivered at the commercial capital of Asia before the missionaries started inland. In terms of circumstances of delivery, Ephesians was definitely sent to Roman Asia.

Why does Ephesians contain no personal greetings if the apostle wrote to the city that was headquarters for three years on his third journey? Paul chose to write a marvelously balanced doctrinal letter, letting the Ephesians know that Tychicus would bring full knowledge of "my affairs and how I am doing" (Eph. 6:21, NKJB). Nothing is known of Tychicus's conversion, but his faithfulness is clear; he was "a beloved brother, and a faithful minister and fellowservant in the Lord" (Col. 4:7; also Eph. 6:21). Furthermore, he was from Roman Asia (Acts 20:4) and was later sent to Ephesus to replace Timothy (2 Tim. 4:12). Tychicus clearly had the relationships in the Ephesian area to relay all the personal greetings that Paul wished to send there. Indeed, Luke's record of the third mission makes clear what a multitude was converted in Ephesus and Asia on Paul's third mission, as discussed at the end of chapter 3. It would have been self-defeating to begin to write greetings because of the many deep relationships that the apostle had in that area.

Ephesians pictures the converts there as heavily Gentile, which would be expected from the record of Acts. Possibly through the coming of Tychicus, Paul had "heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and love unto all the saints" (Eph. 1:15). His letter addressed no crisis. This does not mean that Paul perceived no problems there, for he left the area with the most intense prophecy of apostasy on his lips. Was the real issue lack of total conversion? Paul repreached the entire gospel to the Ephesians, showing them the relationships between salvation through Christ and the need of the Church, between the premortal heritage of the Saints and the strict duty of righteous works for salvation, including gospel living in the home. No New Testament letter so beautifully relates the parts of the gospel to the whole. In the words of a capable Protestant conservative, "Among Paul's epistles there is none more sublime and profound." [^2] Is the obvious inspiration in spite of or because of Paul's imprisonment? Earthly difficulties may be the very means of refining souls and drawing them close to God, as Joseph Smith's later letters from Liberty Jail show.

The great relevance and richness of Ephesians makes to whom it was written somewhat beside the point. Yet some scholars doubt that it was sent there because "at Ephesus" (Eph. 1:1) disappears from the three oldest manuscripts. Yet the heading or footnote was generally unchanged; for instance, the Chester Beatty Papyri titles the letter "To the Ephesians," even though its first verse does not include that designation. [^3] Since almost all Greek manuscripts carry "at Ephesus" in the first verse, accidental omission is possible, or even deliberate modification, based on the fact that the content is applicable far beyond that branch of the Church. The letter may have been intended for all the Asian churches, though written particularly to Ephesus. Was it copied and circulated in some branches without "at Ephesus" in its beginning? The existence of this scholarly debate underlines the superior value of Ephesians as a summary of the doctrines of the Early Church. A recent conservative evaluation makes that point: "It is generally conceded that Ephesians is the deepest book in the New Testament. Its vision of the purpose of God stretches from eternity to eternity." [^4] Members of the restored Church will find in that letter a checklist of characteristics of Christ's true Church. Not tied to particular problems, Ephesians vividly challenges Latter-day Saints to be worthy of their high calling.

Main Teachings

Pre-earth Life and Foreordination

Predestination claims divine predetermination. This doctrine was favored by Reformation theology, especially by Calvinism, as was seen in our study of Romans 9. Though now disbelieved by many in these traditions, the doctrine is still vigorously defended. In this view God must have totally "free scope" in his "unsearchable counsels" of deciding who will be exalted: "grace is not measured by desert, but bestowed at the option of the donor. If I give all my goods to feed the poor or ransom a crew of galley-slaves, I have an undoubted right to select my beneficiaries as I think best." In the King James Bible, God has "predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ" (Eph. 1:5; also 1:11). The word predestination appears only two other times (Rom. 8:29-30). But the Medieval and Reformation doctrine goes far beyond Paul's simple concept. His Greek word is proorizo, which combines the prefix meaning "beforehand" (pro) and the verb for marking off or determining (horizo). No scripture student can doubt that God planned this earth in advance—the question is whether man's agency is excluded. Restoration scripture insists that God sent man to earth with freedom and responsibility. So a better translation of Ephesians and Romans would be "foreordain," which avoids theological theories negating free agency. Although some translations use that term, interpreters continue to grope for meaning in Ephesians 1 without modern revelation.

If mortals are created beings, then God's planning was done without consulting them or considering their development of qualifications for earth life. In Ephesians and Acts, Paul outlines a scheme of timing and assignment; before the creation God "determined allotted periods and the boundaries of their habitation" (Acts 17:26, RSV). Ephesians 1 gives the same message—that the Saints are deliberately sent to earth when the gospel is available. But on what basis was such planning made? Was leadership left to accident? God might foresee individual works and prophetically relate assignments to agency, but predestinarians quickly reject such a possibility. Thus, they teach a salvation superimposed on passive persons. But glorious light shines on these questions with the revealed knowledge that man existed in personal, spiritual form when the plans for earth life were made. The Father was dealing with known characteristics and capacities in planning for the next stage of the eternal venture of his children.

In declaring God's design for mortality, Paul told his most intelligent audience that Greek poets spoke correctly of man as God's "offspring" (Acts 17:28). Indeed, those who proclaim the restored gospel can also preach from English poets the divine heritage of the human race. For instance, Browning glimpsed the truth of stages of existence: "Ages past the soul existed/here an age 'tis resting merely/and hence fleets again for ages." [^5] Christians know that this is true of the Savior, for on his last night on earth he said, "I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father" (John 16:28). But why must Christian doctrine separate the other children of God from God's special Son, who referred to "my Father, and your Father" (John 20:17)? Hebrews preaches the special call of the physical Son of God but just as clearly speaks of the Father as "bringing many sons unto glory" (Heb. 2:10) because he is "the Father of spirits" (Heb. 12:9). Medieval theology invented the classification of uncreated and created. But as Paul said to Athenian philosophers, God's revelation places man in the image and family of God (Acts 17:28). Ephesians 1 is stunning in its applying to mankind a phrase clearly descriptive of Christ's premortal existence. In his intimate prayer of reunion with the Father, Christ said, "You loved me before the foundation of the world" (John 17:24, NKJB). And the Ephesian Saints had that same relationship with the Father: "He chose us in him before the foundation of the world" (Eph. 1:4, literal trans.). The same phrase that refers to Christ's premortal life must also refer to the premortal existence of the Saints.

The Greek of Ephesians 1 or Romans 8 contains a number of words that should refer to premortality. As already indicated, pro before a Greek verb adds the idea of "beforehand," a prefix in the borrowed word prognosis, which in current medical use refers to what is known beforehand about the future condition of the patient. The same Greek verb form is used of the Father's knowing Christ and men before mortality. This is best seen in the 1881 Revised Version that made the Greek proginosko consistent in the following two passages. Peter taught the clear New Testament doctrine that Christ "was foreknown indeed before the foundation of the world" (1 Pet. 1:20, RV). But Paul taught the same doctrine concerning God and early Christians before birth: "For whom he foreknew, he also foreordained to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren; and whom he foreordained, them he also called" (Rom. 8:29-30, RV). The "calling" is conversion on earth, but there are two stages before that, God's foreknowledge and foreordination. In the case of Christ, Peter's language refers not merely to conceptualizing his future existence but to knowing him personally as a premortal spirit. Does Paul use "foreknow" of God's merely preconceiving the future existence of the "many brethren"? That switch of idea is arbitrary and unlikely. As surely as Peter spoke of Christ's preexistence, Paul spoke of those yet to become earthly Saints as personally alive and known by their Father when he made decisions about their foreordinations. [^6]

The magnificent view of Christ's premortal life was reiterated in a powerful revelation to Joseph Smith. It restated Christ's glory "in the beginning, before the world was" (D&C 93:7) and added, "Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be" (D&C 93:29). And by a sweeping reconstruction of Abraham's ancient vision, Joseph Smith gathered fragments scintillating throughout all scripture into the brilliant mosaic of the council that organized mortality and foreordained Christ and other leaders. Christ and "the noble and great ones" selected were of proven reliability, so their agency was perfectly consistent with the trust that God placed in them. All future mortals were there and were guaranteed freedom to succeed or to fail, a necessary condition of progress that is the complete opposite of predestination. The plan of salvation was predetermined, but the choice to come to earth and follow the plan was in the hands of each person. Their achievement of being ready for the next bold stage was recognized, with the promise if they were faithful of "glory added upon their heads for ever and ever" (Abr. 3:26). But critical to such success was the mission of the Son, who in great courage offered to come and die for man's eternal life (Abr. 3:27; Moses 4:1-2). Peter and John wrote of Satan's rebellion at this council, making it clearly possible that Paul referred to that occasion when the Saints received "all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ" (Eph. 1:3).

Second-century Christianity still saw the beacon light of the premortal heritage and life's plan. About sixty years after Paul, Justin Martyr was converted to Christianity and not long afterward described the intense testimony of his first Christian contact, who taught that at death the "soul . . . goes back to the place from whence it was taken." [^7] From about A.D. 150 has been preserved "the oldest Christian sermon extant," [^8] the so-called 2 Clement, which speaks confidently of the faithful belonging to "the first Church, the spiritual one which was created before the sun and moon." Such a church is obviously an organization of persons faithful to God; this has no meaning unless the Saints of the earthly Church were first organized in eternal relationships before coming to earth. And this doctrine came by apostolic authority: "And moreover the books and the apostles declare that the Church belongs not to the present but has existed from the beginning." [^9] Other than Ephesians, what book of an apostle teaches the existence of the Church "before the foundation of the world"? Because of that opening of Ephesians, and because 2 Clement quotes Ephesians 6 on Christ and the Church, the simple Christian author of 2 Clement clearly saw Paul as the apostle teaching the premortal existence of the Saints as the Church. [^10] This knowledge of how the Early Church interpreted Paul is an important path to Paul's intended meanings in Ephesians 1. The Shepherd of Hermas, another important second-century source, is even clearer on the premortal existence of the Church and of the Saints, but that will be discussed shortly in connection with the purpose of works in mortality.

The Last Dispensation

The day will come, Paul told the Philippians, when "at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of those in heaven, and of those on earth, and of those under the earth" (Philip. 2:10, NKJB). Christ's name is rightfully on "every family in heaven and on earth" (Eph. 3:15, RSV). A short passage in Ephesians 1 surveys how this will come about; such a subject is a main theme, though but concisely stated. All will be gathered "in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are on earth" (Eph. 1:10, NKJB). Thus, salvation will be completed in the grand reconciliation of God and all his children. This great work of completion certainly did not take place in Paul's day, nor has it today, when nominal Christians are yet a global minority. In addition to Matthew 24 and the book of Revelation, one prophecy closely matches Paul's. Since they both talk of the final age of renewal, they are here placed together for comparison:

Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he purposed in him unto a dispensation of the fulness of the times, to sum up all things in Christ, the things in the heavens, and the things upon the earth (Eph. 1:9-10, Revised Version, 1881).

Times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. And he shall send you the appointed Jesus Christ, whom heaven must receive until times of restoration of all things, which God spoke through the mouth of all his holy prophets from the beginning (Acts 3:19-21, literal trans.).

Peter's "restoration of all things" is strikingly like Paul's concept of summing up or recapitulating "all things in Christ." The universal scope of Paul's "fulness of the times" is strikingly like Peter's "times of refreshing." In both prophecies Christ is central to the final scene of restoration reaching throughout heaven and earth. Commentators generally agree that Peter speaks of "the final era of salvation." [^11] The striking correlation of Paul's prophecy shows that he is doing the same, as does a close examination of his words. His whole message emerges from the phrases that are its parts. For analysis the venerable Revised Version is used simply because it carefully mirrors Paul's Greek phraseology. Although the King James Version is usually remarkable in this respect, it is somewhat less literal here.

"The mystery of his will." As commentators note, Paul's "mystery" is not an eternal obscurity, something mystically beyond the understanding of unquestioning believers. Paul does not proclaim the mystery but "the revelation of a mystery kept secret for endless ages" (Rom. 16:25, JB). The last phrase is "eternal times" (chronoi aionioi) and clearly places the origins of the gospel mystery prior to the foundations of this earth. It was established then to be later "made known to all nations for the obedience of faith" (Rom. 16:26). The best dictionary of New Testament Greek says of "mystery": "Our literature uses it to mean the secret thoughts, plans, and dispensations of God which are hidden from the human reason . . . and hence must be revealed to those for whom they are intended." [^12] In Ephesians and Colossians Paul mingles mystery and dispensation and revelation of salvation to the Gentile world. He is clearly talking of the premortal plan of salvation, a mystery to the world during times of apostasy, but known and proclaimed by the prophets in Paul's day. [^13]

"He purposed . . . unto . . . the fulness of the times." These words may be the alpha and omega of God's plan of salvation, for his purpose predates creation, whereas the fulness of times prepares mankind to close mortal history. In his mind Paul may have swept from premortality to the final era. Yet interpreters generally see "unto" as a statement of purpose—that God planned in order to bring about the dispensation of fulness of times. For many, this is the beginning of the Christian era. After all, some contend, "in these last days" God spoke by his Son (Heb. 1:2); he was sent "when the fulness of the time was come" (Gal. 4:4). But this is a superficial comparison, for in the Father's plan, events matured to bring about the first coming of the Savior, and his second coming was possible only after further long periods, referred to in the plural by the "fulness of the times." Paul clearly looked to future eras. Israel would not be ready to believe until "the fulness of the Gentiles" had run its course (Rom. 11:25). Christ had come in the "last" or "most recent" days from the point of view of one living then, but Paul still spoke of the "times and the seasons" in the future that would bring about the Second Coming (1 Thes. 5:1). There were still later days of trial and apostasy coming (1 Tim. 4:1; 2 Tim. 3:1). Paul did not claim to live in the final period, for he told the Thessalonians that earth would see the coming of Satan's apostasy before Christ's time of perfecting all things.

The "dispensation of the fulness of the times." What is a dispensation? This English word is a fair guide, for God's dispensing or giving out of authority establishes a dispensation. Paul used a Greek term of similar origin; oikonomia combined the word for giving out with oikos, a household or material possessions. Thus oikonomia was assigned supervision in business or government. In Jesus' story of the scheming manager this word is translated "stewardship" (Luke 16:2-4). But in 1 Corinthians, Ephesians, and Colossians the same word is "dispensation." That comparison shows that Paul's "dispensation" is delegated authority. Classical Greek meanings are fundamentally "management" or "administration." For instance, Pharaoh's appointment of Moses over the king's grain supply is a "dispensation." [^14] So translators are correct to render this concept in Ephesians 1:10 as "administration" or "commission." Although other translators miss this main idea, the following examples from Paul show that a dispensation involved delegated authority to earthly prophets.

Paul reminded the Ephesians of "the dispensation of the grace of God which was given to me for you" (Eph. 3:2, NKJB). At the same time he wrote the Colossians about his priesthood service "according to the dispensation of God which is given to me for you" (Col. 1:25). Through Paul's first vision and later temple vision, God had outlined his call not to Jews but to Gentiles. The first apostles sent him from Jerusalem to Tarsus-Antioch (Acts 9:27-30), after which Peter and his counselors gave Paul the "right hands of fellowship" and the commission to carry the gospel to the Gentiles (Gal. 2:9). So Paul's personal "dispensation" was agency under Christ to do his work. And no one has a right to change the apostle's definition in the case of the future dispensation. [^15] Thus, the "dispensation of the fulness of the times" clearly means that God will again call trusted servants for his latter-day work, commissioning them to prepare the world for his coming.

"To sum up all things in Christ." For Peter, the final era was for restoration, which ties to the Old Testament vision that God would gather his people from all lands before the end. Paul's Greek word plainly means to "sum up" in the sense of arguments being restated and summarized, or making a total from earlier entries. Modern committee translations all agree on this for Paul's other use of this term, where the Old Testament commandments were "summed up" by the Golden Rule (Rom. 13:9, NKJB). After naming the Mosaic laws there, Paul's point is that they are summarized by the law of loving one's neighbor. So he is using "sum up" in the sense of restatement, as did writers and speakers. The Roman rhetorician Quintilian gives that literary definition: "The repetition and grouping of the facts, which the Greeks call anakephalaiosis and some of our own writers call the enumeration, serves both to refresh the memory of the judge and to place the whole of the case before his eyes." [^16]

Thus, Quintilian explains that the sections of a speech must be concisely regrouped for "their cumulative effect." "Summing up" is a "final recapitulation" of the major strands of argument; "as the Greek term indicates, we must summarize the facts under the appropriate heads." [^17] Understanding how Paul and his contemporaries used "summing up" is critical to understanding his message. His translators and commentators are simplistic, seeing the apostle as teaching once more that Christ will be acknowledged as the head. But Paul's "summing up" is talking of something else done through Christ's power, for the "things in the heavens and the things upon the earth" are "summed up." In other words, Paul's subject is not Christ, but how heavenly salvation will be brought to all through the process of "recapitulation" or "restoration." Thus, the King James "gather together" is Paul's basic idea—the strands of authority and truths of all the past will be reestablished at the final dispensation. This is in its nature pluralistic—the reintegration of God's prior revelations in the final time of preparing the earth for the judgment of Christ.

Joseph Smith has more logic here than have the interpreters, for he claimed the incredible authority of the great prophets returning past priesthood powers. Joseph Smith reviewed Paul succinctly: "The dispensation of the fulness of times will bring to light the things that have been revealed in all former dispensations, also other things that have not been before revealed. He shall send Elijah the prophet, etc., and restore all things in Christ." [^18] The restoration of the full keys and their use was the burden of the Prophet's Nauvoo message: "Now the purpose . . . in the winding up scene of the last dispensation is, that all things pertaining to that dispensation should be conducted precisely in accordance with the preceding dispensations." He continued by explaining that eternal ordinances and authority must be revealed "from heaven to man or to send angels to reveal them." [^19] As just quoted, Elijah would be one such messenger, fulfilling his latter-day mission to "turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers" (Mal. 4:5-6).

Paul spoke of the unity of all the heavens and the earth; Peter said that the "living and the dead" must be prepared for judgment through the gospel "preached . . . to those who are dead" (1 Pet. 4:5-6, NKJB). This completes the circle of this discussion, which opened with Paul's insistence that every person who ever lived must acknowledge Christ in some degree. Latter-day Saints have the most comprehensive program ever known for preaching to the living and the dead and doing baptisms for the living and the dead. Joseph Smith was authorized by multiple mighty angels, "all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys . . . and the power of their priesthood" (D&C 128:21). The restoration of these powers is for the restoration of all of God's children to him through Christ, for the dead of all past times are to hear the gospel in the preaching begun by Christ (1 Pet. 3:18-20). And at the end, ordinances and sealings must unite all in heaven and earth, as Paul prophesied. The result is the marvelous "recapitulation" of Paul or "restoration" of Peter. The founding Prophet of this restoration sounded no uncertain trumpet on the inspired result: "For it is necessary in the ushering in of the dispensation of the fulness of times, which dispensation is now beginning to usher in, that a whole and complete and perfect union, and welding together of dispensations, and keys, and powers, and glories should take place, and be revealed from the days of Adam even to the present times" (D&C 128:18).

Grace and Works

"Not of works, lest any man should boast" (Eph. 2:9). So the tracts begin on salvation through Christ. Yet no one commanded works more firmly than did Christ, who closed his most urgent sermon with the warning that hearing without doing will bring destruction (Matt. 7:26-27). The true gospel is taught when all its parts are taught, not when one principle is isolated from the rest. Like the balance in Romans of initial grace and final works, the first three chapters of Ephesians emphasize grace while the last three emphasize the works that must follow grace for salvation. Besides a dozen times that grace and its synonyms appear in Ephesians, two dozen specific commandments are added to illustrate how the Saints must live for exaltation. In reality, Paul preached that neither faith alone nor works alone would result in salvation. In Ephesians both are blended and balanced. If seeking to please God through his commands is unchristian, Paul was unchristian.

Like Colossians, Ephesians declares the glory of Christ: king of kings (Eph. 1:20-21), head of the church (Eph. 1:22-23), and agent of the Father in creation (Eph. 3:9). But like Romans, Ephesians adds Paul's profound feeling for the Savior, whose love for his Saints is returned in everlasting love for him. Because Latter-day Saints show this love in action, they are targets of suspicion and even jealousy. The older Protestant tracts for them frequently closed with the invitation to believe in Christ "if you are a Mormon, or any other unsaved person." [^20] Misguided missionaries to Latter-day Saints justify themselves by claiming that the Latter-day Saints believe in some other Jesus, which is simply an uninformed smear. As these words are written, tens of thousands of Latter-day Saint teachers are preparing Sunday lessons from the precious Gospels in a year when the five-million-member Church is studying the life of Christ. By the evangelical standard of salvation through accepting Christ, the Latter-day Saints are indeed saved. Their faith is written in the greatest scripture, the "book of life" that records faith as shown in "works" (Rev. 20:12). With Paul they worship "the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ" (Eph. 3:14), seeking to be "strengthened" daily by the Holy Ghost (Eph. 3:16), and through solemn covenants "to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge" (Eph. 3:19, NKJB). For they live for eternal glory with Christ, which will last "through all generations of time and of eternity" (Eph. 3:21, literal trans.). [^21]

"For by grace are ye saved through faith" (Eph. 2:8). Grace here is no mysterious abstraction, but a relationship with God through Christ. This proof-text is a crescendo and recapitulation of the devotional language of the apostle in which prominent synonyms sparkle: "mercy" (Eph. 2:4); "his great love wherewith he loved us" (Eph. 2:4); "his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus" (Eph. 2:7). Nothing says that grace is an exclusive means to salvation. On the contrary, grace is God's initiative in showing his goodwill and presupposes a responsible answer. The timing is all-important if Paul's words are to be understood and are not to be mere fuel for debate. The apostle frequently uses "saved" in the future tense, but he does so in the past tense here. Saved from what? The Ephesian Saints were not told that they were saved in God's kingdom; as of then they were saved from past "lusts of our flesh" (Eph. 2:3). In other words, Christ's forgiveness came to blot out what they had done in their past ignorance of the gospel. God gave his grace freely to save them from their sins prior to their knowing the gospel. Thereafter they were to follow a higher standard, for Paul named the serious sins that must be put aside as a condition of "any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God" (Eph. 5:5). Every important letter of Paul on grace also contains this strict list of moral conditions of maintaining the relationship in God's grace.

Thus "not of yourselves" (Eph. 2:8) and "not of works" (Eph. 2:9) have the particular context of conversion. The new convert can offer gratitude, not a record of high performance for the Lord. Yet at that point God trusts him with the priceless gift of forgiveness on condition that faith really leads to repentance and a holy life. Romans, Galatians, and Ephesians make the "gift" of forgiveness an immediate reality, with the two possibilities of perfecting title or losing possession. Indeed, one newly baptized has the position of a person who has signed a conditional sales contract for a desired physical object. Immediate possession and enjoyment is given, which is not disturbed as long as the required payments are met. Only in the event of careless or willful default does the property return to the seller. "Not of works" is accurate at the outset of discipleship but is plainly less true as one's responsibilities grow before the Lord. No amount of theorizing can explain away the required Christian works in the last three chapters of Ephesians.

"Not of works" is immediately followed by the challenge of works in the new Christian life: "For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works" (Eph. 2:10). The creation here is the new member of the Church, the new life after baptism, "the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness" (Eph. 4:24). Thus, Paul's grace section agrees with his works section in insisting that righteous works are required of Church members in order for them to stay in God's favor. They have been baptized (Eph. 4:5) and have received "the holy Spirit of promise" (Eph. 1:13), the Holy Ghost that assures them of eternity. But they are warned, "grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption" (Eph. 4:30). How can they grieve the Holy Spirit, the Holy Ghost? This warning is among the commandments for a righteous life. As modern revelation also says, one must avoid sin in order to keep the Spirit (D&C 1:33). Grace and salvation follow the same principle, for they may be lost through sin.

Paul's passage also reminds the Saints that they were sent to earth to do good works. The full verse on post-conversion works reaches back to the reason for mortality: "For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God has prepared beforehand that we should walk in them" (Eph. 2:10, NKJB, italics added). The italicized phrase is related to the premortal terminology of Ephesians 1; it is proetoimazo, which is also accurately rendered as "prepared in advance" (NIV). [^22] That verb is followed by a Greek purpose clause indicating that God's premortal preparation had "good works" as its objective for earth life. Here is a case where many Christians see the life-giving water of grace without seeing the eternal snows that feed it. Ephesians teaches the great truth that God made this world as a place for men and women to achieve good works. Latter-day Saints immediately remember Abraham's revelation on the grand council, when the premortal Savior explained the purpose of mortality: "We will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them" (Abr. 3:25).

Thus, Paul's full teaching of grace and works leads back to Ephesians' testimony of the Saints' pre-existence. A source in Paul's shadow also blends the Saints' premortal life with their agreement to come to earth to learn to live God's commandments. This source is the Shepherd of Hermas, so named because the revealing angel came in shepherd's form to Hermas, a simple Christian unlikely to invent new doctrine. A source gives about A.D. 150 for this writing, since it refers to Hermas's brother as then bishop of Rome. [^23] But the first part, in which the premortal existence appears, was written when Clement was bishop of Rome, at the end of the first century. [^24] Hermas saw the Church in the form of an old woman because, as his messenger said, "She was created the first of all things." [^25] Here is the second-century doctrine of the pre-existence of the Church strongly reiterated, for God created the world "for the sake of his Holy Church." [^26] Straight logic requires some confrontations here, for there is no such thing as a church apart from the people that constitute it. And Hermas is not told that the Church was planned before the physical creation but that it was then organized, which means its members were in existence to have premortal relationships with one another. If creation was indeed for the sake of the Church, then those called to membership and leadership looked to earth as their next stage of progression. And this is what Hermas was told: "God . . . created the world . . . and by his own wisdom and forethought created his holy Church . . . and everything is becoming level for his elect in order that he might keep for them the promise which he made with great glory and joy, if they keep the commandments of God, which they received in great faith." [^27]

Hermas here referred to an occasion of planning mortality when the heavens rejoiced and God's elect then "received" God's promises "in great faith." Such a group portrait has no meaning in terms of a scattered acceptance of the gospel on earth; the circumstances of hearing God's covenant are celestial and not mortal. Ephesians, Hermas, and the restored vision of Abraham all agree that men and women on earth must seek God's grace through the Atonement—and then give their lives thereafter to righteousness. All three sources also measure success by the condition given in Hermas's vision: "If they keep the commandments of God."

Church Organization

Christ taught that membership in his Church was necessary for eternal salvation. He charged the apostles to baptize all believers in all nations and then follow up by "teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you" (Matt. 28:19-20). Conversion and baptism only begin the Lord's program of continued teaching. And no one has authority to alter his command to convert and teach by defining the first as essential to salvation without the second. The true gospel requires the decision for Christ and also the commitment to discipleship of Christ under his authorized servants. In other words, the true gospel requires the true church. And Ephesians joins with 1 Corinthians to indicate what divine organization the Church must have.

Protestants have long talked of the "invisible church," theorizing on a mystical unity that somehow overarches or overlooks the fragmentation of the visible churches. Paul's two leading epistles on Church organization stress unity and define it as harmony with Christ's living apostles. Nothing has produced more open pain among Christian leaders than this contradiction between the Christian constitution and the departure of Christianity from it. Thus, a devout commentator on Ephesians hopes that "its glorious picture of the true nature of the Church is God's message for a day marked by deep concern about the disunity of Christendom." [^28] Such "deep concern" materialized in the ecumenical movement, which takes its name from the Greek word for the whole world, expressing the concept of a universal church. The last decades have been characterized by Protestant and Catholic world councils and conferences on unity. With what success? Protestant interchurch unity is more verbal than real, though many bridges of understanding stand. Yet even supporters doubt the result: "It has become an axiom of the Ecumenical Movement that unity does not imply uniformity; diversity is essential for unity. [^29]

Paul's standard was clearly otherwise. The Early Church exhibits personal tolerance and rich differences of personality but agreement in doctrine and allegiance to one set of leaders. Paul taught the necessity of patience with individuals, bearing with one another in love and long-suffering (Eph. 4:2). Yet there was but one Christian Church, and within it a "unity of the Spirit," to which Paul added seven doctrinal unities: "One body, and one Spirit . . . one hope of your calling . . . one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all" (Eph. 4:3-6). Here Paul gives the spirit and body image that is so powerful in 1 Corinthians 12. He had mentioned Christ's "church, which is his body" (Eph. 1:22-23). So "one body and one spirit" is in plain words one true Church inspired by the Holy Ghost. Organization without revelation is mechanical, but revelation without inspired supervision is chaos. This picture of one true Church arises in great part from Paul's desire in Ephesians to teach Gentile Saints their eternal calling to be united with Jewish Saints. Though these were historically apart, Christ had "broken down the middle wall of division between us" (Eph. 2:14, NKJB). Paul could scarcely have written this without thinking of the shoulder-high temple wall separating the Court of the Gentiles from the inner Israelite courts, for he nearly lost his life on the charge of bringing a Gentile across that barrier. [^30] Gentiles are no longer outside, Paul says—Jew and non-Jew are "both one" (Eph. 2:14), "one new man" in the "one body" of the Church (Eph. 2:15-16).

Gentiles no longer are "strangers and foreigners" but belong to the same "household of God." Next, the Church becomes a beautifully framed building, and its members "are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone" (Eph. 2:19-20). Thus, apostles are hardly less important than Christ, because he appointed them to help bear the weight of the Church. Should the twelve apostles be considered as historical founders or as continued successors in present times? Christian theology chooses the former, seeing the papacy or preaching ministry as limited to proclaiming the apostolic revelation. The apostles' mission ended with "the task of foundation-laying." [^31] In this view, any church founded on the Bible is using the apostles as a foundation. But how much of the apostles' teaching is in the Bible? What doctrines were in the lost letters to the Corinthians and the Laodiceans? And how much was never written in the first place? The Thessalonians were told that Paul had already clearly explained the apostasy and so was only reminding them of main points (2 Thes. 2:5). In the spirit of scolding for poor memory, Paul added, "Hold the traditions which ye have been taught, whether by word, or our epistle" (2 Thes. 2:15). Most of what Paul taught "by word" is not recorded at all. [^32] And only minimal fragments are preserved from Peter, James, and John. Only the Early Church had the full foundation of living teachings. So traditional churches have an incomplete foundation, much of which disappeared when the apostles disappeared.

Memorials to dead apostles will never satisfy vital Christians. Paul insists that only living apostles can bring godliness to the Saints: "And [the Lord] himself gave some to be apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, and some pastors and teachers, for the perfecting of the saints for the work of ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come to the unity of the faith and the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ" (Eph. 4:11-13, NKJB).

This is a remarkable statement on the goals of the Church—what Paul was working for in every speech and letter. This is Paul's version of Christ's commission to the apostles; the growth for salvation comes after baptism and through the member's faithfulness in Christ's church. Its members are collectively "the body of Christ," and they must be "edified," which in Greek means literally "built up." In Paul's comparison, their characters are in construction through instruction. In plain terms, Paul taught that only teaching directed by the living Twelve would bring the Saints to a "unity of the faith."

Christian churches have kept "pastors and teachers" but have left Christ's body without a head, for the "pastors and teachers" themselves cannot agree. Why the inconsistency of keeping some offices of Christ's church and ignoring the most important? Only a true apostolic government can command the respect of true Christians and lead them by true revelations. That is proved by what the Corinthians and Galatians did to the gospel when Paul was absent. Protestant leaders face the dilemma of knowing that disunity is wrong but fearing centralization. Those working for church union were branded as "ecumaniacs" some years ago by a prominent Methodist bishop. He felt that central administration would contradict the Protestant principle of free dissent. But that hard choice is essential. The religion of the apostles required believers to bridle their tongues, their appetites, and the human love for power and notoriety through pushing untested theories. "Unity of the faith" was the goal of the Early Church, and Paul said it could not be reached without the management of living apostles.

The embarrassment of believers intensifies in the situation of differing doctrines and multiple churches. A recent statement of conservative Bible teachers assesses a crisis: "We deplore the scandalous isolation and separation of Christians from one another. We believe such division is contrary to Christ's explicit desire for unity among his people and impedes the witness of the church in the world." [^33] Here is proof of Paul's point, for he warned against the consequences without inspired general authorities: "That we be not children, thrown about and carried around by every wind of teaching through the deceit of men, through their evil designs of scheming and error" (Eph. 4:14, literal trans.). Paul makes apostles absolutely necessary to perform the function of keeping the Church together: one faith, one church, one set of leaders over it. He insisted that unity was brought about only by continuing apostles of the Lord. And Christian history proves his point.

The Early Church was an effective organization. Paul outlines the main structure of the Church in several major letters. Glimpses of the duties of different officers are found in his comments and also in the meaning of the names given these officers, as illustrated on the accompanying chart. The word apostle suggested special authority to the Greek-speaking branches; more important, Acts clearly describes how the Twelve exercised presiding authority over the Church. As earlier discussed, 1 Corinthians 12:28 places apostles "first" because all spiritual gifts are subordinate to priesthood authority. In Ephesians and 1 Corinthians 12, Paul names prophets next, using a word for one with spiritual discernment or a warning prediction, as shown in the cases of Agabus (Acts 11:27-29; 21:10-11) and the Corinthian testimony meetings (1 Cor. 14). In the New Testament, prophet indicates divine inspiration, and the word can be linked with any office of authority. When Paul said that the foundation of the Church was "apostles and prophets" (Eph. 2:20), he evidently used two words for the same calling—one for authority and the other for inspiration to lead. He reinforced that impression by referring to the mysteries of salvation revealed "unto his holy apostles and prophets" (Eph. 3:5).

"Prophets" are listed second because of their prominence in all Church leadership. Every administrative appointment should be carried out by the direction of the Spirit, which should make every Church officer a prophet in his appointed office. In 1 Corinthians 12, Paul names "teachers" as the third calling in the Church. Modern revelation has recognized the importance of person-to-person teaching by a grade of priesthood with the name of teacher, but there are many other appointments to teach throughout every Church level and jurisdiction. Perhaps Paul used "teacher" as a pervasive function rather than as a technical priesthood office. General authorities (2 Tim. 1:11) and local authorities (1 Tim. 3:2) are teachers, as well as are those they appoint to teach in special situations.

The Constitution of Christ's Church in Paul's Writings

Offices in Eph. 4:11: apostle prophet

Greek term: apostolos prophetes

Meaning: "one sent," "forthteller"

special or "foreteller"

messenger

Offices in 1 Cor. 12:28: apostle prophet

Greek term: same as above same as above

Meaning: same as above same as above

Specific local offices

(1 Tim. 3; Titus 1;

Acts 14:23; Philip. 1:1): deacon

Greek term: diakonos

Meaning: servant

The Constitution of Christ's Church in Paul's Writings

evangelist pastor teacher

euangelistes poimen didaskalos

bringer of shepherd teacher

good news

help government teacher

antilempsis kubernesis same as above

help or aid director or

administrator

elder bishop

presbuteros episkopos

elder (a civic overseer

office)

What is a "pastor"? The accompanying chart shows that the "pastors" of Ephesians 4 are equivalent to the "helps and governments" of 1 Corinthians 12. The Greek word for pastor simply means shepherd, no doubt referring to the bishop with a local flock, for on both lists the first offices are general, with local offices afterward. Speaking to the presiding elders of Ephesus, Paul called them by the Greek word for bishop ("overseer") and charged them to watch over "all the flock" (Acts 20:28). But Paul evidently sent oral messages to bishops, who are not mentioned in the public letters except for Philippians, which was written with special relationships. More will be learned about early bishops from Paul's last letters.

And "some" are evangelists, Paul says in Ephesians 4. The historic fragments on this office remind one of the need for revelation about many details of the Lord's organization. The verb "evangelize" first meant to announce good news, and in the New Testament was used to refer to preaching the gospel. Thus, scholars naturally assume that an "evangelist" refers to a preacher of the gospel. If that is true, the restored Church well qualifies, with over twenty-five thousand missionary "evangelists" in all parts of the world as these words are written. But since the Early Church stressed missionary work intensely, it is strange that evangelist appears in the New Testament only three times, one of which is in the Ephesians list of Church offices. And Paul, the most successful missionary on record, never calls himself an evangelist. Joseph Smith defined the term as follows: "An evangelist is a patriarch. . . . Wherever the Church of Christ is established in the earth, there should be a patriarch for the benefit of the posterity of the saints, as it was with Jacob in giving his patriarchal blessing unto his sons." [^34] If the missionary announces the good news of the gospel in public, the patriarch announces special messages of the Spirit on a sacred, private level. One ancient inscription calls a priest giving private oracles an "evangelist," showing the flexibility of the word. In the New Testament, Philip is called an evangelist many years after any of his known missionary journeys (Acts 21:8), and Timothy is told to do the work of an evangelist in the context of correcting and guiding the Saints who are in danger of apostasy, not of preaching to outsiders who do not have the truth (2 Tim. 4:2-5).

What is the core characteristic of Christ's organization? Seekers over centuries have concluded that the true church could not be on earth without authorized apostles and prophets. The medieval papacy was a centralized force for unity, but it differed strikingly in form and holiness from the apostolate of the Early Church. One mark of restored priesthood is the use of wise counselors at every level of Church government, for in management as well as in marriage, it is not good for man to be alone. As Hugh Nibley perceptively observed, divine Church leadership is not a chain with individual links able to split apart, but a twelve-strand cable in which joint strength prevents a break or bears the load if it happens. A committee of three apostles was central to Church government during Jesus' life and afterward (Matt. 17:1; Gal. 2:9). Thus, the corporate leadership of twelve, with committee direction within or in addition to that group, is the Lord's system in the New Testament. It is amazing that there have not been more attempts to duplicate it. One was made when Joseph Smith quietly reestablished the Quorum of the Twelve after being ordained by the ancient apostolic presidency of Peter, James, and John (D&C 27:12-13). In Britain Edward Irving had founded the Catholic Apostolic Church, and after his death in 1834 a modern council of the twelve was appointed. Four decades later most of them had died without replacements, but the striking claim caught the imagination of the leading Christian historian in the United States at the end of the century. Philip Schaff, who had carefully studied and written on the Early Church, noted the "astounding assumptions, which, if well founded, would require the submission of all Christendom to the authority of its inspired apostles." [^35]

"Perfecting of the Saints"

The Church is a means to an end, not an end in itself. Devoted members seek to perfect the Church, but the Church exists to help members draw closer to God through faith, ordinances, and better lives. These measure the real work of the Church, not hours spent in meetings or numbers of buildings. Paul explained that the combination of general and local authorities would move the members from the level of "children" to "the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ" (Eph. 4:13-14). This defines what he means by "perfecting" and "edifying" the Saints—their spiritual maturity is to grow to be like Christ. As in Romans and Colossians, the older, worldly person must disappear for the Christlike person to be formed. The old person walked in a worldly "conversation" (Eph. 4:22), an archaic term that translates a Greek word meaning "conduct." "Be renewed" (Eph. 4:23) is a program, an ongoing process that Ephesian members are vitally involved in long after their conversion.

The main New Testament name for Church members symbolizes their post-conversion growth. In every church Paul writes to the "saints"; the Greek term (hagios) is often translated simply as "holy" in the King James Version. Indeed, the English saint comes from the Latin sanctus, meaning "holy." So a saint is literally a holy person, though Paul's letters reveal a good deal of unsaintly conduct in those with that name. But God conferred the name "holy" on his people so they would know their true name and live up to it. They were in the process of becoming "sanctified," the verb form (hagiazo). Thus, the goal of the Early Church is revealed by knowing that the "saints" were seeking "sanctification" or to become "sanctified." Christ gave himself for the Church, Paul said, "that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word" (Eph. 5:26). Baptism did cleanse past sins for Church members, but Paul's letters show that the ideals of the kingdom were not yet fully realized. Dale Carnegie used to speak of reforming others by complimenting them on their best qualities, giving them a good reputation to live up to. Today human relations experts say the same thing in language of positive reinforcement. Growth comes to those who sincerely reach to higher goals in their own self-image. In the gospel, the past is set aside through baptism and repentance, and then comes the phase of proving worthy to be identified with Christ and the Saints. The covenant of perfection is the first step, and the second is becoming perfect under the guidance of the Spirit. There are certain things that those committed to Christ will always avoid, "as is fitting for saints" (Eph. 5:3, NKJB). Live up to your holy name and reputation, is Paul's command.

The "born-again Christian" may claim sudden reform or feel that God's grace makes his imperfections irrelevant. But New Testament salvation is deeply tied to character development, and a character is the sum total of one's moral habits. Moral growth follows the rule of life: practice makes perfect. Do the world's achievers have nothing to teach the Christian seeking eternal achievement? Voltaire's diligence is reflected in a saying attributed to him: "Perfection is attained by slow degrees; it requires the hand of time." Benjamin Franklin realized that principle early and listed the virtues he wanted to develop. His autobiography explains his successful strategy of improvement—he worked intensely on one quality at a time, and after upgrading one area of conduct, he concentrated on another. A basketball coach does the same thing by assigning a poor foul shooter to work intensely on that weakness; a musician does the same thing by repeating a difficult passage until he can play it flawlessly. Through Christ, the Saints have higher motivation and a model, and revelation teaches them eternal values. But mastering the elements of growth one at a time is the only practical way to grow. To seek to be generally good is not enough. What specific acts must cease, and what righteous attitudes and practices must arise in their place? Paul answers with Christian specifics.

Godliness is not achieved by prohibitions alone. So Ephesians identifies each evil practice and replaces it with the higher standard of the gospel. The bad habit of lying must cease and be replaced with the strict commitment to tell the truth to each other (Eph. 4:25). The worldly option is unrestrained anger, but Paul commands reconciliation quickly—before sunset (Eph. 4:26). To prevent stealing, Paul commands honest labor to be able to give instead of to take (Eph. 4:28). As in other letters, Paul reminds the Saints that sexual intercourse out of marriage may bar one from God's kingdom (Eph. 5:5). But how does one control sexual drives? Paul's answer is that one should be busy serving God and helping others. Then one thinks on the Lord and on righteous friendship and service; gratitude and goodwill are within, and joy is expressed in the music of the soul (Eph. 5:19-20). That person needs no drink or drugs to lift sagging spirits, for steady spiritual stimulation makes harmful stimulants a poor substitute (Eph. 5:18).

Living for eternity changes everyday relationships. Paul says a good deal about bad words springing from a bad attitude. He measures all speech by a golden rule of communication: "Do not let any unwholesome talk come out of your mouths, but only what is helpful for building others up according to their needs, that it may benefit those who listen" (Eph. 4:29, NIV). This means anything hurtful to another, including the barrage of bad names and lustful comments that permeate careless company. In a strong sexual context Paul forbids "foolish talk or flippant humor" (Eph. 5:4, literal trans.). What is wrong goes far beyond the words themselves. The King James Version says these are not "convenient," an archaic word for "fitting" or "appropriate" (Eph. 5:4). That is, profanity and sexual innuendo are simply inconsistent with the holiness that a true Saint is seeking. Instead, the apostle counsels, there should be "giving of thanks" (Eph. 5:4). This recurrent teaching in Ephesians pictures the true Saint with inner appreciation for God and all his children. The real sin of profanity and obscenity is the hostile feeling toward others that it reveals. Those who debase others in their minds produce blame, accusation, and insult in private comments. Saints who would be perfect have a clear choice between two ways of thinking, speaking, and acting:

Put away from you all bitterness and bad temper and anger and loud accusation and evil speaking, with every wrong (Eph. 4:31, literal trans.).

And be kind to one another, tenderhearted, forgiving each other, just as God also forgave you through Christ (Eph. 4:32, literal trans.).

Paul ends Ephesians with the call to war against Satan, the true enemy. His kingdom is as real as God's, and Satan's kingdom is governed by Satan's principles (Eph. 6:12). The object is to withstand him without adopting his methods. But God will protect his Saints in the struggle. Paul may have glanced up at his guard's armor as he wrote of battle gear, a theme also in earlier letters and scriptures. Faith and righteousness are the principles of protection, and the sure weapon is the "sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God" (Eph. 6:17). As described in the great Book of Mormon passage on the iron rod (1 Ne. 15:24), the word of God is a powerful means of success in life's struggle. The key to understanding it is Paul's identification of the Holy Ghost with the word of God. Personal revelation through prayer is the word of God; living prophets speaking by the Holy Ghost give the word of God; Christ and his prophets teach the word of God in scripture. All these give invincible strength to those seeking to be Saints in more than name only.

Scriptures sometimes associate sanctification with forgiveness through Christ, sometimes with the purifying influence of the Spirit—but more regularly with living Christ's laws, the means of obtaining both forgiveness and the constant guidance of the Holy Ghost. How these eternal realities of Ephesians apply today was summed up by Brigham Young: "Cast all bitterness out of your own hearts—all anger, wrath, strife, covetousness, and lust, and sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, that you may enjoy the Holy Ghost, and have that Spirit to be your constant companion day by day, to lead you into all truth, and then you will have good doctrine, good feelings, good wives, good children, a good community; and, finally, you will be Saints in the fullest sense of the word, but not yet. I believe we shall be Saints, through the grace of God." [^36]

Family Life

"And walk in love, as Christ also has loved us and given himself for us" (Eph. 5:2, NKJB). Paul pictured the Church as those under covenant of righteous relations, following their Savior in uplifting all those around them. Husbands and wives receive special instructions in these principles; all the apostle said about concern for others is finally applied to the family. Indeed, Paul outlines a constitution of the family similar to the constitution of the Church in 1 Corinthians 12. This family structure is also defined in 1 Peter 3—these are the convictions of the Early Church. But constitutions define general relationships, leaving everyday living to be worked out within guidelines. This makes flexibility in different marriages inevitable as couples operate within general Christian roles.

Nothing written exceeds Ephesians 5 for its high view of married love. In our day of concern for women's rights, Paul's language about wives' "submitting" themselves to their husbands must be examined (Eph. 5:22). There are twin questions of what Paul meant and what application it has in gospel living today. By analogy, the modern world exists because of the principle of specialization; tasks are divided for better technology. So polarity between priesthood and motherhood is sound social engineering, making possible better-trained leaders in Church affairs and expert mothering in the crisis of a society losing its values. In this system neither sex is inferior (Gal. 3:28), and Latter-day Saints believe that God gave preexistent callings to serve in given sexual roles. [^37] Paul's "submit" has the literal meaning of "subordinate" in both Greek and Latin. This refers to placement in order, and is frequently a military term of arranging forces near each other and sometimes an anatomical term of the relationship of parts of the body. Thus, men and women fit into the orderly arrangement of Church and family with equal dignity and importance before God.

One avoids the emotional booby trap of "subordination" by asking specifically what it means in action: "Wives, submit yourselves unto your husbands, as unto the Lord" (Eph. 5:22; also Col. 3:18). The first step in understanding is to see the many relationships of submission that Paul teaches. "Submitting yourselves one to another in the fear of God" (Eph. 5:21) had just been given as a general principle for all Saints. This also meant subordination of all to lawful government on the local and national levels (Rom. 13:1, 5; Titus 3:1). Men and women also shared "submission" to appointed local leaders in the Church (1 Cor. 14:32; 16:16). "Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they watch for your souls" (Heb. 13:17); these branch leaders "labour among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you" (1 Thes. 5:12). In what does the bishop admonish his members? He deals with questions of spiritual health and physical well-being, not with choice of menu, colors of dress, or the thousand personal decisions that express individuality. With proper counsel, the bishop plans and carries out group activities of worship, assistance, and recreation. In Paul's specific comparison, the husband is head to the wife "even as Christ is the head of the church"; but this analogy suggests strongly that Christ taught all things necessary for salvation and certainly did not dictate in the ordinary choices of everyday life (Eph. 5:23-24).

It is critical for husbands who imagine they have a mandate to think for their wives to understand what family presidency really is. Christ is the model for priesthood leadership in the home because he taught gospel truths, because he was a perfect example of living the truths that he taught, and because in the end he gave his life for the disciples that he loved. Paul gives husbands the duty of following Christ as the model leader; this is not a blank check for dominance. The word of the Lord is equally available to husbands and wives, and spiritual matters are questions of conscience for which both must answer to God directly. Just as the husband ought to have the providing role in a childbearing marriage, he is also assigned to lead in providing regular times of prayer, family teaching, church participation, and companionship and communication with wife and children. Because of common commitment, the wife is told to respect and support her husband's religious leadership. And the husband with a knowledge of good leadership will respect the principle of consultation before decision. As Paul says, Christ led with his only goal the salvation and eternal fulfillment of his disciples. On that analogy every caring husband will sacrifice time and money to see that his wife continues to have opportunities to develop her talents and interests in and out of the home.

Leadership always includes two opposing problems—lack of use, and abuse. And Paul warns fathers not to overdirect. The apostle commands, "Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter against them" (Col. 3:19). But children also face the danger of leadership without love: "Fathers, provoke not your children to anger, lest they be discouraged" (Col. 3:21). Ephesians repeats that instruction with the substitution of a positive program: "Bring them up in the training and admonition of the Lord" (Eph. 6:4, NKJB). Wives and husbands normally share the education and moral training of their children, but many women today stand at the head of single-parent households. So President Spencer W. Kimball's words on male leadership have great insight for mothers also. After using Paul's metaphor of Christ's sacrificing all for the Church, he added:

When the husband is ready to treat his household in that manner, not only his wife but also his children will respond to his loving and exemplary leadership. It will be automatic. He won't need to demand it; it will come because they will want to do what they understand to be necessary and right. Certainly if fathers are to be respected, they must merit respect. If they are to be loved, they must be consistent, lovable, understanding, and kind—and they must honor their priesthood. They must see themselves as fortunate trustees of precious spirit-children whom God has entrusted to their care. [^38]

---
Notas:
[^1] For the language on two stones found and a photograph of one, see Jack Finegan, The Archaeology of the New Testament: The Life of Jesus and the Beginning of the Early Church (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969), pp. 119-20.
[^2] The King James "almost" of Acts 26:28-29 is a simple adjective used in a typical Greek prepositional phrase: en oligo. It means "short" or "small" and implies a noun: "in a short [time]." The standard lexicons give regular uses like this in the New Testament and in works of New Testament times.
[^3] Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, The Words of Joseph Smith (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), p. 237.
[^4] See Josephus, Jewish War 1:408-16; Jewish Antiquities 15:331-41 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^5] Seneca, Epistles 77:1-3 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^6] Pliny the Elder, Natural History 3.5.66-67 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^7] Ignatius, Ephesians 1:3 (Apostolic Fathers, Loeb Classical Library).
[^8] M. I. Finley, "Slavery," The Oxford Classical Dictionary, 2d ed. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1970), p. 995.
[^9] Imperial edicts from the first and second centuries are cited in Naphtali Lewis and Meyer Reinhold, Roman Civilization (New York: Columbia University Press, 1955) 2:268-70.
[^10] Seneca, Epistles 47:3.
[^11] Ibid. 47:11 (Robin Campbell trans.).
[^12] Ibid. 47:20 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^13] Ulpian, On the Edict 1, cited in Justinian, Digest 11.4.1, cited in Thomas Wiedemann, Greek and Roman Slavery (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1981), p. 190.
[^14] Pliny the Younger, Letters 9:21 (Betty Radice trans.). The runaway in this case was a freed slave with a continuing relationship with his old master.
[^15] John Edwin Sandys, Companion to Latin Studies, 3d ed. (New York: Hafner Publishing Co., 1968), p. 365.
[^16] Xenophon, Persian Anabasis 1.2.6 (Loeb Classical Library). Compare the earlier Herodotus, Persian Wars 7.30, which comments on the size of Colossae and its situation on the Lycus River.
[^17] Strabo, Geography 12.8.16 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^18] Ibid.
[^19] For a translation from existing Latin copies, see Edgar Hennecke, New Testament Apocrypha, ed. Wilhelm Schneemelcher, trans. R. McL. Wilson (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1965) 2:131-32.
[^20] Some have thought that Ephesians was this letter under a different name, but the burning issue of false doctrine about Christ is not discussed directly there. The letters to the Corinthians and Galatians show that Paul wrote specific refutations to the problems in specific locations.
[^21] Knopf-Kruger, cited in New Testament Apocrypha, p. 129. Compare the opinion of Erasmus: "No argument against a Pauline authorship can be stronger than the epistle itself." Cited in D. Edmond Hiebert, Introduction to the New Testament (Chicago: Moody Press, 1977) 2:230.
[^22] Hubert Jedin, Ecumenical Councils of the Catholic Church, trans. Ernest Graf (Freiburg: Herder, 1960), p. 13.
[^23] For the original creed of the Nicene Council, different from the later "Nicene Creed," see Henry R. Percival, The Seven Ecumenical Councils, Select Library of Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., n.d.) 14:3. The Father and Son were defined as the "same" in "reality," or "being," or "essence" (homoousion)—this is normally translated "of one substance."
[^24] John H. Leith, Creeds of the Churches (Atlanta: John Knox Press, 1973), p. 67.
[^25] Ibid., p. 354. For the similar Church of England model, see ibid., pp. 266-67.
[^26] Ehat and Cook, p. 378, abbreviations expanded.
[^27] Donald Guthrie, "Colossians," in D. Guthrie et al., The New Bible Commentary, Revised (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1970), p. 1143.
[^28] John A. Hardon, Modern Catholic Dictionary (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1980), p. 29 ("Anthropomorphism").
[^29] Alan Richardson, Dictionary of Christian Theology (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1969), p. 11 ("Anthropomorphism").
[^30] Milton V. Backman, Jr., American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), p. 479.
[^31] Ehat and Cook, p. 60.
[^32] See Richard Lloyd Anderson, "Clement, Ignatius, and Polycarp," Ensign (Aug. 1976), p. 53.
[^33] Several translators have used "elemental spirits" instead of "basic principles" in this passage. In Hebrews 5:12 the latter meaning is clear, and the former meaning is purely speculative in Paul's writing. The Greek term means "elemental spirits" in mystic and astrological writings, which Paul's writings are not.
[^34] "Tender mercies" is literally "inner feelings of mercy." The King James Version's obsolete use of "bowels" is discussed under the background of Philemon.
[^35] Strabo, Geography 12.8.15.
[^36] Pliny the Elder, Natural History 36.95
[^37] Henry Clarence Thiessen, Introduction to the New Testament (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1954), p. 239.
[^38] Frederick G. Kenyon, ed., Chester Beatty Biblical Papyri, Fasciculus III Supplement, Pauline Epistles, Plates (London: Emery Walker, Ltd., 1937), f. 75. r. (Ephesians 1:1-11).
