Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul ( 1983)

PHILIPPIANS

Profile

Sent from: Paul, at Rome, joined by Timothy.

Sent to: Members at Philippi, in northern Greece, "with the bishops and deacons."

Date: About A.D. 62.

Purpose: To thank the Philippians for help and to encourage them to perfect their lives.

Main themes: Christ and obedience; progressive salvation.

Background

The City

Philippi was named for its refounder Philip, the father of Alexander the Great, the world conqueror. But a different world conqueror came when Paul arrived with his small missionary group in obedience to the vision of the pleading man of Macedonia (Acts 16:9). They landed at Neapolis (modern Kavalla) and made their way over the coastal range to the interior plains flanked by spectacular mountains. From the high acropolis above the theater, one views Paul's city below, with the wide circumference of the periphery wall and small stream beyond, and a sea of fertile fields on the outside. The remodeled second-century city lies in crumbled splendor, with walls and gates and forum located where Paul walked earlier. Besides the road from the coast, the main east-west road ran through Philippi, which increased its economic and intellectual vitality. Communication and help to the apostle went out on these routes.

As one of the first missionaries, Luke sketched the place of first European preaching: "Philippi, a city of the first rank in that district of Macedonia, and a Roman colony" (Acts 16:12, NEB). Anthony and Augustus had defeated Julius Caesar's assassins at the battle of Philippi; afterward that "small settlement" was "enlarged" by immigration of rewarded veterans. [^1] Later, Augustus eliminated Anthony, and many who lost their Italian lands were permitted to resettle in Philippi and other eastern cities. [^2] This explains the social overtones when Paul was beaten for teaching "customs which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to observe, being Romans" (Acts 16:21). "Colony" was a technical term for Romans settled outside Rome. That Philippi was a colony implies that it had civic rights of Rome and the honor of modeling its local government after that of the mother city. The old Roman virtues were loyalty and reliability. These qualities certainly summarize the remarkable faithfulness of the Philippian Christians.

Church Members

Trusting in the Troas vision, Paul entered Philippi and found the devout women meeting at the place of prayer on the edge of the city. One of their number was a vital personality—Lydia, whom the Greek calls a "dealer in purple" (Acts 16:14, NEB), was from Roman Asia and probably had import contacts. She had a large enough house for four missionaries and the means to insist that they stay with her (Acts 16:15). She may be one source of assistance that Paul received from Philippi soon after and long after leaving. The other convert named in Acts is the Philippian jailor, baptized after the humility of despair when the earthquake deprived him of his prisoners. But this literal act of God was discerned by this man of faith, whose household joined the Church with him (Acts 16:33-34). The same was true of Lydia's household (Acts 16:15). Paul met with these members and others before leaving Philippi after his first visit (Acts 16:40).

When Paul wrote a dozen years later, the Philippian church was directed by the "bishops and deacons" (Philip. 1:1), suggesting that its growth had resulted in several household churches. Moreover, the quality of the members there rises above that of all other known branches. Paul's warm feelings are expressed at the beginning of the final chapter, where he calls the Philippians "my joy and crown" (Philip. 4:1), terms not used elsewhere. Appreciation to the strong women of that branch is evident as he asks for harmony between Euodia and Syntyche and mentions "those women which laboured with me in the gospel" (Philip. 4:3). They were to be assisted by Paul's "true yokefellow," who Clement of Alexandria thought was Paul's wife, temporarily staying in a trusted branch of the Church. [^3] Another intriguing name follows, Clement, a trusted "fellowlaborer." Yet others merit that title, "and their names" are "in the book of life." [^4] Here is another unique compliment to the Philippians. In fact, they are told that they "have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence" (Philip. 2:12). What other letter to a church made such a statement? Paul could not say anything like that to the Corinthians or Galatians, so the Philippians stand at the high end of the spectrum of faithfulness. What Paul would teach them is most revealing on the subject of how exaltation is obtained.

Reason for Writing

Paul and Silas left Philippi with the formal apology of the city fathers and fresh scars of their public beating. But Saints eternally blessed by the missionaries would not ignore their practical needs. Paul and his companions went seventy-five miles west to Thessalonica, where ugly opposition was stirring, and the Philippians filled Paul's needs there once and then sent help again (Philip. 4:16). After a riot in that place, persecution soon forced Paul to the new field of labor in southern Greece. He left three branches of the Church in northern Greece, which explains another compliment to the Philippians: "In the beginning of the gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no church shared with me concerning giving and receiving but you only" (Philip. 4:15, NKJB). In this time Paul was at Corinth, laboring intensely at missionary work and earning bread by his trade. He preached the gospel to the Corinthians "freely"; "other churches" paid the cost of Corinthian service, for "that which was lacking to me the brethren which came from Macedonia supplied" (2 Cor. 11:7-9).

These references of aid at Corinth show that the Philippians were able to send messengers three hundred miles. They did the same thing when Paul was more than twice that distance in Rome. Of the prison epistles, Philippians has the clearest references to imprisonment at the empire's capital. Since it is fashionable to doubt that location, the two Philippians' references to Rome must be surveyed. First, the Saints "of Caesar's household" sent greetings (Philip. 4:22). Commentaries create a wrong impression by assuring readers that the imperial household extended throughout the empire. Any reigning Caesar directed a huge official staff, a civil service handling finances and resources. Outside Rome, the imperial establishment did not staff provincial political centers but collected some taxes and managed scattered business operations. [^5] Greetings from provincial staff on a state property or from minor tax collectors would be vague and puzzling to the Philippians. Moreover, Philippians 1 makes the point that Paul's imprisonment had extended the gospel to prominent places. Since the imperial bureaucracy concentrated in Rome, a simple "Caesar's household" implies the center of the empire. In Josephus, for instance, Herod's son Antipater used the slave of Augustus' wife in a plot and was accused of "having corrupted the household of Caesar"—at Rome. [^6] Again Philo tells how Herod's grandson Agrippa was made king and en route to Palestine visited Alexandria; there Agrippa was considered worthy of honor partly because he was "a member of Caesar's household." [^7] This supposedly shows how "Caesar's household" could be used outside of Rome, but it proves the opposite, for Agrippa had just come from Rome, where he was fostered by the new emperor. In these first-century examples, Rome is strongly indicated when "Caesar's household" is used without modification.

The other Roman reference in Philippians is Paul's indication that his "bonds in Christ" were becoming known "in the whole praetorium" (Philip. 1:13, literal trans.). This Latin term was written in Greek form, which the apostle obviously expected to be clear without explanation. The King James Version uses "palace" because the New Testament uses the term of Pilate's headquarters and of the building in Caesarea where Paul was brought after the Jerusalem arrest. But as discussed at the beginning of this chapter, Acts describes no general missionary work during Paul's Palestinian arrest—perhaps he felt restrained because of Jewish hostility while imprisoned. So vitally expanding conversions do not fit the Palestinian buildings or situations. But custody at Rome was another mission, Luke says, for Paul taught the gospel "with complete freedom" (Acts 28:31, JB). That is the situation in Philippians 1, which fits the Roman imprisonment. Thus, "praetorium" in that setting could be the military barracks or more probably the praetorian guard stationed there. That is the common meaning of praetorium in historical writings and inscriptions of Paul's century. [^8] So the gospel that Paul preached to visitors was heard by his Roman guards and began to spread through the ranks as it had also through Caesar's staff. Some Bible-bound scholars say that Paul could be imprisoned elsewhere than Rome because the praetorian troops were stationed in other major cities. But special personal missions aside, the imperial guard was stationed only at Rome to guard the emperor. [^9]

Paul wrote to the Philippians near the end of his two-year imprisonment (Acts 28:30), for he had a specific expectation of release instead of general faith that it would happen: with the Lord's blessing he would "come shortly" (Philip. 2:24). This fits the time necessary for communications to go back and forth between Paul and the Philippians. After all their prior help, they had sent Epaphroditus to Rome with things to support the chained apostle (Philip. 4:18). Paul was grateful and recounted their relationship of more than a decade by sending thanks "for your fellowship in the gospel from the first day until now" (Philip. 1:5). Support for a messenger on the long journey to Rome probably took some organizing, which is evidently reflected in the opening recognition of the bishops and deacons, unprecedented in the other letters that have survived. With the letter Paul was sending back the messenger. Epaphroditus was appreciated as a "brother and fellow-laborer" (Philip. 2:25, literal trans.). This man had longed for his Philippian friends; he was discouraged at being sick but was also discouraged because word came back from Philippi that they knew he "had been sick" (Philip. 2:26). In fact, Epaphroditus had been critically ill, for Paul makes the point that this messenger risked his life to help Paul—"for the work of Christ he came close to death" (Philip. 2:30, NKJB). The devotion of Epaphroditus is a symbol of the solid faith and works of the Philippians. Far on the road of progression, they received a letter underlining how much diligence is required for the prize of exaltation with God.

Main Teachings

Christ and Obedience

The most faithful branch of the Early Church was not exempt from the warning of conditional salvation. They were commended and challenged, which is the key to the apostle's preaching of eternal exaltation. Whether discussed in Galatians, Hebrews, or Philippians, continued righteous living is required. Paul's theme verse has been dulled by the traditional "conversation," but literally reads: "Only let your conduct be worthy of the gospel of Christ, so that whether I come and see you or am absent, I may hear of your affairs, that you stand fast in one spirit, with one mind striving together for the faith of the gospel" (Philip. 1:27, NKJB). The watchwords to the faithful are the same as to those in danger of apostasy: "stand fast"—"live worthily." In the Sermon on the Mount, the Savior had given the same conditions for personal salvation, and Paul repeats several of those teachings. Jesus required bearing fruit (Matt. 7:15-20), which Paul explains as "the fruits of righteousness" (Philip. 1:11). Jesus gave a crucial comparison in opening his sermon: "Ye are the light of the world" (Matt. 5:14), which Paul applies to the Philippians, who "shine as lights in the world" (Philip. 2:15). Meaning what? Paul's compliment is based on Jesus' commandment: "Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven" (Matt. 5:16).

Religious people generally feel that good works are important. But those teaching a theology of grace see them as the natural result of grace and minimize the personal moral struggle. Yet what could be plainer than Paul's core message to these accomplished Saints? "Work out your salvation with fear and trembling" (Philip. 2:12). Philippians has several capsule sermons on grace and works, and this is one. Because human effort can be only partial, "fear and trembling" is trusting the Father's leadership and Christ's atonement in the midst of the confusing pressures of life. But because grace is also partial, the command is to do good works. Some vigorously deny this by quoting Paul's qualifying verse: "For it is God who works in you both to will and to do for his good pleasure" (Philip. 2:13, NKJB). Does this mean that God controls the righteous like robots, or does it mean that he powerfully motivates the humble? On this subject there is more wisdom in the following story than in many theological abstractions. A minister walked by a perspiring man pulling weeds; the minister commented, "That is a lovely garden that you and the Lord have." The gardener answered, "Yes, but you should have seen it when the Lord had it alone." This story is really an analogy of Paul's missionary work, of the Philippians' help to Paul, or of a modern Saint's faithfulness. God has given his marvelous physical and spiritual resources, but they lie dormant without man's positive actions. Christ would not have commanded works, nor would Paul have exhorted the Philippians to work out their salvation, unless these were central obligations with specific rewards attached to them. [^10] Philippians teaches works for salvation. God has done his part through Christ, and individuals are expected to do their part.

Paul associated "working out" salvation with the fact that the Philippians had "always obeyed" (Philip. 2:12). Although believing in Christ is a form of obedience, Paul is asking seasoned believers to obey, which clearly refers to the high moral life commanded in every epistle he wrote. Paul is less specific in his letter to the Philippians than he is elsewhere because their lives show no glaring problems. He bluntly refutes false teachers and Judaizers, but in warning, not in correction (Philip. 3:1-3). [^11] So the nature of obedience is clearer from an epistle like Romans. There the subject is righteous living after baptism; Paul commands not to "obey" sin (Rom. 6:12) and demands a choice between following "sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness" (Rom. 6:16). In Philippians, one of Paul's major teachings is to face trial and evil as courageously as Christ did. In Hebrews Paul also presents the Son of God as first perfected through obedience and then offering "eternal salvation unto all them that obey him" (Heb. 5:8-9). That is exactly Philippians' reasoning on the premortal and mortal Christ. Coming to earth among men, he was "obedient unto death, even the death of the cross" (Philip. 2:8). Then Paul follows that powerful picture with the command to continue in obedience like the Savior and work out salvation (Philip. 2:12). The disciple is to gain salvation just as his Savior brought about salvation. Jesus had grace and revelation, but he also had the responsibility of free choice, an independent power to act for good. If he was not a passive instrument, neither are those who follow him. For Paul makes him the strict model of obedience in his sacrifice, suffering, and consistent courage in facing every evil.

Thus, Paul taught that salvation is won only through sacrifice. In teaching that, he added a panorama of Christ and his mission—equaled only in Colossians 1 and Hebrews 1. In the premortal existence Christ was "in the form of God" (Philip 2:6). Yet service, not status, was his goal. Modern revelation throws precious light on Christ's attitude then. Satan remodeled the Father's plan for mortality and sought God's power, but Jesus offered to die as a Savior for mankind, saying, "Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever" (Moses 4:1-3). This fits Paul's theme, for just before picturing Christ, the apostle stressed humility and true concern for others, asking an end to "strife or vainglory" (Philip. 2:3), the latter word literally meaning "empty honor." Satan sought this, but Paul teaches that Christ did not compete for reputation but sought to serve in humility. Thus, he literally "emptied himself" (Philip. 2:7, NKJB) or nullified his former status by coming to earth "in the likeness of men" (Philip. 2:7). Here is the magnificent picture of the Savior "made flesh" (John 1:14)—his glory was set aside and restored, but he had obtained his physical body.

Christ is still in the "form of God" (Philip 2:6) and the "form" and "likeness of men" (Philip. 2:7). Though he has returned to glory, mortals will be physically raised in his likeness. For a time after death, men and women will leave behind "the flesh" (Philip. 1:22-23). But at his coming the Lord "will transform our lowly body that it may be conformed to his glorious body, according to the working by which he is able even to subdue all things to himself" (Philip. 3:21, NKJB). Jesus once stood before stunned apostles and extended his arms and proved his physical existence by eating with them. He was observably in the form of men after his resurrection. And this resurrected body is the model for the resurrection of each individual. Since Christians believe that Christ is God, one of the members of the Godhead has a physical body. To avoid this fact, many ministers will claim that Christ took up his resurrected body to show his reality and then set it aside. And some will even deny the physicalness of his resurrection in spite of the apostles' sensory experiences. But Paul plainly teaches that Christ will come with "his glorious body" (Philip. 3:21), which means that Christ still has physical form, and that his physical form is like the Father's is shown in Philippians 2, Colossians 1, and Hebrews 1. Joseph Smith was not ashamed of the restored knowledge that man has God's outward form and his divine potential. Joseph Smith's visions clarify Paul's testimony of the physical image shared by the Father, Christ, and man. "If men do not comprehend the character of God they do not comprehend themselves" was the modern prophet's challenge. He added with authority, "God himself who sits enthroned in yonder heavens is a man like unto one of yourselves."

Progressive Salvation

"And this I pray, that your love may abound still more and more in knowledge and in all discernment, that you may approve the things that are excellent, that you may be sincere and without offense till the day of Christ" (Philip. 1:9-10, NKJB). Philippians has the same opening and closing subject—growth in the gospel. Already complimented on moral living, these Saints are told to improve in understanding and moral excellence. This was the gospel to the members, as written to Thessalonica a decade earlier (1 Thes. 3:12; 4:1). The purpose of the Church was clearly to build character, and the preaching of the gospel was to bring salvation (Rom. 1:16). Then are not character and salvation intimately related? This does not mean a gospel of perfectionism and guilt at slow growth. Philippians is a book of joy (Philip. 3:1; 4:4), encouraging faith to pray and to "not be anxious about anything" (Philip. 4:6, NIV). Yet confidence is not complacency here. Philippians does not know static salvation but continual development.

Salvation is the constant subject of Christian preaching, but traditional explanations of salvation are strangely sterile. Negative definitions are common because all people experience personal weakness, sin, and resulting self-doubt. One thoughtful Christian definition of salvation is "The gracious act of God whereby man is delivered from his sinful selfhood into newness and fullness of life." [^12] Protestant and Catholic theology harmonize though differing on the means of sacraments as well as on belief. But the above definition is earth-bound, promising a better life but with great vagueness on its nature. And the definition is flawed on another serious issue—"the gracious act of God" implies a moment of forgiveness rather than the process that Paul preached. Joseph Smith also defined what a person was saved from, but in a setting of eternal progression: "Salvation means a man's being placed beyond the powers of all his enemies"; [^13] "When we have power to put all enemies under our feet in this world and a knowledge to triumph over all evil spirits in the world to come, then we are saved." [^14] Many Christians claim to have salvation now. Have they victory over death? That is promised in the future. Is sin really overcome in their lives? If not, they have verbal salvation only.

Since Philippians teaches progressive salvation, one must also ask, "Progression to what?" Christian theology has stressed the passive enjoyment of God by those who are saved. Catholic theologians speak of the "beatific vision." Some talk of enjoying loved ones but declare that "happiness consists essentially in the immediate vision and love of God." [^15] This picture of heaven does not include personal activity, only watching God's activity. And the traditional Protestant view emphasizes "blessed rest" and "blissful enjoyment of the Lord." [^16] If that is the Christian future, there is no personal preparation to make. A simple believer here can be an intelligent spectator there. But the restored gospel adds that humans will share God's glory, power, and activity in eternity. Without displacing the Father or Christ, faithful Saints will share divine creation and leadership that traditional theology restricts to God. That potential future activity demands that training in integrity and leadership must start now.

Latter-day Saint theology teaches preparation here for competence hereafter in the same sense that a professional school teaches skills for helping others after graduation. Many a Christian has been dissatisfied with the traditional static view of heaven. One such was the vigorous Hebrew scholar who became president of the expanding University of Chicago. President William Rainey Harper spoke bluntly in a graduation exercise attended by Joseph F. Merrill, a Latter-day Saint scientist later called to the apostleship. Elder Merrill later said, "President Harper remarked that he did not want to go to the heaven pictured by some Christians, where he would sit with a crown on his head around the throne of grace. . . . 'I want to go,' he said, 'where I can continue my studies and my work.' To myself I said, 'Brother, you want to go to the Mormon heaven'—the one indicated by the doctrine of eternal progress." [^17] Although Philippians says little about the activities of heaven, it requires a character achievement from the Saints that is far more profound than the view of "believe now and praise hereafter."

Paul compares gaining salvation to winning a race, one of his most revealing analogies. He uses an athletic theme in five letters and in one speech, [^18] so its teaching of the importance of effort before the reward cannot be ignored. Outside of Philippians, the best example is the Corinthian challenge: "Do you not know that all those running a race run to get the prize? So run to take it. Each one competing uses self-control in everything—they indeed to get a perishable crown, but we an imperishable one. And so I now run, not aimlessly, and so I box, not as flailing the air. But I press my body and force it to serve, lest after preaching to others, I should be rejected" (1 Cor. 9:24-27, literal trans.).

Important Greek cities in which Paul preached held athletic contests. The Corinthians, for instance, were familiar with their great games at nearby Isthmia, which rivaled the games of Olympia and Delphi. The crowns at these panhellenic contests were of olive, laurel, pine, or wild celery. [^19] So Paul stresses the necessary labor for a temporary honor that will dry and crumble. How much more valuable is exertion for an eternal reward? Does that come without effort? No, Paul answers. The athlete sacrifices comfort for the hard training before the race and then gives total energy during it. The analogy is clear—God furnishes the prize, but men and women must give their all to obtain it.

Philippians matches Paul's Corinthian challenge thought for thought. For the main subject is the necessary struggle for the Saints, whether epitomized in the phrase "work out your own salvation" or in the vivid comparison of running to obtain the crown. There is no honor in mere belief or in mere belonging. The apostle bares his soul as a totally dedicated person, achieving not because of faith alone but because of a divine partnership: "I can do all things through Christ, who gives me power" (Philip. 4:13, literal trans.). Sharing his feelings, Paul tells how grace operated in him. Looking back on his Jewish self-sufficiency (Philip. 3:5-6), he emphasizes that his own righteousness was not enough without "the righteousness which is of God by faith" (Philip. 3:9). This summarizes but does not explain Christian salvation. Cooperation between divine initiative and human agency is evenly balanced in the intense picture of Paul's race for exaltation: "Not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect: but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended: but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus" (Philip. 3:12-14.)

This is the personal version of the Corinthian challenge—the same comparison, the same striking word agreements, and the same straining for salvation. And salvation was not yet acquired by Paul. As Paul told the Corinthians, if he did not carefully control his life, he would not qualify for God's kingdom (1 Cor. 9:27). Though the apostle is charged with "the perfecting of the saints" (Eph. 4:12), he says bluntly that he is not yet perfect and that his salvation is not won. As in a race, the test is not in starting but in finishing. Eternal salvation is not obtained until the efforts for Christ are finished. And the required output is great, for who ever watched a leisurely race? "Race" in Paul's Corinthian challenge is stadion, the 200-yard contest of the length of the "stadium," sometimes doubled to 400. Such short distances demand a fast pace. An ancient observer, Lucian of Samosata, gives the image: "The good runner, from the moment the barrier falls, simply makes the best of his way; his thoughts are on the finish line, his hopes of victory in his feet; he leaves his neighbor alone and does not concern himself at all with his competitors." [^20] Paul might have written this, for Corinthians and Philippians carry the message of competition with self, of reaching all-out for the real goal of life, exaltation in God's kingdom.

Saved by grace? Yes, but only if the disciple gives as much for Christ as Christ gave for him. The great result takes the total cooperation of the Lord and of his son or daughter. In the above King James translation, "apprehend" describes this partnership not of grace alone or works alone. "Apprehend" means to grasp or to lay hold of, translating the same Greek word used for taking the prize in 1 Corinthians 9:24. In Philippians, Paul is dashing at full speed to reach salvation, the purpose for which Christ reached to him: "I press on to take hold of that for which Christ Jesus took hold of me" (Philip. 3:12, NIV). Here is Paul's insight on the relationship of his first belief to his life afterward. This mature passage focuses on the sequence of grace, which came first, with the response of a lifetime of activity. Grace is not even discussed in Philippians. Paul did not teach "push-button salvation," getting glory in one move. Even Paul was pursuing perfection, so grace is a call to grow. If the offer of that opportunity is not met by growth, grace is robbed of its result. Every Saint has the choice to respond in daily life, the agency of action.

And what does God expect after sincere belief and baptism? The roots of Philippians are in the Sermon on the Mount and its searching questions are on the full frontiers of sexual morality, honesty, worship of God, and love of his children. After Joseph Smith outlined Latter-day Saint beliefs in twelve of the Articles of Faith, he reached to Philippians for the open-ended challenge of maturing in Christlike qualities. Paul asked the Philippians to consider deeply whatever things are "true, . . . honest, . . . just, . . . pure, . . . lovely, . . . of good report"—to seek "virtue" and whatever merits "praise" (Philip. 4:8). Such qualities glow in those committed to Christ in thought, word, act, habit, and character. These character ideals in Philippians are best explained by the voice of conscience. The King James translation of these traits is accurate, with only two words needing comment, "honest" and "virtue."

"Honest" in the King James Version has an obsolete meaning that still had some use in the time of Joseph Smith. The dictionary of his period gives one meaning as "decent, honorable, or suitable." That is the meaning of Paul's adjective—to seek the conduct that moral people recognize as admirable and worth praising. What is true and pure and lovely includes the beautiful in art, music, and literature. But Paul stressed what is true and pure and lovely in personal conduct and human interrelationships. And this leads to "virtue," a word of unrecognized depth. Paul's "virtue" is the Greek arete; in early literature it referred to prowess on the battlefield. A word of skill in living, it refers to merit in the personal sense or, as in modern translations, to moral "excellence" (RSV, NIV). Paul is not talking of abstractions but of the devoted life that he had led for the Lord (Philip. 4:9). Joseph Smith underlined this truth by adding this thought to Paul's ideals: Latter-day Saints seek to be "benevolent" and to do "good to all men" (A of F 13). This kind of virtue is forged in fires of inspiration from God, producing self-control like pure steel, and a radiant awareness of others. Such virtue is both individual and social, for its product is service, not solitude.

Paul's final church letter closes with the evidence of the nearness of God. Jesus left the Twelve with the promise of a peace above anything that the world could offer (John 14:27). From his own experience the seasoned apostle promised the same: "the peace of God, which surpasses all understanding, will guard your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus" (Philip. 4:7, NKJB). This word for peace appears nearly a hundred times in the New Testament, about half of these times in Paul's writings. Not many lives had such conflicts as did Paul's; Paul knew few comforts, and eventually his life was taken. But peace was his constant companion, for it was one sure "fruit of the Spirit" (Gal. 5:22). Through the Holy Ghost, Paul consistently knew the rightness of his course and God's love for him. Paul found this peace by repentance, accepting the true Church and its ordinances, and using every opportunity thereafter to do what God commanded him. His words and his life combine to teach progressive salvation.

NOTES

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] For the language on two stones found and a photograph of one, see Jack Finegan, The Archaeology of the New Testament: The Life of Jesus and the Beginning of the Early Church (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969), pp. 119-20.
[^2] The King James "almost" of Acts 26:28-29 is a simple adjective used in a typical Greek prepositional phrase: en oligo. It means "short" or "small" and implies a noun: "in a short [time]." The standard lexicons give regular uses like this in the New Testament and in works of New Testament times.
[^3] Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, The Words of Joseph Smith (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), p. 237.
[^4] See Josephus, Jewish War 1:408-16; Jewish Antiquities 15:331-41 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^5] Seneca, Epistles 77:1-3 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^6] Pliny the Elder, Natural History 3.5.66-67 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^7] Ignatius, Ephesians 1:3 (Apostolic Fathers, Loeb Classical Library).
[^8] M. I. Finley, "Slavery," The Oxford Classical Dictionary, 2d ed. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1970), p. 995.
[^9] Imperial edicts from the first and second centuries are cited in Naphtali Lewis and Meyer Reinhold, Roman Civilization (New York: Columbia University Press, 1955) 2:268-70.
[^10] Seneca, Epistles 47:3.
[^11] Ibid. 47:11 (Robin Campbell trans.).
[^12] Ibid. 47:20 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^13] Ulpian, On the Edict 1, cited in Justinian, Digest 11.4.1, cited in Thomas Wiedemann, Greek and Roman Slavery (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1981), p. 190.
[^14] Pliny the Younger, Letters 9:21 (Betty Radice trans.). The runaway in this case was a freed slave with a continuing relationship with his old master.
[^15] John Edwin Sandys, Companion to Latin Studies, 3d ed. (New York: Hafner Publishing Co., 1968), p. 365.
[^16] Xenophon, Persian Anabasis 1.2.6 (Loeb Classical Library). Compare the earlier Herodotus, Persian Wars 7.30, which comments on the size of Colossae and its situation on the Lycus River.
[^17] Strabo, Geography 12.8.16 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^18] Ibid.
[^19] For a translation from existing Latin copies, see Edgar Hennecke, New Testament Apocrypha, ed. Wilhelm Schneemelcher, trans. R. McL. Wilson (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1965) 2:131-32.
[^20] Some have thought that Ephesians was this letter under a different name, but the burning issue of false doctrine about Christ is not discussed directly there. The letters to the Corinthians and Galatians show that Paul wrote specific refutations to the problems in specific locations.
