Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul ( 1983)

8

Letters to Leaders

Paul's last known letters were sent to his trusted assistants Timothy and Titus. They blend in speaking about common problems in the Church and in Church leadership. They are normally called the Pastoral Letters because Timothy and Titus are often pictured as bishops. As discussed with Ephesians 4, pastor means shepherd and strongly suggests the bishop, the direct leader of a flock. Although Bible annotations ending 2 Timothy and Titus call these men bishops, unknown scribes gave these opinions long after the apostolic age. Timothy and Titus were not bishops because Paul left them to choose bishops and to direct Church affairs in a region. But bishops of the Early Church supervised cities and towns. So Timothy and Titus stood between general and local authorities. They might be what Latter-day Saints have called assistants to the Twelve, regional representatives, stake presidents, or mission presidents. The Pastoral Letters are like Philippians in the sense that Paul felt confident in the faith of those to whom he wrote. But the Pastorals go beyond any public letter to reveal personal convictions and counsel of the great apostle.

The end of Acts is the close of a consecutive narrative in Paul's life. But Luke abruptly stops without a hint that Paul's work was then finished. Earlier, Festus heard Paul and sent him to Rome with no charge of legal wrongdoing (Acts 26:31-32). Then the Pastoral Letters mention Paul's visits to Asia Minor, Greece, and Crete that are clearly late in his life. They show that he was released and had some Mediterranean ministry before the final grim imprisonment described in 2 Timothy. So these letters continue the book of Acts. The introduction of 2 Timothy will discuss how Paul died as a result of the fire of Rome and of Nero's accusation of the Christians afterward. The fire was the summer of A.D. 64, and waves of investigation and execution followed. The earliest sources say simply that Paul died under Nero, which could be as late as A.D. 68. Appendix A shows that Paul's imprisonment in Acts ended about the spring of A.D. 63, which gives from one to five years for the events mentioned in the Pastoral Letters.

Thus, the closing years of Paul's life are illuminated in these letters, though many scholars disbelieve what they see. Some claim that the administrative regularity in the Pastorals must come from a later age. But does the evolution of administration take decades? The Latter-day Saints began in 1830 with a handful of members governed by two presiding elders and a few unassigned elders and members of the lesser priesthood. But only a dozen years later a sophisticated organization met the needs of thousands of members in many lands. Bishops, elders, and deacons are mentioned in the Pastoral Letters, officers clearly present long before that, as indicated in the chart accompanying the discussion of Ephesians 4. Paul left his first Gentile converts with presiding elders on the first mission (Acts 14:23). Should scholars' preconceptions modify the Pastoral documents? Good history arises when documents correct preconceptions. The Pastorals give details about local organization not found in Paul's letters to branches, for Timothy and Titus were assigned local supervision.

A related issue divides Pastoral students along the same lines. These final letters refer to false teachers who are strikingly like the Gnostics of the second century. These pseudo-Christians quite generally sought salvation by mystic knowledge of the ultimate divinities behind the Old Testament Creator. Many detested the Creation because it formed matter, and many sought to explain away the Resurrection for the same anti-physical biases. Because the Pastoral false teachers resemble second-century Gnostics, some scholars insist on post-Pauline dating. But this is unnecessary. As already seen, Colossians (about A.D. 61) refutes a heresy like Gnosticism. And John's letters (about A.D. 100) do the same (1 Jn. 4:1-3). History is the study of causation and sequence, and many a "first" is later outflanked by the discovery of the same thing earlier. Those who denied the physicalness of Christ were strong when John wrote after A.D. 96. A similar philosophy could have existed when Paul wrote thirty years earlier, particularly in light of the early "Colossian heresy."

The Pastoral Letters are vigorously challenged on the basis of vocabulary and style. But the greater the man, the greater his possibilities of creative expression. One example will illustrate the objections and answers. The Pastorals have about 175 words not used elsewhere in the New Testament. But that figure will be deflated by looking at this list, which includes many common Greek words that Paul would inevitably use in discussing religious and moral issues. [^1] Moreover, many of these 175 unique words are simply different forms of words already used by the apostle. For instance, Paul regularly uses "otherwise" and also the common word "to teach"; 1 Tim. 6:3 combines these forms into a verb "to teach otherwise." Should that really be considered a unique word in the Pastorals? Subtraction of such related words lowers the percentage of variance to be more in line with other letters. Yet one would expect the general letters to the churches to differ from those to priesthood leaders. Style generally follows content, time of writing, and the moods and needs of both writer and reader. In the Pastorals we see Paul writing in his maturity, with details about the special subjects of apostasy and Church government, without the urgency of reconverting or correcting members, and more openly sharing his personal thoughts with associates. A varied vocabulary would naturally follow such different circumstances.

Some scholars prefer to build skyscrapers on stylistic sand. By subjective judgment they define what Paul could have written, break letters into supposed originals, identify interpolations, and demote documents to anonymity in spite of ancient inclusion in the works of an identified author. Before the knife of such "knowledge" is applied to the Pastorals, consistency demands that they be judged by the standard applied to other books. The debate on style can exist only because Paul's authentic letters are identified by early information. Paul's unchallenged letters are validated by examining the quotations from the second century and by examining the manuscript collections and references thereafter. And the Pastorals pass this test. Since Paul's first letter to Timothy was written to Ephesus, its first certain quotation comes appropriately from the neighboring bishop of Smyrna about A.D. 110. [^2] Writing to the Philippians, he deliberately features quotations from Paul in order to motivate them to follow their founder.

Polycarp himself describes his method near the beginning of his letter, an early glimpse of "standard works": "Paul . . . wrote letters to you, from the study of which you will be able to build yourselves up into the faith given you." [^3] A phrase from Galatians immediately follows, and the two next quotations are from 1 Timothy:

But the beginning of all iniquities is love of money (Polycarp 4:1, literal trans.).

We brought nothing into the world, but we do not have anything to take away (Polycarp 4:1, literal trans.).

For the root of all evils is the love of money (1 Tim. 6:10, literal trans.).

For we brought nothing into the world, and it is certain that we are not able to take anything away (1 Tim. 6:7, literal trans.).

Because Polycarp surveys Paul through short snippets, the above use of 1 Timothy is clear. Other Pastoral references are probable, though shorter. As a young man, this early bishop of Smyrna had personally known John, but nevertheless emphasized Paul's teachings because of the apostle's relationship with the Philippians.

The most important early document about New Testament books dates about sixty years after Polycarp. It is a list of scriptures accepted by the second-century Church, written in rough Latin. Called after its discoverer, the Muratorian Fragment begins in the middle of a discussion of the Gospels and afterward names Paul's authentic letters, separating them into the categories of those written to churches and those written to individuals: "One to Philemon and one to Titus, but two to Timothy for the sake of affection and love." [^4] Thus, the external evidence for the Pastorals is basically the same as that for Romans and Galatians. [^5] Indeed, the argument of style could be made against those books for departing from the norm of the Corinthian letters by overemphasizing grace. But within the treasure of Paul's letters there is much variety of mood and of emphasis. The strength of these letters to leaders is their special insight into Christian living and practical Church government, as well as their intense themes of authority against the threat of false teachers. Their pages are bright leaves from the autumn of the Church, which stood full before the imminent winter of apostasy.

1 TIMOTHY

Profile

Sent from: Paul, possibly in or near Greece.

Sent to: Timothy, directing the Church in the area of Ephesus.

Date: Probably between A.D. 63 and 66.

Purpose: To instruct Timothy in appointing bishops and supervising his region of the Church.

Main themes: False teachers; priesthood offices; earthly and eternal welfare.

Background

Timothy

Timothy may have been about eighteen when Paul revisited the Galatian churches and added him to the missionary group on its way west to Greek lands. Perhaps Paul earlier converted his family on the first mission as he visited Lystra, Timothy's home (Acts 16:1). Did they help after Paul's stoning? Did they ignore threats when Paul revisited their branch and preached about the test of opposition? (Acts 14:22.) Whenever he was baptized, Timothy was well respected by the priesthood leaders in the area when Paul added him to the second mission (Acts 16:2). Nothing is known of Timothy's father beyond his being Greek. But Paul remembered Timothy's first "sincere faith" (2 Tim. 1:5, RSV), which he received from his grandmother Lois and his mother Eunice (2 Tim. 1:5). His mother was Jewish and an early convert (Acts 16:1). Thus, Paul protected him against Jewish hostility by having him circumcised (Acts 16:3). "Honoring God" is a free translation of Timothy's name, which no doubt expressed the devotion of his parents. He clearly grew through spiritual as well as physical nourishment. The King James "from a child" is probably not strong enough; Paul says literally, "From infancy you have known the holy scriptures" (2 Tim. 3:15, NIV).

So the fire of faith passed through Jewish generations to the young man who would serve under an apostle called to declare the Messiah to the Gentiles. Paul could not do his work without delegation and assignment. And no one was more constantly used and trusted than Timothy, whom he called his "true child in the faith" (1 Tim. 1:2, RSV) or his "beloved child" (2 Tim. 1:2, RSV). Paul also used these affectionate phrases earlier when he sent his trusted Timothy to settle troubles at Corinth: "I sent to you Timothy, my beloved and faithful child in the Lord, to remind you of my ways in Christ, as I teach them everywhere in every church" (1 Cor. 4:17, RSV). Paul warned the Corinthians not to despise Timothy, but this is less an evidence of Timothy's tentativeness than of their strong opposition to all priesthood authority (1 Cor. 16:10-11). Timothy's worth is proved by his continued labors with Paul, for Timothy's history is virtually the history of Paul's missions. Paul added Timothy's name to the opening of seven letters and mentioned his trustworthiness in two others. Paul had many powerful companions, but not one continued to be closer to him.

Timothy had served in missionary work and in building the branches over a dozen years when Paul sent him to Ephesus to preside over that region (1 Tim. 1:3). Then he was probably in his early thirties, and Paul counseled him to speak with authority: "Let no one despise your youth" (1 Tim. 4:12, NKJB). The issue here is not some supposed bashfulness of this experienced associate, whose vigor is written in thousands of missionary miles. He was assigned by an apostle called directly by God. The problem was that rebellious teachers openly challenged the true priesthood, beginning the era of evil that 2 Thessalonians 2 describes. But Paul told Timothy that he had the power and ability to fill his calling—that if he would not fail, the Lord would not fail him. In the Pastoral Letters, Paul twice refers to Timothy's blessings by the laying on of hands. Perhaps Paul had also set him apart to the regional authority over Asia Minor, for he referred to the inspired promises that Timothy could depend upon: "I set this commandment before you, child Timothy, according to the earlier prophecies upon you, so that through them you might carry on the good warfare" (1 Tim. 1:18, literal trans.).

Reason for Writing

Paul had arrived in Rome in the spring and was imprisoned two years, with a probable release at the beginning of the travel season of A.D. 63 (Acts 28:30-31). The angel's prophecy said he would stand "before Caesar" (Acts 27:24), which he apparently did before leaving Rome. Why didn't Luke write the rest of the story? The best explanation for breaking off writing is that he was too busy making history to write it. This missionary-recorder must have been involved in the labors of the final years. After joining in greetings at the end of Colossians and Philemon, Luke does not appear again until the painful notice that he is the only one present to support Paul in his final crisis (2 Tim. 4:11). Christians high and low were then being executed. If Luke did record the last years, his work probably perished with him in the brutal events surrounding 2 Timothy. So the Pastoral Letters stand alone in this closing era.

What came of Paul's intent to visit Spain? He told the Roman Saints that he would see them "whenever I travel to Spain" (Rom. 15:24, literal trans.). But during his intervening imprisonment he planned to visit Philemon (Philem. 1:22) and also the Philippians. In the latter case, events would permit him to see them "shortly" (Philip. 2:24) and even before that to send Timothy "shortly unto you" (Philip. 2:19). These plans just before an intended release would logically be carried out before any visit to Spain. So 1 Timothy and Titus could come from an Aegean visit right after release or from a later visit after traveling to Spain. If the latter happened, it would have been a major mission, filling considerable time before the final arrest documented in 2 Timothy. Writing about A.D. 96, Clement of Rome said that Paul had reached the "boundaries" or "limits of the west," a phrase far more appropriate for Spain than for Rome. [^6] The early Muratorian Fragment also says that Paul visited Spain, though its source of information is debated. [^7] There is no certain evidence, though the fourth-century historian Eusebius hints at early sources beyond the Roman imprisonment of Acts: "Having, therefore, made his defence at that time, it is recorded that the apostle again journeyed on the ministry of preaching, and, having set foot for the second time in the same city, was perfected in his martyrdom." [^8]

Paul's concern for reliable bishops suggests his purpose in writing. The earliest post-apostolic letters picture the bishop as the critical leader in the fight against apostasy. Paul said that he had excommunicated two who apparently spoke against the constituted authorities, "whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme" (1 Tim. 1:20). Paul told Timothy to remain at Ephesus; the apostle was on his way to Macedonia, perhaps to visit the Philippian branch again (1 Tim. 1:3). [^9] He had assigned Timothy "so you may command certain people not to teach different doctrines" (1 Tim. 1:3, literal trans.). Thus, true priesthood is linked with true doctrine. In these critical needs Paul not only instructed but planned to return "shortly" to throw his strength into the battle (1 Tim. 3:14). There is an urgency in 1 Timothy from the opening warning about rebuking false teachers to the closing language of command. "O Timothy, guard what has been entrusted to you" (1 Tim. 6:20, RSV) is spoken in sober warning against those reforming the revealed gospel.

Main Teachings

False Teachers

Paul does not dignify the counterfeit leaders with detailed refutation. His labels build a significant picture, however, with certain criticisms throwing a solid shadow of the false beliefs. At first glance, Paul's criticisms seem directed at scattered untruths, but the errors link into an integrated philosophy that choked the Christian Church at the close of the apostolic era. The opening and closing of 1 Timothy use the same word for those who have literally "missed the goal" or "swerved from" the faith (1 Tim. 1:6; 6:21). They are opposing the gospel with what the King James Version calls "science falsely so called" (6:20). But this "science" is the only time the King James Version translates the Greek gnosis as anything but "knowledge" in over two dozen appearances. Although "science" means "knowledge" in Latin, the translation is unfortunate. Here and in related passages Paul speaks of false religious knowledge rather than of any science-religion conflict, for there is little evidence of such a conflict elsewhere in the New Testament.

Paul's phrase is "falsely-named knowledge," an early slogan in the fight against apostasy. The first post-apostolic historian was Hegesippus, a second-century Jewish Christian who wrote five books on the Church and on heresies. Significant extracts from his books exist in the fourth-century history of Eusebius. Hegesippus reported a whirlwind of false teachers when the apostles' deaths created a vacuum in leadership, a parallel to the Book of Mormon picture of no further apostles because of the wickedness of the people (4 Ne.; Morm. 1). Hegesippus said that these false teachers preached a substitute gospel, which he called "falsely-named knowledge," the identical phrase of 1 Timothy 6:20. [^10] As a whole, the second-century heretics are called "Gnostics," from gnosis, the Greek term meaning "knowledge." Their ancient critics described many sects, with endless theories and strange galaxies of divine beings. Like many sects that have broken from the Church today, the Gnostics generally claimed secret doctrines to add to the Church's public message. With recent discovery of Gnostic books, intense debate centers on when Gnosticism came into existence.

Paul accuses the false teachers of speculating about Judaism and of lacking logic. And Hegesippus describes the earliest Gnostics as Samaritans and Jews, significant because he had concentrated his investigations on early events in Palestine. [^11] Two careful scholars commented on such Gnostic origins: "It is remarkable that Gnostic heresy entered Christian circles in Palestine through Jewish channels." [^12] One of Hegesippus's Gnostic sects came from Simon Magus, the scheming convert of Samaria who opposed Peter in Acts 8. Simon and his first imitators were contemporaries of Peter and Paul. Moreover, another source supplements Hegesippus—Justin Martyr, born in Samaria at the beginning of the second century, had special local knowledge about Simon. He detailed the Samaritan background of Simon Magus, indicating that Simon's mistress was "the first 'thought' generated by him." [^13] This concept marks Simon's theories as Gnostic, for most sects had elaborate systems of sub-divinities springing from the true God, their method of reducing the Old Testament Creator to a junior divinity who made a physical world by mistake. [^14]

The Christian champion against Gnosticism in the late second century was Irenaeus, and his description of the system of Simon Magus may be based on an earlier lost work of the Samaritan Justin Martyr. [^15] So Irenaeus must be taken seriously when he outlines Simon's blasphemous teachings:

Simon's system was strong from his time to the mid-second century, when Justin said that it had captured "almost all the Samaritans, and a few even of other nations." [^17] Earlier Simon was a successful religious impostor when confronted by Peter in Samaria about A.D. 35, so the peak of his influence was during the closing years of Peter and Paul. All of this does not prove that Paul argued directly against Simonism in the Pastoral Letters, but the first Christian records prove that such ideas were clearly taught within Paul's lifetime.

Today's anti-Mormon literature proclaims against genealogical work by quoting Paul: "Neither give heed to fables and endless genealogies" (1 Tim. 1:4). But that was not the interpretation of Paul and the New Testament writers, for Matthew begins with Jesus' genealogy to Abraham, and Luke 3 takes it back to Adam, just as endless as an earthly genealogy can be. Paul preached that Christ descended from David (Rom. 1:3), and the apostle knew his own descent from Benjamin (Rom. 11:1). Indeed, the Gentile convert Luke records the lineage of the prophetess Anna from the tribe of Levi (Acts 4:36). In short, true genealogy, a serious Latter-day Saint goal, is sustained by the practice of the Early Church. Paul's phrases, however, show that he condemns only false genealogies. Paul's term never appears alone, but as part of a pattern, which is translated literally in its two appearances as follows: "Myths and endless genealogies . . . questions . . . empty talk" (1 Tim. 1:4); "Foolish questions and genealogies and strifes, and warring about the law" (Titus 3:9). Similar Pastoral phrases crop up regularly to characterize the false teachings as unsubstantial, untrue, filled with "unholy and blabbering myths" (1 Tim. 4:7, literal trans.) or "unholy and empty talk" (1 Tim. 6:20, literal trans.). Paul is clearly condemning irresponsible theories and invented stories, the meaning of the Greek muthos of the above passages. The "genealogies" condemned by Paul are clearly those that are debatable and fictitious.

Each is free to envision what false genealogies Paul had in mind. Several good scholars are confident that the apostle refuted false explanations of the ancestry of the Creator. Paul's problem was not Jewish attitudes but Christian hereby of Jewish origin. Paul's criticisms are not Romans-like, against Jewish pride; they are against inventing anti-physical doctrines on resurrection and marriage. So the early Gnostic genealogies of the misguided creator fit this picture. In their view, the material world was a mistake, so from Simon on, their lower creator-divinity was elaborately descended from their highest god. The scheme was Jewish because it gave a counterexplanation of Genesis. Thus, it fits Paul's warning not to be seduced by "Jewish myths" (Titus 1:14, literal trans.).

The teachers of false genealogies had once known the truth but had "turned aside" to their "foolish reasoning" (1 Tim. 1:6, literal trans.). Gnostic myths generally aimed at saving the true God from contaminating himself with physical things, so their ultimate god would have nothing to do with creation, crucifixion, or resurrection. Creation of human bodies was a related problem for them, as were foods. And Paul prophesied that false teachers would be found "forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from foods which God has created to be received with thanksgiving" (1 Tim. 4:3, NKJB). The prophecy logically refers to a false revulsion toward the body both in marrying and in eating (the King James "meats" was written in 1611 as a general term for food). Paul also speaks of the "latter" or "later" times; the adjective is neutral, not suggesting how far in the future he means (1 Tim. 4:1).

Paul's prophecy on marriage soon began to be fulfilled. Some Gnostic sects treated morality and eating with indifference on the theory that the soul was not affected by the flesh, but others taught that sexual relations and eating flesh contaminated the soul. Among the latter was the group founded by Saturninus, close successor of Simon Magus: "They declare also that marriage and generation are from Satan. Many of those too, who belong to his school, abstain from animal food, and draw away multitudes by a feigned temperance of this kind." [^18] Medieval Christianity inherited its ascetic practices from ancient attitudes that produced such thinking. Although not forbidding marriage for the normal person, it defined marriage as a lower way of life. The danger of Gnosticism was in its anti-materialistic premises. Christian theologians know that Gnosticism was defeated as a movement in the second century. But the overall conflict between God and matter was never really defeated. True, the Fathers of the Church vigorously upheld the scriptural accounts of the Creation and of the Resurrection. Yet the strange result is that they taught that Christ is physically resurrected but that his Father is eternally a non-physical being. This discrepancy puts great pressure on Christian ministers to spiritualize the Resurrection or to explain it away as a temporary sign.

The real answer to false doctrine is the truth. Paul regards debate as pointless but powerfully stresses Christ as the true revelation of God and the only means of salvation. The relationship of the Father and of Christ is shown throughout 1 Timothy. One careful analyst notes that the "favorite titles" for divinity in 1 Timothy are Lord and Savior: "The remarkable feature of these two titles is that the author uses them interchangeably for God and Christ." [^19] Christ is also "God." "He therefore leaves himself open to the charge of virtual Ditheism." [^20] This last word means belief in two Gods and comes in an unusual comment for a Christian scholar. Paul does verbally separate Christ and the Father here and elsewhere in his letters. One distinctive concept taught in 1 Timothy is that Christ is between the Father and his children: "For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus" (1 Tim. 2:5). Here the Greek mesites has the same meaning as the English "mediator." Thus, Christ stands as a third party with the Father and mankind—he is the literal "go-between," the arbitrator assigned to overcome alienation and bring peace among the parties. Before the merging of the Father and Son by the Nicene Council, Arius had claimed that the Son was subordinate and was thus a distinct person himself. And one capable Christian, while doubting that the Pastoral author intended this doctrine, feels that the above language severs the persons of the Trinity: "An Arian Christ is the logical conclusion of the mediator-christology which we have here." [^21] In everyday English, Paul's "mediator" is separate from the Father; this is also the testimony of the restored Church.

Paul's testimonies of Christ in 1 Timothy are now seen as bits of creeds or hymns, an intriguing but unprovable line of inquiry. In the letter they are spontaneous gems of personal testimony, artfully composed but probably Paul's core thoughts on the Savior repeated in some form over and over during his life. One sentence captures the essence: Christ was "manifested in the flesh" (1 Tim. 3:16, NKJB). Pungent phrases follow on the Savior's mission, perhaps with chronological intent, for he was "seen by angels" at glory" with the same physical body that a moment before had stood before the awestruck apostles (Acts 1:9-11). This summarizes the "mystery of godliness," which here, as in Ephesians, is the plan to be openly revealed through Jesus Christ. The Christian mystery is never one permanently hidden from mortals, but is one to be shown fully as soon as God's children are able to understand.

This principle applies also to the Father, who is called invisible" in virtually every translation of 1 Timothy 1:17. As pointed out in Colossians 1, the same Greek word is simply "unseen" and has no connotations of some eternally nebulous God. As the logical A. T. Hanson says, "This is the only passage in the entire New Testament in which God is described as invisible without the accompanying assertion that he has made himself known in Christ or in his works of creation." [^22] In other words, the implied thought behind not seeing the Father is always that the Son reveals him—the visual equivalence of Christ as "the image of the unseen God" (Co. 1:15, JB). Paul's strongest statement on the veiling of the Father is in the present tense: the Father is "dwelling in unapproachable light, whom no man has seen or can see" (1 Tim. 6:16, NKJB). Here Joseph Smith used a leading doctrine of the New Testament to override the impression of isolated words—for the Saint with "the light and the hope of immortality dwelling in him" will live to see God (1 Tim. 6:16,JST . That is the message of Jesus' beatitude: "Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God" ( Matt. 5:8).

Did the apostle who watched Stephen seeing the Father and the Son deny that man had ever seen God? Probably he meant that ordinary men never see God unless called as prophets or sustained by God's Spirit. Possibly Paul also denied that the real Father had been seen by Christian apostates with their invented schemes of the being higher than the Creator. Certainly Paul stressed that the unseen Father was sending the Son in the mighty drama of "the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ," which once more is the New Testament message that the Father is revealed through the Son (1 Tim. 6:14). The full beliefs of the Early Church were well understood and were referred to only in part in such letters. John, who also called the Father unseen (John 1:18), portrayed the thrones of the Father and the Son in the presence of the Saints in the glorified city (Rev. 22:3; compare 3:21). And Paul's most powerful passage on Christ revealing the person of the Father (2 Cor. 4:4-6) promises that the faithful will see eternal realities (2 Cor. 4:14) that are temporarily unseen in this life (2 Cor. 4:18). That is how the Early Church understood this language, for soon after Paul the martyr-bishop Ignatius spoke of Christ as "invisible, who for our sakes became visible." [^23] Likewise the Father is unseen for the period of mortality, after which the righteous will see him.

Priesthood Offices

To become a minister today one certifies through college training and then is generally hired by a local church. In the Early Church no prior training was required but only a call from Christ or his servants. Priesthood is a necessary concept in any organized church, though the word itself may be avoided. Who has the right to baptize and administer the sacrament of the Lord's Supper? Roman Catholics have a regularly ordained priesthood for the ordinances, but Protestants also have orderly procedures of appointment. Priesthood is the right to perform ordinances and to lead, which means that Church management is a type of priesthood. The source of authority may be the "call" of a Church, as mentioned in the survey of Protestant ministers in Utah, 45 percent of which agreed that "the ministerial office is or should be conferred upon incumbents through the congregations." [^24] But should authority be given by ordination? The same group was asked this question, and 71 percent of these ministers denied that "authority is conveyed by the laying on of hands by those who have received the authority in this manner." [^25]

Joseph Smith spoke of delegated priesthood by quoting Paul's instruction not to neglect the "gift" given "by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery" (1 Tim. 4:14). This is not confirmation after baptism, for prophecy rarely precedes that ordinance. But the opposite is true of a priesthood call. In other words, all baptized converts freely receive the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. But priesthood comes on a selective basis, making the inspired call a prerequisite. This double stage of inspiration plus ordination appears in several situations of Paul's life. At Antioch before the first mission, "the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Paul," after which they were set apart by the laying on of hands (Acts 13:1-3). And Paul summoned "the elders of the church" from the Ephesian area and told them that "the Holy Ghost made you overseers" (Acts 20:28, literal trans.). So local officers were not given the right to act without prior designation by revelation. The inspired call and the laying on of hands are the first two steps of divine authority already discussed in connection with Hebrews 7.

That discussion also gave biblical evidence for a third proper step, approval of the group over which the officer will preside. This also appears in the letter of Clement, bishop of Rome, written about the time that John was imprisoned at Patmos. He was shocked that the Corinthians had perverted their right of approval by dismissing their leaders, who were installed by the apostles: "We consider therefore that it is not just to remove from their ministry those who were appointed by them, or later on by other eminent men, with the consent of the whole church." [^26] The survey near the beginning of this discussion indicates that a sizable number of Protestant leaders are called by their congregations, but that group had neither the right to call nor to dismiss in the procedures of the Early Church. Appointment came through supervising priesthood leaders, with the group's right to accept or reject those so appointed. The rationale would be that they had the right to show their own willingness to be directed, a check and balance on inspired leadership but not a substitute for it. This was the pattern when Paul and Barnabas organized their first converts. The pronouns of Acts clearly indicate that the apostles placed the elders over the members, which justifies the slight liberty of the first translation following as compared with the literalism of the second: "Paul and Barnabas appointed elders for them in each church" (Acts 14:23, NIV); "They had appointed elders for them in every church" (Acts 14:23, RSV).

Timothy was told that after prophecy came "the laying on of the hands of the presbytery" (1 Tim. 4:14), meaning the body of elders. Joseph Smith explained the principle: "A man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof" (A of F5). This requires a visible chain of authority, each link being a valid ordination by one having authority. That is just what Paul required in individual ordinations, for Timothy was told, "Lay hands suddenly on no man" (1 Tim. 5:22). Once more, the selective procedure clearly indicates priesthood ordination. This is the letter that spells out what qualifications bishops and deacons must have, cautioning Timothy to weigh and consider before appointing bishops and deacons. Timothy's ordination (1 Tim. 4:14) is one link in the chain of authority, and his ordination of others (1 Tim. 5:22) is a second link. How many more would appear if there were fourteen letters on priesthood appointment instead of two? Yet ordination clearly appears where it should appear in the letters and in Acts. Self-appointed and congregationally appointed leaders are ruled out in the procedures of the Early Church, which had a regular line of authority from Christ and his apostles.

The Master summarized the "top-down" priesthood appointment of the Twelve: "You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and appointed you" (John 15:16, NKJB). And the apostles followed that pattern in local appointment by the higher authorities. Selection and ordination were the responsibility of Timothy and Titus as regional officers appointed by the apostle Paul. The old Protestant view was a church patched together out of cooperating sectional elements, but the Early Church expanded through the central leadership of the apostles. Clement of Rome, who looked back on the Neronian persecution and the martyrdom of Peter and Paul, defined the true Church as that organization with local authorities appointed under the direction of the apostles: "They appointed their first converts, testing them by the Spirit, to be bishops and deacons of the future believers." [^27] The true Church would continue while the true gospel was preached by a priesthood linked by a chain of authority to the founding apostles. Few churches even talk about tracing the laying on of hands as it is outlined in 1 Timothy. Those with traditional orientation may speak of a general succession without any records to sustain the validity of early ordinations. But Latter-day Saint priesthood holders can trace their lines of ordination back to the glorious restoration of the priesthood to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery by John the Baptist and the ancient presiding apostles.

Paul's instructions on appointing bishops make a final point about priesthood calls by revelation. The Holy Ghost speaks to the calling officer in quiet assurance more than in overpowering force, though apostles today have experienced the force of the Spirit as an inner burning or even as a spiritual shock. Yet Paul talks about practical investigation together with the stage of revelation. The bishop must have specific qualities of worthiness, as is shown in the choice of an apostle to replace Judas, where the requirements were outlined by Peter and met by two men, with the Lord's will then sought (Acts 1:15-26). So Paul required Timothy and Titus to do their best thinking as a part of the process of inspiration. Latter-day Saints are well aware that the Lord commanded Oliver Cowdery to "study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right" (D&C 9:8). Thus, thoughtful analysis is a part of the process of revelation. This insight into priesthood callings has tremendous relevance to the operation of the restored Church, though members do not always understand as well as do those called to ward and stake leadership. This author's assignment in the latter situation in the last three years has been an overwhelming personal experience, for the revelations of the Spirit are profound realities in the calling of bishops and of other Church officers today.

Paul's list of bishop's qualifications is really much more than that. The Early Church was not divided into a relatively few especially holy Saints contrasted with the great mass of members. Leaders and members were both expected to live up to the same standards. Thus, 1 Timothy 3 and Titus 1 contain a practical profile of the ideal life for anyone who aspires to serve God. These two sources are nearly identical in their picture of the effective leader. And what dedicated disciple can ignore leadership? The Church of Jesus Christ is a divine system of service and support. Every member should be a teacher and an example to someone else—all perform the functions of the bishop on some level. Every serious parent leads the family as the bishop leads his flock. Thus, Paul's standards for the bishop become a moral measurement.

The good leader has tested integrity and skill in serving. Paul summarizes in saying that the bishop should not be a "novice" (1 Tim. 3:6), in literal Greek "newly planted" or "newly converted." Jesus challenged the baptized to live that people "may see you good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven" (Matt. 5:16). Righteousness neither parades itself nor hides its reality. So Paul notes that one living the gospel will have a "good report" among honorable outsiders (1 Tim. 3:7). If slander occasionally misrepresents, reliable honesty is reflected in credit reports and in one's reputation for keeping personal and financial promises. Directing others starts with directing oneself. That means controlling temper, turning down liquor, and curbing greed for material possessions. These areas of self-control are summed up in a powerful word translated "sober" (1 Tim. 3:2; Titus 1:8). In Greek sophron is an intense cultural ideal, controlling one's life with a sound mind, making desires serve intelligent moral convictions. So the faithful leader is indeed what the translations here call "sober-minded" (NKJB) or "self-controlled" (NAB, NIV).

The bishop must be "the husband of one wife"? (1 Tim. 3:2; Titus 1:6.) Marriage is assumed, but the emphasis is not on "a wife" but on "one wife." So some commentators have seen a prohibition against polygamy, which was not a marriage custom in Timothy's Greek world. Others have seen a prohibition of remarriage in case of death of the first wife. But this runs counter to Paul's instructions for younger widows to remarry and live productive family lives (1 Tim. 5:14). Moreover, that woman following Paul's rule could be widowed again. Would she then be ineligible for welfare help, which required her to be the "wife of one man"? (1 Tim. 5:9.) Consistency demands the interpretation of moral faithfulness in marriage here; welfare eligibility of the second-time widow would be judged not by her number of marriages but by her morality in each marriage. So "husband of one wife" must mean sexual loyalty to the lawful spouse. Common sense dictates that Paul is talking about fundamental morality here, just as he talks about fundamental honesty and goodwill to others. Translators have no right to confuse the issue by the rendition "married only once," since the Greek of the above verses is literally "man of one woman" or "woman of one man." Perhaps these phrases have the right connotation by translating "one woman's husband" and "one man's wife." Sexual relations must be restricted to marriage.

A bishop must also be a successful family leader. But from the early middle ages the Catholic bishop was not married, on the theory that single clergy would have more time for the Lord. But Paul looks to the quality of such time, for an unmarried man lacks the social experience to lead a small flock effectively. Reaching out to his own children was a prerequisite to being trusted with a group of the Lord's children. "Children in subjection" (1 Tim. 3:4) or "faithful children" (Titus 1:6) is the result of two wills—the well-motivated parent and also the well-motivated child. Paul does not demand perfect success but encourages a righteous approach to parenting. The bishop is a person who is careful with human feelings, who is not violent and quick tempered. In modern terms, he does not abuse his wife or children physically or emotionally. And he is a good teacher of the gospel—in the home before he is called to teach in the Church. And he reaches with warm "hospitality"—in the home before he is called to do the same in the Church. Whether one is called to Church leadership depends on the Lord's needs, but every parent should be able to upgrade family leadership with Paul's insights here.

Ephesians 4 gave "the perfecting of the saints" as the purpose of priesthood offices, both general and local. The name for each office throws light on its goal. "Bishop" evolved from the Greek episcopos, literally an "overseer." In Paul's farewell address to leaders at Ephesus, he reminded them how revelation had made them "overseers," which probably means "bishops" (Acts 20:28). They were to care for the flock, suggesting their image as pastors, or shepherds, as discussed in Ephesians 4. The bishop leads a flock by "looking after" its welfare. Scholars spend time debating whether there was corporate leadership or sole leadership of the bishop within the New Testament churches. But in the restored Church, bishops act with counselors, which probably explains why bishops merge with elders in some early sources. [^28] Because history is so often evolution, historians can be misled by superficially assuming evolution. The New Testament documents the existence of bishops, but only in fragments. But the earliest post-apostolic literature shows bishops with centralized authority. The same thing was no doubt true earlier—the evolution is in the quality of the sources, not in the bishop's office.

Paul's instructions to Timothy and Titus indicate strong centralized leadership—such high qualifications naturally pertain to one specially selected, for joint appointment of many in one small branch would exhaust leadership quickly and make these qualifications meaningless. Paul tells Titus that the bishop is "the steward of God" (Titus 1:7). In Greek that term is "household manager," given in one translation as "representative" (JB), because the bishop holds the delegated management of his unit, what Paul termed a "dispensation," as discussed in connection with Ephesians 1. The first well-documented bishop is Ignatius of Antioch, who about A.D. 110 was arrested and escorted to Rome via Asia Minor. Before leaving that area he wrote to six churches, and his message to each was that apostasy could be stayed only by following the bishop. "Let no one do any of the things pertaining to the Church without the bishop"—that meant that no administration of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper was valid without him or the one "whom he appoints"; nor was any baptism or meeting to be held without his authorization. [^29] The bishop, then, was a local officer, for there is a bishop in each church addressed. Ignatius gives wise practical advice to Bishop Polycarp of Smyrna, encouraging inspiration for individual needs: "Not all wounds are healed by the same plaster." [^30]

Ignatius continually names elders and deacons after the bishop, the elders being compared to the Council of the Twelve, which suggests their role as counselors. [^31] Indeed, the name of elder arose from the senior councils that governed Greek communities, so elders were like a board of advisors under executive direction. In A.D. 96 the bishop of Rome complained that the Corinthians had rejected their presiding elders; with references to the bishop intermingled, this could mean the bishop and his assistants. [^32] But that letter does not discuss offices in detail. Since the unity of the Church is strongly stressed in the letters of Ignatius and Clement, any apparent differences probably relate to our lack of full information. In addition to administrative functions, early Christian elders had the personal assignments that Latter-day Saint home teachers have today. That is strongly suggested in the New Testament as James encourages the sick to call for the elders for blessings. And Polycarp later describes how elders helped the bishop watch over the Church: "Let the elders also be compassionate, merciful to all, bringing back those that have wandered, caring for all the weak, neglecting neither widow, nor orphan nor poor." [^33] Polycarp is clearly a sole bishop but joins "the elders with him" in writing the letter, indicating that they are senior priesthood leaders of that church. [^34] In addition to the strong bishop of 1 Timothy 3, there are "the elders that rule well, . . . especially they who labor in the word and teaching" (1 Tim. 5:17, literal trans.). Some elders appear to have been called to special positions of leading or assisting out of the pool of those regularly serving the Saints.

The last priesthood office in the above sources is the deacon. In Philippians 1:1 deacons are named after the bishops, and the same is true in 1 Timothy 3. Again, their name profiles their function, for the common verb of serving or helping furnishes the noun diakonos. "Helper" has a more general use in the New Testament, with Paul using the term frequently of himself (generally translated "minister"), with application even to Phebe of the port near Corinth (Rom. 16:1). But this woman's reference is followed up by no job description as a priesthood office. The same lack of application dooms the attempt to make deacons' wives into officials; they are charged with the responsibility to support their husbands (1 Tim. 3:11). Like bishops, deacons go through the two stages of proving worthiness and then being called (1 Tim. 3:10). Named right after the bishop, they meet similar standards, though personal competence in teaching and social skills are not stressed.

So here is an important distinction—the deacons are successful family heads like the bishops, but unlike the bishop they do not preside. Deacons are not told that they cannot care for the Church without successfully caring for a family first (1 Tim. 3:5). Their married status is related to the Jewish background that required Levitical priests to be thirty years old, a general pattern that the Savior honored before beginning his ministry. Yet his ability at age twelve in the temple shows youth's potential for early priesthood service. The restored Church began with older deacons and lowered the age when the Church became stable with regular supervision from experienced priesthood leaders. Those in the Old Testament ordained to serve God were from the tribe of Levi only and restricted their work to the temple. But by revelation the comparable New Testament office of deacon was given to any Israelite or Gentile member who qualified. Since God's work grows, there is flexibility in who receives priesthood, when it is received, and assignments in it. But the authority remains the same, and the continuity of Early Church and the Restoration is illustrated by Justin Martyr's written defense to the emperor about A.D. 150 explaining what happens after the symbols are blessed in sacrament meeting: "Those who are called by us deacons give to each of those present to partake of the bread and wine mixed with water . . . and to those who are absent they carry away a portion." [^35]

Since many priesthood offices have disappeared or lain idle, thoughtful people must ask whether the priesthood disappeared after Christ and the apostles. The deacon's office is missing in many churches, though there is a dynamic movement in both Catholic and Protestant faiths to "restore" its early vitality. The medieval church added many priesthood offices that have no basis in early Church government. On the other hand, many Protestant churches hardly have a skeleton of the organization in Paul's day. But modern revelation has restored all the offices found in the New Testament and in the earliest Christian sources. The offices of teacher, priest, and high priest appear in early sources, but only by incidental mention, preventing a full understanding of what is meant. For that matter, the final dispensation should have the offices of the Primitive Church and more if God so commands. But the New Testament and earliest bishops completely support Joseph Smith's claim of restoring "the same organization that existed in the Primitive Church" (A of F 6)

Theologians classify different churches in terms of their basic framework or "polity." Emphasis on governing boards of elders is called Presbyterian, and emphasis on the supreme authority of bishops is called Episcopalian polity. Yet the Early Church was both of these and more, for it had the government of apostles directing all offices of the priesthood. Regional and world bishops are known in Eastern Orthodox, Roman Catholic, and some Protestant churches. But archbishops, metropolitan bishops, national bishops, or a worldwide bishop are all substitutes for the traveling and supervising council of apostles. First- and second-century bishops supervised in a given city. Polycarp writes to the Philippians with the apologetic opening, "Not at my own instance, but because you first invited me," and explains that he cannot take the place of the apostle Paul. [^36] Under imperial arrest, Ignatius writes to Asian churches and to Rome itself to share testimony but not to govern: "I do not order you as did Peter and Paul—they were apostles." [^37] A dozen years earlier, Clement had written from Rome, but in the most circumspect terms, not as a presiding priesthood officer, but as the "Church of God which sojourns in Rome to the Church of God which sojourns in Corinth." [^38] In facing the ultimate Corinthian sin of dismissing its priesthood officers, he complains but does not discipline.

In a lesser crisis Paul warned the Corinthians of his coming and promised excommunications. In the process of shaming but not directing, Clement recalls how the authorized "bishops and deacons" were first appointed by the apostles, who "preached from district to district, and from city to city." [^39] No bishop had this apostolic jurisdiction between cities, but apostles were set over the entire Church. The Early Church was a balanced system of general and local authorities, with the legitimacy of the latter dependent on the former. The Pastoral Letters show the power of bishops, elders, and deacons in upgrading lives; these offices were by nature person to person and were not concerned with the administration of a region or of the whole Church. Regional bishops later evolved, but apostles or their special assistants are in this position in the Pastoral Letters. Great medieval bishops developed as unauthorized expansions of local offices. And councils of hundreds of bishops usurped the apostolic function of revealing doctrine, which is clearly described in Acts and in 1 Corinthians 12. Through priesthood restoration, the missing general authorities have now been reestablished in their proper position in Christ's Church.

Earthly and Eternal Welfare

Superficial religion relaxes in heaven before its time. Impractical churches have treated symptoms of poverty without going to causes of the disease. Modern national materialism arose in reaction to the failure of religion to be practical. But a church speaking only of distant salvation is not the successor to the religion of the New Testament, for the first six chapters of Acts give equal weight to saving souls and to meeting the practical needs of the converted. The author of Christian welfare principles was Christ, who defined love as service and explained service as the range of others' physical, social, and emotional needs. He outlined the question on the day of judgment—whether others have been helped (Matt. 25:31-46). Have they been fed and clothed? Have they been welcomed when strangers? Have they been visited and fellowshipped when isolated from society? The Early Church addressed these needs, but through principles more profound than only easy handouts and occasional visits.

Behind 1 Timothy 5 is the commitment to productive labor, exemplified by Paul's regular tent-making and requiring industry as a condition of full fellowship in 2 Thessalonians 3. Greek philosophy idealized the contemplative life, but for Paul one is serving God when producing goods or serving God and neighbors. Paul is prayerful and thoughtful, and is a scholar of the scriptures. But where is Paul's advice to withdraw to meditative cloisters? The principle of activity is applied to widows in 1 Timothy. Not until age sixty are they to be "enrolled" (1 Tim. 5:9, literal trans.). Some unnecessarily imagine a formal order of women devoted to prayer and charitable works. But the issue here is only Church obligation, not organization. And the rule was to not give support while a woman was able-bodied. People who lived to age sixty were about as vigorous as moderns before wonder drugs. Younger widows were encouraged to remarry, raise families, and "manage the house" (1 Tim. 5:14, NKJB). But Paul vigorously attacked idleness, for an aimless life is more than a wasted life, as his contrast between Christian widows and worldly widows shows. Evil is avoided by filling life with righteous activities.

So Paul insisted on productive work from those able to work, with the warning that anything less invited Satan's temptations. The exceptions seem to be the welfare collection at Antioch before a coming famine and the welfare collection that Paul brought to Jerusalem from the Gentile branches, discussed in connection with 2 Corinthians 8 and 9. Though no one knows how these resources were distributed, their collection was for special circumstances of Jerusalem poverty, with the high percentage of widows indicated in Acts 6. So Paul's teachings in 2 Thessalonians and 1 Timothy harmonize with giving help freely for special needs but in normal times requiring the able to be self-reliant. There is no evidence that Latter-day Saint leaders studied these two letters of Paul in their economic leadership after the 1929 American depression. Yet their inspiration agreed wholly with Paul's welfare principles as they sought to aid the jobless and still preserve "independence, industry, thrift, and self respect"—"the aim of the Church is to help the people to help themselves." Decades earlier, Brigham Young's inspired reflections on his "experience" had led him to the same truth: "It is never any benefit to give out and out to man or woman, money, food, clothing, or anything else, if they are able bodied and can work . . . when there is anything for them to do."

Thus, the Early Church handled welfare by rules of self-help and emergency assistance, but like Latter-day Saints, they insisted on one further essential. The Pastoral Letters show the family as the basic teaching unit of the Church, indicated by the idea that a bishop must be one who has successfully taught his children. The economic analogy is clear. Teaching in the Church backs up family teaching but does not replace it; likewise, Church welfare support will be available only when family resources have failed. The rule is simply that believing "men and women" who run households must help widows related to them—"Let not the Church be burdened, that it may assist those who are really widows" (1 Tim. 5:16, literal trans.). And the family relationship is not defined narrowly, for the commandment of Moses to honor father and mother is extended to honoring grandmother. This elderly matriarch is to be "reverenced" (1 Tim. 5:4, literal trans.). Paul explains this duty of respect along with the duty of support: "Let them first learn to reverence their own household and to return what they owe to their progenitors" (1 Tim. 5:4, literal trans.). In the King James Version this privilege of repayment belongs to the "children or nephews," but "nephews" is used in the obsolete sense of "grandchildren" or "descendants," the exact meaning of the Greek term. And lest anyone mistake his plain words, Paul underlines the religious obligation: "But if anyone does not provide for his own, and especially for those of his household, he has denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever" (1 Tim. 5:8, NKJB).

Self-respect is related to the respect of others, especially in critical youth and old age. Christ's atonement showed that every individual is worth the suffering of the Son of God. And the rule of family support says to every individual that lifelong labors for children are seeds sown for an autumn harvest. Grandmothers are stressed in 1 Timothy mainly because they lived longer than their husbands. As long as anyone survives, the comfort of eternity is sweeter through the comfort of loved ones this side of it. Ancient and restored churches unite in assuring the aged of care when self-support and family support are exhausted. This inspired system gives the elderly unquestioning acceptance, and the senior knows seniority in love and understanding. The elderly can still give generous affection. Paul profiles the worthiness of widows for help, and this stands as a model for the lifetime service of married and unmarried: "If she brought up children, if she showed hospitality, if she washed the Saints' feet, if she assisted the afflicted, if she pursued every good work" (1 Tim. 5:10, literal trans.).

Is worthiness for earthly welfare unrelated to worthiness for eternal welfare? Since Paul teaches good works as the basis for the full respect of the Church, are good works unrelated to the full salvation of God? Writing to the regional leaders, Paul's overall message was worthiness—of bishops and deacons, of women for welfare, of Timothy in his calling, of the Saints for eternity. Salvation is not a distant condition unrelated to practical life, but the outgrowth of how a person lives. Joseph Smith taught such continuity to Brigham Young, who explained it in many spontaneous sermons: "I am decidedly in favor of practical religion—of everyday useful life" was his theme. This meant preparing for the great things of eternity by daily responsibilities here: "But I would not be prepared for that sphere of action, unless I could manage the things that are now within my reach." [^40] This is exactly what Paul required of the prospective bishop—proven skill on a small scale before managing a greater responsibility. And the Church helped its needy on the same basis that God grants exaltation—meeting full needs after a member had made all possible efforts at self-help. Brigham Young saw that principle as permeating every relationship with the Lord here and in eternity: "You know that it is one peculiarity of our faith and religion never to ask the Lord to do a thing without being willing to help him all that we are able, and then the Lord will do the rest." [^41]

Living worthily requires living with eternal values. Paul first contrasted the superficial and the eternal in women's lives. He pictured the philosophy of dress to impress, and he asked female Saints to ask the more profound question of what kind of person was within the clothes: "I desire . . . that women dress themselves with clothing well designed in modesty and good taste, not with braiding or gold or pearls or expensive apparel—but using what fits women committed to godliness, good works" (1 Tim. 2:9-10, literal trans.). It helps to know that Paul lived two years in Rome before he wrote these words. He would have nothing against the elegantly natural braids that have always cascaded over women's shoulders. But in Nero's last years Roman society erupted with gross exaggerations. Surviving statues of aristocratic women have a high layering that must come from hairpieces. And the Roman rich unwittingly bequeathed innumerable gold rings and bracelets to the museums. The Romans themselves laughed at the extremes of the time of 1 Timothy; the elder Pliny was incredulous at pearls hanging from finger pieces, in clusters on earrings, or even worse: "They even use them on their feet, and fix them not only to the laces of their sandals but all over their slippers." [^42] Today's fads are equally ridiculous, but as Paul emphasized, the woman cultivating "good works" is putting on eternal beauty.

Paul also exposed the superficial in the ancient male world of muscles and money. The women's challenge to seek godliness was repeated in Timothy's terms: "Train-yourself in godliness; for while bodily training is of some value, godliness is of value in every way, as it holds promise for the present life and also for the life to come" (1 Tim. 4:7-8, RSV). There is some sarcasm here for the Greek culture that heaped praise on its professional athletes. Yet Paul must have been in superb physical shape from many travels, and he does not deny value in the careful training of the athlete, which he knew well enough to mention regularly. But far more important is regular spiritual exercise. Paul could look upon modern streets and be mildly pleased with joggers and striders caring for their bodies. And then he could open family-room doors for the strange sight of men dedicating days to television sports while going out of physical and spiritually fit? Through practice in spiritual things—in prayer, worship, and scripture reading, and in teaching and serving family, the larger Church family, and friends beyond that fellowship (1 Tim. 4:13). As a leader, Timothy must be what he preaches, and Paul's checklist of qualities reminds every Saint not to break training "in word in conduct, in love, in spirit, in faith, in purity" (1 Tim. 4:12, NKJB).

Paul continues his athletic language in closing with personal advice to Timothy: "Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life" (1 Tim. 6:12). These are words for competition in many events of the Greek games, so Timothy will get the reward through valiant effort, as discussed in Philippians. So will the rich Saints if they are "rich in good works" (1 Tim. 6:18-19). This same message came to grasping men and overdressed women. Only eternal things are worth having, for all else will pass away. Selfishness comes in many forms, but most obviously in the greed for things. Paul does not condemn owning possessions but praises the man of wealth who is "ready to distribute, willing to communicate" (1 Tim. 6:18). This last word simply repeats the first thought, for the King James "communicate" usually translates the Greek word meaning "to share." So the fault with many of the rich is not their wealth but their poverty of spirit, a fault also shared by masses of men and women without wealth. Thus, money is not "the root of all evil" but the "love of money," in Greek philarguria, which is used in the general sense of "avarice" and "greed." As President Spencer W. Kimball is fond of saying, the sin behind all sin is selfishness. And greed for material things is epidemic. As Paul says, we will not carry wealth out of this world. So what is permanent and eternal?

The answer is positive qualities of character. Not only are all bank accounts left here at death, but also left are real estate, houses, automobiles, drugs and alchohol, elaborate clothes, false power, and empty status—the list can easily be expanded. What men and women take to eternity is themselves. The real joy of the gospel is not the promise of possessions in the hereafter. Without the right inner qualities, one could have celestial mansions and be as dissatisfied there as here. But true gospel riches bring the present possession of the Holy Ghost, who communicates the love and nearness of God, virtually an immediate reward for moral choices here. Happiness is not what one owns, but what one is. Untold individual acts forge each of the qualities here that are transferable to eternity: "righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness" (1 Tim. 6:11). In the King James Version these words are all accurate except "patience," the strong Greek word (hupomone) meaning "endurance," which is the required completion of faith in Romans 5:3 and in the verses before Hebrews 11. Paul's main message to Timothy is woven through his prior letters; hold fast and "continue," for by that effort "you will save both yourself and those who hear you" (1 Tim. 4:16, NKJB). Paul's sunset letters are understandably conscious of his years of faithfulness and the requirement of faithfulness for future rewards. The Pastoral Letters weld worthiness to salvation.

---
Notas:
[^1] Simon Magus was the true creator, who first generated "thought," supposedly incarnate in his mistress.
[^2] "Thought" migrated to lower space "and generated angels and powers, by whom . . . this world was formed."
[^3] Simon came to redeem the imprisoned, transmigrating "thought" and "conferred salvation upon men, by making himself known to them." He appeared in the form of Jesus but was not a man; he appeared "to have suffered in Judea, when he had not suffered."
[^4] Since the prophets were inspired by lower divinities, the enlightened can ignore them, and "being free, live as they please; for men are saved through his grace, and not on account of their own righteous actions." [^16]
[^5] Seneca, Epistles 77:1-3 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^6] Pliny the Elder, Natural History 3.5.66-67 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^7] Ignatius, Ephesians 1:3 (Apostolic Fathers, Loeb Classical Library).
[^8] M. I. Finley, "Slavery," The Oxford Classical Dictionary, 2d ed. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1970), p. 995.
[^9] Imperial edicts from the first and second centuries are cited in Naphtali Lewis and Meyer Reinhold, Roman Civilization (New York: Columbia University Press, 1955) 2:268-70.
[^10] Seneca, Epistles 47:3.
[^11] Ibid. 47:11 (Robin Campbell trans.).
[^12] Ibid. 47:20 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^13] Ulpian, On the Edict 1, cited in Justinian, Digest 11.4.1, cited in Thomas Wiedemann, Greek and Roman Slavery (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1981), p. 190.
[^14] Pliny the Younger, Letters 9:21 (Betty Radice trans.). The runaway in this case was a freed slave with a continuing relationship with his old master.
[^15] John Edwin Sandys, Companion to Latin Studies, 3d ed. (New York: Hafner Publishing Co., 1968), p. 365.
[^17] Strabo, Geography 12.8.16 (Loeb Classical Library).
[^18] Ibid.
[^19] For a translation from existing Latin copies, see Edgar Hennecke, New Testament Apocrypha, ed. Wilhelm Schneemelcher, trans. R. McL. Wilson (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1965) 2:131-32.
[^20] Some have thought that Ephesians was this letter under a different name, but the burning issue of false doctrine about Christ is not discussed directly there. The letters to the Corinthians and Galatians show that Paul wrote specific refutations to the problems in specific locations.
[^21] Knopf-Kruger, cited in New Testament Apocrypha, p. 129. Compare the opinion of Erasmus: "No argument against a Pauline authorship can be stronger than the epistle itself." Cited in D. Edmond Hiebert, Introduction to the New Testament (Chicago: Moody Press, 1977) 2:230.
[^22] Hubert Jedin, Ecumenical Councils of the Catholic Church, trans. Ernest Graf (Freiburg: Herder, 1960), p. 13.
[^23] For the original creed of the Nicene Council, different from the later "Nicene Creed," see Henry R. Percival, The Seven Ecumenical Councils, Select Library of Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., n.d.) 14:3. The Father and Son were defined as the "same" in "reality," or "being," or "essence" (homoousion)—this is normally translated "of one substance."
[^24] John H. Leith, Creeds of the Churches (Atlanta: John Knox Press, 1973), p. 67.
[^25] Ibid., p. 354. For the similar Church of England model, see ibid., pp. 266-67.
[^26] Ehat and Cook, p. 378, abbreviations expanded.
[^27] Donald Guthrie, "Colossians," in D. Guthrie et al., The New Bible Commentary, Revised (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1970), p. 1143.
[^28] John A. Hardon, Modern Catholic Dictionary (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1980), p. 29 ("Anthropomorphism").
[^29] Alan Richardson, Dictionary of Christian Theology (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1969), p. 11 ("Anthropomorphism").
[^30] Milton V. Backman, Jr., American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), p. 479.
[^31] Ehat and Cook, p. 60.
[^32] See Richard Lloyd Anderson, "Clement, Ignatius, and Polycarp," Ensign (Aug. 1976), p. 53.
[^33] Several translators have used "elemental spirits" instead of "basic principles" in this passage. In Hebrews 5:12 the latter meaning is clear, and the former meaning is purely speculative in Paul's writing. The Greek term means "elemental spirits" in mystic and astrological writings, which Paul's writings are not.
[^34] "Tender mercies" is literally "inner feelings of mercy." The King James Version's obsolete use of "bowels" is discussed under the background of Philemon.
[^35] Strabo, Geography 12.8.15.
[^36] Pliny the Elder, Natural History 36.95
[^37] Henry Clarence Thiessen, Introduction to the New Testament (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1954), p. 239.
[^38] Frederick G. Kenyon, ed., Chester Beatty Biblical Papyri, Fasciculus III Supplement, Pauline Epistles, Plates (London: Emery Walker, Ltd., 1937), f. 75. r. (Ephesians 1:1-11).
[^39] D. Edmond Hiebert, An Introduction to the New Testament, vol. 2, The Pauline Epistles (Chicago: Moody Press, 1977), p. 267.
[^40] E. K. Simpson in E. K. Simpson and F. F. Bruce, Commentary on the Epistles to the Ephesians and the Colossians (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1965), p. 25.
[^41] Since "predestination" is used heavily as a Calvinistic term, "foreordination" is theologically more neutral. Even though the two terms are similarly constructed and used interchangeably in dictionaries, eternal planning with conditional agency is meant when Latter-day Saints use the term "foreordination."
[^42] Robert Browning, "Cristina," in Bells and Pomegranates, The Complete Poetic and Dramatic Works of Robert Browning (Cambridge, Mass.: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1895), p. 170.
