Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul ( 1983)

TITUS

Profile

Sent from: Paul, possibly in or near Greece.

Sent to: Titus, directing the Church in Crete.

Date: Probably between A.D. 63 and 66.

Purpose: To instruct Titus in appointing bishops and supervising his region of the Church.

Main themes: The premortal promise; qualifications for bishops; ideals for men and women; grace and saving works.

Background

Titus

Titus was an early convert from the Greek world who became a trusted associate in Paul's missionary work and direction of the Church. With slightly less intimacy than to Timothy, Paul calls Titus his "true child in the common faith" (Titus 1:4, literal trans.). Other subtle contrasts establish Titus individuality. "Let no one despise your youth" (1 Tim. 4:12, NKJB) was Timothy's charge, expressed to Titus as, "Let no one despise you" (Titus 2:15, NKJB). This suggests that Titus was older than Timothy, though the common name of "son" would indicate that they were both younger than Paul. Titus was possibly converted earlier than Timothy, for he went to the Jerusalem Council before Timothy was called as a missionary. That council took place right after the first mission, when Paul assigned strong converts to stay with their branches (Acts 14:23). So Titus was probably not a first mission convert, but being "a Greek" (Gal. 2:3) he would likely come from earlier Gentile areas, from Paul's work with Barnabas at Antioch before the first mission, or from Paul's little-known labors at Tarsus just before that.

Out of many inevitable conflicts over the gospel, Titus's trial at the Jerusalem Council stood out. Jewish brethren teaching circumcision insisted that Titus become a full Jewish proselyte in addition to becoming a Christian. But Paul would not even consider such a compromise for a Gentile (Gal. 2:3), and Titus was not "compelled to be circumcised" (Gal. 2:3). Further presiding or missionary assignments surely followed, though there is no record of such service. But Titus emerges as a seasoned assistant in disciplining the Corinthian branch of the Church. The story is found here and there in 2 Corinthians. Paul had expected to meet Titus to hear his report in Asia Minor (2 Cor. 2:12-13) but crossed to Northern Greece, where his fears were replaced with the comforting news that the branch as a whole had repented (2 Cor. 7:7). Titus obviously had done his work with courage and capacity, but Paul goes further to show another critical ingredient in his success—his love for the people that he sought to help. "And his heart goes out all the more to you, as he remembers the obedience of you all, and the fear and trembling with which you received him" (2 Cor. 7:15, RSV). Paul says literally that Titus was not covetous toward the Corinthians—that he sincerely worked for their interests and not his own (2 Cor. 12:18).

How many times did Titus do the same thing in several different branches of the Early Church? After many years of Titus's proving and growing, Paul assigned him to direct the work in the branches on the large island of Crete. His choice obviously rested on Titus's faithful experience but no less on the "earnest care" for the Saints that continued in "the heart of Titus" (2 Cor. 8:16, RSV). The opening chapter of Titus shows that confused conditions in Crete demanded strong leadership and that Paul had complete confidence that Titus would measure up to the task. Some five years earlier, Titus had well earned Paul's solid description of him as "my partner and fellow worker" (2 Cor. 8:23, NKJB).

Reason for Writing

On his Roman voyage Paul inched around the eastern point of Crete and sailed slowly past the high cliffs of the southern side of that long island (Acts 27:7-8). While debating about whether to winter there, he no doubt learned more about Crete and its people. The decision was made to put in to a harbor in Crete protected from winter gales, but sudden winds overruled and forcibly sped the apostle west to shipwreck at Malta (Acts 27:12-15). But after Roman release, he evidently revisited Crete. He "left" Titus in Crete "that you might straighten out what was left unfinished" (Titus 1:5, NIV), which opens a clear possibility that Paul first labored with Titus there and built up Church membership but not the full Church organization. Missionary work there would resemble that in Greece, inasmuch as early migrations to Crete had established cities with the same proud traditions of the mainland. Moreover, there were Jewish groups in the major centers of the island, for Cretans were among the pilgrims at Pentecost (Acts 2:8-11). The first seeds, if not the first conversions, were laid when Peter preached so powerfully by the Holy Ghost on that historic day in Jerusalem.

Crete was a picturesque theater for the drama of the spread of the gospel. Lying like a sleek Greek warship, it stretches 160 miles east to west with a trim average girth of 25 miles. Its size exceeds the combined states of Delaware and Rhode Island. Crete is the largest and nearly the southernmost of the island extensions thrown south and east from the Greek mainland. Divided by rocky ridges and high mountains, the island was described by Strabo as "thickly wooded" but punctuated by "fertile hollows." [^1] Crete nourished its inhabitants with grain and olive and grape, all mentioned in prehistoric sources and no doubt still the backbone of the economy in Paul's time. [^2] Homer spoke of Crete as the island of a hundred cities, and in Paul's day Pliny the Elder listed forty as still vital. [^3] Island society had strong traditions of landed and subordinated classes, with Spartan-like military organization and an accompanying pattern of homosexuality found elsewhere in Greek culture. [^4] Roman occupation had changed much politically, for Crete was organized as a province with the nearby section of Northern Africa. [^5]

When Titus was assigned to "set in order" or "straighten out" Church affairs, a great part of his job was to choose strong bishops or presiding elders: "Appoint elders in every city as I commanded you" (Titus 1:5, NKJB). The Church had been in Crete long enough to have branches in many cities, but it was under attack of the "gainsayers," an archaic King James term meaning literally those "speaking against" or "opposing." They were so combative that Paul said not to continue to debate with them—"after the first and second admonition" they were to be ignored (Titus 3:10). In this verse the opposer is a "heretic," which word ties to the "heresies" Paul opposed in the Corinthian and Galatian branches (1 Cor. 11:19; Gal. 5:20). All these words adapt the Greek for "divisions," and Paul used "heretic" in that exact sense of a believer causing factions within the faith. At the end of Paul's life these reorganized Christians were everywhere. In Crete there were "many unruly" (Titus 1:10) or "many insubordinate" (Titus 1:10, NKJB), the latter translation exactly mirroring the Greek. The apostates would not stay in the ranks or submit to authority. In 1 Timothy such conditions were rampant around Ephesus as Paul directed Timothy to take vigorous measures to defend the faith. An island might be thought to be immune to such trends, but identical conditions in both places show that apostasy was the major problem everywhere at the end of Paul's life. So he wrote Titus not merely to have bishops appointed but to ensure that men would be called who would face the cross fire of the most dangerous enemies of the apostles—the rebels against their teaching and authority.

Priesthood organization is clearly behind the letter to Titus, though not as obviously as in 1 Timothy. Direction by the general authority is evident in Paul's assignment of Titus to Crete, and regional authority is evident in Titus's appointment of the elders to direct congregations as bishops. Paul does not need to explain ordination to the experienced Titus; he mentioned laying on of hands to Timothy in the personal reminders of their close relationship. The letter to Titus adds other intriguing glimpses into Paul's delegation of authority. He perhaps planned to open a new mission field, telling Titus to come immediately to Nicopolis when Paul would send Artemas or Tychicus. The former is unknown, but Tychicus had shown his reliability in accompanying Paul to Jerusalem with the welfare collection, and he had earlier carried the letters to Ephesus and Colossae. Much like Titus in experience, Tychicus was the kind of man whom Paul would consider as the new regional supervisor in Crete. Paul planned to transfer Titus to Nicopolis in view of wintering there (Titus 3:12), which no doubt meant Paul would do missionary work in that city, where Titus's assistance would be invaluable. "Nicopolis" means "city of victory," a name given to several cities in gratitude for winning a battle. But this last known field of Paul would symbolize many victories over error in teaching Christ's gospel.

Since 1 Timothy and Titus pertain to labors around Greece, the proper Nicopolis would be in this region—on the west coast of Greece opposite the boot of Italy. Augustus won sole power there and commemorated this earthly glory by uniting the local populations into a new city, which a generation before Paul was said to be "populous" and growing. With typical showmanship, Augustus set up international games there, and with typical flattery, Herod the Great had "helped construct the greater part of their public buildings." Apparently Paul labored here in his last known winter, probably with Titus at his side. The King James footnote to Titus says that Paul wrote this letter from Nicopolis, but that is a late manuscript addition with no historical value, apparently added because of the mention of Nicopolis in the letter. However, the letter itself mentions the probable messengers carrying it: "Zenas the lawyer," a fascinating reference to one otherwise unknown, and Apollos, the talented and dynamic fellow laborer so prominent at the end of Acts 18 and throughout 1 Corinthians. He was still faithful and working under Paul's direction. The apostle instructs Titus to send them on their way and to supply their needs (Titus 3:13). Were they going to deliver 1 Timothy at Ephesus after seeing Titus? Or were they en route to a regional assignment like that of Timothy and Titus? Either case is a reminder of the constant apostolic supervision over the Early Church found in New Testament letters.

Main Teachings

The Premortal Promise

Paul writes "in hope of eternal life, which God, that cannot lie, promised before the world began" (Titus 1:2). This sentence sums up the first half of Ephesians 1. Thus, careful treatment is demanded of the gospel's central invitation—when it came, and to whom. This doctrine is woven throughout Paul's writings (Rom. 16:25). It is undeveloped except in the first two chapters of Ephesians; yet that book and the early Christian sources in the previous discussion of it show that the premortal existence of mankind was assumed in discussing the premortal promise of salvation. Understanding the importance of the doctrine and its present Christian neglect requires some background on the meaning of "promised before the world began" (Titus 1:2), the equivalent of God having "chosen us in him before the foundation of the world" (Eph. 1:4).

The discussion of Ephesians pointed out that apostles had used such phraseology of Christ, with his premortal glory specifically in mind. And the doctrine of Saints being preknown and prechosen must be judged by the meanings that Paul applied to the Lord. The same words applied to Christ and the Saints indicate that they both experienced the same type of premortal life. The Lord proved his physical parallel with mankind by totally sharing physical and emotional mortality before returning to God. Will not men and women share his kingdom and resurrection in the future? Then what revelation ever denied that they shared Christ's premortal existence of the past? When the consistent and spiritually sensitive Gandhi tried to understand Christianity, he was puzzled by this divided thinking. Why should he believe that "Jesus was the only incarnate son of God"? He explained a logic that is near blasphemy to all but Latter-day Saints: "If God could have sons, all of us were his sons. If Jesus was like God, or God himself, then all men were like God and could be God himself." [^6] The issue here is what Paul meant by God's pre-earthly promise, but that question cannot be divorced from the biblical and logical association of mankind with Christ in the premortal existence.

Paul's "promise" is a bold word in describing the premortal plan of salvation. He might have said that God made an "inner resolution," but he did not. Whether in English or Greek, a promise is normally made to someone; unless the self is specifically mentioned, promising is a social act. Paul's word (epaggello) is related to the English "angel"—both come from the root for giving news to another. Earlier Paul's term meant to announce, with the idea of promise coming from proclaiming an intention. Such acts require a receiver or an audience, just as discussed in latter-day revelations about the great council in heaven, where the plan of salvation was decided and announced to the spirits coming to earth (Abr. 3:22-28). Christian theology has difficulty with the idea of souls living before the creation of earth and of their bodies. Yet many scholars agree that God's "promise" of salvation suggests a hearer, so they alter the time when it was made: "Since there is reference to a promise, the phrase refers not to God's eternal design . . . but to the promise of salvation made at the beginning of human history and frequently repeated." [^7]

But that is a most inconsistent position. In the words of the King James Version, God's promise of salvation was made "before the world began" (Titus 1:2). The Greek phrase is pro chronon aionion, literally "before the eternal times." The adjective appears seventy-one times in the King James New Testament and is always translated as "eternal," "everlasting," or the equivalent. And "before" indicates that God's promise was made prior to measuring ages and times. This is not God's revelation of salvation to Noah or Abraham, as some commentaries weakly contend, but God's announcement prior to all earthly eras. Most translations give that idea: "Before the beginning of time" (NIV) or "Before time began" (NKJB). Their accuracy is proved by Paul's identical words concerning Christ's appointment "before the world began" (2 Tim. 1:9). Here the phrase must refer to God's precreation plan, as commentators agree. But what is clear about Christ's premortal appointment should also be clear of the premortal assurance to mankind. Some translations contradict themselves here, for they have Christ chosen "from all eternity" (2 Tim. 1:9, NEB) or "before the beginning of time" (2 Tim. 1:9, JB). But with the same Greek phrase the same translations make God's promise of salvation "long ages ago" (Titus 1:2, NEB) or "so long ago" (Titus 1:2, JB). Yet Paul gave the same eternal perspective to Timothy and to Titus. God could promise salvation to mankind only by selecting a Savior for them—both of these events took place at the same time before the Creation.

Such confusion comes from modern Christian assumptions that differ from Paul's. Jewish commentators look at these scriptures with far more empathy for the idea of mankind sharing a pre-earth life with Jesus because rabbinical and Jewish apocryphal writings contain many references to premortality. [^8] The prevalence of this idea in Paul's culture demands a more open-minded look at Paul's allusions to it. An idea never mentioned is an idea probably not believed, but an idea incidentally mentioned is often an idea so well accepted that an author had no reason to explain it. This is the case with Paul's indications of a human pre-earth life. Paul disagreed with some Jewish concepts and refuted them, but others he accepted. His mention of the premortal life puts it in the latter category. Josephus says that the most devout Jewish sect, the Essenes, believed that souls were immortal before birth, were placed "in the prison-house of the body," and finally left "as though liberated from a long servitude." [^9] And their writings in the Dead Sea Scrolls are greatly illuminated by this understanding, as Hugh Nibley has explained at length. [^10] Other references to the earlier life of souls are in pre-Christian writings well accepted by first-century Pharisees. A little before Paul's birth, the writer of the Wisdom of Solomon reflected, "As a child I was by nature well-endowed, and a good soul fell to my lot; or rather, being good, I entered an undefiled body." [^11] And from the century before, there is the profound writing of Jesus Ben Sirach, a Jewish scribe who represented the intelligent pre-Phariseeism of his day. He wrote of the Creation in terms of God choosing Israel and mankind's testing period. And he spoke of a Creation covenant, which is different from that later given to Moses, for then Israel saw the cloud but not God, and heard Moses' voice but not God's: "He established with them an eternal covenant and showed them his judgments. Their eyes saw his glorious majesty, and their ears heard the glory of his voice. And he said to them, 'beware of all unrighteousness.' And he gave commandment to each of them concerning his neighbor." [^12]

These glimpses before the Gospels explain a Jewish view shown when Jesus' "disciples" asked whether a disadvantaged man had sinned, or his parents, since "he was born blind" (John 9:2). Scholars too quickly explain the question by legalistic discussions of the rabbis. But the highly educated did not ask it, only ordinary Israelites. The question assumes a premortal life because it raises the issue of premortal sin. And Jesus negated the latter without criticizing the former. Representative writings are the sampling techniques available to understand ancient history, and they show a widespread Jewish belief in intelligent life for each soul before birth. Paul agreed, as shown in his opening remarks to Titus about the premortal promise. Indeed, such language refers to God's precreation covenant, which is found in the traditional Jewish materials of Jesus Ben Sirach and in the early Christian traditions of the Shepherd of Hermas, discussed in connection with Ephesians 2. And Titus 1:2 is the key that unlocks Romans 8 and Ephesians 1, for God's earthly callings of Israel and of the Gentiles played out the script prefashioned in the heavenly council. The full gospel teaches that before birth God's children were present to see God's covenant made and that here they carry that knowledge in their inner souls as well as learn of it through the prophets. This is why poetic inspiration reaches for the same truth, no thanks to self-centered earth:

The homely nurse doth all she can

To make her foster-child, her inmate Man,

Forget the glories he hath known,

And that imperial palace whence he came. [^13]

Qualifications for Bishops

See the earlier section on "Priesthood Offices" under 1 Timothy.

Ideals for Men and Women

Few subjects in world literature have attracted such outdated comments as the subject of the feminine role. Yet woman's image in the Early Church has vital meaning because her dignity in the family was recognized and because her personal potential was made equal to man's. Paul has the reputation of not agreeing with this picture, but his negative comments have a Corinthian context, as has been seen, and in the Pastoral Letters seem to be defensive because of false teachings. On the other hand, there is the inspiring harmony of the marriage roles discussed in Ephesians. And taken as a whole, the women's teachings in 1 Timothy and Titus equate the personal qualities of men and women, which has important implications for the challenges faced by married and single females in modern society. This subject is not a dry historical topic, but a dynamic set of issues demanding relevant application. In suggesting some interpretations, it is critical to see that the Early Church worked with certain revealed principles; for the same reason that they must not be compromised, neither must they be exaggerated and overdone.

The Pastoral Letters' main contribution here is their vision of how many moral qualities Saints of both sexes ought to share. The sexual double standard is unfortunately alive and well in many religious countries, but men and women are equally responsible before the Lord for avoiding intimate relations outside of marriage. As has been seen, the Early Church met this problem with excommunication, not with tactful sermons. Both sexes must also be judged by the same rule for honesty and by all other commands of righteousness. As Paul said in Romans 1, moral laws are written in the hearts of both men and women (Rom. 1:26-27). That is why there is a great deal of overlap in Greek and Roman ideals and the apostles' standards for Christian living. For instance, Aristotle divides sex roles into male courage for the defense of the state and female homemaking for the life of the state. Yet in his view both sexes should strive for the same personal quality, sophrosune, the control of one's life by intelligent wisdom. [^14] The adjective for this same quality is sophron, translated in the King James Version as "sober" and already discussed as one of Paul's prerequisites for a good bishop (1 Tim. 3:2; Titus 1:8). And this adjective of self-discipline leads off Paul's list of character achievements for mature men (Titus 2:2) and young women (Titus 2:4), reinforced by the same quality required in young men (Titus 2:6). If assignments of the sexes diverge, the gospel still expects them to face the same process of developing moral skills.

Paul lists women's personal standards in outlining the female ideal (1 Tim. 2:9-15), requirements for deacons' wives (1 Tim. 3:11), values for elder women (Titus 2:3), and values for young women (Titus 2:4-5). A dozen qualities on these lists equal or are similar to men's standards. The few unique feminine qualities pertain to dress, homemaking, and mothering. Thus, the gospel establishes an area of special female competence but defines the majority of personal values as shared by both genders. Scripture knows no artificial stereotypes like the helpless female or the combative male. One would expect the apostles' letters to be true to Jesus, whose courage no one doubts, but who blended assertiveness with tenderness and sensitivity. And did Paul deny this range of qualities to women? As discussed in connection with 1 Corinthians 14, Paul's docile woman is a wrong impression based on his criticism of some women interrupting public worship. And the Pastoral rule must be read in a similar context: "And I do not permit a woman to teach or to have authority over a man, but to be in silence" (1 Tim. 2:12, NKJB). But the background is the severe apostasy that hangs like a cloud over the Pastoral Letters.

Timothy and Titus are both told not to allow their authority to be challenged (1 Tim. 4:12; Titus 2:15). And the woman "in silence" follows Paul's command that leaders pray "without anger or quarreling" (1 Tim. 2:8, RSV). The King James "doubting" for this last word (dialogismos) makes no sense with "anger," an act of social aggression, so committee translations favor the view that here "the thought of outward disputing and discussion is upper-most." [^15] Thus, Paul asks priesthood officers to seek harmony in worship just before asking women to respect authority, two sides of the same coin. The woman's "silence" is respect for those presiding as the Church gathered, the exact situation of Corinthian women told not to take over the meetings, though they participated in them (1 Cor. 11:5). It is even doubtful whether "silence" is the right translation for the Pastoral caution, for there is another obvious alternative. Paul uses hesuchia, which in classical Greek meant a state of rest and contentment. [^16] Paul clearly uses that sense in asking Thessalonian men to avoid idleness, to work "with quietness . . . and eat their own bread" (2 Thes. 3:12). "Silence" is not what Paul had in mind there; he was referring to being at peace with one's work, a message extended to all the Thessalonian converts (1 Thes. 4:11). On this evidence Paul was not stressing "silence" to women as much as he was peaceful support of their leaders.

The same basic issue is behind the other apparent limitations for women: they are to learn "with all subjection" (1 Tim. 2:11); to be "obedient to their own husbands" (Titus 2:5); in earlier letters, to "submit" to their husbands (Eph. 5:22; Col. 3:18). There are some important steps in understanding Paul here. First, the above terms translate forms of hupotasso, which means to put under the organizational leadership of another. Second, every person in the Early Church, including Christ himself, was placed in such a relationship, as discussed in connection with Ephesians 5. An example is the duty of all men and women "to be subject to" civil authorities (Titus 3:1). This suggests what such terms meant in practice. No wife is commanded to be blindly "obedient" (Titus 2:5), a most unfortunate translation if it suggests to some husbands that they are in charge of their wives' personal decisions. But since all are commanded to be subject to Church and governmental leaders, "submit" means to support the one assigned to plan for the group. Civil leaders seek the security and welfare of the state and have authority to request resources or personal help for those purposes. Family members are likewise "subject" to the family leader in the sense of accepting assignments for the common good of the family.

"Submit" is probably offensive today but remains significant in stating leadership relationships. Instead of being emotionally unnerved by a word, thinking people will ask what concept is being taught. "Cooperate" is a loose translation, but that is the working concept that Paul asks of all Saints—cooperation with Church and civil leaders, and cooperation of wives with the family leadership of their husbands. The Early Church and the restored Church also make the husband responsible for cooperation with his wife—supporting her financially, responding to her emotionally, and helping with their common tasks. Since Eve is an essential role model, Paul's comment on her should be seen as incidental reasoning, not revelation, for Paul's subject was not Eve but the importance of following priesthood leadership (1 Tim. 2:12-14). Modern revelation teaches that the Fall was as much preplanned as was the Atonement. And just as Christ used his agency to carry out his part of that plan, so did the original parents of mankind, who were given the consequences of their actions and the right of choice. (Moses 4:8-9; also 4:17). So Latter-day Saints have viewed the fall in eternal perspective: "This was a transgression of the law, but not a sin in the strict sense, for it was something that Adam and Eve had to do." These words of Joseph Fielding Smith rephrase what was said many times by Brigham Young: "We should never blame Mother Eve, not the least." Rather than downgrading Eve for her initiative, Latter-day Saint doctrine opens the opposite possibility of her superior insight in taking the first step to create the mortal condition for our testing.

Husbands well know areas where wives' skills and awareness exceed their own. This is not so much a matter of sexuality as it is a matter of individuality, for business, government, and Church councils exist because decisions are usually better made by a group than by an individual. Married couples need the best thinking of each partner to reach their maximum potential. The husband's assignment as provider drains much of his time and thought away from the home, while the wife probably uses a greater range of skills in the home. This is illustrated by the timeless pattern written as a Roman epitaph just before Paul: "She loved her husband in her heart; she bore two sons, one of whom she left on earth, the other beneath it; she was pleasant to talk with, and she walked with grace; she kept the house and worked in wool." [^17] A successful wife is companion, psychologist, teacher, nurse, nutritionist, economist, interior decorator, custodian, craftsman, and seamstress. Those handling that many areas in the business world are on the executive level. Paul gives moral goals rather than exact roles, but his picture of the woman's world includes critical teaching and managing. But today's woman manages and teaches in a world shaken by technological explosions and in societies weakened by loss of values.

Today's greatest problems and their solutions are in the home. Paul's values for men and women stress example, teaching, and discipline in the home. This is the business of the parental partnership. The greatest problem in our society is the abandonment of children through the abandonment of parental leadership. Mass media and profit-motivated entertainment are falsely educating young people everywhere. For over a century Latter-day Saint leaders have stressed the home as the leading unit to counterattack the forces threatening the young. In recent decades, they have seen the home as the main teaching arm of the Church. "Every member a missionary" is now supplemented by "Every parent a teacher." The gospel must be taught in discussions at the dinner table, in private conversations, in scheduled scripture reading, in the sincerest pleadings of family prayer, in family home evening lessons, and in family church attendance. The greatest success will come to parents who know the gospel, who know their children, and who know the world that they all live in. In short, gospel education and broad education for life are critical skills for parenting.

Women have historically suffered from double standards of morality and economics. And from Paul's day to the nineteenth century, discrimination and economic necessity emphasized schooling for men far more than for women, as men were trained to make a living. Now women face the same economic reality prior to marriage, sometimes during marriage, and again during widowhood. But a nonworking mother certainly needs knowledge for effective homemaking and the training of her children, and any woman should seek knowledge for its own sake. President Spencer W. Kimball's profile of women has been inspiring. The Latter-day Saint woman may be single or married, a mother or childless; she is service oriented and measures priorities by the values of the restored gospel. She is not at the mercy of others' opinions, for she studies scripture herself; [^18] her mind is developed: "Good women are articulate as well as affectionate." [^19] Her goals may be personal improvement or service to family, Church, or community, but in her own way and without compulsion she seeks to meet President Kimball's challenge: "Sharpen the skills you have been given." [^20] President Kimball has emphasized, "We do not desire the women of the Church to be uninformed or ineffective." [^21]

Grace and Saving Works

Hundreds of tracts and sermons on being saved reiterate a few basic propositions: the sinfulness of mankind, the threat of punishment, and the acceptance of God's grace through Christ to prevent the punishment. Good works have no significant place in such a scheme because of the fallen nature of human beings and because of God's total power of initiative. As one Protestant writer puts it, "Faith wrought by the grace of the spirit lays aside trust in self, denies all self-confidence, renounces any thought of merit even in our faith; and entrusts the believer as a helpless, undeserving, ill-deserving, hell-deserving sinner wholly to the goodness, mercy, love, kindness, and grace of God revealed in Jesus Christ." [^22] There are more subtle presentations of basic Protestantism, but none more forthright. Popular presentations stress the total guilt and spiritual incompetence of men and women.

The young Gandhi was exposed to such Christianity after deeply feeling that "morality is the basis of things, and that truth is the substance of all morality." [^23] Therefore he recoiled from this religion that altered the punishment without changing the person. When he was taught that the Atonement was superimposed on the sinner and that "all good works were useless," he replied, "If this be the Christianity acknowledged by all Christians, I cannot accept it. I do not seek redemption from the consequences of my sin. I seek to be redeemed from sin itself, or rather from the very thought of sin." [^24] In other words, he judged the Protestant premise to be morally shallow, feeling in his heart that true religion would result in gradually ridding one's life of the sins that caused alienation from God. But a religion rewarding works contradicts the traditional Christian principle that men and women are created to be noncontributing beings. Calvin emphasized their degradation before God:

Observe that the righteousness of God is not sufficiently displayed, unless he alone is held to be righteous, and freely communicates righteousness to the undeserving. . . . For so long as man has anything, however small, to say in his own defense, so long he deducts something from the glory of God. To this purpose, indeed, Paul . . . says, that all the parts of our salvation are treasured up with Christ, that we may glory only in the Lord (1 Cor. 1:29). For he intimates that whosoever imagines he has anything of his own, rebels against God, and obscures his glory. Thus . . . we never truly glory in him until we have utterly discarded our own glory. [^25]

Here, works ride on a religious teeter-totter. Only by abasing mankind and their righteous acts can God's majesty rise. But such traditional views developed because medieval Christianity lost its knowledge of man's eternal heritage. Modern revelation does not picture man as a groveling creature: "Man was also in the beginning with God" (D&C 93:29). God's basic relationship with men and women did not arise after Adam sinned, but when Christ stood before Adam and all his future descendants prior to creation. Critics have barked at the heels of the most spectacular source for our knowledge of the premortal council, the Book of Abraham, revealed to Joseph Smith as an inspired translation or reconstruction. Hugh Nibley recently published the striking parallels of the Apocalypse of Abraham, a book dated at about Paul's time, in which God speaks of those who first existed "in the light . . . and then afterwards I gave commandment to them through my word." [^26] Commentators are puzzled by Paul's reference to God as the "Father of spirits" (Heb. 12:9). But Joseph Smith bluntly taught that mankind is of the race of the Gods: "Spirits are eternal. At the first organization in heaven we were all present and saw the Savior chosen and appointed, and the plan of salvation made, and we sanctioned it." [^27] Titus, the book stressing the importance of people's works for salvation, starts with the importance of people—God's promise of eternal life to them "before the world began" (Titus 1:2).

Far from being Calvin's low objects of grace, men and women are the literal children of God, and the world was framed for their advancement. God's children have come knowing the risk of venturing to earth, trusting in the premortal promise that the Savior would come to atone for their sins, but with their responsibility for discerning the light and for walking in it. They are independent agents in God's universe; under him they are creators within their own spheres of assignment. This is the earthly completion of salvation that began as a divine assurance prior to mortality: "God . . . saved us and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began" (2 Tim. 1:9). Full salvation was then a promise before any opportunity to do works, so it did not originate by works. Yet the Pastoral Letters contain a dozen forthright commands to good works. So mortal works fulfill the plan of the premortal promise. If grace is stressed and works also are stressed, the simple answer is that both are important to salvation.

Sensitive men and women are grateful for the Atonement. But God's unlimited mercy should elevate their self-confidence, not erase it. God's power and man's significance blend, just as the related issues of his grace and man's works blend. Paul plainly teaches that Christ's goal was not merely to cancel past sins but to lead mankind to a life above sin. Greek has a very specific purpose clause, introduced by the preposition hina, translated literally "in order that." And Paul strikingly expresses the purpose of the Atonement by using this construction twice to reinforce his point. "The grace of God" is manifest "in order that" we may avoid "worldly lusts" and "live with righteousness and godliness in this world" (Titus 2:12, literal trans.). And the point is driven home as he restates the doctrine: "Jesus Christ . . . gave himself for us in order that he might redeem us from all iniquity and purify a people special to himself, zealous of good works" (Titus 2:13-14, literal trans.). Paul clearly considers the Atonement incomplete without individual actions. The main point of Titus is to stress the good works necessary to retain Christ's grace.

Yet some give the proof-text "Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us" (Titus 3:5). But quoting that alone perverts Paul's message, for here Paul refers to salvation from the evil works mentioned just before (Titus 3:3)—and salvation comes not through mercy alone but "by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost" (Titus 3:5). In English or Greek, "regeneration" is literally rebirth, the same act of baptism that Jesus challenged Nicodemus to accept (John 3:5). So saving grace came to the early Saints through their agency in accepting the ordinances. Paul's point is not to subtract righteous works from salvation, but to show that the Lord mercifully offered salvation when only wicked works were in view. "Not by works of righteousness" really indicates the need of such works in the future, as God had to send his Son to compensate for their lack in the past. The apostle's message here is that in spite of unrighteous works, God allowed forgiveness through Christ and its acceptance through baptism. After that ordinance, the momentum of a continuing righteous life is required for exaltation.

That is also the thought of the grace-works message of Ephesians 2, for Paul there teaches salvation "when we were dead in sins" (Eph. 2:5)—grace came by repentance to people formerly undeserving of grace. And Titus emphasizes that the purpose of the forgiveness is to reach a higher life; in Ephesians grace is also followed by the command that one reborn in Christ must be "created . . . unto good works" (Eph. 2:10). Paul concluded the grace passage of Titus 3:5 with the doctrine that baptized members have the duty "to maintain good works" (Titus 3:8). Those who think that Paul downgraded works are in for a shock if they will open a complete Bible concordance. Paul used ergon eighty-two times; it is translated as "work" and sometimes "deed," mostly in the positive sense of asking the Saints to produce good works. Those books confronting the Judaizers are the exception and use "works" negatively in a limited context. Hebrews is an example, contrasting the "dead works" of the superseded temple (Heb. 9:14; also 6:1) with the "good works" expected of every true Saint (Heb. 10:24; also 13:21). Excluding the nondoctrinal note to Philemon, every other letter of Paul expects the performance of "good works" from the baptized members. Paul's letters were generally written to reinforce faith in God's grace and to command the actions consistent with it. And his last letters state vividly this double formula for salvation.

These Pastoral Letters stress good works for salvation because they oppose false Christians teaching the irrelevance of works. Simon the Samaritan, whom Peter rebuked, was discussed in connection with the false teachers of 1 Timothy. Early Christian sources make Simon Magus the pioneer of Gnostic systems that grew more elaborate in the second century. He had already taught a central heresy imitated by later Gnostics—the scheme of imagined "angels and powers, by whom also he declared this world was formed." [^28] As noted, these false generations of gods correlate with Paul's condemnation of "genealogies," which are false and debatable deviations (Titus 3:9). And Simon's strange "theology" was matched by a new morality, for he taught that standards of virtue came from inferior gods "to bring men into bondage . . . and that those who are his should be freed from the rule of them who made the world." The result is the striking opposition of apostolic truth by a justification through faith: "Those who place their trust in him . . . are saved through his grace, and not on account of their own righteous actions." [^29] Irenaeus, the second-century bishop reporting these views, knew in his day that Simon's successors "lead profligate lives," and earlier information showed that Simon's first followers were "free" and could "live as they please." [^30]

Peter's last known letter confirms that teachings like Simon's permeated the Church: "While they promise them liberty, they themselves are slaves of corruption" (2 Pet. 2:19, NKJB). In the immediate decades afterward, Jude and John wrote letters revealing the same lawless piety. All of this greatly illuminates the false teachers opposed by Paul in writing to Titus and Timothy. The struggle was critical, "for there are many rebellious people" (Titus 1:10, NIV). They were literally "insubordinate" (Titus 1:10, RSV) in the sense of not following their appointed leaders. One causing division was to be warned only a few times, for he had "turned away" from the faith (Titus 3:11, literal trans.). Paul wrote again that apostates "turn away from the truth" (Titus 1:14, literal trans.); this striking phraseology appears also in Paul's last letter of 2 Timothy. Thus, Paul wrote, "It is necessary to silence those who are overturning whole households, for shameful gain teaching things they ought not to teach" (Titus 1:11, literal trans.). Their "Jewish myths" (Titus 1:14, RSV) must not be taken merely as Judaism, for Paul accepted the Old Testament. These were perversions of Judaism itself—a reinterpretation of the Old Testament that Simon and later Gnostics were guilty of. "Unto the pure all things are pure" (Titus 1:15). This applies to overdone dietary restrictions of religious or health faddists. Paul may well have had in mind early Gnostic prohibitions of eating flesh, as discussed in connection with 1 Timothy. Since he spoke against intoxicating drink, his principle does not apply to harmful substances opposed by the prophets.

In a striking parallel to the close of 1 Timothy, Paul ridiculed the special knowledge claimed by these counter-Christians. The Lord himself had given the test of action to his apostles: "If ye love me, keep my commandments" (John 14:15). And for Paul, belief in Christ without doing Christ's works is false teaching: "They confess that they know God, but in works they deny him" (Titus 1:16, literal trans.). Thus, a religion failing to make disciples' deeds a condition of full salvation is just as wrong as is a religion failing to teach forgiveness through Christ. Grace and works both save because both contribute to salvation in the celestial kingdom, as modern revelation makes clear (D&C 76:50-53, 69). Faithful Protestants are moral people, displaying more profound religion than the Reformation slogans—faith alone and grace alone. That reduced formula is presumptuous, for no one can go to Paul's letters and weight the exact proportions of grace, faith, and faithful works required for exaltation. Wisdom is found in the common saying "Pray as though everything depends on the Lord, and work as though everything depends on you."

Just as in modern revelation (D&C 130:20-21), Paul teaches that blessings come by obedience to God's laws, including the ultimate blessing of being with God in eternity. The Greek word for law is nomos, and theologians use "antinomian" to describe Simon-like people who consider moral rule irrelevant to salvation. Protestantism is admittedly close to the drink here: "Yet the antinomians have a point. The gospel itself, as Wesley saw, is 'within an hair's breadth' of antinomianism." [^31] But Paul's last word should settle this subject: "The law is good if one uses it lawfully" (1 Tim. 1:8, NKJB)—that is, the law is good if one uses Paul's blending of grace and obedience, faith followed by works. Protestant theory permanently shatters man's ability to perform: "The best the law can do for us is to bring home to us our sinfulness . . . and so prepare us for the remedy offered in the gospel. . . . Hence the gospel calls us, not to do, but to believe." [^32] On the contrary, Paul taught that the new person in Christ would put sinfulness behind and learn to live a higher life. This progress is the eternal purpose of Christ's restored gospel.

---
Notas:
[^1] What times are Jesus and Paul speaking about? Jesus was asked about Jerusalem's destruction and the end of the world (Matt. 24:1-3). His answer was long and involved, showing that many events would intervene between the Crucifixion and the Second Coming. Like Christ and like other apostles, Paul knew of "the times and the seasons" (1 Thes. 5:1), showing his understanding of the complexities of future religious history. Occasionally Paul mentioned that Christ had come in the latter days of the world, meaning the later dispensations. As discussed in 2 Thessalonians 2, Paul expected the reign of Satan on earth before the reign of Christ could come. Some conditions of apostasy were in the near future, as when Paul's Greek reads "following times" (1 Tim. 4:1, literal trans.), suggesting immediate later days instead of latter days. So like Jesus, Paul wrote of events from his time up to the extreme wickedness of "the last days" (2 Tim. 3:1). A convenient list of the Greek terms appears in Joseph Henry Thayer, A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament (New York: American Book Co., 1889), pp. 706-7. Thayer's count was 168 unique words. Note his following list (pp. 707-8) of 53 words found only in the Pastorals and other letters of Paul, excluding Hebrews.
[^2] Can latter-day events be separated from those of the immediate future? Jesus mentioned two points of departure, the persecution and deaths of the apostles and the destruction of Jerusalem. After each of these events Jesus outlined the era of false teachers and wickedness, giving an overview first (Matt. 24:9-12) and then reviewing the same period after describing Jerusalem's fall (Matt. 24:23-26). He twice refers to this trying period as the time of "false prophets" (Matt. 24:11, 24), and it clearly takes place right after the above events of the first century. Paul is also preoccupied with the coming era of false teachers. Writing almost forty years after Jesus' prophecy, Paul is in the midst of transition from true to false teachers. They surround him. That is why his latter-day prophecy (2 Tim. 3:1-5) abruptly stops on a present note—"from such turn away" (2 Tim. 3:5). A later dating of Polycarp is sometimes assumed on the basis of his Philippians 7:1Philippians 7:1, which quotes John 4:1-3 on not confessing that Christ has come in the flesh; Polycarp then adds, "This man is the firstborn of Satan." Irenaeus later reports an anecdote of Polycarp applying this phrase to Marcion about A.D. 140 (Against Heresies 3.3.4). But like John, Polycarp apparently had favorite phrases, which could be used generally in the epistle and applied specifically later, the explanation that Kirsopp Lake gives in footnoting this passage in the Loeb Classical Library edition. The close of Polycarp's epistle mentions collecting the letters of Ignatius shortly after he had left, so about A.D. 110 is a necessary date if one assumes the unity of the letter, and there is no objective basis on which to question that.
[^3] What conditions are in the latter-day world? There is a verbal correlation between Paul and Christ here. Paul says, "In the last days perilous times shall come" (2 Tim. 3:1). But the Greek reads literally "harsh times," rendered as "difficult times" (JB) or "times of stress" (RSV). Thus, Paul's basic idea is exactly that of Jesus, who speaks of Jerusalem's fall and the following "great tribulation" (Matt. 24:21). This is often translated "affliction" in the King James Version and "distress" in modern translations. Thus, Paul and Christ speak of an age of great difficulty when the world is to be dominated by Satan. Paul gives more details about human degradation and pictures mankind as turning from the love of God to the love of self, money, and pleasure (2 Tim. 3:2, 4). Jesus is less specific but makes the same observation: "Because iniquity will increase, the love of many will grow cool" (Matt. 24:12, literal trans.). Polycarp to the Philippians 3:2 (Apostolic Fathers, Loeb Classical Library). In his marginal notes translator Kirsopp Lake finds phrases from eleven of Paul's fourteen letters. Ones with no traces are 1 Thessalonians, Philemon, and Titus.
[^4] Where is the Church in the age of wickedness? Christ's prophecy gives a long period of tribulation before the faithful are gathered out from the world to prepare for his Second Coming. As discussed in connection with Ephesians 1:9-10, Paul also looked forward to a restoration era, but that is not his subject in 2 Timothy. Yet clear parallels with Jesus in his treatment of apostasy show that Paul also expected the latter-day gathering referred to in Matthew 24. Neither Jesus nor Paul give any hint that the true Church will exist in the age of wickedness. As stated, the Savior's formula is clear because he repeated it twice: after Jerusalem's fall come "false Christs and false prophets" to "deceive the very elect" (Matt. 24:24); this restates what he said would occur right after the apostles' martyrdoms: "Many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many" (Matt. 24:11). As Paul wrote, many had indeed been deceived; he mourned with Timothy that "all Asia" had deserted Paul and the truth he taught. And with those severe conditions present, Paul added, "Evil men and impostors will grow worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived" (2 Tim. 3:13, NKJB). "Impostors" here is the unanimous choice of current committee translations instead of the King James "seducers." Since Greek-speaking Jews used that term in the sense of false prophets, Paul matched Jesus' "false prophets" with a synonym. [^19] Paul also used Jesus' exact word for "deceiving and being deceived." One province was then spoiled—"worse and worse" must mean the loss of others and finally all. Paul's total pessimism can be explained only by his conviction of total apostasy, which he earlier had expressed in 2 Thessalonians 2 in saying that the temple of God, meaning the Church of God, would be possessed by Satan. Daniel J. Theron, Evidence of Tradition (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book House, 1958), p. 111. The fragment is named for the discoverer, L. A. Muratori, and comes from an eighth-century copy, dated by reference to the recent times of Pius, Roman bishop in the mid-second century. For background see Johannes Quasten, Patrology (Westminster, Md.: Newman Press, 1964) 2:207-9.
[^5] Some argue against authenticity from the absence of the Pastorals in the Chester Beatty Papyri, of the same date as the Muratorian Fragment and discussed under the authorship evaluation at the beginning of Hebrews. But the end of the Chester Beatty manuscript is destroyed; the scribe could have included the Pastoral Letters by writing smaller or adding supplementary pages. There is another valid possibility: since the Muratorian Fragment lists Paul's Church letters separately from Paul's personal letters, that arrangement might also have been followed by the Chester Beatty Papyri scribes.
[^6] 1 Clement 5:7 (Apostolic Fathers, Loeb Classical Library).
[^7] Theron, p. 109: "Paul's departure from the city as he was proceeding to Spain."
[^8] Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History 2.22.2, trans. Hugh Jackson Lawlor and John Ernest Leonard Oulton, Eusebius (London: S.P.C.K., 1954), p. 55.
[^9] As mentioned earlier, the annotations at the end of Paul's letters have no value as evidence because they are later scribal entries.
[^10] Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History 3.32.7.
[^11] Ibid. 4.22.4-7. This quotation from Hegessipus indicates the infiltration of Gnostic teachings in the Church at Judea after A.D. 62.
[^12] Lawlor and Oulton 2:143.
[^13] Justin Martyr, First Apology 26 (Ante-Nicene Fathers). This translation is changed by substituting "thought" for "idea," translating the Greek ennoia.
[^14] Gnostic systems taught "endless genealogies" of beings springing from other beings, "endless" in the sense that such speculations seemed never to cease, and also "endless" in the quantitative sense. Before the middle of the second century Basilides had complex groups springing from the ultimate God, arranged in a subordinated system of 365 heavens, obviously taken from the number of days in the year. Irenaeus, Against Heresies 1.24.3-4.
[^15] See Justin Martyr, First Apology 26: "But I have a treatise against all the heresies that have existed already composed, which, if you wish to read it, I will give you." Justin's conversion was in the early second century. As just discussed in the text, he had special access to Samaritan sources on Simon.
[^16] Irenaeus, Against Heresies 1.23.2-3 (Ante-Nicene Fathers). Scholarly skepticism against Irenaeus's details on Simon is not justified. Second-century Gnosticism is far more elaborate, and there is no reason to doubt that Simon taught the basic ideas in the first century, as Justin outlines and Irenaeus details. Indeed, Peter's harsh condemnation of Simon in Acts 8 is hardly justified without knowing his fraudulent career before and after his conversion. Even before his conversion he was saluted as "the great power of God" (Acts 8:10). Competent historians have trusted the informational link from Irenaeus to Justin Martyr. Compare Louis Duchesne, Early History of the Christian Church, 4th ed. trans. (London: John Murray, 1947) 1:114-16.
[^17] Justin Martyr, First Apology 26.
[^18] Irenaeus, Against Heresies 1.24.2. Saturninus is early second century.
[^19] A. T. Hanson, The Pastoral Letters (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1982), p. 39. In this and following quotations, it is evident that Hanson, like many scholars, does not accept Paul as the Pastoral author.
[^20] Ibid., p. 40. Hanson is forthright enough to note that 1 Timothy diverges from Christian orthodoxy here, though he backs away from his conclusion by a strange faith that the author must not have intended to say what he did: "We may be quite sure that any such doctrine was far from his conscious mind."
[^21] Ibid., p. 69.
[^22] Ibid., p. 62.
[^23] Ignatius, To Polycarp 3.2 (Apostolic Fathers, Loeb Classical Library). Compare 2:2: "But pray that the invisible things may be revealed to you."
[^24] Milton V. Backman, Jr., American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979), p. 481.
[^25] Ibid.
[^26] 1 Clement 44. "Other eminent men" no doubt refers to the appointment of bishops by apostolic assistants such as Timothy and Titus after the first missionary work.
[^27] Ibid. 42. Compare the quotation and comment at note 26 above.
[^28] Standards for the "bishop" (Titus 1:7) are preceded by Paul's instructions to "ordain elders in every city" (Titus 1:5). While scholars see the two titles as synonymous, it is certainly possible that Titus ordained elders in each city and appointed one bishop also. The same possibility exists for other early sources mentioning elders and bishops.
[^29] Ignatius, Smyrnaeans 8.
[^30] Ignatius, To Polycarp 2:1.
[^31] Ignatius, Trallians 3:1 and elsewhere.
[^32] 1 Clement 44, 57.
