Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul ( 1983)

2 TIMOTHY

Profile

Sent from: Paul, in prison at Rome.

Sent to: Timothy, supervising the Church in the Ephesian region.

Date: About A.D. 66.

Purpose: To request Timothy's coming before Paul's execution and to share Paul's final testimony and prophecies about the Church.

Main themes: Apostasy of the Church; enduring to the end.

Background

Paul's Martyrdom

"At Rome Nero was the first who stained with blood the rising faith," Tertullian wrote around A.D. 200, naming Peter and Paul as Nero's victims there. [^1] Tertullian was a converted lawyer, expert in Roman affairs and Roman history; he was also passionate about truth and information from the Early Church. Thus, his details about Paul's death must be respected, even though their origins are not clear. Tertullian had no doubt that Paul was "beheaded," a death "suited to Roman citizenship," since it spared him the agony of suffering. [^2] Elsewhere Tertullian lists the cities where the apostles founded churches, including Rome, "where Paul wins his crown in a death like John's," a reference to the similar beheading of John the Baptist. [^3] The later historian Eusebius accepted this story, writing of Nero, "It is related that in his time Paul was beheaded in Rome itself." [^4] The source of this information was apparently Origen, a careful scholar of the early third century, who also wrote that Paul "was martyred in Rome under Nero." [^5] Much earlier, there is unmistakable reference to this death of Paul from Clement, bishop at Rome before the end of the first century. But to understand it, one must first understand Paul's involvement with Nero's persecution of the Christians.

In July, A.D. 64, summer heat lay upon the center of the empire, where news of Nero's scandals would periodically infect the city. Fire broke out in the huddled shops near the great circus. A fateful wind projected the flames down the length of the circus, through narrow streets, and over the hills, sparing nothing and no one. Fleeing refugees stared at escape routes cut off by sudden fiery walls. The only defense was to destroy lines of buildings that otherwise would have been bridges for the blaze. After five days of chaos, only four of the city's fourteen districts were untouched: "Three were levelled to the ground, while in the other seven were left only a few shattered, half-burnt relics of houses." [^6] The astute and aristocratic Tacitus is the best surviving source of information about the fire; he hated Nero but gives no reason to believe rumors of his complicity. But public outrage made Nero the scapegoat; then he proved his innocence by blaming the strange sect of the Christians. Although Tacitus considered Christianity a "destructive superstition," he reported that his sources were sorry for Christian sufferings, since they were not "for the public good, but to glut one man's cruelty." [^7]

Any true disciple, Jesus said, must be prepared to "take his cross, and follow me" (Matt. 16:24). Many first-century Christians did this literally:

Nero fastened the guilt and inflicted the most exquisite tortures on a class hated for their abominations, called Christians by the populace. Christus, from whom the name had its origin, suffered the extreme penalty during the reign of Tiberius at the hands of the procurator Pontius Pilate. And the destructive superstition, thus checked for the moment, again broke out not only in Judaea, the source of the evil, but even in Rome, where all things hideous and shameful are collected from the world and become popular. First, therefore, those who confessed were arrested. Then upon their information an immense multitude was convicted, not so much for the crime of arson as for the hatred of mankind. And mockery was added to their deaths. They were covered with the skins of beasts, torn by dogs, and perished; many were fastened to crosses or were burned with fire; and after daylight others were burned as torches in the night. [^8]

This judicial assault at Rome apparently left the Christians of the rest of the empire relatively safe. Though public prejudice permitted the persecutions, Tacitus writes as though the technical charge was "the crime of arson." Christian belief itself was never illegal by any evidence during Paul's life. As discussed, he had probably been released a year before Nero's fire, at which time he would have been in Spain or in the general area around Greece. He would have continued his labors. From Rome there may have been expanding waves of judicial inquiry, finally reaching the leaders. Or more likely, enemies cried treason to try to implicate Christian leaders and outlaw the religion. The martyrdom of Paul and Peter was under Nero, for no Christian source suggests their death date after A.D. 68. As mentioned in appendix A, the historian Eusebius dates their deaths as A.D. 67, perhaps on the basis of information that they outlived the Roman fire by some years. Some scholars mechanically place their deaths right after the fire of A.D. 64, but without certainty.

When the Roman bishop Clement wrote the Corinthians thirty years later, he linked the apostles' courage and the Neronian persecution. The opening of his letter suggests that he wrote about A.D. 96; some tact was demanded during the last part of the reign of Domitian, another Nero. In these circumstances Clement referred to "the greatest and most righteous pillars," who were "persecuted and contended unto death." [^9] With this unmistakable but careful reference to martyrdom, he surveyed the lives of Peter and Paul and added his clear reference to the "immense multitude" of martyrs that Tacitus had described: "To these men with their holy lives was gathered a great multitude of the elect, who were the victims of jealousy and offered among us the fairest example in their endurance under many indignities and tortures." [^10] Since no other major persecution is known in the first century, Clement of Rome plainly ties the deaths of Paul and Peter to the Roman events of Nero's last years, a general association without any strict chronology. He notes their martyrdom only three decades after the death of Paul, who faced execution for the faith in the Christian trials between A.D. 64 and 68.

Reason for Writing

"The time of my departure is at hand" (2 Tim. 4:6). This tells how serious Paul's feelings were as he wrote his last letter to Timothy, and also how seriously anyone ought to read his convictions written in the shadow of eternity. He had suffered in many prisons and had faced death many times. Now the Spirit whispered that his mission was finished, and he wrote with the realization that Nero had made Christian blood cheap. Indeed, what could he expect but to walk to Calvary with the Master, who promised nothing less to his apostles? But, like the Lord, on the eve of his death he continued to pour out precious counsel to those about him. He asked for some help but repaid it by giving the strength of his mind and spirit, not complaining but building up others to the end. Paul's final example of courage is as precious as are the words of his letter. His faith glows so strongly that it is easy to read 2 Timothy without realizing the grim conditions under which it was written. These are barely sketched by Paul's strong words of appreciation to Onesiphorus, who "arrived in Rome" and made considerable effort to find out where Paul was imprisoned (2 Tim. 1:17, NKJB): "He often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain" (2 Tim. 1:16, NKJB). Perhaps the same thing could be said of the Roman Saints that sent greetings, including Linus and the woman Claudia (2 Tim. 4:21). [^11]

Did Timothy send Onesiphorus to Rome to find Paul and deliver a message and assistance? Here was a man who evidently could afford the journey, for Paul mentions "how many things" he furnished Paul earlier at Ephesus (2 Tim. 1:18). Paul's care to mention his household is perhaps gratitude for everybody's risk in allowing Onesiphorus to come to Rome. Perhaps this brother was now returning with Tychicus, whom Paul was sending "to Ephesus" (2 Tim. 4:12). Such greetings to an Ephesian family combine with Timothy's concern for what is happening "in Asia" (2 Tim. 1:15); also, the apostate Hymenaeus (2 Tim. 2:17) was at Ephesus (1 Tim. 1:20; also 1:3). Thus, 2 Timothy was addressed to Paul's trusted understudy, probably still presiding over the Church in the Roman province of Asia and its metropolis of Ephesus. His ministry was surveyed in the background material of 1 Timothy. This second letter updates his work and reveals the spiritual power of this young assistant to Paul. The letter is Timothy's transfer: "Be diligent to come to me quickly" (2 Tim. 4:9, NKJB). Why, then, did Paul write much advice on Timothy's personal life and on the use of his presiding authority? The obvious answer is that Paul could not be sure whether he would be alive when Timothy arrived. Thus, 2 Timothy contains precious personal advice on how to live the gospel and serve when called.

Paul had probably been visiting Timothy shortly before his arrest. This seems connected with Paul's warning: "Alexander the coppersmith did me much evil" (2 Tim. 4:14). Though the name is common, this man is probably the same man excommunicated at Ephesus by Paul earlier (1 Tim. 1:20). Timothy must guard against him in that area, for he "greatly withstood our words" (2 Tim. 4:15). Probably this former Church member accused Paul before the authorities with lies and distortions, making Paul's defense futile. Paul was probably sent to Rome automatically, inasmuch as Christian leaders would be of special concern to Nero. Perhaps they sailed from nearby Miletus, where a companion Trophimus had to be left because of sickness (2 Tim. 4:20). Paul had left personal things in the more northern city of Troas (2 Tim. 4:13); he may have been arrested there or he may have visited Troas on the way to Ephesus or in custody on the way to Rome.

Now Paul wanted his books and his cloak (2 Tim. 4:13), for circumstances had turned against him. He had received an initial hearing and was apparently awaiting final trial; he was obviously held as probably guilty. "At my first defense no one stood with me, but all forsook me. . . . But the Lord . . . strengthened me. . . . And I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion" (2 Tim. 4:16-17, NKJB). None of this fits his Acts imprisonment, for the letters of that time looked forward to a release, whereas in 2 Timothy Paul looks only to final condemnation. With time on his hands, he wanted the books. He needed Timothy immediately, urgently asking a second time that he come "before winter" (2 Tim. 4:21). With the cold season coming on, the thick cloak would be necessary in his stone prison. [^12]

No known document describes Paul's final trial. When he sent 2 Timothy, visitors were still allowed, and the literate Luke was still with him (2 Tim. 4:11). Timothy was coming and was instructed to bring Mark. Years after being considered unfit for a Gentile mission, Mark had now proved his worth as being "useful to me for ministry" (2 Tim. 4:11, NKJB). Is this a hint that Mark was needed at Paul's trial? He could testify of Paul's earliest missionary work, as Timothy could testify of all thereafter. Mark could also report the earliest preaching of the Jerusalem apostles—perhaps even something of Jesus himself. By then both Mark and Luke had probably written their Gospels and were the historians of the faith. It could not yet have been a crime to be a Christian—Paul would not have asked Timothy and Mark to march into certain death. The hundreds of their brothers and sisters condemned after the fire were apparently accused of starting it. The issue now was surely different. Was Paul risking the brightest minds of the Church to prevent a decision that Christian belief was unlawful? Accused in some form of being a traitor to the state, Paul wrote for help in facing his trial. Yet he did not expect anything less than execution. Because of this, Paul shared his inner convictions with his son in the gospel, affording a matchless perspective on Paul's life and his knowledge of the future of the Early Church.

Main Teachings

Apostasy of the Church

The classic Latter-day Saint study distinguishes between "apostasy from the Church" and "the apostasy of the Church." [^13] All scholars agree that the former topic permeates the Pastorals. Yet Christian scholars do not look for evidence of complete apostasy and therefore miss the big picture in the Pastorals. But the theme of 2 Timothy cannot be seen by looking in gopher holes—one has to stand up and view the landscape. The danger to the Church is signaled by the unusual act of Paul naming six people in 2 Timothy who have turned from the faith. [^14] Moreover, the time of writing is all important—first in comparison with the other later writings of the New Testament. Paul's last letter is his most pessimistic, and so is Peter's. Writing in the next decades, Jude and John have a siege mentality. For instance, John notes the many false teachers and bluntly says, "It is the last hour" (1 Jn. 2:18, NKJB), with clear reference to apostasy and not the Second Coming. None of these apostles, least of all Paul, prophesies that the Early Church would continue in favor with God. Under these circumstances, the total divine rejection of the Church is a critical issue.

By any analysis, 2 Timothy was written after the Neronian persecution started. As discussed in introducing this letter, both pagan and Christian historians stressed the "huge crowd" of Christians then slain for the faith. Can one overestimate how many deserted the faith everywhere after that event? True, massive execution was confined to the city of Rome, but obviously there was fear of its repetition in other centers of the empire. Indeed, Paul was arrested outside of Rome, probably in the province of Asia, present western Turkey. Timothy received Paul's last letter there and was reminded about conditions known to him in his region: "This you know, that all those in Asia have turned away from me" (2 Tim. 1:15, NKJB). But the commentators here show mass apathy. Paul wrote only three years after the greatest shock the Early Church had experienced, and scholars' opinions show only that these watchmen are not on the walls. They speak of Paul overstating conditions because of depression or frustration—or complaining of those who failed to defend him at his arrest in Asia, or of those from Asia in Rome who failed to come to his aid. This last is the worst possibility, since Paul appealed to Timothy's knowledge, which pertained to Asia but not to Rome.

Paul's following mention of Onesimus help is supposed to prove that "all . . . Asia" was a reference only to those failing to help. But the key here is the preceding verses, not the after-thought. Reference to Timothy's knowledge—"this you know"—shows that common concerns of Paul and Timothy were the subject of "all . . . Asia." Just before that, Paul told Timothy to follow the "sound words" that Paul taught him (2 Tim. 1:13)—and to "guard the truth that has been entrusted" to him (2 Tim. 1:14, RSV). [^15] When "all . . . Asia" appears in the next sentence, it is simply to say that this section has now "turned away" from both "sound words" and the truth entrusted to Timothy. And Paul's key verb is one of gospel rebellion, for he earlier warned Titus of those "that turn from the truth." The real context of "all . . . Asia" is doctrinal disbelief.

A whole province lost to the true gospel? The only knowledgeable commentator is the historian of the conversion of that province. Luke's epic of massive conversions was followed by the prophecy of apostasy in Asia, reviewed toward the end of chapter 3 of this book. Scholars have noted the close ties of 2 Timothy 4 with Paul's farewell speech at Ephesus, recorded by Luke in Acts 20. But Paul's reference to the turning away of "all . . . Asia" in 2 Timothy 1 has the same close ties to Acts 19, where Luke went out of his way to note membership "throughout all Asia" (Acts 19:26), prefaced by the "all" in Asia who heard the gospel (Acts 19:10). Luke probably wrote Acts just a few years before 2 Timothy, and with phrasing based on mutual missionary rejoicing. So "all Asia" was already Christian vocabulary for the entire province. The larger point is that Luke's theme for the third mission is the Church's rise and fall in Asia. After vividly showing the conversion of hundreds and even thousands, he closes the story with the apostle's pathetic prophecy that Asia would be choked by apostasy "after my departing" (Acts 20:29). As the accompanying chart shows, ten years before writing 2 Timothy, Paul stood before the Ephesian leaders. At that time he wept in warning that the wolves would lacerate the Asian flock. Later, he faced departure from life, still preoccupied with the same apostasy of "all . . . Asia"—and beyond.

The Asian Apostasy During the Apostles' Lives

Date

Event (A.D.) Reference Scripture

Widespread 54 Acts 19:10 "All they which dwelt in Asia

conversion in heard the word of the Lord"

Asia Acts 19:26 "Almost throughout all Asia"

Paul converted people from

worship of Pagan deities

Warning to 58 Acts 20:29-30 "After my departing shall

Ephesus grievous wolves enter in

among you, not sparing the

flock. Also of your own

selves shall men arise,

speaking perverse things, to

draw away disciples after

them"

Widespread 66 2 Tim. 1:15 "All those in Asia have

Asian apostasy turned away from me" (NKJB)

Prophecies of 66 2 Tim. 3:13 "But evil men and impostors

total apostasy will grow worse and worse,

deceiving and being deceived"

NKJB)

2 Tim. 4:3-4 "For the time will come when

they will not endure sound

doctrine, but according to

their own desires, because

they have itching ears, they

will heap up for themselves

teachers; and they will turn

their ears away from the

truth, and be turned aside to

fables" (NKJB)

2 Tim. 3:1-5 "But know this, that in the

last days there shall come

difficult times. For men

shall be lovers of

themselves, lovers of money

. . . lovers of pleasure

rather than lovers of God,

having a form of godliness,

but denying its power"

(literal trans.)

Final Warning 96 Rev. 2:5 "Remember therefore from what

at Ephesus you have fallen; repent and

do the first works, or else

I will come to you quickly

and remove your lampstand

from its place—unless

you repent" (NKJB)

Luke and Timothy were present when Paul warned the Ephesian elders about the coming apostasy, and Luke chose to end his record of the final mission of Paul on that pessimistic note, just as Paul wrote his last letter in the same mood. It should not tax the imagination that so many deserted in Asia. Paul was writing from Rome, where Nero still lived and the threat of death surely turned lukewarm believers into apostates. After all, at Paul's first hearing "no man stood with me" (2 Tim. 4:16), which comes perilously close to saying, "All those in Rome have turned away from me." If the fever was raging in these major locations of the Early Church, the whole patient was critically ill. As mentioned, the problems in 1 Timothy are the same in Titus, which shows that serious dissent had spread throughout the branches. This picture is validated by the Lord's messages to the Asian churches in the later book of Revelation. There a typical branch has "a few names" that are still faithful (Rev. 3:4), and all are given stern warnings to repent while there is still time.

The terms closing 1 Timothy are repeated in 2 Timothy as Paul warns of specific false teachers "who have fallen from the truth, saying that the resurrection has already come" (2 Tim. 2:18, literal trans.). This same thinking tenaciously prevailed three decades later when John identified the "antichrists" as teaching that Christ did not "come in the flesh" (1 Jn. 4:3). As discussed, the Gnostics were characterized by their antimaterialistic bias from their first-century roots. Their complex mythologies and grotesque doctrines generally had the inner logic of saving their god and his worshippers from contact with physical things. Orthodox Christian councils and scholars have also adopted this antimaterialistic premise for the Father's person—most Gnostics did the same for the Father's creation, the person of the Son, and the resurrection of the human race. For to them, nothing material was truly eternal, so the Resurrection must be explained away. Specific first-century evidence comes from a primitive Gnostic named Menander. [^16] Samaritan Justin Martyr said that Menander was a Samaritan and a "disciple" of Simon the Sorcerer. [^17] Menander taught his followers "that they should never die," and his reasoning was that "they obtain the resurrection by being baptized into him." [^18] So the Resurrection was spiritualized and thus denied. This illustrates the similar false teachings that Paul opposed in 2 Timothy.

In this letter and in the writings of John, the priesthood organization of the Early Church was shown under attack. There is one clear casualty. Demas was earlier mentioned as a fellow-laborer with Luke (Col. 4:14; Philem. 1:24). But at the end he has "forsaken me, having loved this present world, and is departed unto Thessalonica" (2 Tim. 4:10). Paul afterward says that he sent Tychicus to Ephesus, and others named after Demas were probably away from Rome on assignment. No less than nine men seem to be fellow-laborers sent by Paul to different areas as his life closed. Tychicus must be typical; he was from Asia and was sent there to replace Timothy, who was now coming to Rome to be with Paul. Both "beloved" and "faithful" (Col. 4:7), Tychicus is obviously another regional representative, directing bishops in a major area. Forces of rebellion probably consumed the main attention of these leaders, for the Pastoral Letters mainly guide regional leaders to direct members and to keep them from deception. To accomplish this, area supervisors had to appoint leaders and train them, the real meaning of Paul's reminder to teach "faithful men" (the bishops) so they could "teach others" (their flocks). This verse (2 Tim. 2:2) has nothing to do with handing the Christian faith down through the centuries.

The absence of missionary orientation contradicts the normal understanding of Timothy's charge to "do the work of an evangelist" (2 Tim. 4:5). Though the thought might be to convert non-Christians, the reality is otherwise, for this immediately follows Timothy's duty to save the members from turning away to false teachers. Indeed, this calling is the same one assigned in 1 Timothy, where he was told to be "an example to the believers" (1 Tim. 4:12). An example from the believers for outsiders, or "an example to the believers"? Some variation of the latter is preferred by scholars and current committee translations, partly because Titus was to be an example to Church members (Titus 2:7), and Paul held himself up as the example of gospel living (Philip. 3:17, 2 Thes. 3:9). What did Timothy do? In 1 Timothy, he selected leaders, taught the members of the Church, guided the welfare program, and opposed all who taught false doctrine. This goes far to vindicate Joseph Smith's view that an evangelist in the Early Church blessed the members, as discussed in connection with Ephesians 4. No evidence in the Pastoral Letters shows Timothy laboring with nonmembers. Did the Neronian persecution cause the Church to be cautious about doing missionary work in Paul's final years? Or did the spreading apostasy demand that leaders give their whole time to protecting the flock? Right after 2 Timothy, Paul and the many regional leaders under his direction simply disappear. Were these associates also martyred after the trials of the presiding apostles?

Paul's last letter underlines the coming transition at the deaths of the apostles, and so does the Savior's prophecy on the Mount of Olives. Because the latter is detailed, it is a guide to Paul's similar language. The easy comparison shows that Paul clearly knew Jesus' words and explained the future of the Church in those terms. It is both faith promoting and instructive to see how both sets of prophecies validate and illuminate the other. The following basic questions will help get at the main issues through comparisons:

In 2 Timothy the final result is "having a form of godliness; but denying the power thereof" (2 Tim. 3:5). This remarkable headline summarizes latter-day conditions and also characterizes the false teachers facing Timothy. [^20] So here is the bridge between Paul's day and the future, implying a long absence of the truth. The implications are stunning in "having a form of godliness; but denying the power thereof" (2 Tim. 3:5). This could be said only of religions that have the name but not the reality. "Power" in Paul is not to be taken lightly, for in the plural it is the word for revelations and miracles. Christian churches today claim the Bible for their guide but on the whole make prophets and the full gifts of the Spirit a matter of history. One commentator writes that after the first century "the gift of prophecy itself, in spite of occasional revivals, gradually fell into disuse and in some measure into disrepute." [^21] The charismatic movement has spread across traditional churches in their attempts to revitalize old organizations, a demonstration that much has been lost. And a reader of Paul cannot forget that the gospel itself is power—the "power of God unto salvation" (Rom. 1:16; 1 Cor. 1:18). If the form is without the power, the preaching is without salvation.

Like Jesus, Paul repeats his prophecy of the coming deceptive apostasy: "The time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine. . . . And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables" (2 Tim. 4:3-4). And who will turn away? Obviously the prophecy fits only Church members; those outside the faith could not lose the truth, for they did not have it. Timothy's commission was to teach "good doctrine" to "the brethren" (1 Tim. 4:6). As discussed, his ministry was to Church members; just before the above prophecy Paul reminded Timothy to strive to keep the members in the faith. But the point of the prophecy is that Timothy is not promised success.

The prophecy on losing sound doctrine also tells how the members will transform the faith: "After their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears" (2 Tim. 4:3). But these last three words should appear with "they" and not after "teachers." For translations now follow the clear meaning of the Greek, which makes "having itching ears" apply to Church members: "Because they have itching ears, they will heap up for themselves teachers" (2 Tim. 4:3, NKJB). [^22] Thus, the real threat to the Church was not opposition but inner corrosion. Here Paul's last prophecy on the Church fits his last recorded speech on the subject, Acts 20. Both carry the same pessimism about the Church's future and the same mechanism for its failure. What made Paul's Ephesian farewell heartrending to him was not his leaving but his realizing that the great flock he had gathered would be divided and spoiled. There would be successors to the apostles, but not true successors, for after Paul left would come "savage wolves . . . not sparing the flock" (Acts 20:29, NKJB). Again, the real threat to the Church was not opposition but disintegration: "Of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them" (Acts 20:30). The first known subapostolic writing deals with this very issue; as might be expected, the Corinthians had dismissed their authorized leaders. But the most significant point here is that Clement of Rome wrote and quoted the Lord as prophesying of inner division: "Our apostles also knew through our Lord Jesus Christ that there would be strife for the title of bishop." [^23]

Thus, Paul's last words on the Church are words of warning—about counterfeit leaders and a substitute gospel. Christians who recognize the apostasy of Judaism from Jehovah must examine their own roots in the long perspective of Old Testament cycles. Time and again the Lord raised up new prophets with Jeremiah's message: "The prophets prophesy falsely . . . and my people love to have it so" (Jer. 5:31). So the theme of imitation prophets is an old one, simply because it is too easy for inquiring faith to degenerate into self-serving smugness. Paul's career is a reminder that professionals may miss God's message while they are mightily engaged in religious minutiae. Paul told Timothy that the truth would be turned into "fables," literally "myths" in his language (2 Tim. 4:4); and he told the Ephesian elders that future Christian leaders would teach things that were "perverse" (Acts 20:30), meaning in Greek and Latin "turned around," twisted or distorted. Who but God could cut through two millennia of theological complications and reestablish the powerful and understandable set of truths preached by Paul and the early apostles? Latter-day Saints testify of this reality through modern revelations as powerful as Paul's. Their claim cries to be considered with increased seriousness, for there has never been a day of more obvious religious floundering, where leaders were less sure of what Christ's Church is or where to look for it. As a case in point, the following comes from the draft of a "contemporary statement of faith" of a major Christian church: "The body of Christ is one, but its oneness is hidden and distorted by the struggles and enmities that persist in the church as they do in the world. . . . Nonetheless the church is one body in a unity yet to be disclosed." [^24]

Enduring to the End

The outer Paul is shown in his missionary history in Acts, but the inner Paul is glimpsed from time to time in his writings, and nowhere more intensely than in his last letter, which is less pastoral than personal. Overall it is well summarized as "an epistle of mingled gloom and glory," [^25] for, in the words of a careful scholar, "humanly speaking, the Church was trembling on the brink of annihilation." [^26] We have just seen that statement to be accurate. Thus, Paul's gloom is for the future of the Church, the painful loss of those lost, and the crumbling work of a lifetime. But the glory was his own certainty that he had filled his calling well. He had written powerfully on enduring to the end (Heb. 3:6, 14). But he preached what he also sought to achieve, telling priesthood leaders that neither inconvenience nor persecution could alter his purpose: "That I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify [to] the gospel of the grace of God" (Acts 20:24). Paul was pressing "toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus" (Philip. 3:14). Virtually his last recorded words express satisfaction that the race was won and the crown gained.

Paul's life is a study in priority. Life is not long enough to reach many goals, and Paul reached his because he devoted his life to it. That goal was not comfort, recognition, or possession. He had renounced the world, but not to seek the same false values in more subtle ways in Christ's church. Paul exchanged comfort for thousands of missionary miles; he forfeited the respect of devoted Jews in and out of the Church for the principle that God's will must be done for the Gentiles; at the end he sent for his total personal possessions not on his body—a cloak and parchments (2 Tim. 4:13). Paul's sacrifices were not calculated but grew naturally from his choice to serve the Lord. One following his path of discipleship may not be called to make the same sacrifices, but he or she will be called to place service above self. Paul finally followed his Master to martyrdom, but this was only the last scene of a life drama of making the Master's cause first. Paul's dying for the faith is impressive because he consistently lived for the faith. Paul's convictions that led him to this are the most intriguing parts of 2 Timothy. The book deserves careful reading for gospel advice to Paul's young understudy—this is concentrated in chapter 2 and sprinkled elsewhere. But this closing letter mainly offers priceless insight into why Paul became such a great servant of the Lord. Understanding these personal dimensions of Paul may give direction for equally great service to the Lord today.

Paul's advice to Timothy reveals what was finally important to Paul. Converted on the Damascus road, Paul stayed converted to death, above all giving love and respect for "Jesus Christ . . . raised from the dead according to my gospel" (2 Tim. 2:8). The apostle sought to be worthy of his relationship with the Lord in the gospel. "Flee . . . youthful lusts" was the advice of a mature man who had learned to channel his desires according to righteousness and selfless love (2 Tim. 2:22). This love is rendered "charity" in the King James Version, but the Greek term is Paul's regular word for love (agape), explained so eloquently in 1 Corinthians 13. The older man shared another aspect of self-control with the younger. Paul was always ready to defend the revealed truth—no other example is necessary beyond the Corinthian correspondence. But he cautions Timothy to know the difference between teaching and mere debating: "And the servant of the Lord must not strive" (2 Tim. 2:24). Paul obviously speaks of the striving that is strife, for his word is Greek for doing battle physically or verbally. Teaching others requires patience and humility, Paul explains (2 Tim. 2:24-26)—one can learn this also from his sustained relationships with the Corinthian and Galatian Saints.

Paul's letters prove that he searched the scriptures; the parchments he wanted were probably copies of them (2 Tim. 4:13). And he told Timothy to read the scriptures, though one verse that seemingly says this really doesn't: "Study to shew thyself approved unto God" (2 Tim. 2:15). This sentence uses a Greek word for giving total attention: "Be diligent to present yourself approved to God" (2 Tim. 2:15, NKJB, italics added). But Paul writes a moving passage on the power of scripture that shows how years of scripture study moved him: "All scripture" is literally "inspired of God" (literal trans.); it is given "for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness" (2 Tim. 3:16). In other words, scripture is the measuring rod, containing those revealed principles for guiding the thoughts and lives of the Saints. Did "all scripture" mean the New Testament as well as the Old? Timothy was told that he had known the scriptures literally "from infancy" and that they could make him "wise unto salvation," a phrase quoted alone with misleading impact (2 Tim. 3:15). Protestantism, which raised the Bible high in judgment over the medieval church, has justly stressed but wrongly exaggerated this verse. Protestants sometimes tell Latter-day Saints that God would give no more revelation because the Bible was enough to make Timothy "wise unto salvation." But Timothy had only the Old Testament, which by itself did as much to prevent as to promote the salvation of the Jews of that time.

But Paul's full words on scripture suggest the full truth. The prophecies and inspired moral teachings of the Old Testament made Timothy "wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus" (2 Tim. 3:15). More is taught here than the principle of believing in Christ—living prophets had to update older scriptures before they had relevance for Timothy. And Paul closes by saying that scripture may make a person "perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works" (2 Tim. 3:17). Ephesians 4:11-12 teaches that this perfection is achieved through apostles and other priesthood leaders. So scripture from past prophets must be supplemented by present and future prophets. Together they make up "all scripture." Stated another way, past scripture is incomplete without the true Church led by prophets. Utah Protestant ministers were asked whether "affiliation with a church is necessary for salvation"; 81 percent answered no, with another 3 percent undecided. [^27] But Paul's gospel was larger, for salvation came in Acts as the scriptures led honest people to the true Church for the saving ordinances and inspired guidance to perfection afterward. As discussed in chapter 3, this issue is raised by Acts 15: scripture alone does not make the true Church, but the true Church with authorized prophets makes new scripture.

It is hard to spend time with Paul's writings without loving his commitment to Christ and admiring his talented discipleship. He thought deeply and wrote with the solid themes and brilliant variations of an inspired symphony. His spirit was attuned to heaven, and his mind was continually at work. His language is alternately elevating and practical; it uses precise logic and knows the traps of logic; it is filled with the peace of spirituality and with sarcasm against lethargy and wickedness. Christ's gospel is impressive for satisfying such a mind and giving it lifelong answers. Paul writes with great knowledge but without sham—that he described personal visions makes their existence certain. What believer in the gospel does not admire Paul's power in the gospel? Eulogy is easy but somehow inappropriate for the man who wrote his eulogy in deeds. Because he wrote at the end to his son in the faith, we have his list of achievements important to him. In intimate sharing, Paul notes that Timothy has literally "followed along" with him and knows "my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, long-suffering, charity, patience" (2 Tim. 3:10). These attributes are great stepping-stones that Paul used to cross the stream of life. They speak for themselves, with comment needed only for the last two. That comment has already been given for "charity," Paul's powerful "love" of 1 Corinthians 13.

But "patience" needs probing. Some was done in showing its place on Paul's ladder of salvation at the beginning of Romans 5 and in showing the setting of "endurance" for Hebrews 11, Paul's great chapter on faith. When Timothy was reminded of the apostle's "patience," the word Paul used is hupomone, a noun usually translated "patience" in the King James Version. But the verb form (hupomeno) is normally translated "to endure." Simply because "patience" is now considered passive, "endure" is a better translation. These words literally refer to "holding up" (meno) "under" (hupo) life's difficulties and pressures. Paul uses this term for "undergoing" chaining and imprisonment: for the sake of offering the gospel to the world "I endure all things" (2 Tim. 2:10). He soon repeats the same word for the price of being with Christ: "If we endure, we shall also reign with him" (2 Tim. 2:12, NKJB). That is the core message to Timothy: "All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution" (2 Tim. 3:12). That was historical truth, for Timothy had just been reminded that Paul had suffered "at Iconium," where Paul was threatened, and "at Lystra," Timothy's city, where Paul was stoned and left for dead (2 Tim. 3:11; Acts 14). Timothy knows also of Paul's persecutions and sufferings "at Antioch" (2 Tim. 3:11); here Acts is silent, but Paul's list of sufferings suggests possible imprisonment and synagogue whippings (2 Cor. 11:23-27).

Thus, enduring to the end has a double component. Believing the gospel may require facing physical or emotional abuse. But it regularly requires the courage to avoid cheap pleasures and the easy "success" of evil. As Jesus said, "Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way" (Matt. 7:14). Resisting temptation is no more easy than exercising muscles that are out of practice. Both moral and physical effort bring initial pain but also bring the reward of great joy in the strength developed. Paul's teachings open the path of repentance, baptism, finding the true Church, and being faithful in it—living God's laws of righteousness and love. Paul's example shows the difficult but exhilarating way of sharing, forgiving, encouraging, and in all things setting the example. Paul in Rome or Joseph Smith in Liberty Jail prove that great troubles may be opportunities for great spirituality. These servants of the Lord rose above self-pity to seek the Lord's strength, which in the night is as sure as the coming sunrise. The joy of life is not in creature comfort but in doing well what one was sent to earth to do. As Socrates said, the state respected him for staying at his assigned post in battle, and heaven would value him only as he stayed at his assigned moral post in life. [^28] That is the message of the life of the apostle to the Gentiles, as he explained its meaning on the brink of giving his life:

For I am now being sacrificed.

And the time of my departure has come.

I have run the good race,

I have finished the course,

I have kept the faith.

Thus there is laid up for me

the crown of righteousness,

which the Lord, the righteous judge,

shall award me on that day.

And not only to me,

but to all who have loved his appearance.

(2 Tim. 4:6-8, literal trans.)

No comment deserves to supersede Paul's self-portrait. But there is an epitaph. This is not found in the pointless search for his grave or his relics; it is found in the evaluation of the Roman bishop three decades after Paul's death. No one knows whether this Clement was the fellow laborer greeted in Philippians 4:3. But he wrote with probable early knowledge of what Paul had done and with the convictions of the Early Church on the meaning of Paul's life. That life is surpassed only by that of the Savior in its message of enduring to the end: "Through jealousy and strife Paul showed the way to the prize of endurance. Seven times he was in bonds; he was exiled; he was stoned. He was a herald both in the east and in the west; he gained the noble fame of his faith; he taught righteousness to all the world. And when he had reached the limits of the west he gave his testimony before the rulers, and thus passed from the world and was taken up into the holy place—the greatest example of endurance." [^29]

NOTES

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] What times are Jesus and Paul speaking about? Jesus was asked about Jerusalem's destruction and the end of the world (Matt. 24:1-3). His answer was long and involved, showing that many events would intervene between the Crucifixion and the Second Coming. Like Christ and like other apostles, Paul knew of "the times and the seasons" (1 Thes. 5:1), showing his understanding of the complexities of future religious history. Occasionally Paul mentioned that Christ had come in the latter days of the world, meaning the later dispensations. As discussed in 2 Thessalonians 2, Paul expected the reign of Satan on earth before the reign of Christ could come. Some conditions of apostasy were in the near future, as when Paul's Greek reads "following times" (1 Tim. 4:1, literal trans.), suggesting immediate later days instead of latter days. So like Jesus, Paul wrote of events from his time up to the extreme wickedness of "the last days" (2 Tim. 3:1). A convenient list of the Greek terms appears in Joseph Henry Thayer, A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament (New York: American Book Co., 1889), pp. 706-7. Thayer's count was 168 unique words. Note his following list (pp. 707-8) of 53 words found only in the Pastorals and other letters of Paul, excluding Hebrews.
[^2] Can latter-day events be separated from those of the immediate future? Jesus mentioned two points of departure, the persecution and deaths of the apostles and the destruction of Jerusalem. After each of these events Jesus outlined the era of false teachers and wickedness, giving an overview first (Matt. 24:9-12) and then reviewing the same period after describing Jerusalem's fall (Matt. 24:23-26). He twice refers to this trying period as the time of "false prophets" (Matt. 24:11, 24), and it clearly takes place right after the above events of the first century. Paul is also preoccupied with the coming era of false teachers. Writing almost forty years after Jesus' prophecy, Paul is in the midst of transition from true to false teachers. They surround him. That is why his latter-day prophecy (2 Tim. 3:1-5) abruptly stops on a present note—"from such turn away" (2 Tim. 3:5). A later dating of Polycarp is sometimes assumed on the basis of his Philippians 7:1Philippians 7:1, which quotes John 4:1-3 on not confessing that Christ has come in the flesh; Polycarp then adds, "This man is the firstborn of Satan." Irenaeus later reports an anecdote of Polycarp applying this phrase to Marcion about A.D. 140 (Against Heresies 3.3.4). But like John, Polycarp apparently had favorite phrases, which could be used generally in the epistle and applied specifically later, the explanation that Kirsopp Lake gives in footnoting this passage in the Loeb Classical Library edition. The close of Polycarp's epistle mentions collecting the letters of Ignatius shortly after he had left, so about A.D. 110 is a necessary date if one assumes the unity of the letter, and there is no objective basis on which to question that.
[^3] What conditions are in the latter-day world? There is a verbal correlation between Paul and Christ here. Paul says, "In the last days perilous times shall come" (2 Tim. 3:1). But the Greek reads literally "harsh times," rendered as "difficult times" (JB) or "times of stress" (RSV). Thus, Paul's basic idea is exactly that of Jesus, who speaks of Jerusalem's fall and the following "great tribulation" (Matt. 24:21). This is often translated "affliction" in the King James Version and "distress" in modern translations. Thus, Paul and Christ speak of an age of great difficulty when the world is to be dominated by Satan. Paul gives more details about human degradation and pictures mankind as turning from the love of God to the love of self, money, and pleasure (2 Tim. 3:2, 4). Jesus is less specific but makes the same observation: "Because iniquity will increase, the love of many will grow cool" (Matt. 24:12, literal trans.). Polycarp to the Philippians 3:2 (Apostolic Fathers, Loeb Classical Library). In his marginal notes translator Kirsopp Lake finds phrases from eleven of Paul's fourteen letters. Ones with no traces are 1 Thessalonians, Philemon, and Titus.
[^4] Where is the Church in the age of wickedness? Christ's prophecy gives a long period of tribulation before the faithful are gathered out from the world to prepare for his Second Coming. As discussed in connection with Ephesians 1:9-10, Paul also looked forward to a restoration era, but that is not his subject in 2 Timothy. Yet clear parallels with Jesus in his treatment of apostasy show that Paul also expected the latter-day gathering referred to in Matthew 24. Neither Jesus nor Paul give any hint that the true Church will exist in the age of wickedness. As stated, the Savior's formula is clear because he repeated it twice: after Jerusalem's fall come "false Christs and false prophets" to "deceive the very elect" (Matt. 24:24); this restates what he said would occur right after the apostles' martyrdoms: "Many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many" (Matt. 24:11). As Paul wrote, many had indeed been deceived; he mourned with Timothy that "all Asia" had deserted Paul and the truth he taught. And with those severe conditions present, Paul added, "Evil men and impostors will grow worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived" (2 Tim. 3:13, NKJB). "Impostors" here is the unanimous choice of current committee translations instead of the King James "seducers." Since Greek-speaking Jews used that term in the sense of false prophets, Paul matched Jesus' "false prophets" with a synonym. [^19] Paul also used Jesus' exact word for "deceiving and being deceived." One province was then spoiled—"worse and worse" must mean the loss of others and finally all. Paul's total pessimism can be explained only by his conviction of total apostasy, which he earlier had expressed in 2 Thessalonians 2 in saying that the temple of God, meaning the Church of God, would be possessed by Satan. Daniel J. Theron, Evidence of Tradition (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book House, 1958), p. 111. The fragment is named for the discoverer, L. A. Muratori, and comes from an eighth-century copy, dated by reference to the recent times of Pius, Roman bishop in the mid-second century. For background see Johannes Quasten, Patrology (Westminster, Md.: Newman Press, 1964) 2:207-9.
[^5] Some argue against authenticity from the absence of the Pastorals in the Chester Beatty Papyri, of the same date as the Muratorian Fragment and discussed under the authorship evaluation at the beginning of Hebrews. But the end of the Chester Beatty manuscript is destroyed; the scribe could have included the Pastoral Letters by writing smaller or adding supplementary pages. There is another valid possibility: since the Muratorian Fragment lists Paul's Church letters separately from Paul's personal letters, that arrangement might also have been followed by the Chester Beatty Papyri scribes.
[^6] 1 Clement 5:7 (Apostolic Fathers, Loeb Classical Library).
[^7] Theron, p. 109: "Paul's departure from the city as he was proceeding to Spain."
[^8] Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History 2.22.2, trans. Hugh Jackson Lawlor and John Ernest Leonard Oulton, Eusebius (London: S.P.C.K., 1954), p. 55.
[^9] As mentioned earlier, the annotations at the end of Paul's letters have no value as evidence because they are later scribal entries.
[^10] Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History 3.32.7.
[^11] Ibid. 4.22.4-7. This quotation from Hegessipus indicates the infiltration of Gnostic teachings in the Church at Judea after A.D. 62.
[^12] Lawlor and Oulton 2:143.
[^13] Justin Martyr, First Apology 26 (Ante-Nicene Fathers). This translation is changed by substituting "thought" for "idea," translating the Greek ennoia.
[^14] Gnostic systems taught "endless genealogies" of beings springing from other beings, "endless" in the sense that such speculations seemed never to cease, and also "endless" in the quantitative sense. Before the middle of the second century Basilides had complex groups springing from the ultimate God, arranged in a subordinated system of 365 heavens, obviously taken from the number of days in the year. Irenaeus, Against Heresies 1.24.3-4.
[^15] See Justin Martyr, First Apology 26: "But I have a treatise against all the heresies that have existed already composed, which, if you wish to read it, I will give you." Justin's conversion was in the early second century. As just discussed in the text, he had special access to Samaritan sources on Simon.
[^16] Irenaeus, Against Heresies 1.23.2-3 (Ante-Nicene Fathers). Scholarly skepticism against Irenaeus's details on Simon is not justified. Second-century Gnosticism is far more elaborate, and there is no reason to doubt that Simon taught the basic ideas in the first century, as Justin outlines and Irenaeus details. Indeed, Peter's harsh condemnation of Simon in Acts 8 is hardly justified without knowing his fraudulent career before and after his conversion. Even before his conversion he was saluted as "the great power of God" (Acts 8:10). Competent historians have trusted the informational link from Irenaeus to Justin Martyr. Compare Louis Duchesne, Early History of the Christian Church, 4th ed. trans. (London: John Murray, 1947) 1:114-16.
[^17] Justin Martyr, First Apology 26.
[^18] Irenaeus, Against Heresies 1.24.2. Saturninus is early second century.
[^20] Ibid., p. 40. Hanson is forthright enough to note that 1 Timothy diverges from Christian orthodoxy here, though he backs away from his conclusion by a strange faith that the author must not have intended to say what he did: "We may be quite sure that any such doctrine was far from his conscious mind."
[^21] Ibid., p. 69.
[^22] Ibid., p. 62.
[^23] Ignatius, To Polycarp 3.2 (Apostolic Fathers, Loeb Classical Library). Compare 2:2: "But pray that the invisible things may be revealed to you."
[^24] Milton V. Backman, Jr., American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979), p. 481.
[^25] Ibid.
[^26] 1 Clement 44. "Other eminent men" no doubt refers to the appointment of bishops by apostolic assistants such as Timothy and Titus after the first missionary work.
[^27] Ibid. 42. Compare the quotation and comment at note 26 above.
[^28] Standards for the "bishop" (Titus 1:7) are preceded by Paul's instructions to "ordain elders in every city" (Titus 1:5). While scholars see the two titles as synonymous, it is certainly possible that Titus ordained elders in each city and appointed one bishop also. The same possibility exists for other early sources mentioning elders and bishops.
[^29] Ignatius, Smyrnaeans 8.
