Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul ( 1983)

Appendix B

Two Descriptions of Paul

There is a striking ancient word portrait of Paul, and a modern one even more striking. The first is in the work known as the Acts of Paul and Thecla. Thecla is presented as a virgin martyr, the center of this apocryphal work that includes her supposed conversion at Iconium. Scholars now consider this work part of a much larger production, the Acts of Paul, a complex and unrewarding piece of fiction. [^1] Tertullian knew that this work was a pious forgery invented shortly before he wrote at the close of the second century. He scorned those who argued from "Thecla's example" that women should baptize; he stressed that these materials "wrongly go under Paul's name," adding that "in Asia the presbyter who composed that writing, as if he were augmenting Paul's fame from his own store, after being convicted, and confessing that he had done it from love of Paul, was removed from his office." [^2] This superstitious novel gives a description of Paul, which some have speculated might be an earlier nugget of information incorporated in the Thecla story. [^3] That remains a possibility, but there is not yet any earlier evidence for the word-portrait. Pious art cannot wait for such debates to end; the Thecla profile has "set the type for this apostle's portraits from an early time." [^4]

This ancient description may well have been read by Joseph Smith, since it was printed in 1820 in a fascinating collection of the authentic Apostolic Fathers plus a fair sampling of imaginative apocrypha of the New Testament. William Hone wrote a preface critical of traditional Christianity and prefaced his selection with a typical title of the time: "The Apocryphal New Testament, being All Gospels, Epistles, and Other Pieces Now Extant, Attributed in the First Four Centuries to Jesus Christ, His Apostles, and Their Companions, and Not Included in the New Testament by Its Compilers." One can argue that Joseph Smith might have read the "Acts of Paul and Thecla." The Nauvoo Library and Literary Institute was organized in early 1844, and minutes list titles of books donated by individuals, including Joseph Smith, who among other titles gave the "Apocryphal Testament." [^5] This does not prove that Joseph Smith picked up the book, turned to page 100, and read the early sketch. That evidence would have to come from a diary that no one now knows about or from inference from a parallel quotation also unknown. But the Hone publication is quoted here because it would have been the most likely for Joseph Smith to have seen:

At length they saw a man coming (namely Paul), of a low stature, bald (or shaved) on the head, crooked thighs, handsome legs, hollow eyed; had a crooked nose; full of grace. For sometimes he appeared as a man; sometimes he had the countenance of an angel. [^6]

This ancient picture is not quoted by Joseph Smith in any known source, but he gave a more detailed one of his own. It appears in the private notes of William Clayton, one of the three most significant recorders of the Prophet's private and public teaching. The introducing notation reads, "By Joseph, Jany. 5th 1841, at the organization of a school of instruction." [^7] The verbal portrait reads:

Description of Paul—He is about 5 foot high; very dark hair; dark complexion, dark skin; large Roman nose; sharp face; small black eyes, penetrating as eternity; round shoulders; a whining voice, except when elevated and then it almost resembles the roaring of a lion. He was a good orator. [^8]

There are nine characteristics of Paul in the Thecla description, and twelve in Joseph Smith's. But the profiles overlap in only two respects: the ancient "crooked nose" compares to Joseph Smith's "large Roman nose," and the ancient "low stature" compares to Joseph Smith's "about 5 foot high."

These two points of resemblance are important, for Joseph Smith adds a specific detail to each. Much apocryphal literature is boring because it narrates in generalities. Granted, a creative historical forger might give particulars; but in real life, vagueness generally reflects lack of firsthand observation, and pictorial sharpness comes from having been personally on the scene. Joseph Smith's description of Paul is stunning for that reason—it includes exact measurements, complexion, shapes, even sounds. The modern Prophet comments with the precision of one who has seen and heard. Joseph Smith was sometimes stimulated by an idea to inquire of the Lord for himself. So he might be dependent on the Thecla sketch purely as a point of inquiry. Or he might never have seen it. Joseph Smith might also have been stimulated by biblical inquiry from (1) Barnabas being called the head god Jupiter, possibly because he was more imposing than Paul (Acts 14:12); (2) Paul's admission that his appearance was not imposing (2 Cor. 10:1, 10); (3) the possibility that Paul's Gentile name had literal significance, since the Latin adjective paulus means "little" or "small." One or more of these points might have stimulated the Thecla description. But Joseph Smith went far beyond any of this.

After giving Paul's profile, the Prophet sought no publicity from it, leaving it as a private description given a small study group. But then, he named a dozen historic prophets who appeared to him and gave detail on only a few when there were special points to be made about the heavenly personages. There is no reason to sensationalize Joseph's description of Paul when he gave it without comment. But many who respect this great modern prophet feel that his description of these twelve specific features could have come only through some form of revelation. The significance is that the prophet of the last dispensation knew so well the great apostle to the Gentiles. Thus, Paul is likely one that Joseph Smith had in mind when he wrote that "divers angels" from Adam to the "present time" had come, each with keys and information (D&C 128:21).

NOTES

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Leon Morris, The First Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians (London: Tyndale Press, 1964), p. 218.
[^2] F. F. Bruce, The New Century Bible Commentary: 1 and 2 Corinthians (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1971), p. 148.
[^3] William F. Orr and James Arthur Walther, 1 Corinthians (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1981), p. 337.
[^4] James Hope Moulton and George Milligan, The Vocabulary of the Greek Testament (Grand Rapids Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1980), p. 651.
[^5] B. M. Foschini is the most vigorous spokesman for the minority view that Paul's words translate into something other than proxy baptism. He has appeared to be near those claiming that many past interpretations make no interpretation possible, but his unusual solution is to modify the normal understanding of the preposition and the punctuation, one that finds little support by Greek scholars. See "Baptism for the Dead," New Catholic Encyclopedia (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967), p. 68.
[^6] Compare Foschini's feeling for the inconsistency of those who claim that Paul argued from a practice with which he did not agree: "We cannot, however, conceive how a man like St. Paul could leave uncensured such a superstitious rite, had it existed." (Ibid.) But if the ceremony did exist, the apostle's tolerance, so apparently strange, is a clue to deeper views than most biographers realize.
[^7] Justin Martyr, Dialogue with Trypho the Jew 72:4, literal translation from the text of Edgar J. Goodspeed, Die altesten Apologeten (Gottingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1914). The translation in the Ante-Nicene Fathers reads: "The Lord God remembered his dead people of Israel who lay in the graves, and he descended to preach to them his own salvation." Justin claimed this a deleted passage from Jeremiah. Irenaeus's use clearly shows that second-century Christians considered it an accurate summary of Christ's visit to the spirit prison. See Against Heresies 3.20 and 4.22.1—the Latin reading has influenced my translation of "the Lord God of Israel."
[^8] Hugh W. Nibley, "Baptism for the Dead in Ancient Times," Improvement Era, Dec. 1948 through April 1949.
