Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul ( 1983)

Appendix C

Baptism for the Dead

Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead? (1 Cor. 15:29.)

The gospel has more than its share of stumbling blocks, as Jesus and Paul both noted. Mortals do not easily understand God's reasons and his full programs. It is hard for non-Christians to understand why a Savior must suffer in the place of men and women—to do something for them that they cannot do for themselves. But once that nourishing truth is known, it is one step further to learn that faithful Saints on earth might perform baptisms for the righteous dead who did not have the opportunity to be baptized. The principle of serving others permeates the gospel. Much opposition to baptism for the dead boils down to skepticism about baptism. Large numbers of Christians of all persuasions do not really think that God requires water baptism, so baptism for the dead is often considered superstitious on its face. But what if Jesus' words to Nicodemus are strictly and eternally true? The Lord made no exception: "Unless one is born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God" (John 3:5, NKJB). Paul used the same image of rebirth, saying that God saves through his mercy and "the washing of regeneration" (Titus 3:5). And his concise epistle of grace makes baptism the required expression of faith: "As many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ" (Gal. 3:27). If, as Peter said, remission of sins comes only by adding baptism to faith (Acts 2:38), then neither the living or the dead are exempt from baptism. Christians cannot consider baptism for the dead seriously until they take baptism as seriously as the Lord and his apostles intended it.

There is a strange ambivalence in the commentaries on 1 Corinthians 15:29. Surveying the current ones leaves the overall impression that they try to explain away the verse rather than to explain it. There is a fair sprinkling of loaded phrases like "strange practice," "unusual baptism," or "abnormal baptismal rite." Yet with all the motivation to minimize, scholar after scholar admits that the Corinthians were baptizing for their dead. Outside of responsible commentaries, many cheap explanations circulate: baptism for the dead meant baptism in order to be joined to the faithful dead, baptism to avoid dead sins, or even baptism over the graves of the dead. But though puzzled by the practice, the best scholars today are convinced that substitute baptism existed. One calls baptism for the dead "a notorious difficulty"; nevertheless, "the most natural meaning of the expression is that some early believers got themselves baptized on behalf of friends of theirs who had died without receiving that sacrament." [^1] A top historian-linguist puzzles over how vicarious baptism was used but thinks the concept is clear: "The prima facie meaning of these words points to a practice of baptism by proxy." [^2] Today's Christian scholars sharply counteract any easy allegorizing here:

Close inspection of the language of the reference makes all attempts to soften or eliminate its literal meaning unsuccessful. An endeavor to understand the dead as persons who are "dead in sin" does not really help; for the condition offered, if the dead are not being raised at all, makes it clear that the apostle is writing about persons who are physically dead. It appears that under the pressure of concern for the eternal destiny of dead relatives or friends some people in the church were undergoing baptism on their behalf in the belief that this would enable the dead to receive the benefits of Christ's salvation. [^3]

These views show the current understanding of Paul's words. Truth is not made by majorities, but informed people can show the reasonable positions on a problem. While not understanding the practice, the best Greek scholars overwhelmingly support vicarious baptism as the only correct translation of Paul's challenge. Many translators continue to follow the "for the dead" of the King James Version. But of the six committee translations most used in this book, four have the phrasing of the Revised Standard Version: "Otherwise, what do people mean by being baptized on behalf of the dead? If the dead are not raised at all, why are people baptized on their behalf?" This is also the trend of competent private translators, such as Moffatt and Goodspeed in the last generation. Some, such as J. B. Phillips, vary the English to "being baptized for the dead by proxy." Two technical reasons are persuasive to scholars. The preposition behind the King James "for" is huper, followed by the noun in a possessive form. The meaning can be physically "over" or "beyond," but it is regularly the concept of representation of one person for another. For instance, in the business documents on papyrus this construction regularly describes agency, the power of attorney of one to represent another; this is basically the "substitutionary sense, as when one man writes a letter for another, seeing that he is unable to write it himself." [^4] A second consideration is usage in the New Testament, where this same construction appears over a hundred times to describe Christ's vicarious sacrifice "for us" (1 Cor. 5:7; 11:24; 15:3). Since baptism for the dead is mentioned in the same wording as the Atonement, it is hard to argue that the latter is vicarious but not the former. Just as Christ in suffering represented others, the Saints were empowered to be agents for their loved ones in baptism.

The practice of baptism for the dead is less disputed now, though its ancient application is debated. [^5] Its importance is minimized by some because it appears a single time in the scriptures, but it was a doctrine for believers and would rarely be discussed publicly—several practices of the believers appear only in the candid discussions of problems in 1 Corinthians. Others say with false learning that Paul disapproved the practice, but putting words into his mouth is highly dangerous in a chapter where he insists time after time that he is telling God's solemn truth. Paul was most sensitive to blasphemy and false ceremonialism—of all people he would not have argued for the foundation truth of the Resurrection with a questionable example. He obviously did not feel that the principle was disharmonious with the gospel. But scholars generally will not accept Paul's approval of baptism for the dead, so the trend is to claim that Paul simply referred to a local custom for the sake of argument. [^6]

Such speculation is inconsistent. If the Corinthians invented proxy baptism out of concern for their loved ones, why limit such concern to that branch of the Church? Similar concern is seen in 1 Thessalonians 4. This deep desire for family salvation was everywhere. Here writers on 1 Corinthians are seeing only a root of one tree, not the trunks towering above. The issue of God reaching the entire human race is an intense issue in the New Testament and in Christian sources immediately afterward. In plain terms, can one talk of baptism for the dead without the parallel doctrine of preaching to the dead? Christ is the first source here, for he told the thief on the cross that he would be in paradise "to day" (Luke 23:43), and Peter says that immediately after death Christ went not to heaven but to the spirit world to continue his preaching (1 Pet. 3:18-21).

The preaching in the spirit world competes with baptism for the dead for the prize of the "most difficult" scripture in the New Testament—different scholars apply this language to both doctrines. There is no doubt of the preaching to the spirits in prison, and there are inevitable questions of consistency. Since the Church taught that the righteous dead heard the gospel, the issue of their baptism is inescapable. Can preaching to the dead be isolated from baptism for the dead? Christ's mission to the pre-Christian dead must start with Peter's teaching, which vividly says that Jesus was crucified but "quickened"—in Greek literally "made alive"—in the spirit and "went and preached unto the spirits in prison; which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah" (1 Pet. 3: 18-20). Christ's visit to the dead is a frequent theme in the next generations after Peter. Justin Martyr quoted an earlier prophecy that was also a Christian article of faith: "The Lord God of Israel remembered his dead sleeping in the earthly grave, and he descended to them to preach the gospel of his salvation to them."

Early references to this subject are plentiful, as Hugh Nibley showed years ago. [^7] Christians were very concerned with pre-Christians from the beginning. So if baptism for the dead is rare, the overall problem is most visible. What was the purpose of Christ's preaching to the dead? An early answer comes from Irenaeus, who had youthful contact with Polycarp, who knew John. Perhaps with that link in mind, Irenaeus starts an indirect quotation, "As I have heard from a certain elder, who had heard from those who had seen the apostles." [^8] Irenaeus develops the idea of the mercy of God for those called in the Old Testament; then he resumes the quotation to say, "The Lord descended to the parts under the earth, announcing to them also the good news of his coming, there being remission of sins for such as believe on him." [^9] In Acts, remission of sins was the result of faith plus baptism. Irenaeus has a simplistic view of Old Testament forgiveness but preserves the above understanding that Christ's preaching to the dead had the same goal as his historical preaching to the living—the perfection of the person to prepare him to meet God. Peter also says this in his verse following his description of Christ's preaching in the spirit world; all must appear before the judge of "the living and the dead" (1 Pet. 4:5, NKJB): "For this reason the gospel was preached also to those who are dead" (1 Pet. 4:6, NKJB).

Some scholars are too cautious to link 1 Peter 3:19 on Christ preaching in the spirit prison with 1 Peter 4:6 on the general preaching to the dead. But the key words for preaching in those verses are kerusso and euangelizo, the only two words in the New Testament that are consistently used of the missionary proclamation of the gospel. [^10]These synonyms show that Peter is talking of similar events. God cannot reach all his children without sending messengers to the worlds of the living and of the dead. And the two Greek words just mentioned constantly refer to teaching baptism as well as faith. For instance, nearly every baptism mentioned in Acts is preceded by one of these words, generally translated "preach" or "preach the gospel." Christ's commission to the Twelve at the end of Matthew and Mark commands baptism as the immediate result of the preaching. Thus, Peter virtually suggests Paul's baptism for the dead in his verbs for preaching to the dead, the same verbs that are found in the above early Christian references on Christ's visit to the spirit world. In turn, Paul virtually suggests Peter's concern for the living and the dead in the context of baptism for the dead in 1 Corinthians 15:29, as already discussed in the chapter treating that letter. And the two interrelated doctrines come together in the document known as the Shepherd of Hermas, which derives its name from a series of visions and teachings from an angel as a shepherd. In the second century the Muratorian Canon gives the date as midcentury: "But Hermas composed the Shepherd quite recently in our times in the city of Rome, while his brother, Pius, the bishop, occupied the chair of the city of Rome." [^11]

The Shepherd of Hermas is not a source for new doctrine, for its main theme is preserving the faith. Its author is dutiful and conservative, seeking to hold to what he had been taught in a Christian career going back to the turn of the century and Clement of Rome, whom he mentions. Quasten sizes up the author as "an earnest, pious, and conscientious man, one who had proven himself steadfast in time of persecution." [^12] Thus, he is a source for the common doctrines and practices of the Christian Church. And he welds preaching to the dead to baptism for the dead. These doctrines come in the allegory of building the tower, which the angel defines as the Church. The three lower courses of stones represent the foundation generations of the righteous men of the Old Testament, with the last and largest number of 40 representing the "prophets and teachers of the preaching of the Son of God." These have the seal, clearly defined as baptism by (1) the requirement "to come up through the water that they might be made alive"; (2) the quotation of John 3:5, referring to water as the way to "enter into the kingdom of God"; and (3) the summary, "the seal, then, is the water." [^13] As the following passage begins, Hermas's messenger is explaining that the pre-Christian dead—"who had fallen asleep"—were also baptized; this is followed by the explanation that the New Testament priesthood bearers had been baptized again to make this possible:

"So these also who had fallen asleep received the seal of the Son of God and 'entered into the kingdom of God'. . . . This seal, then, was preached to them also, and they made use of it 'to enter into the kingdom of God.'"

"Why, Sir," said I, "did the 40 stones also come up with them from the deep, although they had received the seal already?"

"Because," said he, "these apostles and teachers who preached the name of the Son of God, having fallen asleep in the power and faith of the Son of God, preached also to those who had fallen asleep before them, and themselves gave to them the seal of the preaching. They went down therefore with them into the water and came up again, but the latter went down alive and came up alive, while the former, who had fallen asleep before, went down dead but came up alive. Through them, therefore, they were made alive, and received the knowledge of the name of the Son of God. . . . For they had fallen asleep in righteousness and in great purity, only they had not received this seal. You have then the explanation of these things also." [^14]

Some parts of the above message are obvious, and others are clear in the light of Hermas's purpose in writing. Since the above words explain the vision-parable or allegory, they relate to Christian doctrine and practice. The plainest point is that after death the "apostles and teachers" continued their missionary labors in the spirit world, adding the dimension that preaching to the dead continued after Christ. The consequences of that doctrine are revolutionary. Thus, the spirits do not merely receive an announcement of Christ's victory; continued preaching assumes individual growth there and acceptance of gospel principles beyond simple belief. Thus, the emphasis on baptism for the pre-Christian righteous logically fits the scheme. But what kind of baptism? The normal understanding overestimates the author: "Thus Hermas is so thoroughly convinced that baptism is absolutely necessary for salvation that he teaches that the apostles and teachers descended into limbo after death . . . to baptize the righteous departed of pre-Christian times." [^15]

The above conclusion lacks common sense. Hermas's book proves that he is a Christian traditionalist, and the spirit-world passage underlines the point by three repetitions of the words of John 3:5 on entering the kingdom of God through water. He is so bound by scripture that he cannot imagine salvation without baptism, and he obviously writes with consciousness of Peter's words on preaching in the spirit world. Thus, Hermas also writes with awareness of Paul's reference to baptisms of the living for the dead. Those "fallen asleep" in his passage are, of course, the dead, and his subject closes with plain words about the righteous who had died without baptism. So Hermas is discussing what Christians believe about baptism for the dead; so this "pious and conscientious" author certainly refers to the known baptism for the dead and not the unknown. That explains his question to the angel, for he found it contradictory that the New Testament priesthood leaders went into the deep again, the symbol of their personal baptisms. If they would merely baptize others, there could be no puzzle. So Hermas's question was really about rebaptism of those already baptized. The explanation was that both groups go into the water, but the effect of remission of sins is only for those dying without baptism. This cooperative baptism is proxy baptism, the only type mentioned by the "apostles and teachers" that he refers to. The joint immersion in water is part of the symbolism not expressly interpreted, referring to the earthly baptisms that were a shared experience of the living and the dead.

Latter-day Saints have that clear understanding through the sweeping vision received by their twentieth-century prophet Joseph F. Smith. His great message was the continuing preaching to the dead after Christ, the instruction necessary to benefit from proxy baptism—for only "the dead who repent will be redeemed" (D&C 138:58). Latter-day Saints well know that the founding prophet Joseph Smith instituted baptism for the dead and planned the first latter-day ordinance temple before his martyrdom. But how much Joseph Smith said about the preaching to the dead needs to be stressed—for in no sense was proxy baptism ever cheapened into mechanical salvation without the faith and repentance of the one for whom baptism was done. Joseph Smith taught the fair opportunity to be baptized if a person lived when the true gospel and its authority was not on earth. But he also taught the fair opportunity to hear the gospel, whether on earth or in the spirit existence after death: "All who have not had an opportunity of hearing the gospel, and being administered to by an inspired man in the flesh, must have it hereafter, before they can be finally judged." [^16] This statement is two years earlier than Joseph Smith's first sermon on baptism for the dead and has overtones of 1 Peter 4:5-6, where all are readied for judgment by hearing the gospel, whether alive or dead. Indeed, Joseph Smith's early thinking is clear, for he completed his New Testament corrections on February 2, 1833. Coming to 1 Peter 4:6, he read, "For thus was the gospel preached also to them that are dead" and changed the verb to "is," indicating his knowledge that the preparation of the spirits for the blessings of the gospel is continuous. [^17]

The Prophet had in mind the personal welfare of those who had died without the gospel as he contemplated leaving Missouri for Illinois. The great work of restoration was moving to "a time to come in the which nothing shall be withheld" (D&C 121:28). And the work would involve the dead in the spirit world, for their eyes were on the coming revelations, "which our forefathers have awaited with anxious expectation to be revealed in the last times" (D&C 121:27). In 1840 the Prophet announced and authorized baptism for the dead, generally restricting the work to near relatives and commanding that careful records be kept of it, "lest we should run too far." [^18] The principle balanced what was taught in the spirit world with what could be done only on earth. Even after death, "there is never a time when the spirit is too old to approach God." But God's plan and not wishful thinking must govern the procedures of salvation: "There is a way to release the spirit of the dead; that is, by the power and authority of the priesthood, by binding and loosing on earth." [^19] But the earthly work is always dependent on repentance and the agency of the individuals themselves: "Now all those [who] die in the faith go to the prison of spirits to preach to the dead in body, but they are alive in the spirit, and those spirits preach to the spirits that they may live according to God in the spirit. And men do minister for them in the flesh, and angels bear the glad tidings to the spirits, and they are made happy by these means." [^20]

The cable of salvation for the dead has many strands in past scriptures; yet it was produced from the fresh steel of revelation. Joseph Smith explained baptism for the dead to the Church with this observation: "The only way to obtain truth and wisdom, is not to ask it from books, but to go to God in prayer and obtain divine teaching." [^21] At this time the Twelve were in England, and the Prophet notified them of the new teaching by mentioning 1 Corinthians 15:29 but indicating further knowledge "independent of the Bible." [^22] Nowhere is the point more powerful than in Joseph Smith's two formal letters to the Church on the subject, using the language of revelation. "Verily, thus saith the Lord" is the authority for the practice and its procedures (D&C 127:6). History is implied in reestablishing any principle, but divine reconstruction is not dependent on fragmentary sources: "For I am about to restore many things to the earth, pertaining to the priesthood, saith the Lord of Hosts" (D&C 127:8). This appendix started with the views of scholars narrowly analyzing the single verse of 1 Corinthians 15:29. Joseph Smith was far from anti-intellectual, but he employed a method beyond scholarship. In writing to the Church on baptism for the dead, he gave an inspired synthesis, a revealed correlation of important scriptures that throw great light on the practice (D&C 128), not to mention the passages from 1 Peter 3 and 4 cited throughout his discourses. The Prophet had a synoptic view of his subject, not an isolated interpretation of 1 Corinthians 15:29. He eloquently pictured God's concern with the salvation of all his children.

The candid and universal spirit in Joseph Smith remarkably mirrors these same qualities in Paul, who expressed deep admiration for the faithful martyrs of the past and a harmony with them in God's great work: "They without us should not be made perfect" (Heb. 11:40). Joseph Smith used no scripture more often in explaining work for the dead, for it indicates the unity of the family of God in all ages and suggests salvation through interdependence, just as the turning of the children to their fathers does at the end of Malachi. One with the truth is obligated to share the gospel with the living, and Joseph Smith insists on the same horizon for the dead, "for their salvation is necessary and essential to our salvation" (D&C 128:15). Joseph Smith admitted that vicarious baptism was indeed a "bold doctrine," yet one he rightfully declared because he held "a dispensation of the priesthood . . . by actual revelation" (D&C 128:9).

This appendix stresses the main points that baptism was an ancient practice and that it could be reestablished only by divine instruction to latter-day prophets. It will close with a scholar's views on both of these issues. Here is one of the off-the-record conversations with experts that goes behind their more formal lectures and publications. It comes through my friend and Brigham Young University colleague Paul R. Cheesman, who took the trouble to outline his visit with Edgar Goodspeed on the subject of baptism for the dead. Goodspeed was best known for his popular and precise "American Translation" of the New Testament, where 1 Corinthians 15:29 begins, "Otherwise, what do people mean by having themselves baptized on behalf of the dead?" Professionally, he was a world expert in the Christian documents of the first two centuries and the everyday language of the papyri that reveal so much about New Testament words. So his testimony is impressive, captured in its main points by Professor Cheesman's reconstruction:

Interview between Dr. Edgar J. Goodspeed and Paul R. Cheesman, held in Dr. Goodspeed's office on the campus of the University of California at Los Angeles during the summer of 1945.

Cheesman: Is the scripture found in 1 Corinthians 15:29 translated properly as found in the King James Translation?

Goodspeed: Basically, yes.

Cheesman: Do you believe that baptism for the dead was practiced in Paul's time?

Goodspeed: Definitely, yes.

Cheesman: Does the church to which you belong practice it today?

Goodspeed: No.

Cheesman: Do you think it should be practiced today?

Goodspeed: This is the reason why we do not practice it today. We do not know enough about it. If we did, we would practice it.

Cheesman: May I quote you as a result of this interview?

Goodspeed: Yes. [^23]

NOTES

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Leon Morris, The First Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians (London: Tyndale Press, 1964), p. 218.
[^2] F. F. Bruce, The New Century Bible Commentary: 1 and 2 Corinthians (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1971), p. 148.
[^3] William F. Orr and James Arthur Walther, 1 Corinthians (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1981), p. 337.
[^4] James Hope Moulton and George Milligan, The Vocabulary of the Greek Testament (Grand Rapids Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1980), p. 651.
[^5] B. M. Foschini is the most vigorous spokesman for the minority view that Paul's words translate into something other than proxy baptism. He has appeared to be near those claiming that many past interpretations make no interpretation possible, but his unusual solution is to modify the normal understanding of the preposition and the punctuation, one that finds little support by Greek scholars. See "Baptism for the Dead," New Catholic Encyclopedia (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967), p. 68.
[^6] Compare Foschini's feeling for the inconsistency of those who claim that Paul argued from a practice with which he did not agree: "We cannot, however, conceive how a man like St. Paul could leave uncensured such a superstitious rite, had it existed." (Ibid.) But if the ceremony did exist, the apostle's tolerance, so apparently strange, is a clue to deeper views than most biographers realize.
[^7] Justin Martyr, Dialogue with Trypho the Jew 72:4, literal translation from the text of Edgar J. Goodspeed, Die altesten Apologeten (Gottingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1914). The translation in the Ante-Nicene Fathers reads: "The Lord God remembered his dead people of Israel who lay in the graves, and he descended to preach to them his own salvation." Justin claimed this a deleted passage from Jeremiah. Irenaeus's use clearly shows that second-century Christians considered it an accurate summary of Christ's visit to the spirit prison. See Against Heresies 3.20 and 4.22.1—the Latin reading has influenced my translation of "the Lord God of Israel."
[^8] Hugh W. Nibley, "Baptism for the Dead in Ancient Times," Improvement Era, Dec. 1948 through April 1949.
[^9] Irenaeus, Against Heresies 4.27.1. The version here and in the next quotation is that of J. B. Lightfoot, The Apostolic Fathers (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book House, 1962), pp. 277-78, a translation carefully following the Latin.
[^10] Ibid.
[^11] Compare Richard L. Anderson, Euangelion—A Study in New Testament Context (Brigham Young University, M.A. Thesis, 1957).
[^12] Daniel J. Theron, trans., Evidence of Tradition (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book House, 1958), p. 113, with "chair" substituted for "seat."
[^13] Quasten 1:93.
[^14] The Shepherd of Hermas, similitude 9.16.2-4 (Loeb Classical Library, Kirsopp Lake trans.).
[^15] Ibid., 9.16.3-7.
[^16] Quasten 1:101.
[^17] The Elders Journal 1:43 (July 1838), also cited in Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, selected by Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), p. 121.
[^18] For the date of completion of the manuscript, see Robert J. Matthews, "A Plainer Translation": Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1975), pp. 36-37, 96. Dean Matthews courteously took the time to share his transcribed notes of the manuscript of the Joseph Smith Translation, which show that the verses on preaching to the dead in 1 Peter 3 and 4 are singled out by being handwritten, with no evidence of corrections after first being written. Thus, that the correction was made by 1833 is quite clear. Dean Matthews also noted characteristic misspellings of Sidney Rigdon in the handscript of the letters of Peter (compare his book, p. 89). Historian Dean Jesse knows of no document showing Sidney Rigdon as the Prophet's scribe after leaving Kirtland.
[^19] Ehat and Cook, p. 268.
[^20] Ibid., p. 77.
[^21] Ibid., p. 370, with my bracketed word and punctuation.
[^22] Ibid., p. 77.
[^23] Joseph Smith to the Twelve, October 1840, cited in Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2d ed. rev., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51) 4:231.
