Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul ( 1983)

Appendix D

Glossary of Ancient Sources

Paul's physical world and the world of thought surrounding him have been illustrated in this book through the best available sources of his time. This short dictionary gives dates generally estimated or reconstructed for persons, plus a concise identification to estimate the value of each source. None of these sources have been quoted for insight into Paul's life and thought unless they are nearly contemporary with him, though information about his cities must often come from a wider time spectrum. Further information is easily available from standard reference works, such as the Oxford Classical Dictionary or the Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church. Additional ancient sources used in the appendixes are identified there.

Apocalypse of Abraham Considered to have been written at the end of the first century. A Jewish-Christian book describing Abraham's conversion from idolatry and his visions of the preexistence and the Creation. See chapter 8, note 77, for Hugh Nibley's evaluation.

Apostolic Fathers A.D. 96—150. A standard collection of the earliest Christian writings after the apostles, the most significant of which are the letters from the bishops Clement of Rome, Ignatius, and Polycarp, as well as the long Shepherd of Hermas.

Aristotle 384—322 B.C. The Greek philosopher who began as a pupil of Plato and learned enough to write on the whole range of science and humanities known to the ancient world.

Augustus 63 B.C.—A.D. 14. The first emperor, a leader who brought peace and a new constitution to Rome just before the Christian era.

Catullus 84—54 B.C. A Roman poet who illustrates the changing values of Italian society prior to Paul.

Chester Beatty Papyri A.D. 175. The oldest nearly complete New Testament manuscripts, discovered and collected in the 1930s.

Cicero 106—43 B.C. A prominent Roman statesman whose writings reveal political and geographical conditions of his time.

Clement, First See Clement of Rome.

Clement, Second Probably first half of first century. Early Christian letter or sermon found in the collection known as the Apostolic Fathers.

Clement of Alexandria A.D. 150—215. A competent Alexandrian Christian scholar who had access to second-century information on the earlier Church from teachers and writings.

Clement of Rome Prominent about A.D. 96. The first bishop after the apostles whose writings have survived. At the end of the first century he directed a letter from Rome to Corinth, criticizing the Corinthian Saints for dismissing their priesthood leaders, who had been lawfully appointed. This letter is known as 1 Clement.

Dio Cassius Prominent at the beginning of the third century. A senator and Roman historian who capably used earlier sources.

Ecclesiasticus Written about 180 B.C. A book of the traditional Apocrypha that contains the wisdom of the orthodox scribe Jesus, son of Sirach.

Epicurus 341-270 B.C. The founder of one of the most influential schools of thought after Plato and Aristotle.

Eusebius A.D. 260-340. Prominent Christian bishop whose scholarship was recognized by Constantine. His Ecclesiastical History is invaluable for its quotation of early sources now lost.

Hegesippus Prominent in the mid—second century. A historian of early Palestinian Christianity, fragments of whose writings survive in the history of Eusebius.

Hermas See Shepherd of Hermas.

Ignatius A.D. 35—107. Bishop of Antioch who was arrested and martyred in the early second century. On his way to Rome he wrote seven letters that describe chaotic conditions in the Asian churches. These are found in the collection known as the Apostolic Fathers.

Irenaeus A.D. 130—200. Bishop of Lyons, France, at the height of the threat of the Gnostics, whose views he reports from contemporary and earlier information.

Jesus, the Son of Sirach See Ecclesiasticus.

Josephus A.D. 37—100. Jewish political and military leader who was taken to Rome after Jerusalem's fall of A.D. 70. His detailed histories are a prime source of first-century Jewish information.

Justin Martyr A.D. 100—165. A philosopher converted to Christianity, whose debate with Trypho the Jew dates from A.D. 135 and who also described second-century worship in a defense to the emperor.

Juvenal Prominent in the early second century. A poet whose biting satire gives insight into Roman society shortly after Paul.

Lucian Prominent after the mid—second century. A Greek philosophersatirist who describes ancient life while exposing its inconsistencies.

Mishnah Compiled about A.D. 200. The earliest written version of the Pharisees' laws. Easily available in the translation of Herbert Danby, it is a mine of information on ancient Judaism, much of it dating back to great Rabbis of Paul's time.

Muratorian Fragment A.D. 175. A partially preserved list of New Testament books accepted as authentic by the Christian churches in the second century. Traditional background is included for some books and for the end of Paul's life.

Origen A.D. 185-253. A brilliant and prolific Alexandrian scholar who was well informed on what the Christian church of his day knew about its origins.

Pausanias Prominent about A.D. 150. A traveler who left detailed descriptions of his tours through the mainland Greek cities.

Philo 20 B.C.—A.D. 50. A Jewish scholar of Alexandria who blended Hebrew traditions with the Greek education of his day.

Plato 429—347 B.C. An Athenian deeply influenced by his teacher Socrates. In addition to writing many other probing dialogues, Plato reconstructed Socrates' defense, given before Socrates was sentenced to death.

Pliny the Elder A.D. 24—79. A member of the Roman middle class who compiled a massive encyclopedia of the world and objects in it.

Pliny the Younger A.D. 61—112. The nephew of the elder Pliny. He was a senator whose correspondence discloses much political and personal information about Roman life.

Plutarch A.D. 50—120. A traditional Greek of the educated class who wrote about people, customs, pagan religion, and philosophy.

Polycarp A.D. 69—155. Bishop of Smyrna in Asia Minor, he had known John. Soon after Ignatius died in the very early second century, Polycarp wrote a letter to the Philippians, which is included in the collection known as the Apostolic Fathers.

Quintilian A.D. 30—100. A revered Roman teacher of rhetoric who wrote on the nature of language and classical education.

Seneca 4 B.C.—A.D. 65. A capable Roman writer-philosopher who was also minister of state under Nero.

Shepherd of Hermas Written about A.D. 155, with parts probably much earlier. The longest book in the collection entitled the Apostolic Fathers, it was written by Hermas, brother of the Roman bishop, as visions and instructions from an angel appearing as a shepherd.

Strabo 64 B.C.—A.D. 21. Careful geographer who lived in Asia Minor and reported much from personal knowledge.

Suetonius A.D. 69—130. A middle-class Roman with a distinguished career in the civil service, he wrote biographies of the first-century emperors.

Tacitus A.D. 56—115. Roman senator-historian with good sources and a deep sense of realism in evaluating the events and emperors of the first century.

Tertullian A.D. 160—220. An educated lawyer-Christian who made primitive Christianity his quest and defended its principles in biting writings.

Ulpian Prominent in the early third century. For a time the chief legal officer in Rome, Ulpian summarized criminal and administrative law from traditional materials.

Wisdom of Solomon Written just before the Christian Era. One of the books of the traditional Apocrypha, it expresses conventional Jewish devotion and wisdom.

Xenophon 428-354 B.C. A native Athenian who involved himself in national affairs and wrote on a wide variety of subjects, including the dramatic march of Cyrus' Greek army through Asia Minor.

Zadokite Document Considered to have been written in the first century B.C. One of the principle writings of the Essenes of the Dead Sea community, it outlines the struggle with evil and the rules of the sect. 1983
