Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 4 ( 1965)

Preface

Volume 4 of Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants begins with a revelation that has provided this dispensation, the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, with valuable information about the government of the Church. From this priesthood revelation (Section 107), given March 28, 1835, the volume continues the sections in numerical sequence through Section 136.

The Doctrine and Covenants from Sections 1 through 133 contains revelations and historical material given through Joseph Smith. Section 133 was received in November 1831, but Section 132 carries the date of July 12, 1843, the last revelation in the Doctrine and Covenants received by the Prophet. What follows, by section, is material prepared by others than the Prophet and a revelation to Brigham Young. Section 134, a declaration of belief regarding governments and laws in general, was written by Oliver Cowdery during the Joseph Smith period; Section 135, the historical statement of the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, was written by John Taylor; Section 136, received by Brigham Young, is the revelation concerning preparations for the trek across the plains.

In the sections of the Doctrine and Covenants covered in this volume, one will find, in general, the reason why President Joseph F. Smith said the following:

I say to my brethren that the book of Doctrine and Covenants contains some of the most glorious principles ever revealed to the world, some that have been revealed in greater fulness than they were ever revealed before to the world; and this, in fulfilment of the promises of the ancient prophets that in the latter times, the Lord would reveal things to the world that had been kept hid from the foundation thereof; and the Lord has revealed them through the Prophet Joseph Smith. (Conference Report, October 1913, p. 9.)

In addition to Section 107, other major revelations discussed in Volume 4 include Section 109, the dedicatory prayer for the Kirtland Temple; Section 110, the account of the restoration of keys of the priesthood by Moses, Elias, and Elijah; Section 112, concerning the Twelve Apostles; Section 115, in which the name of the Church is revealed and a fundamental purpose of the Church is given; Section 116, about Adam-ondi-Ahman, where an important council of priesthood leaders of all dispensations will convene; Section 119, the law of tithing; Section 121, a revelation on the fate of the apostate and the manner in which the priesthood members should govern themselves; Section 122, a revelation on adversity; Section 124, on temple ordinances, the necessity of obeying leadership, the appointment of Hyrum Smith as Patriarch to the Church and Assistant President, the purpose of officers in the Church, and the general conference; Section 128, on salvation of the dead and the restoration of the keys of the dispensations; Sections 129, 130, and 131, doctrinal matters of the highest significance; Section 132, the revelation on marriage for eternity, including plural marriage. The remaining sections have been mentioned above.

In the Lord's Preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, we are informed that the message of the dispensation as carried in the Doctrine and Covenants is not only for the members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, but also "unto all men, and there is none to escape. . . ." (D&C 1:2.) In fact, "the voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days" (D&C 1:4), and the revelations are to be published unto the "inhabitants of the earth" (D&C 1:6).

In other words, as President Joseph Fielding Smith has said, this book belongs not alone to the Latter-day Saints, but to the entire world. However, it becomes a person's book only when he accepts it as scripture. (Doctrines of Salvation 3:201.)

In September 1832, the Lord reminded the Saints of their responsibility to observe the commandments given in the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants as well as the condemnation upon Zion if repentance would not follow. This admonitory instruction seems as pertinent today as then.

And your minds in times past have been darkened because of unbelief, and because you have treated lightly the things you have received—

Which vanity and unbelief have brought the whole church under condemnation.

And this condemnation resteth upon the children of Zion, even all. And they shall remain under this condemnation until they repent and remember the new covenant, even the Book of Mormon and the former commandments which I have given them, not only to say, but to do according to that which I have written—

That they may bring forth fruit meet for their Father's kingdom; otherwise there remaineth a scourge and judgment to be poured out upon the children of Zion. (D&C 84:54-58.)

When one examines the number of revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants by years, as shown in "Background Information on the Doctrine and Covenants" in Volume 1, it will be noted that the years 1829-1833 were the most fruitful, with 99 revelations. Three revelations are recorded for the preceding years, beginning with 1823. In other words, of the 133 sections for which the Prophet was responsible, three times as many were given during the five "fruitful" years than in the ten years from 1834 to 1843. Does this mean that as the dispensation lengthened fewer revelations were received?

This is a complex question to answer, and a number of answers might be given. Shortly before and for several years after the Church was organized on April 6, 1830, there was a definite need for many more recorded revelations than later. Revelations addressed to individuals who sought wisdom from the Prophet make up many early revelations. In these, great doctrinal truths are enunciated. The doctrines of the Church were not always revealed in fulness in the beginning, but piecemeal through the years. Questions regarding church administration, duties of officers, guidance for the members of the Church, the place of the priesthood in the gospel, and the events of the future—all these and many more subjects claimed the interest of the members. As fast as the Saints were prepared to receive more revelation, they were given "in their time." One might think of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants as the "constitution" of the Church, and subsequent revelations as additions to this fundamental framework.

Not all of the revelations received by the Prophet Joseph Smith are included in the Doctrine and Covenants. The first compilation, A Book of Commandments, contained 65; the 1835 edition, The Doctrine and Covenants, 102; the 1844 edition, 111; the 1876 edition, 136, the same as the current edition, 1921. By appointment of the First Presidency, the 1876 edition was prepared by Elder Orson Pratt; the latest edition, under the direction of Elder James E. Talmage. The important fact is that there is sufficient in the present edition to give exaltation to the obedient.

The primary source of the other revelations by the Prophet is the seven-volume History of the Church by Joseph Smith. In this source one will find that there are many revelations entitled "Revelation."

Among these revelations are those giving counsel and instruction to individuals and also doctrinal subjects. An example of a revelation to an individual that might have application in some present-day homes, and for which the family home evening program and home teaching are intended to assist, is the following:

Revelation.

Mine anger is kindled against my servant Reynolds Cahoon, because of his iniquities, his covetous and dishonest principles, in himself and family, and he doth not purge them away and set his house in order. Therefore, if he repent not, chastisement awaiteth him, even as it seemeth good in my sight, therefore go and declare unto him these words. (HC 2:299, November 1, 1835.)

A revelation not captioned "Revelation" (of which there are many), but which is of doctrinal importance, was referred to by the Prophet in a sermon delivered April 8, 1844, at a general conference:

You know very well that the Lord has led this Church by revelation. I have another revelation in relation to economy in the Church—a great, grand, and glorious revelation. I shall not be able to dwell as largely upon it now as at some other time; but I will give you the first principles. You know there has been great discussion in relation to Zion—where it is, and where the gathering of the dispensation is, and which I am now going to tell you. . . . The whole of America is Zion itself from north to south, and is described by the Prophets, who declare that it is the Zion where the mountain the Lord should be, and that it should be in the center the land. . . .

I have received instructions from the Lord that from henceforth wherever the Elders of Israel shall build up churches and branches unto the Lord throughout the States, there shall be a stake of Zion. In the great cities, as Boston, New York, etc., there shall be stakes. (HC 6:318-19.)

An example of a prophecy, comparable with Section 87 on war, is:

I prophesied that the Saints would continue to suffer much affliction and would be driven to the Rocky Mountains, many would apostatize, others would be put to death by our persecutors or lose their lives in consequence of exposure or disease, and some of you will live to go and assist in making settlements and build cities and see the Saints become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains. (HC 5:85, August 6, 1842.)

Vision is one method of revelation. The number of visions received by the Prophet is numerous, but most of them are not in the Doctrine and Covenants. An important one in its doctrinal message is the following:

The heavens were opened upon us, and I beheld the celestial kingdom of God. . . .

Thus came the voice of the Lord unto me saying—

Revelation.

All who have died without a knowledge of this Gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that Kingdom, for I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts.

And I also beheld that all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability, are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven. (HC 2:380-81, January 21, 1836.)

If one were to cite the great many inspired statements of the Prophet Joseph Smith, a sizeable number of sections similar to Sections 130 and 131 of the Doctrine and Covenants could be prepared. (The purpose of this discussion is not to argue that we should have additions to or another Doctrine and Covenants, but to substantiate the thesis that the Prophet had many revelations in addition to those in the Doctrine and Covenants. The principle of continuous revelation was very active during his lifetime.) The following are only a few examples:

The gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, cannot be received through the medium of any other principle than the principle of righteousness, for if the proposals are not complied with, it is of no use, but withdraws. (HC 3:379, June 27, 1839.)

The spirit of revelation is in connection with these blessings. A person may profit by noticing the first intimation of the spirit of revelation; for instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing into you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas, so that by noticing it, you may find it fulfilled the same day or soon; (i.e.) those things that were presented unto your minds by the Spirit of God, will come to pass; and thus by learning the Spirit of God and understanding it, you may grow into the principle of revelation, until you become perfect in Christ Jesus. (HC 3:381.)

As concerning the resurrection, I will merely say that all men will come from the grave as they lie down, whether old or young; there will not be "added unto your stature one cubit," neither taken from it; all will be raised by the power of God, having spirit in their bodies, and not blood. (HC 4:555, March 20, 1842.)

Except a man and his wife enter into an everlasting covenant and be married for eternity, while in this probation, by the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood, they will cease to increase when they die; that is, they will not have any children after the resurrection. (HC 5:391.)

Salvation means a man's being placed beyond the power of all enemies. (HC 5:392, May 17, 1843.)

The great misery of departed spirits in the world of spirits, where they go after death, is to know that they come short of the glory that others enjoy and that they might have enjoyed themselves, and they are their own accusers. (HC 5:425, June 11, 1843.)

Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was. (HC 6:364, May 12, 1844.)

History of the Church is a rich legacy available to this generation. It is very possible that among the "other books," other than the Bible, that Nephi saw come forth for the salvation of men in our day are the inspired writings of the Prophet's history.

A question asked frequently is: Why has not the Doctrine and Covenants had more revelations added to it? President Joseph Fielding Smith answered this question as follows:

When the Lord has a revelation to be placed in the Doctrine and Covenants he will indicate it. The Doctrine and Covenants does not contain all the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith. It is a "selection" of revelations which contain doctrines and commandments covering every phase of salvation, which, if we will follow them, will direct us to the celestial kingdom. The Lord has given revelation to each of the presidents of the Church, but it is unnecessary that every word revealed should be added to that volume. President Wilford Woodruff said:

"I have had the administration of angels in my day and time, though I never prayed for an angel. I have had, in several instances, the administration of holy angels. . . . The Lord revealed to me by vision, by revelations, and by the Holy Spirit, many things that lay before me." (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, pp. 288, 300.)

President Brigham Young had similar experiences, and the revelations of the Lord were with him in directing the pioneers across the plains. He had the revelations from the Lord in the building of colonies and cities throughout the western territory and in sending forth men and women to colonize them. The history which is written gives evidence of that inspiration. President John Taylor also was directed during many trying days by revelation from the Lord. President Joseph F. Smith was likewise led, and we have at our command his vision of the redemption of the dead. (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, p. 601. Read also pages 596-602.) President Heber J. Grant had the spirit of prophecy and revelation, to the writer's knowledge, for the benefit of the members of the Church, and so has it been down to the present day.

Can you tell me why some members of the Church are clamoring for more revelation to be placed in the Doctrine and Covenants, when most of those who do are not keeping the commandments of the Lord that are already revealed? What privilege does a person have to ask for more revelation, when he does not conform his life to the commandments already given? There is a very significant statement in Section 59 of the Doctrine and Covenants as follows:

"And they (the saints who are faithful) shall also be crowned with blessings from above, yea, and with commandments not a few, and with revelations in their time—they that are faithful and diligent before me." (D&C 59:4.) . . .

Let us one and all take an inward look. Perhaps it is because we have not humbled ourselves; because we have failed to heed the commandments and to accept and abide in the revelations already given, that there is not more given to us. It is my humble opinion that we are receiving council by inspiration, or revelation, at every general conference of the Church. Would it not be wise for the members of the Church to pay more heed to these counsels and prepare ourselves for more to come? (Answers to Gospel Questions, 1958, 2:202-5.)

Revelation is given as members of the Church heed the counsel of the prophets, seers, and revelators. An important aspect of this subject was revealed January 2, 1831. The members of the Church, including the Prophet, had been praying about the outcome of conditions in the world. The Lord revealed that because of these prayers he was making known to his prophet sufficient concerning the subject and admonished them to receive it lest the wickedness of men would bring about events that would find them unprepared for these events. The Lord said:

Ye hear of wars in far countries, and you say that there will soon be great wars in far countries, but ye know not the hearts of men in your own land.

I tell you these things because of your prayers; wherefore, treasure up wisdom in your bosoms, lest the wickedness of men reveal these things unto you by their wickedness, in a manner which shall speak in your ears with a voice louder than that which shall shake the earth; but if ye are prepared ye shall not fear. (D&C 38:29-31.)

If we listen to the words of the living prophets, we shall then find the answers to our personal problems. Thus, the windows of heaven are open to the faithful through the prophets of the Lord. An important question is: Are we sufficiently humble to accept as inspired the words of the prophets? An additional question might be asked: Are we also living in such a way as to receive the personal revelation to which we are entitled?

The Savior instructed the Nephites that if they would receive what had already been revealed, "then shall the greater things be made manifest unto them." (3 Nephi 26:9-10.)

Revelation need not be always expressed as "Thus saith the Lord" and placed in written form. Elder Harold B. Lee of the Council of the Twelve related the following at the Brigham Young University on October 15, 1952:

Brother [John A.] Widtsoe, who, coming home from a Stake Conference some years ago, told of a little discussion he had with a group of officers round about the Stake between meetings. In the course of one of these discussions someone had said to him, "Brother Widtsoe, how long has it been since the Church received a revelation?" Brother Widtsoe rubbed his chin thoughtfully and said in reply, "Oh, probably since last Thursday." [On Thursdays the First Presidency and the Twelve meet.] I think that surprised the people who asked.

In this same sermon Elder Lee said:

I recall an incident a little over six months ago when an important matter had been decided upon, and the Presidency had called the Twelve to announce the decision. After the decision had been made, it was a thrilling thing to hear the President of the Church say, "Brethren, the Lord has spoken." It was a wonderful thought to hear the President before he left for his mission to Europe, in a sort of a farewell talk to the Council, say something like this to them: "Brethren, pray for me. This is an important mission that I am going on. Pray for me, and I'll try to live so that the Lord can answer your prayers through me."

Specific testimonies of revelation as well as printed revelations may be found throughout the dispensation. Here is what President Brigham Young said on the subject:

It has been observed that the people want revelation. This is revelation; and were it written, it would then be written revelation, as truly as the revelations which are contained in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. I could give you revelation about going to California, for I know the mind of the Lord upon that matter. I could give you revelation upon the subject of paying your Tithing and building a temple to the name of the Lord; for the light is in me. I could put these revelations as straight to the line of truth in writing as any revelation you ever read. I could write the mind of the Lord, and you could put it in your pockets. But before we desire more written revelation, let us fulfil the revelations that are already written, and which we have scarcely begun to fulfil. (Journal of Discourses 6:319, April 7, 1852.)

Examples and illustrations, as valuable as they are in helping to build faith in a principle of the gospel, do not provide the sure word of prophecy in and of themselves. Ultimately, in the life of each person there must come the conviction of the Holy Ghost. As scripture is made by the Holy Ghost, so also the knowledge of the truth must come by the same Spirit. Many years of research into the writings and sermons of the prophets, seers, and revelators of the dispensation have only confirmed what the Spirit had already revealed personally to the author—scripture is being made today. The Doctrine and Covenants is a most glorious book, full of truths about which a sincere truthseeker will exclaim: "It is of God!" With equal fervor and knowledge, he also testifies that continuous revelation is in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, as evidenced by the words of the prophets, seers, and revelators of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times! Of these things, there is no question in the mind of him who has received the witness of the Holy Ghost.
