Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 4 ( 1965)

Section 107

Revelation on Priesthood, given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, dated March 28, 1835. On the date named the Twelve met in council, confessing their individual weaknesses and shortcomings, expressing repentance, and seeking the further guidance of the Lord. They were about to separate on missions to districts assigned. See History of the Church, vol. 2, p. 209.—Distinction between the Aaronic and the Melchizedek Priesthoods—The right of presidency belongs to the Melchizedek Priesthood—High authority of the Presidency of the High Priesthood—The Bishopric as the presidency of the Aaronic Priesthood—Duties of the several quorums and of the presiding officers thereof—The Twelve constitute the Traveling Presiding High Council—The Twelve to ordain evangelical ministers, or Patriarchs—Descent of the patriarchal order from Adam to Noah—Bishops to be chosen from the High Priesthood unless literal descendants of Aaron are made known—The order of Church tribunals—No one in the Church exempt from accountability.

George Q. Cannon: Introduction

On the 14th day of February, 1835, the Prophet called an assemblage at Kirtland of all the men who had formed the Camp of Zion. He said to call this meeting he had been directed by the Almighty. The elders who had passed through the trials and sufferings of the journey to Zion were to be ordained to the ministry to go forth and prune the vineyard for the last time before the coming of the Lord. Twelve men were to be chosen as Apostles to bear testimony of the name of the Lord Jesus and to send it abroad among all nations, kindreds, tongues and people.

Under the hands of the Prophet the three witnesses of the Book of Mormon, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris were blessed by the direction of the Holy Spirit to choose the Twelve Apostles of the Church. The men thus selected were all equal in authority, but in a later time the Prophet designated the order in which they should sit in council—that is, according to age the eldest first. And under this rule the first Quorum of the Twelve Apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ in these last days were: Thomas B. Marsh, David W. Patten, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, William E. McLellin, Parley P. Pratt, Luke Johnson, William Smith, Orson Pratt, John F. Boynton, and Lyman E. Johnson. . . .

To the twelve it was not only a call to the ministry; for some of them it was a call to martyrdom.

Of the disciples chosen then and of those since selected to keep the quorum complete, not one has escaped the afflictions of time.

With some the pains were too intense to be endured, the burdens too heavy to be borne; and they dropped aside from the on-marching ranks to find, as they hoped, repose and safety amidst the cooling shadows of that world from which they had been chosen to be special witnesses of the Son of God. Such are no longer His apostles.

But the others, with unshaken resoluteness, have gone forward in fulfillment of their high mission, under the scorching heat of fiery persecution. Joseph is their captain and their fellow soldier in the cause of Christ. With him and after him many of them have, with continuous and unyielding zeal, toiled steadily on until worn out in the performance of the duty assigned them by their Master Jesus; they have passed to the enjoyment of His promised rest. With Him they and the other faithful apostles will stand triumphant when human time shall be no more, and when the voice of the Eternal shall fill the universe with the thunder of His judgments. They shall not then be only twelve; for they who have been called of God to this holy calling and who endure faithful, though they may lay down their mortality, yet shall they not lose their apostleship; for it abideth with them in this world and in the worlds to come. [Sec. 124:130.] (Life of Joseph Smith, 1907, pp. 177-79.)

Joseph Smith: Introduction

In compliance with the above request [Footnote: According to the explanatory note the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 107, the forepart of this revelation, the first fifty-eight verses, was given March 28th, the same day the Twelve ask the Prophet to enquire of the Lord for them, the other items were revealed at sundry times] , I inquired of the Lord, and received for answer the following: [Section 107, follows.] (HC 2:210, March 28, 1835; Kirtland, Ohio.)

John A. Widtsoe: Introduction

One hundred years ago this spring great things happened in this Church; the greatest, as an evidence of God's guiding hand over his Church, occurred on March 28th, 1835, just a few days more than one hundred years ago. On that day The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints received a revelation which is one of the most remarkable documents in the possession of man. It stands absolutely unique; there is none like it . . . it sets forth, in plainness and simplicity, the organization of the quorums of the priesthood; the mutual relations of the quorums to one another; the judicial system of the Church is foreshadowed and outlined; and there is a wonderful picture of the early history of the priesthood. I doubt whether any other such documents, of the same small extent, the same few number of words, lies at the foundation of any other great human institution. . . .

It is so comprehensive in its brevity, so magnificent in its simplicity, that we have found no occasion, up to the present, to wish that it might have been more complete. . . .

I find in the History of the Church that the first Twelve who had been selected in February scarcely knew what to do. It was a new calling to them. Finally they assembled and decided that they would leave their homes and set about to preach the Gospel, in accordance with instructions given through the Prophet Joseph Smith. On March 28th, 1835, as they were about to leave on their missions, they sent to the Prophet Joseph Smith a letter, the major part of which reads as follows (It is signed by the Council of the Twelve, by their clerks, Orson Hyde and William E. M'Lellin):

"We feel to ask of him whom we have acknowledged to be our Prophet and Seer, that he inquire of God for us, and obtain a revelation, (if consistent) that we may look upon it when we are separated, that our hearts may be comforted. Our worthiness has not inspired us to make this request, but our unworthiness. We have unitedly asked God our Heavenly Father to grant unto us, through his Seer, a revelation of his mind and will concerning our duty that coming season, even a great revelation, that will enlarge our hearts, comfort us in adversity, and brighten our hopes amidst the powers of darkness." (HC 2:210, March 28, 1835.] (CR, April 1935, pp. 80-82.)

D&C 107 6D&C 107 1John Taylor: 1, 6

D&C 107 6D&C 107 1. . . There are two distinctive general Priesthoods, namely, the Melchizedek and Aaronic, including the Levitical Priesthood . . . they are both conferred by the Lord; that both are everlasting, and administer in time and eternity . . . the second Priesthood is called the Priesthood of Aaron; because it was conferred upon Aaron and his seed throughout all their generations . . . the lesser Priesthood is a part of, or an appendage to the greater, or the Melchizedek Priesthood, and has power in administering outward ordinances. The lesser or Aaronic Priesthood can make appointments for the greater, in preaching, can baptize, administer the sacrament, attend to the tithing, buy lands, settle people on possessions, divide inheritances, look after the poor, take care of the properties of the Church, attend generally to temporal affairs; act as common judges in Israel, and assist in ordinances of the Temple, under the direction of the greater or Melchizedek Priesthood. They hold the keys of the ministering of angels and administer in outward ordinances, the letter of the Gospel, and the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins. . . . It is further evident that as the Melchizedek Priesthood holds the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the church, and that the Presidency thereof has a right to officiate in all the offices of the Church, therefore that Presidency has a perfect right to direct or call, set apart and ordain Bishops, to fill any place or position in the Church that may be required for that ministry to perform in all the Stakes of Zion, or throughout the world.

D&C 107 6D&C 107 1Aaron and his sons held the Aaronic Priesthood, and the Levites were given unto them to minister unto them to keep his charge, the charge of the congregation, to do the service of the tabernacle, keep the instrument of the tabernacle, and the charge of the children of Israel. . . . [Numbers 3:5, 10.] They seemed to have been an appendage to the Aaronic Priesthood to assist in the service of the tabernacle and other duties. Aaron and his male descendants were selected for the Priesthood, and the other Levites as assistants, or an appendage. [Numbers 3:39, 44-45, 50-51.] (Items on Priesthood, 1899, pp. 30-31, 33-34.)

D&C 107 2Harold B. Lee: 2

D&C 107 2The priesthood

D&C 107 2The history of the Melchizedek Priesthood did not begin with this earth. The prophets understood the premortality existence of priesthood. The Apostle Paul expressed it when he said, "Without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of life; but made like unto the Son of God; abideth a priest continually." (Hebrews 7:3.) That men who are called of God to the authority of the ministry on earth may have been selected for such an appointment even before they took mortal bodies is clearly evident from the scriptures. (Articles of Faith, p.194.) In support of this doctrine, I bring you now three statements: two scriptural quotations and one from the Prophet. You recall Abraham received from the Lord this instruction, ". . . and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones; (meaning the organized intelligences before the world was) and God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born." (Abraham 3:22-23.)

D&C 107 2In the 13th chapter of Alma, verses 3 and 4, we have a very interesting observation that makes this point very clear. This Nephite prophet spoke of the priests who had been ordained after the order of the Son of God, and then added:

D&C 107 2"And this is the manner after which they were ordained—being called and prepared from the foundation of the world according to the foreknowledge of God, on account of their exceeding faith and good works; in the first place being left to choose good or evil; therefore they having chosen good, and exercising exceeding great faith, are called with a holy calling, yea, with that holy calling which was prepared with, and according to, a preparatory redemption of such.

D&C 107 2"And thus have they been called to this holy calling on account of their faith, while others would reject the Spirit of God on account of the hardness of their hearts and blindness of their minds, while, if it had not been for this they might have had as great privilege as their brethren." (Alma 13:3-4.)

D&C 107 2Now these are made clear by this statement of the Prophet:

D&C 107 2"Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was. (Now note this.) I suppose I was ordained to this very office in that Grand Council. It is the testimony that I want that I am God's servant and this people His people." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 365.) (Address to Seminary and Institute Faculty, "Priesthood," July 17, 1958, pp. 4-5.)

D&C 107 2Stephen L Richards: 2

D&C 107 2Priesthood

D&C 107 2The Priesthood is usually simply defined as "The power of God delegated to man." This definition, I think, is accurate. But for practical purposes I like to define the Priesthood in terms of service and I frequently call it "the perfect plan of service." I do so because it seems to me that it is only through the utilization of the divine power conferred on men that they may ever hope to realize the full importance and vitality of this endowment. It is an instrument of service. Its uses and purposes are all defined in terms of service, and the man who fails to use it is apt to lose it, for we are plainly told by revelation that he who neglects it "shall not be counted worthy to stand." [Sec. 107:100.]

D&C 107 2The Priesthood is not static and a man's ordination to it is not a static investiture. There may be some men, however, who so regard it, for they seem to be so smug and content with their ordinations.

D&C 107 2I can well imagine such a man going into the presence of the great Eternal Judge and saying in substance, "While I was on earth I was a High Priest. I come now to claim the reward of a High Priest." I think it is not difficult to suppose what may be his answer. He will likely be met with such questions as these, "What did you do when you were a High Priest? How did you use this great power which you held? Whom did you bless with it?" Upon his reply to such interrogatories as these will his reward be predicated? (CR, April 1937, pp. 46-47.)

D&C 107 2Charles W. Penrose: 2

D&C 107 2The priesthood

D&C 107 2When a woman is sealed to a man holding the Priesthood, she becomes one with him. . . . The glory and power and dominion that he will exercise when he has the fulness of the Priesthood and becomes a "king and a priest unto God," she will share with him. Sisters have said to me sometimes, "But, I hold the Priesthood with my husband." "Well," I asked, "what office do you hold in the Priesthood?" Then they could not say much more. The sisters are not ordained to any office in the Priesthood and there is authority in the Church which they cannot exercise; it does not belong to them; they cannot do that properly any more than they can change themselves into a man. . . . When you are sealed to a man of God who holds it and who, by overcoming, inherits the fulness of the glory of God, you will share that with him if you are fit for it, and I guess you will be. (CR, April 1921, p. 24.)

D&C 107 5Joseph F. Smith: 5

D&C 107 5All . . . offices . . . are appendages to this priesthood

D&C 107 5There is no office growing out of this Priesthood that is or can be greater than the Priesthood itself. It is from the Priesthood that the office derives its authority and power. No office gives authority to the Priesthood. No office adds to the power of the Priesthood. But all offices in the Church derive their power, their virtue, their authority, from the Priesthood. If our brethren would get this principle thoroughly established in their minds, there would be less misunderstanding in relation to the functions of government in the Church than there is. (CR, October 1903, p. 82.)

D&C 107 7Joseph F. Smith: 7

D&C 107 7The office of an Elder, of a High Priest, of a Seventy—all the offices in the Church are simply appendages to the Melchizedek Priesthood, and grow out of it. (CR, October 1903, p. 87.)

D&C 107 8Joseph Smith: 8

D&C 107 8The Melchizedek High Priesthood was no other than the Priesthood of the Son of God; that there are certain ordinances which belong to the Priesthood, from which flow certain results; and the Presidents or Presidency are over the Church; and revelations of the mind and will of God to the Church are to come through the Presidency. This is the order of heaven, and the power and privilege of this Priesthood. (HC 2:477, April 6, 1837.)

D&C 107 9Joseph F. Smith: 9

D&C 107 9We have the council of the first presidency consisting of three presiding high priests who are called of God and appointed to preside over the Church and over the Priesthood of God, and I want to say here that it does not follow and never has followed that the members of the first presidency of the Church are necessarily to be ordained apostles. They hold by virtue of their rights as presidents of the Church all the keys and all the authority that pertains to the Melchizedek Priesthood, which comprehends and comprises all of the appendages to that priesthood, the lesser priesthood and all the offices in the priesthood from first to last, and from least to greatest. (CR, April 1913, p. 4.)

D&C 107 10Joseph Smith: 10

D&C 107 10High Priests

D&C 107 10A High Priest is a member of the same Melchizedek Priesthood with the Presidency, but not of the same power or authority in the church. (HC 2:477, April 6, 1837.)

D&C 107 10Brigham Young: 10

D&C 107 10A person who is ordained to the office of an Elder in this kingdom has the same Priesthood that the High Priests, that the Twelve Apostles, that the Seventies, and that the First Presidency hold; but all are not called to be one of the Twelve Apostles, nor are all called to be one of the First Presidency, nor to be one of the First Presidents of all the Seventies, nor to be one of the Presidents of a Quorum of Seventies, nor to preside over the High Priests' Quorum; but every man in his order and place, possessing a portion of the same Priesthood, according to the gifts and callings to each. (JD, May 7, 1861, 9:89.)

SCD&C 107 10D&C 107 11D&C 107 12Joseph F. Smith: 10-12

SCD&C 107 10D&C 107 11D&C 107 12Today the question is, which is the greater—the High Priest or the Seventy, the Seventy or the High Priest? I tell you that neither of them is the greater, and neither of them is the lesser. Their callings lie in different directions, but they are from the same Priesthood. If it were necessary, the Seventy, holding the Melchizedek Priesthood, as he does, I say IF IT WERE NECESSARY—he could ordain a High Priest; and if it were necessary for a High Priest to ordain a Seventy, he could do that. Why? Because both of them hold the Melchizedek Priesthood. Then again, if it were necessary—though I do not expect the necessity will ever arise—and there was no man left on earth holding the Melchizedek Priesthood except an Elder, that Elder, by the inspiration of the Spirit of God, and by the direction of the Almighty, could proceed, and should proceed, to organize the Church of Jesus Christ in all its perfection, because he holds the Melchizedek Priesthood. But the house of God is a house of order, and while the other offices remain in the Church, we must observe the order of the Priesthood, and we must perform ordinances and ordinations strictly in accordance with that order, as it has been established in the Church through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his successors. (CR, October 1903, p. 87.)

SCD&C 107 13D&C 107 14D&C 107 15D&C 107 16D&C 107 17Orson Pratt: 13-17, 20

SCD&C 107 13D&C 107 14D&C 107 15D&C 107 16D&C 107 17There is a lesser Priesthood, sometimes called the Priesthood after the order of Aaron, or the Aaronic Priesthood, which is merely an appendage to the higher Priesthood of Melchizedek; in other words, it is included in the Priesthood of Melchizedek. It is more especially called the lesser Priesthood, because those holding it, and being in possession of no higher authority, can only obtain a certain portion or measure of the blessings that the Lord has in store for his people; it can proceed so far and no farther; it is limited in its nature, its power, its ordinances and its ministry. But when combined with the higher Priesthood after the order of Melchizedek, it then can receive all the blessings that are ordained of the Almighty to be bestowed upon his people in any dispensation. . . .

SCD&C 107 13D&C 107 14D&C 107 15D&C 107 16D&C 107 17The Priesthood of Aaron, being an appendage to the higher Priesthood, has power to administer in temporal ordinances, such as that of baptism for remission of sins, the administration of the Lord's Supper, and in attending to temporal things for the benefit of the people of God. Among the privileges that are granted to this lesser Priesthood is to hold communion with holy angels that may be sent down from heaven. . . . [Sec. 13.]

SCD&C 107 13D&C 107 14D&C 107 15D&C 107 16D&C 107 17Let me here say, for the benefit of those who have not studied the Doctrine and Covenants of the Church, that if we have literal descendants of Aaron, they have the birthright, through their obedience to the Gospel of the Son of God, to the Bishopric, which pertains to the lesser Priesthood, they have the right to claim it, and to all the keys and powers pertaining to it, they have the right to be ordained and set apart to that calling and to officiate therein, and that too without the aid of two counselors. That is what we are taught in modern revelation. But as we have none at present, to our knowledge, that belong to the seed of Aaron, that has the right to this by lineage, the Lord has pointed out that those who are ordained to the higher Priesthood have the right, by virtue of this higher authority, to administer, when set apart by the First Presidency, or under their direction and according to their instruction as Bishops to officiate in the Presidency of the lower Priesthood. This order has been followed ever since the Lord revealed these things to this Church. A Bishop must be ordained to the high Priesthood, and by authority of that Priesthood, he may be set apart as a Bishop to preside over the lesser Priesthood to exercise the functions thereof, with the exception of one condition, that is, he must have two counsellors ordained from among the high Priests of the Church. These three persons must officiate in relation to all the ordinances that pertain to the lesser Priesthood, and to administer in temporal things, having a knowledge of them by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, as we are taught in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. [Sec. 68:14-21.] (JD, May 13, 1877, 18:363-64.)

SCD&C 107 18D&C 107 19Orson Pratt: 18-19

SCD&C 107 18D&C 107 19The higher Priesthood after the order of the Son of God, we are told in a modern revelation, holds the power to commune with the Church of the Firstborn that are in heaven, and that too not in a spiritual sense alone; or, as some would infer, to commune with them without receiving any revelation, to commune with them without beholding their personages; but in the literal sense, even the same as one man communes with another. It holds not only the power of the ministration of holy angels to be seen personally, but also the power of beholding the face of God the Father, that through the power and manifestations of the spirit of God and of His angels we may be prepared to enter into the presence of God the Father in the world to come, and enjoy continual communion with Him, and be crowned with the glory of the celestial kingdom, to stand in our place and calling to all eternity, in connection with all those who hold the Priesthood in the eternal worlds. (JD, May 13, 1877, 18:363.)

SCD&C 107 21D&C 107 22Joseph F. Smith: 21-22

SCD&C 107 21D&C 107 22I will call your attention to the fact that the Lord in the beginning of this work revealed that there should be three High Priests to preside over the High Priesthood of His Church and over the whole Church. (D&C 107:22, 64, 65, 66, 67, 91, and 92.) He conferred upon them all the authority to preside over all the affairs of the Church. They hold the keys of the house of God, and of the ordinances of the Gospel, and of every blessing which has been restored to the earth in this dispensation. This authority is vested in a Presidency of three High Priests. They are three Presidents. The Lord himself so calls them. (D&C 107:29.) But there is one presiding President, and his counselors are Presidents also. . . . I have always held, and do hold, and trust I always shall hold, that it is wrong for one man to exercise all the authority and power of presidency in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. (CR, November 1901, p. 82.)

SCD&C 107 21D&C 107 22David O. McKay: 21-22

SCD&C 107 21D&C 107 22The Lord has said that the three presiding high priests chosen by the body, appointed and ordained to this office of presidency, are to be "upheld by the confidence, faith, and prayer of the Church." No one can preside over this Church without first being in tune with the head of the Church, our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. He is our head. This is his Church. Without his divine guidance and constant inspiration, we cannot succeed. With his guidance, with his inspiration, we cannot fail.

SCD&C 107 21D&C 107 22Next to that as a sustaining potent power, come the confidence, faith, prayers, and united support of the Church. (CR, April 1951, p. 157.)

D&C 107 22J. Reuben Clark, Jr: 22

D&C 107 22Upheld by the confidence . . . of the Church

D&C 107 22To speak in terms of political science, this assembly here today, this Annual Conference, of the Priesthood and membership of the Church will, for the purpose of sustaining the Authorities of the Church, act as a constituent assembly. Every General Authority of the Church, as well as other Church officers, comes before such an assembly twice each year.

D&C 107 22Again speaking in terms of political science, in the Church the nominating power rests in a group, the General Authorities, but the sustaining or electing power rests in the body of the Church, which under no circumstances nominates officers, the function of the Church body being solely to sustain or to elect. In fact, as will be seen, the General Authority or other officer, is proposed to the body of the Church for their sustaining vote. . . .

D&C 107 22Furthermore, the actual procedure for voting is normally by the uplifted hand of those present. No electioneering, no speech-making, no stating of objections, no proposing of candidates, no vocal demonstration of any kind is in order. Anyone seeking to do any of these things would not only be out of order as a matter of procedure, but would be likewise breaking the peace of the State by interrupting and disturbing a public assembly, would be subject to arrest as a disturber of the peace, and if necessary, would have to be so dealt with as a matter of public order. This assembly might be called the "voting booth" of the Church. . . .

D&C 107 22It is obvious that only members of the Church are entitled to vote, and an excommunicant is not a member.

D&C 107 22Anyone not desiring to sustain anyone proposed may not only indicate his dissent here but he may, if he wishes, present his objections to the proper authority of the Church, and will be given an appropriate hearing. This is the rule and order of the Church. . . .

D&C 107 22With this view of the rights, powers, and duties of the President of the High Priesthood of the Church, and also of the First Presidency (D&C 107:64-66; 102:9; 107:91, 92; 90:12, 15, 16; 107:33, 39; 81:2), it is clear that the sustaining vote by the people is not, and is not to be regarded as, a mere matter of form, but on the contrary a matter of the last gravity. Every person is entitled to indicate whether or not he or she can sustain the officer proposed. While all the Church members vote and sustain the officer, yet the sustaining Priesthood power comes from the Priesthood itself. Your voting will result in the Church body's acknowledging the administration of the man appointed by revelation as the Presiding High Priest over the High Priesthood of the Church. (CR, April 1940, pp. 71-74.)

D&C 107 22Wilford Woodruff: 22

D&C 107 22Do you know of any reason in case of the death of the President of the Church why the Twelve Apostles should not choose some other than the President of the Twelve to be the President of the Church?

D&C 107 22I know of several reasons why they should not. First, at the death of the President of the Church the Twelve Apostles become the presiding authority the Church, and the president of the Twelve is really the President of the Church, by virtue of his office as much while presiding over the Twelve Apostles as while presiding over his two counselors. . . . Second, in case of the death of the President of the Church it takes a majority of the Twelve Apostles to appoint the President of the Church, and it is very unreasonable to suppose that the majority of that quorum could be converted to depart from the course marked out by inspiration and followed by the Apostles at the death of Christ and by the Twelve Apostles at the death of Joseph Smith. (Wilford Woodruff, March 28, 1877, p. 561.)

D&C 107 23James E. Talmage: 23

D&C 107 23The Twelve Apostles

The title "Apostle" is one of special significance and sanctity; it has been given of God, and belongs only to those who have been called and ordained as "special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world, thus differing from other officers in the Church in the duties of their calling." (D&C 107:23.) By derivation the word "Apostle" is the English equivalent of the Greek "apostolos," indicating a messenger, an ambassador, or literally "one who is sent." It signifies that he who is rightly so called, speaks and acts not of himself, but as the representative of a higher power whence his commission issued; and in this sense the title is that of a servant, rather than of a superior. Even the Christ, however, is called an Apostle, with reference to His ministry in the flesh (Hebrews 3:1); and this appellation is justified by His repeated declarations that He came to earth to do not His own will but that of the Father by whom He was sent. [John 4:34; 5:30; 6:38-39.]

D&C 107 23So great is the sanctity of this special calling, that the title "Apostle" should not be used lightly as the common or ordinary form of address applied to living men called to this office. The quorum or council of the Twelve Apostles as existent in the Church today may better be spoken of as the "Quorum of the Twelve," the "Council of the Twelve," or simply as the "Twelve," and as the "Twelve Apostles," except as particular occasion may warrant the use of the more sacred term. It is advised that the title "Apostle" be not applied as a prefix to the name of any member of the Council of the Twelve; but that such a one be addressed or spoken of as Brother______ or Elder______, and when necessary or desirable, as in announcing his presence in a public assembly, an explanatory clause may be added, thus, "Elder______ one of the Council of the Twelve." (LEJ, February 24, 1914, 11:580-81.)

SCD&C 107 23D&C 107 24Brigham Young: 23-24

SCD&C 107 23D&C 107 24What ordination should a man receive to possess all the keys and powers of the Holy Priesthood that were delivered to the sons of Adam? He should be ordained an Apostle of Jesus Christ. That office puts him in possession of every key, every power, every authority, communication, benefit, blessing, glory, and kingdom that was ever revealed to man. That pertains to the office of an Apostle of Jesus Christ. (JD 9:87, May 7, 1861.)

SCD&C 107 23D&C 107 24Now brethren, the calling of an Apostle is to build up the kingdom of God in all the world: it is the Apostle that holds the keys of this power, and nobody else. If an Apostle magnifies his calling, he is the word of the Lord to this people all the time, or else he does not magnify his calling;—either one or the other.

SCD&C 107 23D&C 107 24If he magnifies his calling, his words are the words of eternal life and salvation to those who hearken to them, just as much so as any written revelations contained in these three books (Bible, Book of Mormon, and Doctrine and Covenants). There is nothing contained in these three books that is any more revelation than the words of an Apostle that is magnifying his calling. (JD, August 29, 1852, 6:282.)

SCD&C 107 23D&C 107 24Charles W. Penrose: 23-24

SCD&C 107 23D&C 107 24When the Prophet Joseph was taken, and the quorum of the First Presidency was thus dissolved, it devolved upon the Twelve. Read this Section 107 and you will find that the Lord gave to the Twelve authority to hold the keys, equal with the First Presidency—that is, when the First Presidency was dissolved. The Quorum of the Twelve came next, and they had power to set in order all the other offices in the Church. That is part of their duty, as the Lord has commanded in this section. . . . God knew what was coming, and He so ordered things that Brigham [Young] stood at the head of the Twelve and when the Prophet Joseph, and the Prophet Hyrum, the Patriarch, were taken, the Twelve came up in their place, as the Lord had ordained. Satan then had twelve to overcome instead of three. Furthermore, you will find in the same revelation, in Section 107, that even if the Twelve should all be taken away, then there are Seventy to come up. [Sec. 107:26.] It puts one in mind of the Irishman's wall. He built it five feet high and eight feet thick, and when they asked him the reason, he said that if the wind came and blew it over it would be higher than it was before. . . . So the Lord ordained, in the order of the priesthood, that when the First Presidency was dissolved, the Twelve should succeed, having all the keys, power and authority to regulate the Church and to organize the quorums. Thus it was that President Young and the Twelve conducted the affairs of the Church for some time. There was a majority of the Twelve who stood faithful, who were ready to do their duty, and the Lord says that "a majority may form a quorum" when it is impossible to have them all together. The vacant places were filled up in the quorum; and when the proper time came, President Young, who was a Presiding High Priest (so are all the Twelve—God's High Priests—a presiding traveling High Council), and his two counselors, were upheld and sustained by the vote and faith and fellowship of the Church, and formed the Presidency of the Church, in the way God has appointed. (CR, October 1905, pp. 41-42.)

SCD&C 107 23D&C 107 24Wilford Woodruff in behalf of the Council of Twelve: 23-24

SCD&C 107 23D&C 107 24After the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph there were pretenders who asserted that they had the right to take his place at the head of the Church. Some were deceived by their pretensions, not being familiar with the order of the Priesthood.

SCD&C 107 23D&C 107 24For some time before his death the Prophet Joseph was inspired of the Lord to anticipate his own departure from earthly scenes. This was shown in various ways; but especially in the great anxiety which he displayed to bestow upon the Twelve Apostles all the keys and authority of the Holy Priesthood which he had received. He declared in private and in public that they were equipped and fully qualified and that he had rolled the kingdom of God onto the shoulders of the Twelve Apostles.

SCD&C 107 23D&C 107 24I, Wilford Woodruff, being the last man living in the flesh who was present upon that occasion feel it a duty I owe The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, to the House of Israel, and to the whole world to bear this my last testimony to all nations, that in the winter of 1843-44, Joseph Smith, the Prophet of God, called the twelve apostles together in the City of Nauvoo, and spent many days with us in giving us our endowments, and teaching us those glorious principles which God had revealed to him. And upon one occasion he stood upon his feet in our midst for nearly three hours declaring unto us the great and last dispensation which God had set His hand to perform upon the earth in these last days. The room was filled as if with consuming fire; the Prophet was clothed upon with much of the power of God, and his face shone and was transparently clear, and he closed that speech, never-to-be-forgotten in time or in eternity, with the following language:

SCD&C 107 23D&C 107 24"Brethren, I have had great sorrow of heart for fear that I might be taken from the earth with the keys of the Kingdom of God upon me, without sealing them upon the heads of other men. God has sealed upon my head all the keys of the kingdom of God upon the earth, and to prepare the Saints for the coming of the Son of Man. Now brethren, I thank God I have lived to see the day that I have been enabled to give you your endowments, and I have now sealed upon your heads all the powers of the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods and Apostleship, with all the keys and powers thereof, which God has sealed upon me; and I now roll off all the labor, burden and care of this Church and Kingdom of God before heaven and earth, and before God, angels and men; and if you don't do it you will be damned."

SCD&C 107 23D&C 107 24And the same spirit that filled the room at that time burns in my bosom while I record this testimony, and the Prophet of God appointed no one else but the Apostles to stand at the head of the Church and direct its affairs. (Pamphlet—Church Historical Department, October 1888.)

SCD&C 107 23D&C 107 24Orson Hyde: 23-24

SCD&C 107 23D&C 107 24Who has ever read Brigham Young's writings in which he has laboured to establish his right and claim to the Presidency of the Church? No one. God pleads his own cause through Brigham, because he obeys him; but man has to plead the cause of man who is sordid, illiberal, murmuring, and corrupt.

SCD&C 107 23D&C 107 24In the month of February, 1848, the Twelve Apostles met at Hyde Park, Pottawattamie County, Iowa, where a small Branch of the Church was established; and I must say that I feel not a little proud of the circumstance, and also very thankful, on account of its happening in my own little retired and sequestered hamlet, bearing my own name. We were in prayer and council, communing together; and what took place on that occasion? The voice of God came from on high, and spake to the Council. Every latent feeling was aroused, and every heart melted. What did it say unto us? "Let my servant Brigham step forth and receive the full power of the presiding Priesthood in my Church and kingdom." This was the voice of the Almighty unto us at Council Bluffs, before I removed to what was called Kanesville. It has been said by some that Brigham was appointed by the people, and not by the voice of God. I do not know that this testimony has often, if ever, been given to the masses of the people before; but I am one that was present on that occasion, and did hear and feel the voice from heaven, and we were filled with the power of God. This is my testimony; these are my declarations unto the Saints—unto the members of the kingdom of God in the last days, and to all people.

SCD&C 107 23D&C 107 24We said nothing about the matter in those times, but kept it still. (After seating myself in the stand, I was reminded of one circumstance that occurred, which I omitted in my discourse. Men, women, and children came running together where we were, and asked us what was the matter. They said that their houses shook and the ground trembled, and they did not know but that there was an earthquake. We told them that there was nothing the matter—not to be alarmed; the Lord was only whispering to us a little, and that he was probably not very far off. We felt no shaking of the earth or of the house, but were filled with the exceeding power and goodness of God.) We knew and realized that we had the testimony of God within us. On the 6th day of April following at our annual conference, held in the Log Tabernacle at Kanesville, the propriety of choosing a man to preside over the Church was investigated. In a very few minutes it was agreed to, and Brigham Young was chosen to fill that place without a dissenting voice, the people not knowing that there had been any revelation touching the matter. They ignorantly seconded the voice of the Lord from on high in his appointment. . . . Yes, the voice of God was the voice of the people. Brigham went right ahead, silently, to do the work of the Lord, and to feed his sheep, and take care of them like a faithful shepherd, leaving all vain aspirants to quarrel and contend about lineal descent, right, power, and authority. (JD, October 1860, 8:233-34.)

D&C 107 23Joseph Fielding Smith: 23

D&C 107 23Special witnesses

D&C 107 23Let us consider briefly the great responsibilities which devolve upon the apostles. They are special witnesses for Jesus Christ. It is their right to know the truth and have an abiding witness, and this is an exacting duty upon them, to know that Jesus Christ is in very deed the Only Begotten Son of God, the Redeemer of the world and the Savior of all those who will confess their sins, repent and keep his commandments. The question frequently arises: "Is it necessary for the members of the Council of the twelve to see the Savior in order to be an apostle?" It is their privilege to see him if occasion requires, but the Lord has taught that there is a stronger witness than seeing a personage, even of the Son of God, in a vision. I wish we could get this clear in the minds of the members of the Church. The Savior said:

D&C 107 23"Wherefore I say unto you, all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men.

D&C 107 23"And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him, but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come." (Matt. 12:31-32.)

D&C 107 23Therefore the seeing, even the Savior, does not leave as deep an impression in the mind as does the testimony of the Holy Ghost to the spirit. Both Peter and Paul understood this. Here are the words of Paul:

D&C 107 23"For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost,

D&C 107 23"And have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come,

D&C 107 23"If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame." (Heb. 6:4-6.)

D&C 107 23What is the lesson to be learned from this? That the impressions on the soul that come from the Holy Ghost are far more significant than a vision. It is where Spirit speaks to spirit, and the imprint upon the soul is far more difficult to erase. Every member of the Church should have the impressions on his soul made by the Holy Ghost that Jesus is the Son of God indelibly pictured so that they cannot be forgotten. We read that it is the Spirit that giveth life. [2 Cor. 3:6.] (Address to Seminary and Institute Faculty, "The Twelve Apostles," 1958, p. 6.)

D&C 107 26Anthon H. Lund: 26

D&C 107 26Equal in authority to that of the Twelve

D&C 107 26If the First Presidency is dissolved through the death of the Prophet, then the Twelve apostles have the authority to take the reins of government. [Sec. 107:23-24.] Should there ever arise such a case as the Apostles' quorum also being dissolved (which I do not think will ever happen), the Lord has further provided that a quorum of Seventy can hold and exercise the same power. I see a beautiful illustration here of the Lord's providence, in providing that his Church shall not be left in doubt. (CR, November 1901, p. 75.)

D&C 107 26Spencer W. Kimball: 26

D&C 107 26Today we announce to you the appointment of four new General Authorities to assist in the carrying forth of the work of the Lord, especially in the missionary area. The First Quorum of the Seventy will be gradually organized, eventually with seventy members, the presidency of which will be made up of the seven members. Three Brethren this day will be added to the First Quorum of the Seventy. (CR, October 1975, pp. 3-4.)

D&C 107 26Today we shall present four additional members of the First Quorum of the Seventy to you for your votes.

D&C 107 26In 1941, five high priests were called to assist the Twelve Apostles in their heavy work, and to fill a role similar to that envisioned by the revelations for the First Quorum of the Seventy. The scope and demands of the work at that time did not justify the reconstitution of the First Quorum of the Seventy. In the intervening years, additional Assistants to the Twelve have been added and today we have twenty-one.

D&C 107 26Commencing a year ago, brethren other than the First Council of the Seventy were called into the First Quorum of the Seventy, and at present there are fourteen in that quorum, including the First Council.

D&C 107 26Since the functions and responsibilities of the Assistants to the Twelve and the Seventy are similar, and since the accelerated, worldwide growth of the Church requires a consolidation of its administrative functions at the general level, the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve, with the concurrence of the Assistants to the Twelve and the First Quorum of the Seventy, have felt inspired to call all of the Assistants to the Twelve into the First Quorum of the Seventy, to call four new members into the quorum, and to restructure the First Council of the Seventy.

D&C 107 26You will see that these changes, which are reflected in the list of General Authorities to be read by President Tanner, bring to thirty-nine the total number in the First Quorum of the Seventy, thus providing a quorum to do business.

D&C 107 26With this move, the three governing quorums of the Church defined by the revelations—the First Presidency, the Quorum of the Twelve, and the First Quorum of the Seventy—have been set in their places as revealed by the Lord. This will make it possible to handle efficiently the present heavy workload and to prepare for the increasing expansion and acceleration of the work, anticipating the day when the Lord will return to take direct charge of His church and kingdom. (CR, October 1976, p. 10.)

SCD&C 107 27D&C 107 28D&C 107 29D&C 107 30D&C 107 31D&C 107 32Lorenzo Snow: 27-32

SCD&C 107 27D&C 107 28D&C 107 29D&C 107 30D&C 107 31D&C 107 32Here are my counselors. We are one. We are united. . . . And here we have twelve men sitting in front with us—Twelve Apostles. There are many of these that you know. . . . We are united together. We do not quarrel with each other. We do not slander one another, but we go where counsel requires and we are heart and soul together. What for? Not to make ourselves rich, not to make ourselves wealthy, but to see what we can accomplish in the interests of the people, and we are laboring continually to see what we can do. We come together every week and we talk about what we can do for the people. What can we do for these forty-two or forty-three Stakes of Zion? (CR, October 1900, p. 5.)

SCD&C 107 27D&C 107 28D&C 107 29D&C 107 30D&C 107 31D&C 107 32Stephen L Richards: 27-32

SCD&C 107 27D&C 107 28D&C 107 29D&C 107 30D&C 107 31D&C 107 32Now who is entitled to interpret the doctrine of the Church, granting that same items are susceptible of different constructions? I am sure that upon serious reflection there is no real difference of opinion on this question among the members. It is so well established by the revelations which we have received and the practice of the Church that the President and his Counselors are invested with this authority that I cannot believe any member will seriously dispute it. In the language of the revelation they, the Presidency, are constituted "a quorum . . . to receive the oracles for the whole Church." [Sec. 124:126.] They are the supreme court here on earth in the interpretation of God's law.

SCD&C 107 27D&C 107 28D&C 107 29D&C 107 30D&C 107 31D&C 107 32In the exercise of their functions and delegated powers they are controlled by a constitution, a part of which is written and a part of which is not. The written part consists in authenticated scripture, ancient and modern, and in the recorded utterances of our latter-day prophets. The unwritten part is the spirit of revelation and divine inspiration which are appertinent to their calling.

SCD&C 107 27D&C 107 28D&C 107 29D&C 107 30D&C 107 31D&C 107 32In formulating their interpretations and decisions they always confer with the Council of the Twelve Apostles who by revelation are appointed to assist and act with them in the government of the Church. When, therefore, a judgment is reached and proclaimed by these officers it becomes binding upon all members of the Church, individual view to the contrary notwithstanding. God's Kingdom is a kingdom of law and order. [Sec. 132:8.] He is the Lawgiver and the Supreme Judge, but he has delegated authority and conferred the keys of the Kingdom upon these men whom he has chosen. They act for him and, thank the Lord, we accept them. It is the only safe thing to do.

SCD&C 107 27D&C 107 28D&C 107 29D&C 107 30D&C 107 31D&C 107 32There are some, perhaps, who may feel that it is subversive of individual freedom of thought and expression to be controlled by the interpretations of our leaders. I wish to assure them that any feeling of constraint will disappear when once they secure the genius and true spirit of this work. Our unanimity of thought and action does not arise, as some suppose, from duress or compulsion in any form. Our accord comes from universal agreement with righteous principles and common response to the operation of the Spirit of our Father. It is actuated by no fear except one. That is the fear of offending God, the Author of our work. (CR, October 1938, pp. 115-16.)

D&C 107 29George Q. Cannon: 29

D&C 107 29Their decisions are not entitled to the same blessings

D&C 107 29There are at the head of this Church, chosen by the Lord, three men, who constitute what is called the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. One is the President. The other two are his Counselors. But all three are Presidents, according to the revelations. One, however, holds the keys. President [Wilford] Woodruff is distinguished from every other one of us by the fact that he possesses the keys of the kingdom on the earth. He represents the Supreme authority. His voice to us, in its place, brings to us the voice of God. Not that he is God; not that he is infallible. He is a fallible man. His Counselors are fallible men. The First Presidency cannot claim, individually or collectively, infallibility. Infallibility is not given to men. They are fallible. But God is infallible. And when God speaks to the Church through him who holds the keys, it is the word of the Lord to this people. Can President Woodruff do this without his counselors? I do not know what he can do, or what he might do; but I know that he does not do it. I know that President [Brigham] Young did not, nor President [John] Taylor. I know that President Joseph Smith did not. He sought the counsel of his Counselors. They acted in concert, they are a power. But, as it was said . . . if the First Presidency were divided, and the Twelve were divided, then we would not have the blessings that God has promised, and I do not know what would be our fate. (MS, September 5, 1895, 57:566-67.)

D&C 107 30Stephen L Richards: 30

D&C 107 30The decisions of these quorums

D&C 107 30Now, I don't know that it is possible for any organization to succeed in the Church under the priesthood without adopting the genius of our Church government. What is that? As I conceive it, the genius of our Church government is government through councils. The Council of the Presidency, the Council of the Twelve, the Council of the Stake Presidency, or quorum, if you choose to use that word, the Council of the Bishopric, and the quorum or Council of the Quorum Presidency. I have had enough experience to know the value of councils. Hardly a day passes but that I see the wisdom, God's wisdom, in creating councils: to govern his kingdom. In the spirit under which we labor, men can get together with seemingly divergent views and far different backgrounds, and under the operation of that spirit, by counseling together, they can arrive at an accord, and that accord (the occasions are so negligible as not to be mentioned), and therefore I say that accord is always right. That accord represents the wisdom of the council, acting under the Spirit. (CR, October 1953, p. 86.)

D&C 107 33James E. Talmage: 33

D&C 107 33Though an Apostle is thus seen to be essentially an envoy or ambassador, his authority is great, as is also the responsibility associated therewith, for he speaks in the name of a power greater than his own—the name of Him whose special witness he is. When one of the Twelve is sent to minister in any stake, mission or other division of the Church or to labor in regions where no Church organization has been effected, he acts as the representative of the First Presidency, and has the right to use his authority in doing whatever is requisite for the furtherance of the work of God. His duty is to preach the Gospel, administer the ordinances thereof, and set in order the affairs of the Church, wherever he is sent. (LEJ, February 24, 1914, 11:581.)

SCD&C 107 34D&C 107 35John A. Widtsoe: 34-35

SCD&C 107 34D&C 107 35It was in this notable revelation [Sec. 107] that the missionary work of the Church was formally organized for the first time in this dispensation. Missionary work has been done by this Church from the very beginning of its existence; and perhaps even before the Church was organized. But, when Section 107 was given, missionary work was formally established; the appointment and definition of the Twelve Apostles were clearly made; the labors and functions of the Seventies were equally clearly set out; and missionary work went forward, from that time on, as never before. (CR, April 1935, pp. 82-83.)

D&C 107 34Joseph Smith: 34

D&C 107 34On the 28th of February, the Church in council assembled, commenced selecting certain individuals to be Seventies, from the number of those who went up to Zion with me in the camp . . . to begin the organization of the first quorum of Seventies, according to the visions and revelations which I have received. The Seventies are to constitute traveling quorums, to go into all the earth, whithersoever the Twelve Apostles shall call them. (HC 2:201-2, February 28, 1835.)

D&C 107 34Rudger Clawson: 34

D&C 107 34The Seventy . . . act . . . in building up the church

D&C 107 34Next to the Twelve Apostles are the First Seven Presidents of the Seventies. Oh, what a heavy weight of responsibility rests upon these seven men! . . . These Seven Presidents are called to look after the interests of this great body of Seventies, to counsel, to direct, to warn them against the spirit of neglect and indifference, or commend them for their good works. Have they any time for idleness? Have they any time to waste? No, indeed! These men meet together regularly once a week, that they may counsel concerning the affairs of the quorums of Seventy, which are scattered throughout the Church, from Canada in the north to Mexico in the south. (CR, October 1903, p. 59.)

D&C 107 35Joseph Smith: 35

D&C 107 35What importance is there attached to the calling of these Twelve Apostles, different from the other callings or officers of the Church? . . .

D&C 107 35They are the Twelve Apostles, who are called to the office of the Traveling High Council, who are to preside over the churches of the Saints, among the Gentiles, where there is a presidency established; and they are to travel and preach among the Gentiles until the Lord shall command them to go to the Jews. They are to hold the keys of this ministry, to unlock the door of the Kingdom of heaven unto all nations, and to preach the Gospel to every creature. This is the power, authority, and virtue of their apostleship. (HC 2:200, February 27, 1835.)

SCD&C 107 36D&C 107 37Joseph Fielding Smith: 36-37

SCD&C 107 36D&C 107 37The first high council in this dispensation was organized at the home of Joseph Smith in Kirtland, February 17, 1834. The First Presidency presided in this council and the following brethren were chosen as its members: Joseph Smith, Sen., John Smith, Joseph Coe, John Johnson, Martin Harris, John S. Carter, Jared Carter, Oliver Cowdery, Samuel H. Smith, Orson Hyde, Sylvester Smith, and Luke S. Johnson. Several days before this action was taken the Prophet had explained the manner in which councils should be conducted. "No man," said he, "is capable of judging a matter in council unless his own heart is pure." Ancient councils were conducted with strict propriety; no one was permitted to whisper, leave the room, or think of anything but the matter before them for consideration. If the presiding officer could stay, others were expected to do the same, until the Spirit was obtained and righteous decision was reached. . . .

SCD&C 107 36D&C 107 37The day after the revelation was given regarding the endowments (D&C, Sec. 105), a council of high priests met and called a number of individuals to receive these blessings in the house of the Lord; and on the 3rd of July, 1834, the high priests assembled and a high council for the Church in Missouri was organized agreeable to the revelation and pattern given in Kirtland. (Essentials in Church History, 1950, pp. 169, 178.)

SCD&C 107 36D&C 107 37Joseph Smith: 36-37

SCD&C 107 36D&C 107 37On the third of July, the High Priests of Zion assembled . . . in Clay County [Missouri] , and I proceeded to organize a High Council, agreeable to the revelation and pattern given at Kirtland [Section 102] , for the purpose of settling important business that might come before them, which could not be settled by the Bishop and his council. . . .

SCD&C 107 36D&C 107 37I gave the Council such instructions in relation to their high calling, as would enable them to proceed to minister in their office agreeable to the pattern heretofore given; read the revelation on the subject; and told them that if I should now be taken away, I had accomplished the great work the Lord had laid before me, and that which I had desired of the Lord; and that I had done my duty in organizing the High Council, through which council the will of the Lord might be known on all important occasions, in the building up of Zion, and establishing truth in the earth. (HC 2:122, 124, July 3, 1834.)

SCD&C 107 36D&C 107 37John Taylor: 36-37

SCD&C 107 36D&C 107 37In Kirtland, Ohio, a great many things were revealed through the Prophet. There was then a presidency that presided over the High Council, in Kirtland; and that High Council and another which was in Missouri, were the only High Councils in existence. As I have said, the High Council in Kirtland was presided over by Joseph Smith and his Counselors; and hence there were some things associated with this that were quite peculiar in themselves. It is stated that when they were at a loss to find out anything pertaining to any principles that might come before them in their councils, that the presidency were to inquire of the Lord and get revelation on those subjects that were difficult for them to comprehend. And I would make a remark here in relation to these things, that all High Councils, and all Presidents of Stakes, and Bishops, and in fact all men holding the Priesthood, who are humble and faithful and diligent and honest and true to the principles of our religion, if they seek unto God with that faith that he requires of us, he will give them wisdom under all circumstances and on all occasions, and the Holy Spirit will never fail to indicate the path they shall pursue. (JD, October 21, 1877, 19:241.)

D&C 107 38Rudger Clawson: 38

D&C 107 38The seven presidents of Seventies labor under the direction of the Twelve Apostles, and hold themselves in constant readiness to respond to every call. They are always on hand; we know where to find them. They go with the Twelve into the stakes of Zion, or wherever duty calls, in a spirit of cheerfulness and willingness. (CR, October 1903, p. 59.)

D&C 107 39Joseph Smith: 39

D&C 107 39Evangelical ministers

D&C 107 39An Evangelist is a Patriarch, even the oldest man of the blood of Joseph or of the seed of Abraham. Wherever the Church of Christ is established in the earth, there should be a Patriarch for the benefit of the posterity of the Saints, as it was with Jacob in giving his patriarchal blessing unto his sons. [Gen. 48; 49:1-27.] (HC 2:381, June 26, 1839.)

D&C 107 39Eldred G. Smith: 39

D&C 107 39Evangelical ministers

D&C 107 39Then in this day and age, and I think if our records were more complete, we would probably find something similar with those of ancient times, the Lord tells us in The Doctrine and Covenants that: [Sec. 107:39, quoted.]

D&C 107 39Thus today we have more than one patriarch; we have one or more in each of the stakes of the Church. . . . And just as it was in ancient times—today, too, the Lord's people desire his blessings. And as a Church we have the priesthood and the authority through which these blessings may be given. A patriarchal blessing today, given by an ordained patriarch, should contain a declaration of lineage, that is, the tribe of Israel through which the promises of inheritance shall come, even as assignments of inheritances were given in ancient Israel. . . .

D&C 107 39We know that some of the inhabitants of the earth who join the Church are not direct descendants of Israel. It is given to us that the descendants of Shem and Japheth, sons of Noah, if they receive the gospel, are entitled to the priesthood. Only the sons of Cain are not entitled to the priesthood, and you can read why in the Pearl of Great Price. [Moses 7:12, 21-22; Abr. 1:21-27.] So all the descendants of Shem and Japheth, as they accept of the gospel of Jesus Christ, are entitled to the blessings of Israel, because that was the promise given to Abraham, that through him all the families of the earth should be blessed.

D&C 107 39And so, as these patriarchal blessings are given, there is given a declaration of lineage, or an assignment; for a pure Gentile who joins the Church becomes by adoption of the seed of Abraham and of Israel. (Gen. 12:3; Abr. 2:11.) . . .

D&C 107 39It is required that patriarchal blessings be recorded in the Church records. The body of the blessing usually contains sacred promises for comfort or for counsel or warning, according to certain possibilities of blessings. All is predicated upon obedience to divine laws and faithfulness. The closing of a blessing is the sacred sealing of the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood. The blessing pronounced, with all it contains, should serve as a comfort and guide through life according to faithfulness and is sealed forever upon the conditions of faithfulness to the laws of God, which includes the laws of nature. Patriarchal blessings have been a source of guidance and comfort to tens of thousands of members of the Church. Their faith has been quickened and strengthened through them. (CR, April 1952, pp. 38-39.)

SCD&C 107 39D&C 107 40D&C 107 41D&C 107 42D&C 107 43D&C 107 44D&C 107 45D&C 107 46D&C 107 47D&C 107 48D&C 107 49D&C 107 50D&C 107 51D&C 107 52LeGrand Richards: 39-52

SCD&C 107 39D&C 107 40D&C 107 41D&C 107 42D&C 107 43D&C 107 44D&C 107 45D&C 107 46D&C 107 47D&C 107 48D&C 107 49D&C 107 50D&C 107 51D&C 107 52The calling of a patriarch or an evangelist is to bless the people or members of the Church. We read of evangelists in the New Testament but find nothing there to indicate what the particular duties of this calling in the priesthood are. [Acts 21:8; Eph. 4:11; 2 Tim. 4:5.] This information has come to us only through the revelations of the Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The Lord instructed the Twelve Apostles of his Church in this dispensation "to ordain evangelical ministers, as they shall be designated unto them by revelation" in all large branches of the Church. (See D&C 107:39.) Then he explained how this order of priesthood was confirmed to be handed down from father to son, indicating further that his order was instituted in the days of Adam and came down by lineage through the patriarchs: (Sec. 107:39-57.) (A Marvelous Work and a Wonder, p. 125.)

SCD&C 107 39D&C 107 40D&C 107 41D&C 107 42D&C 107 43D&C 107 44D&C 107 45D&C 107 46D&C 107 47D&C 107 48D&C 107 49D&C 107 50D&C 107 51D&C 107 52Joseph Fielding Smith: 39-52

SCD&C 107 39D&C 107 40D&C 107 41D&C 107 42D&C 107 43D&C 107 44D&C 107 45D&C 107 46D&C 107 47D&C 107 48D&C 107 49D&C 107 50D&C 107 51D&C 107 52In this revelation [Sec. 107] certain knowledge was revealed concerning the Patriarchal Priesthood and its descent from the beginning of time. Regarding this priesthood the Lord said: [Sec. 107:39-43, quoted.]

SCD&C 107 39D&C 107 40D&C 107 41D&C 107 42D&C 107 43D&C 107 44D&C 107 45D&C 107 46D&C 107 47D&C 107 48D&C 107 49D&C 107 50D&C 107 51D&C 107 52In the following verses are named the other patriarchs from Seth to Noah with the ages of each when ordained. In Genesis we find the descent continued as follows: Shem, Arphaxad, Salah, Eber, Peleg, Reu, Serug, Nahor, Terah, Abraham. (Gen. 11:10-26.) The father of Abraham from what we learn in the book of Abraham, turned to the worship of idols [Abr. 1:5-7; 2:5] ; therefore he either lost his priesthood or it passed by him; nevertheless the descent came through him to Abraham. From Abraham the birthright went to Isaac and from him to Jacob, who was named Israel. From Israel it went to Joseph, the firstborn son of Rachel. The reason for this birthright not going to Israel's oldest son or to any of Joseph's older brothers was evidently because each had forfeited it by transgression. Therefore, the birthright and the Patriarchal Priesthood continued through the seed of Joseph. Just why it was continued through Ephraim rather than through Manasseh, his older brother, we have not been informed, but we may be sure that the Lord had sufficient reason. From that time until now, this birthright has been vested in the descendants of Ephraim. (1 Chron. 5:1-2; Jer. 31:9; D&C 133:30-34.)

SCD&C 107 39D&C 107 40D&C 107 41D&C 107 42D&C 107 43D&C 107 44D&C 107 45D&C 107 46D&C 107 47D&C 107 48D&C 107 49D&C 107 50D&C 107 51D&C 107 52In the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times in which we live, the Lord revealed that this birthright of the first-born in Israel belonged to Joseph Smith, the father of the Prophet, and he was the first patriarch ordained in this dispensation. After his death the office and priesthood was conferred upon Hyrum Smith, the Prophet's oldest living brother. There is an interesting statement in a revelation given to Hyrum Smith in April, 1830, a few days after the organization of the Church. In this revelation the Lord said to him:

SCD&C 107 39D&C 107 40D&C 107 41D&C 107 42D&C 107 43D&C 107 44D&C 107 45D&C 107 46D&C 107 47D&C 107 48D&C 107 49D&C 107 50D&C 107 51D&C 107 52Behold, I speak unto you, Hyrum, a few words; for thou also art under no condemnation, and thy heart is open, and thy tongue loosed; and thy calling is . . . unto the church forever, and this because of thy family. (D&C 23:3.)

SCD&C 107 39D&C 107 40D&C 107 41D&C 107 42D&C 107 43D&C 107 44D&C 107 45D&C 107 46D&C 107 47D&C 107 48D&C 107 49D&C 107 50D&C 107 51D&C 107 52This appears to be a clear indication that he and his descendants after him should hold this patriarchal authority.

SCD&C 107 39D&C 107 40D&C 107 41D&C 107 42D&C 107 43D&C 107 44D&C 107 45D&C 107 46D&C 107 47D&C 107 48D&C 107 49D&C 107 50D&C 107 51D&C 107 52After the death of the Patriarch Joseph Smith, Sr., Hyrum Smith, who was serving as second counselor in the First Presidency of the Church, was called to take the office of patriarch, and the Lord said: [Sec. 124:91-93, quoted.] . . .

SCD&C 107 39D&C 107 40D&C 107 41D&C 107 42D&C 107 43D&C 107 44D&C 107 45D&C 107 46D&C 107 47D&C 107 48D&C 107 49D&C 107 50D&C 107 51D&C 107 52Today in each stake of Zion a patriarch is ordained, in some cases more than one. The patriarchs are authorized to give blessings to all faithful members of the Church, within the borders of the stake in which they live, who come properly recommended by their bishops. (IE, November 1956, pp. 789, 852-53.)

SCD&C 107 53D&C 107 54D&C 107 55D&C 107 56D&C 107 57Joseph Smith: 53-57

SCD&C 107 53D&C 107 54D&C 107 55D&C 107 56D&C 107 57I saw Adam in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman. He called together his children and blessed them with a patriarchal blessing. The Lord appeared in their midst, and he (Adam) blessed them all, and foretold what should befall them to the latest generation.

SCD&C 107 53D&C 107 54D&C 107 55D&C 107 56D&C 107 57This is why Adam blessed his posterity; he wanted to bring them into the presence of God. (HC 3:388, July 2, 1839.)

SCD&C 107 53D&C 107 54D&C 107 55D&C 107 56D&C 107 57John Taylor: 53-57

SCD&C 107 53D&C 107 54D&C 107 55D&C 107 56D&C 107 57Adam, before he left the earth, gathered his people together in the Valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and the curtain of eternity was unfolded before him, and he gazed upon all events pertaining to his descendants, which should transpire in every subsequent period of time, and he prophesied to them. He saw the flood and its desolating influence; he saw the introduction again of a people in the days of Noah; he saw their departure from the right path. He saw Abraham, Moses, and the prophets make their appearance and witnessed the results of their acts; he saw nations rise and fall; he saw the time when Jesus would come and restore the Gospel and when he would preach that Gospel to those who perished in the days of Noah; and in fact, he saw everything that should transpire upon the earth, until the winding up scene. He was acquainted with the day in which we live and the circumstances with which we are surrounded. (JD, April 8, 1875, 17:372.)

D&C 107 53John A. Widtsoe: 53

D&C 107 53There has been much speculation about the location of the Garden of Eden, where Adam and Eve were placed when they came on earth. The earliest record, the Bible, gives no conclusive clue. It says:

D&C 107 53And a river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from thence it was parted, and became into four heads.

D&C 107 53The name of the first is Pison: that is it which compasseth the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold;

D&C 107 53And the gold of that land is good: there is bdellium and the onyx stone.

D&C 107 53And the name of the second river is Gihon: the same is it that compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia.

D&C 107 53And the name of the third river is Hiddekel: that is it which goeth toward the east of Assyria. And the fourth river is Euphrates. (Gen. 2:10-14.)

D&C 107 53It has not been possible with this information to locate Eden with any certainty. Wild guesses have been made that Assyria and Ethiopia, names applied to countries in modern times, might furnish sufficient evidence, but without success.

D&C 107 53The question was finally answered to the satisfaction at least of the Latter-day Saints.

D&C 107 53In 1831, under revelation, the Prophet Joseph Smith directed the Church to found settlements in what is now the state of Missouri, at that time sparsely settled. In and near Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, the Saints planned to build a city to be called the "New Jerusalem, a land of peace, a city of refuge." [Sec. 45:66.] In that "city of Zion" was to be erected a temple to Almighty God. [Sec. 57:3; 84:3-4.]

D&C 107 53The Prophet designated the land at Independence and beyond as "the land where Adam dwelt." (D&C 117:8.) Further, he declared, again under revelation, (History of the Church 3:35) that Spring Hill, Daviess County, Missouri, is "the place where Adam shall come to visit his people," and called it Adam-ondi-Ahman. (D&C 116.) The revelation said that [Sec. 107:53, quoted] .

D&C 107 53Adam-ondi-Ahman is located on the north side of Grand River, in a sharp bend of the stream, on an elevated spot of ground overlooking the river and country roundabout. On the top of the hill was an ancient stone altar.

D&C 107 53". . . when the altar was first discovered, according to those who visited it frequently, it was about sixteen feet long, by nine or ten feet wide, having its greatest extent north and south. The height of the altar at each end was some two and a half feet, gradually rising higher to the center, which was between four and five feet high—the whole surface being crowning. Such was the altar of 'Diahman' when the Prophet's party visited it." (History of the Church 3:39.)

D&C 107 53According to these several revealed statements Adam lived in America, in the region known as the state of Missouri. The Garden of Eden must then have been on the American continent. This view is re-enforced by the recorded testimonies of those who heard Joseph Smith on this subject; for example, Brigham Young said:

D&C 107 53It is a pleasant thing to think of and to know where the garden of Eden was. Did you ever think of it? I do not think many do, for in Jackson County (Missouri) was the garden of Eden. Joseph has declared this and I am as much bound to believe that, as to believe that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. We must let the Lord take his own time and prepare the way for our return to that country, and to build up the Temple. (Journal History, January-April, 1857; March 15, p. 1.)

D&C 107 53Heber C. Kimball said:

D&C 107 53I will say more, the garden of Eden was Jackson County, in the state of Missouri; where Independence now stands. . . . The Prophet Joseph Smith frequently spoke of these things. (JD 10:235.)

D&C 107 53The relative location of Independence and that of Adam-ondi-Ahman corroborate the Bible. After the so-called "Fall," Adam and Eve were driven out of the garden and a flaming sword "placed at the east to keep the way of the tree of life." Apparently Adam and Eve entered the country east of the garden.

D&C 107 53Now Adam-ondi-Ahman is about seventy miles northeast of the city of Independence. If our first progenitors settled at Adam-ondi-Ahman, it is more likely that the people as they increased settled along the course of the Mississippi basin. Noah probably built the Ark near the river. When the flood came, it floated easily into the ocean, to the Asiatic continent where Noah and his family began again the work commenced by Adam. (Evidences and Reconciliations, 1951, 3:158-61.)

SCD&C 107 58D&C 107 59D&C 107 60D&C 107 61D&C 107 62D&C 107 63James E. Talmage: 58-63

SCD&C 107 58D&C 107 59D&C 107 60D&C 107 61D&C 107 62D&C 107 63The revealed word of God has provided for the establishment of presiding officers "growing out of, or appointed of or from among those who are ordained to the several offices in these two priesthoods." (D&C 107:21.) In accordance with the prevailing principles of order characteristic of all His work, the Lord has directed that the bearers of the Priesthood shall be organized into quorums, the better to aid them in learning and discharging the duties of their respective callings. (AF, 1950, p. 209.)

SCD&C 107 60D&C 107 61D&C 107 62Joseph F. Smith: 60-62

SCD&C 107 60D&C 107 61D&C 107 62There must needs be presiding elders . . . priests . . . teachers . . . and deacons

SCD&C 107 60D&C 107 61D&C 107 62Every man should be willing to be presided over, and he is not fit to preside over others until he can submit sufficiently to the presidency of his brethren. (IE, December 1917, 21:105.)

SCD&C 107 64D&C 107 65D&C 107 66D&C 107 67John Taylor: 64-67

SCD&C 107 64D&C 107 65D&C 107 66D&C 107 67The president of the church presides over all patriarchs, presidents, and councils of the church; and this presidency does not depend so much upon genealogy as upon calling, order, and seniority. (Times and Seasons, June 1, 1845, 6:921.)

SCD&C 107 65D&C 107 66First Presidency (Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, Anthon H. Lund): 65-66

SCD&C 107 65D&C 107 66Witness the calling, on February 14, 1835, of David Whitmer and Martin Harris, both High Priests, by the Prophet Joseph, in conformity with prior revelation from God (see Doctrine and Covenants section 18) to "search out the Twelve." They chose the Twelve, ordained, and set them apart for their exalted callings, because they were called upon by the prophet of God who had been instructed of the Lord, and also because these men held the necessary authority of the Priesthood, which authority was exercised, in this case as it should be in all cases, upon proper calling. The Doctrine and Covenants makes it very clear that which each officer in the Church has a right to officiate in his own standing, "The Melchizedek Priesthood holds the right of Presidency, and has power and authority over all the offices in the Church in all ages of the world to administer in spiritual things." (D&C 107:8.)

Further, in the same revelation, verses 65 and 66, we are told: [Sec. 107:65-66, quoted.]

SCD&C 107 65D&C 107 66It is well to remember that the term "High Priesthood," as frequently used, has reference to the Melchizedek Priesthood, in contradistinction to the "Lesser," or Aaronic Priesthood. (IE, May 1902, 5:550-51.)

SCD&C 107 68D&C 107 69D&C 107 70D&C 107 71D&C 107 72D&C 107 73D&C 107 74D&C 107 75D&C 107 76John Taylor: 68-76

SCD&C 107 68D&C 107 69D&C 107 70D&C 107 71D&C 107 72D&C 107 73D&C 107 74D&C 107 75D&C 107 76He [bishop] was to be a common judge among the inhabitants of Zion, or in a Stake of Zion, or in a branch of the Church, when he shall be set apart unto his ministry. His Bishopric is sufficient for any of these places when set apart: and he can only fill those offices for which he is set apart. But a literal descendant of Aaron has a legal right to the Presidency of this Priesthood, to the keys of this ministry, to act in the office of Bishop, without Counselors, except in a case when a President of the High Priesthood is tried. . . . the Bishopric is the Presidency of the Aaronic Priesthood, which is "an appendage to the greater or Melchizedek Priesthood," and that no man has a legal right to hold the KEYS of the Aaronic Priesthood, which presides over all Bishops and all the lesser Priesthood, except he be a literal descendant of Aaron. But, that "as a High Priest of the Melchizedek Priesthood has authority to officiate in all the lesser offices, he may officiate in the office of Bishop," . . . if called, set apart, and ordained unto this power "by the hands of the Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood." [Sec. 107:17.] The power and right of selecting and calling of the Presiding Bishop and general Bishops is vested in the First Presidency, who also must try those appointed by them in case of transgression, except in the case of a literal descendant of Aaron; who, if the firstborn, possesses a legal right to the keys of this Priesthood; but even he must be sanctioned and appointed by the First Presidency. This arises from the fact that the Aaronic is an appendage to the Melchizedek Priesthood.

SCD&C 107 68D&C 107 69D&C 107 70D&C 107 71D&C 107 72D&C 107 73D&C 107 74D&C 107 75D&C 107 76That the Presiding Bishop, who presides over all Bishops, and all of the lesser Priesthood, should consult the First Presidency in all important matters pertaining to the Bishopric. (Items on Priesthood, 1899, pp. 29, 31-32.)

D&C 107 68Rudger Clawson: 68

D&C 107 68In administering all temporal things

D&C 107 68I conceive it to be the duty of a Bishop, not so much to preach the gospel at length, or to occupy much time in the pulpit, but to be the executive officer of the ward, to deal in temporal affairs, and to be a common judge in Israel, and to sit in the Bishop's court and adjudicate and regulate the affairs of his ward, with his counselors. It is the duty of the Bishop particularly to see that the presidencies of the quorums of the Lesser Priesthood are active and faithful. Let him see also that the presidencies of the auxiliary organizations are faithful in the performance of their duty. The great responsibility resting upon him is to see that others do their duty, and let the preaching of the gospel be done by the brethren and sisters of his ward. (CR, April 1902, p. 30.)

D&C 107 74Charles W. Penrose: 74

D&C 107 74Thus shall he be a judge

D&C 107 74Jesus, the Christ, in giving that beautiful sermon that has been alluded to today, the Sermon on the Mount, in the 7th chapter of Matthew, you can read it, said to the multitude, "Judge not that ye be not judged, for with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged, and the measure ye mete out to others shall be measured to you again." [Vs. 1-2.] But judgment, to a great extent, is given into the hands of certain quorums and councils in this Church. One body to exercise judgment is the bishopric, the bishopric of a ward are appointed and ordained to be judges. A bishop is a common judge in Israel to sit with his counselors in judgment upon transgressors and upon those whose difficulties cannot be settled by the teachers who visit them in their homes. . . .

D&C 107 74Now . . . what the Savior meant was that you and I, in our capacity as individuals, as members, outside of any official duty imposed upon us, should not sit in judgment upon one another. . . . It is not our province as members of the Church, to sit in judgment upon one another and call bad names when we reflect upon the acts of people. We have no right, even if we are in official capacity, to form a one-sided judgment. There are two sides to every such question, if not more, always; and we should hear both, "hear defense before deciding, and a ray of light may gleam, showing thee what filth is hiding underneath the shallow stream." Hear the other side before you begin to find fault, and pass judgment. . . . So when we are called upon to sit in judgment, either in a bishop's court or in a high council, (to which the bishop's court may be appealed) if we are members of the high council, just remember what the Lord has said concerning such quorum or council. Every decision of these quorums that are organized must be given in justice, in righteousness, in equity, in fear of the Lord, and with the desire to do what is right, not out of personal feeling. [Sec. 102:16.] Personal feelings ought to be banished from our souls when we sit in judgment having the right to sit in judgment. (CR, October 1916, pp. 21-22.)

D&C 107 76Joseph Fielding Smith: 76

D&C 107 76A literal descendant of Aaron

D&C 107 76There are some men in the Church who have been blessed by patriarchs and pronounced descendants of Levi, but they have not made any claim to the office of bishop, for the revelation governing this situation says literal descendant of Aaron, not of Levi. There is evidently a great host of men who are descendants of Levi but not of Aaron.

D&C 107 76The person spoken of in the revelations as having the right by lineage to the bishopric is the one who is the firstborn. By virtue of his birth he is entitled to hold "the keys of authority of the same." This has reference only to the one who presides over the Aaronic Priesthood. It has no reference whatever to bishops of wards. Further, such a one must be designated by the First Presidency of the Church and receive his anointing and ordination under their hands. [Sec. 68:16-21.] The revelation comes from the Presidency, not from the patriarch, to establish a claim to the right to preside in this office. In the absence of knowledge concerning such a descendant, any high priest, chosen by the Presidency, may hold the office of Presiding Bishop and serve with counselors. [Sec. 68:19; 107:13-17.] (Doctrines of Salvation, 1956, 3:92-93.)

SCD&C 107 77D&C 107 78D&C 107 79D&C 107 80D&C 107 81D&C 107 82D&C 107 83D&C 107 84Joseph Fielding Smith: 77-84

SCD&C 107 77D&C 107 78D&C 107 79D&C 107 80D&C 107 81D&C 107 82D&C 107 83D&C 107 84The apostles constitute the traveling high council of the Church. . . .

SCD&C 107 77D&C 107 78D&C 107 79D&C 107 80D&C 107 81D&C 107 82D&C 107 83D&C 107 84There are several councils in the Church. The traveling high council has jurisdiction in all the world. The high councils in stakes have jurisdiction in a judicial way in the stakes. The First Presidency may sit as an appellate council and their decision is final. The Church is so organized that no member or officer, from the President to the last member received, is "exempted from justice and the laws of God." The special court, or council, presided over by the presiding bishopric has been called into existence several times. The Prophet Joseph Smith was tried before this council on charges made against him by Sylvester Smith after the return of Zion's Camp. Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Frederick G. Williams were each tried by this tribunal. (CHMR, 1949, 3:55.)

SCD&C 107 77D&C 107 78D&C 107 79D&C 107 80Charles W. Penrose: 77-80

SCD&C 107 77D&C 107 78D&C 107 79D&C 107 80An appeal can be made, if it is claimed that injustice is done, [in the High Council Court] to the Presidency of the Church, who do not sit as a court, to hear witness, but go over all the evidence as presented and attested by the clerk, to see if there is any wrong and mistake made, any injustice done, and if so, that they can point out the means, as provided in Section 107 of the Doctrine and Covenants, how the matter can be fully determined and heard again, if they so decide, and that the matter can be so looked into that every point, every part and every item of the decision can be questioned and examined, and a conclusion arrived at as to its justice and righteousness. (CR, October 1920, pp. 18-20.)

SCD&C 107 85D&C 107 86D&C 107 87D&C 107 88D&C 107 89D&C 107 90David O. McKay: 85-90

SCD&C 107 85D&C 107 86D&C 107 87D&C 107 88D&C 107 89D&C 107 90The organization of the Church is so perfect that every man, woman and child within the Church can find something to do; and therein depends the advancement of the person's spiritual welfare. Presidents of quorums: The Lord has said to you, as you will read in the 107th section of the Doctrine and Covenants, that it is your duty to meet with your quorum. If you are the president of a deacon's quorum, you are to meet with twelve deacons, and preside over them, to sit in counsel with them, and to teach them their duties. O deacons, throughout the world! Respond to the call. Do your duty, Bishops, you who hold the presidency of the Aaronic Priesthood; guide the young men in this activity. Are they slothful? Are they inactive? If they are, some of the results of inactivity as befalling the idle individual will afflict the quorum in your ward. Mark it, it will not fulfill its place in the councils of the church unless it be active as a council, as a quorum. This is true of the Teachers, of the Priests, the Elders, the Seventies, the High Priests, and all. (CR, October 1909, p. 92.)

SCD&C 107 85D&C 107 86D&C 107 87D&C 107 88D&C 107 89D&C 107 90Orson F. Whitney: 85-90

SCD&C 107 85D&C 107 86D&C 107 87D&C 107 88D&C 107 89D&C 107 90A stake has one or more quorums of Elders, each composed of ninety-six members, three of whom preside. Each ward should have one or more quorums of priests (forty-eight), teachers (twenty-four), and deacons (twelve), each with a presidency of three [except the priests quorum] . The ward bishopric presides in a general way over all the quorums of the Aaronic Priesthood in the ward, and over all church members, as individuals, residing therein. The bishop of the ward is ex-officio president of the priest's quorum. The Elder's office is the lowest in the Melchizedek Priesthood. The duties of an elder are similar to those of seventy, though intended to be exercised more at home than abroad. (Saturday Night Thoughts, 1921, p. 228.)

SCD&C 107 91D&C 107 92John A. Widtsoe: 91-92

SCD&C 107 91D&C 107 92As long as the Prophet lived, the Lord revealed his will to that generation through him. And it is significant how much of what he revealed dealt with the issues of that day. Since the Prophet's martyrdom, the will of the Lord has been given through succeeding prophets, Presidents Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow, Joseph F. Smith, and Heber J. Grant, who each in his turn has presided over the Church, and, like unto Moses, has guided the people of his generation on the issues of their day by the spirit of revelation. (Sec. 107:91; 8:2-3.)

SCD&C 107 91D&C 107 92During the administrations of all these leaders, those who have accepted them as prophets, who have truly believed that by the spirit of revelation they spoke the Father's will on the issues of the day, who have adjusted their thinking, their living, and their feelings to harmonize with the spirit and the letter of the words of these living prophets—they are the ones who have been comforted and who have had peace in their souls.

SCD&C 107 91D&C 107 92Today the Lord is revealing his will to all the inhabitants of the earth, and to members of the Church in particular, on the issues of this our day through the living prophets, with the First Presidency at the head. What they say as a presidency is what the Lord would say if he were here in person. When the Prophet Joseph Smith was asked what the difference was between the Latter-day Saint Church and the sectarian churches of the world, he said, "We have the Holy Ghost," by which he meant that by the power of the Holy Ghost the will of our Father is revealed to the minds of the leaders of this Church. (CR, April 1945, pp. 90-91.)

SCD&C 107 91D&C 107 92Joseph F. Merrill: 91-92

SCD&C 107 91D&C 107 92Do the people of the Church want a safe guide to what is well for them to do? It is this: Keep in harmony with the Presidency of this Church. Accept and follow the teachings and advice of the President. At every Conference we raise our hands to sustain the President as prophet, seer, and revelator. Is it consistent to do this and then go contrary to his advice? Is anyone so simple as to believe he is serving the Lord when he opposes the President? Of course, the President is not infallible. He makes no claims to infallibility. But when in his official duty he teaches and advises the members of the Church relative to their duties, let no man who wants to please the Lord say aught against the counsels of the President.

SCD&C 107 91D&C 107 92In the spirit of helpfulness let me give you a key. When in doubt go on your knees in humility with an open mind and a pure heart with a real desire to do the Lord's will, and pray earnestly and sincerely for divine guidance. Persist in praying in this way until you get an answer that will fill your bosom with joy and satisfaction. It will be God's answer. If obedient to this answer you will always act as the President indicates. You will then be safe. (CR, April 1941, p. 51.)

D&C 107 92George Q. Cannon: 92

D&C 107 92Seer . . . revelator . . . and a prophet

D&C 107 92"Can a number of men be Prophets, Seers, and Revelators, and yet not interfere with the rights of him who stands at the head?" . . .

D&C 107 92On March 27, 1836, the Prophet Joseph Smith called upon the "quorums and congregation of Saints to acknowledge the Twelve Apostles who were present as Prophets, Seers and Revelators" (History of the Church 2:417) and they were thus sustained. Their being ordained to this authority and sustained as such does not lead to confusion nor to the least conflict of authority, any more than the reception of the gift of prophecy by the Elders leads to any conflict between them and the President of the Church. The remark of the Prophet Moses upon this point is so applicable and so beautifully expresses the correct idea that we insert it. Two young men had been prophesying in the camp of Israel, and Joshua asked Moses to forbid them. Moses replied: "Enviest thou for my sake? Would God that all the Lord's people were prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them!" [Numbers 11:29.] (JI, January 1, 1891, 26:27-28.)

SCD&C 107 93D&C 107 94D&C 107 95D&C 107 96D&C 107 97James E. Talmage: 93-97

SCD&C 107 93D&C 107 94D&C 107 95D&C 107 96D&C 107 97Seventies are primarily traveling elders, especially ordained to promulgate the Gospel among the nations of the earth, "unto the Gentiles first, and also unto the Jews." They are to act under the direction of the apostles in this specific labor. (D&C 107:34-35, 97-98.) A full quorum comprises seventy members, including seven presidents. (AF, 1950, p. 207.)

D&C 107 93Heber C. Kimball: 93

D&C 107 93When you go into heaven, into the celestialized world, you will see the Church organized just as it is here, and you will find all the officers down to the Deacon. Our Church organization is a manifestation of things as they are in heaven, and you are all the time praying that the Church here may be brought into union and set in order as it is in heaven. (Life of Heber C. Kimball, 1945, p. 466.)

D&C 107 93Orson F. Whitney: 93

D&C 107 93And it is according to the vision

D&C 107 93Not only by the gift of prophecy, but by the power of seership, Joseph Smith was able to forecast the future. It was by that miraculous power that he saw the Father and the Son. It was by that wonderful power that he and Oliver Cowdery saw Jehovah, Moses and Elijah in the Kirtland Temple; and by which also Joseph and Sidney gazed upon the glories of the celestial, terrestrial and telestial worlds. By that marvelous power the Prophet, in all probability, beheld the great organization of the Church of God in heaven; for while organizing the councils and quorums of the Priesthood, he said: [Sec. 107:93, quoted.]

D&C 107 93Now, if he saw the Seventies in vision, why not the Apostles? Why not the First Presidency? Why not the stakes and wards, with their presiding officers, and even the auxiliary organizations? Who can say that he did not see them? Who can say that these quorums of the Priesthood, these auxiliary societies and associations, the Church of God in its entirety as it exists upon the earth, are not a reflex of the Church of God in heaven, so far as it is adapted to our present conditions, so far as it has been found necessary to organize it here; the eventual outcome to be a perfect Church, corresponding in every particular to the Church of the First Born; and this that the will of God may be done upon earth even as it is done in heaven? (CR, April 1912, p. 51.)

D&C 107 96Joseph Smith: 96

D&C 107 96If the first Seventy are all employed and there is a call for more laborers, it will be the duty of the seven presidents of the first Seventy to call and ordain other Seventy and send them forth to labor in the vineyard, until, if needs be, they set apart seven times seventy, and even until there are one hundred and forty-four thousand thus set apart for the ministry. (HC 2:221, May 2, 1835.)

D&C 107 98Harold B. Lee: 98

D&C 107 98Now the plan that has been announced is for the appointment of Regional Representatives of the Twelve. [Sec. 84:62; 88:71-73.] Many of you heard the announcement by the First Presidency yesterday. This was the official announcement:

D&C 107 98"As many of you will remember, in 1941, it became necessary for the First Presidency and the Twelve to provide for additional brethren to help with the work of overseeing and setting in order an ever-growing, world-wide Church. Thus in the General Conference of April, 1941, Assistants to the Twelve were named and sustained, 'to be increased or otherwise from time to time as the necessity of carrying on the Lord's work seems to dictate.'

D&C 107 98"Since then the world-wide demands of the Church have increased in ever greater degree, and it is felt by the First Presidency and the Twelve that a further provision for guidance and direction is now needed.

D&C 107 98"What, therefore, is now proposed is the calling of as many brethren as may be necessary, to be known as Regional Representatives of the Twelve, each, as assigned, to be responsible in some aspects of the work to carry counsel to and to conduct instructional meetings in groups of stakes or regions as may be designated from time to time.

D&C 107 98"These Regional Representatives of the Twelve will not be 'General' Authorities, as such, but will serve somewhat as do stake presidents, giving full Church service for greater or lesser periods of service as circumstances may suggest.

D&C 107 98"Fuller details will be in evidence as this plan proceeds under the guidance of the First Presidency and the Twelve." (CR, October 1967, pp. 104-5.)

SCD&C 107 99D&C 107 100Alonzo A. Hinckley: 99-100

SCD&C 107 99D&C 107 100While the revelation is definite in outlining the responsibility, duty and authority of this [first] presidency, the Lord in his mercy, has made the duties and responsibilities and authority of every other man that holds the priesthood, just as clearly defined as for the presidency of the Church. Every man in this Church knows his calling, knows his place, knows his authority. There is no schism, no division, no misunderstanding, because the Lord, after he has outlined all of their duties, sends them forth to labor with this admonition: [Sec. 107:99, quoted.] (CR, April 1935, p. 73.)

SCD&C 107 99D&C 107 100Spencer W. Kimball: 99-100

SCD&C 107 99D&C 107 100The setting apart is an established practice in the Church and men and women are "set apart" to special responsibility, in ecclesiastical, quorum, and auxiliary positions. All missionaries are set apart and it is remarkable how many of them speak often of the authority who officiate of the blessings promised and their fulfilment.

SCD&C 107 99D&C 107 100To some folk the setting apart seems a perfunctory act while others anticipate it eagerly, absorb every word of it, and let their lives be lifted thereby.

SCD&C 107 99D&C 107 100The setting apart may be taken literally; it is a setting apart from sin, apart from the carnal; apart from everything which is crude, low, vicious, cheap, or vulgar; set apart from the world to a higher plane of thought and activity. The blessing is conditional upon faithful performance.

SCD&C 107 99D&C 107 100In a hotel in the Pocono mountains of Pennsylvania long years ago, I learned an important lesson when the president of the Rotary International said to the district governors in the assembly:

SCD&C 107 99D&C 107 100"Gentlemen: This has been a great year for you. The people have honored you, praised you, banqueted you, applauded you, and given you lavish gifts. If you ever get the mistaken idea that they were doing this for you personally, just try going back to the clubs next year when the mantle is on the other shoulders."

SCD&C 107 99D&C 107 100This has kept me on my knees in my holy calling. Whenever I have been inclined to think the honors were coming to me as I go about the Church, then I remember that it is not to me, but to the position I hold that honors come. (CR, October 1958, p. 57.)

SCD&C 107 99D&C 107 100Francis M. Lyman: 99-100

SCD&C 107 99D&C 107 100The Lord makes no mistake in calling men; if we fail, it is our own weakness, for the Lord is ready to give strength sufficient to sustain the brethren in the responsibilities that are upon them. (CR, April 1913, p. 69.)

SCD&C 107 99D&C 107 100Heber J. Grant: 99-100

SCD&C 107 99D&C 107 100I ask every man and woman occupying a place of responsibility whose duty it is to teach the Gospel of Jesus Christ to live it and to keep the commandments of God, so that their example will teach it; and if they cannot live it we will go on loving them, we will go on putting our arms around them, we will go on praying for them that they may become strong enough to live it. But unless they are able to live it we ask them to please step aside so that those who are living it can teach it. No man can teach the Gospel of Jesus Christ under the inspiration of the living God and with power from on high unless he is living it. He can go on as a member and we will pray for him, no matter how many years it may require, and we will never put a block in his way, because the Gospel is one of love and of forgiveness, but we want true men and women as our officers in the Priesthood and in the Relief Societies. (CR, April 1938, p. 15.)

SCD&C 107 99D&C 107 100Henry D. Moyle: 99-100

SCD&C 107 99D&C 107 100I am sure it would be more pleasing to our Father in heaven to have us resign our positions—and that is not a practice which we commend in the Church—but nonetheless it seems preferable to neglecting our duties in the least detail. It gives us an awesome feeling to realize that we are dedicated to the work of the Lord, and having thus committed ourselves, it is not our privilege or our prerogative to violate his commandments, even the slightest of them. The Lord expects, and we expect it of ourselves, each one of us, to live out our lives here upon this earth in as complete conformity to the laws of God as we are capable. No means of rationalizing, no means of conjuring up excuses as to why we should do this or should not do the other, contrary to the will of our Heavenly Father, has any place in our lives. (CR, September 1961, pp. 43-44.)

SCD&C 107 99D&C 107 100Franklin D. Richards: 99-100

SCD&C 107 99D&C 107 100A man in this Church, who is an Elder in Israel, must have a degree of heroism if he is determined to be a servant of God, he must know what it is to be able to stand up in the spirit and power of his calling under all circumstances. God requires him to live and serve him with all his heart, with all his mind, might and strength; and to give himself wholly unto the work to which he has been called, and to have no other business on hand except those things which are subservient to the interests of his Church and Kingdom. (CR, April 1880, p. 92.)

SCD&C 107 99D&C 107 100Joseph Fielding Smith: 99-100

SCD&C 107 99D&C 107 100The story [Matt. 25:14-23] continues and we are told that the man who had two talents also gained two, and also was blessed and told to enter the joy of his lord. But the man who had one and who buried it, brought it and said: "I knew thee that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou hast not sown, and gathering where thou has not strawed; and I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent in the earth: lo, there thou hast that is thine." And his lord was angry with him and said to the other servants: "Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which hath ten talents. For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath. And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth."

SCD&C 107 99D&C 107 100Each man holding the Priesthood should learn his duty from this parable, for when the Lord shall come, like rewards shall be given us. Many who have promised to magnify their Priesthood, and who have failed to do so, shall be cast out. Their Priesthood shall be taken from them and they shall find themselves outside the gates of the City, for they cannot stand with those who have been faithful. Theirs shall be a condition of weeping and gnashing of teeth. Now what is meant by the saying: "For unto every one that hath shall be given, . . . but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath?" Simply this: We are under obligation as men holding the Priesthood to put to service the authority which we have received. If we do this then we shall have other responsibilities and glory added, and we shall receive an abundance, that is the fulness of the Father's kingdom; but if we bury our Priesthood, then we are not entitled to receive any reward, we cannot be exalted. (The Way to Perfection, 1943, pp. 220-21.)

D&C 107 99Ezra Taft Benson: 99

D&C 107 99Men who hold the priesthood "should be anxiously engaged in a good cause." The Lord points out that it is not to be expected, it is not expedient, "it is not meet," he says, "that I should command in all things," for he that does not anything until he is commanded is a slothful servant. And then he says: ". . . men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause . . . and bring to pass much righteousness" (D&C 58:26-27), of their own free will for the power is in them to be agents unto themselves. (CR, October 1948, p. 101.)

D&C 107 99Mark E. Petersen: 99

D&C 107 99Let every man . . . act in the office in which he is appointed

D&C 107 99It is my full belief that whenever any of us accepts a position of any description in the Church, we accept along with it the responsibility of that office, whatsoever it may be. I believe that if a person accepts a position as a teacher in one of our organizations, or if he accepts the responsibility of preaching from the pulpit, such person accepts the responsibility which goes with that call. He becomes a representative of the Church in that position. Every teacher and every preacher therefore is duty bound, upon accepting such a call, to represent the official views and doctrines of the Church, and to teach those official doctrines in his class or from the pulpit with the one thought in mind that conversion is to come about in the hearts of those who listen to him. I do not believe that conversion to the truth comes through the teaching of half-truths or untruths.

D&C 107 99Our classrooms and our assembly rooms have been built at great expense with one thought in mind, and that is that in them we may teach the truth so that we may convert those who come there, so that they in turn will live the gospel and work out their salvation in the earth. (CR, April 1953, p. 83.)
