Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 4 ( 1965)

Section 113

Answers to certain questions on Scripture, given by Joseph Smith the Prophet, March, 1838.

S. What is the root of Jesse spoken of in the 10th verse of the 11th chapter?

George Q. Cannon: Introduction

With the dawn of the new year confusion and mobocratic power increased, and on the 12th of January, 1838, Joseph and Sidney were driven from Kirtland to escape mob violence. Their destination was Far West, and they were pursued more than two hundred miles by armed enemies seeking their lives. The weather was intensely severe, and Joseph and his companion, with their families who had joined them, suffered greatly in their endeavor to elude the murderous pursuit. Several times the pursuers crossed the Prophet's track. Twice they entered the houses where his party had gained a refuge, and once they occupied a room in the same building with only a partition between them, through which the Prophet heard their oaths and imprecations concerning him. Thus they were protected by divine power, else murder would have been done, for the long and unavailing pursuit had filled these would-be assassins with a fiendish desire for blood. Owing to the severity of the season two months were occupied in the journey to Far West, which place the Prophet and his family reached on the 14th day of March, 1838, accompanied by Apostle Brigham Young who had joined him on the way. . . .

While the Prophet had been journeying toward Missouri after escaping the Kirtland mob in January, 1838, a general assembly of the Saints in Far West was held on the 5th day of February, at which David Whitmer, John Whitmer and William W. Phelps were rejected as the local presidency; and a few days later Thomas B. Marsh and David W. Patten, of the Twelve, were selected to act as a presidency until the Prophet should arrive. Oliver Cowdery too had been suspended from his position. Persisting in unchristianlike conduct, W. W. Phelps and John Whitmer had been excommunicated by the high council in Far West, four days previous to the arrival of Joseph.

This was the sad situation as the Prophet approached the dwelling place of the Saints in Missouri. Many of the people went out to meet him, and at a distance of one hundred and twenty miles from Far West they found him and tendered him teams and money to help him forward. The joy they had in his presence arose from an absolute knowledge of his power and authority as a Prophet of God. They were certain that many of their difficulties would end with his presence, because he would give the light of truth by which to guide their footsteps. . . .

At the same conference [April 6, 1838] Brigham Young, David W. Patten and Thomas B. Marsh were chosen to preside over the Church in Missouri.

On the 12th of April, 1838, Oliver Cowdery was found guilty of serious wrong-doing for which he had not made repentance, and he was excommunicated by the high council at Far West. Before the same tribunal on the day following David Whitmer was charged with persistent disobedience of the word of wisdom and with unchristianlike conduct, and he was also cut off. Luke Johnson, Lyman E. Johnson and John F. Boynton were excommunicated about the same time, and less than a month later a similar fate befell William E. McLellin.

It was a sorrowful day for Joseph when he lost the companionship of these men who had been with him during many trials and who had participated with him in the glorious undertaking of heavenly things. But they were no longer anything but dead branches, harmful to the growing tree, and it was necessary for the pruner to lop them off. (Life of Joseph Smith, 1907, pp. 221-24.)

Joseph Smith: Introduction

On the 14th of March, as we were about entering Far West [Missouri] , many of the brethren came to meet us, who also with open arms welcomed us to their bosoms. . . .

Shortly after his [Samuel H. Smith's] arrival, while walking with him and certain other brethren, the following sentiments occurred to my mind: "The Political Motto of the Church of Latter-day Saints." . . .

The Prophet's Answers to Questions on Scripture. [Section 113, follows.] (HC 3:9, March 1838.)

D&C 113 1James E. Talmage: 1

D&C 113 1As made known to the prophet [Isaiah] and by him proclaimed, the coming Lord was the living Branch that should spring from the undying root typified in the family of Jesse [Isaiah 11:1 and 10; compare Romans 15:12; Revelation 5:5; 22:16; see also Jeremiah 23:5, 6.] (Jesus the Christ, 1916, p. 47.)
