Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 4 ( 1965)

Section 116

Revelation given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, near Wight's Ferry, at a place called Spring Hill, Daviess County, Missouri, May 19, 1838, wherein Spring Hill is named by the Lord: Adam-ondi-Ahman, because, said he, it is the place where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel the prophet.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

Adam-ondi-Ahman is located immediately on the north side of Grand River, in Daviess county, Missouri, about twenty-five miles north of Far West. It is situated on an elevated spot of ground, which renders the place as healthful as any part of the United States, and overlooking the river and the country about, it is certainly a beautiful location. (HC 3:39, June 16, 1838.)

Heber C. Kimball: Introduction

The brethren of Caldwell [Missouri] went directly to Adam-ondi-Ahman. . . .

While there we laid out a city on a high elevated piece of land. . . .

The Prophet Joseph called upon Brigham [Young] , myself and others, saying, "Brethren, come go along with me, and I will show you something." He led us a short distance to a place where were the ruins of three altars built of stone, one above the other, and one standing a little back of the other, like unto the pulpits in the Kirtland Temple, representing the order of three grades of Priesthood; "There," said Joseph, "is the place where Adam offered up sacrifice after he was cast out of the garden." The altar stood at the highest point of the bluff. I went and examined the place several times while I remained there. (Life of Heber C. Kimball, August 1838, pp. 208-10.)

D&C 116 1Joseph Smith:

D&C 116 1Adam . . . the Ancient of Days . . . as spoken of by Daniel

D&C 116 1Daniel in his seventh chapter speaks of the Ancient of Days; he means the oldest man, our Father Adam, Michael, he will call his children together and hold a council with them to prepare them for the coming of the Son of Man. He (Adam) is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men, and all that have had the keys must stand before him in this grand council. This may take place before some of us leave this stage of action. The Son of Man stands before him, and there is given him glory and dominion. Adam delivers up his stewardship to Christ, that which was delivered to him as holding the keys of the universe, but retains his standing as head of the human family. (HC 3:386-87, July 2, 1839.)

D&C 116 1Joseph Fielding Smith:

D&C 116 1The place where Adam shall come to visit his people

D&C 116 1The world at large is in ignorance regarding this wonderful character, the Ancient of Days. Much has been written of him, but mostly without knowledge. He is, so the Lord informs us, no other than Adam, our ancient father. As Michael, the arch-angel, he fought the battles against Lucifer in the beginning [Rev. 12:7] , and he shall also sound the trumpet when all the dead shall awake (D&C 29:26), and he shall lead the fight in the final battle with Lucifer. (D&C 88:111-114.) As Adam he was known as the first man on the earth [Sec. 88:112-113] , as by virtue of that honor, he becomes "the father of all, the prince of all, the Ancient of Days." (D&C 27:11.) He holds the keys of salvation for this earth, under the direction of the Holy One, "who is without beginning of days, or end of life," even Jesus Christ. (D&C 78:16.)

D&C 116 1Three years before the death of Adam, he called together his children, including all the faithful down to the generation of Methuselah, all who were high priests, "with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing." (D&C 107:53.) At this grand gathering the Lord appeared and administered comfort unto Adam, and said unto him: "I have set thee to be at the head; a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou art a prince over them forever." The assembly arose and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the prince, the arch-angel. Then Adam stood up in the midst of the congregation—and no such a gathering on any other occasion has this world ever seen—and notwithstanding he was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy Ghost, (he) predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the last generation." And all this is written in the book of Enoch, which shall be revealed in due time. (D&C 107:54-57.)

D&C 116 1Not many years hence there shall be another gathering of high priests and righteous souls in this same valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman. At this gathering Adam, the Ancient of Days, will again be present. At this time the vision which Daniel saw will be enacted. The Ancient of Days will sit. [Dan. 7:9-14.] There will stand before him those who have held the keys of all dispensations, who shall render up their stewardships to the first Patriarch of the race, who holds the keys of salvation. This shall be a day of judgment and preparation. . . .

D&C 116 1It was in the night vision that all this was shown to Daniel, and he saw the Son of Man come to the grand council, as he did to the first grand council in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there he received the keys from Adam "and there was given to him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed." (Dan. 7:13-14.) In this council Christ will take over the reigns of government, officially, on this earth, and "the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the Most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him," even Jesus Christ. [Dan. 7:27.]

D&C 116 1Until this grand council is held, Satan shall hold rule in the nations of the earth; but at that time thrones are to be cast down and men's rule shall come to an end—for it is decreed that the Lord shall make an end of all nations. (D&C 87:6.) Preparation for this work is now going on. Kingdoms are already tottering; some have fallen; but eventually they shall all go the way of the earth, and he shall come whose right it is to rule. Then shall he give the government to the saints of the Most High. [Sec. 38:21-22.]

D&C 116 1This council in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman is to be of the greatest importance to this world. At that time there will be a transfer of authority from the usurper and imposter, Lucifer, to the rightful King, Jesus Christ. Judgment will be set and all who have held keys will make their reports and deliver their stewardships, as they shall be required. Adam will direct this judgment, and then he will make his report, as the one holding the keys of this earth, to his Superior Officer, Jesus Christ. Our Lord will then assume the reigns of government; directions will be given to the Priesthood; and He, whose right it is to rule, will be installed officially by the voice of the Priesthood there assembled. This grand council of Priesthood will be composed, not only of those who are faithful who now dwell on this earth, but also of the prophets and apostles of old, who have had directing authority. Others may also be there, but if so they will be there by appointment, for this is to be an official council called to attend to the most momentous matters concerning the destiny of this earth.

D&C 116 1When this gathering is held, the world will not know of it; the members of the Church at large will not know of it, yet it shall be preparatory to the coming in the clouds of glory of our Savior Jesus Christ as the Prophet Joseph Smith has said. The Saints cannot know—except for those who officially shall be called into this council—for it shall precede the coming of Jesus Christ as a thief in the night, unbeknown to all the world. (The Way to Perfection, 1943, pp. 788-91.)

D&C 116 1Anthon H. Lund:

D&C 116 1The Ancient of Days

D&C 116 1Some there are who follow our Elders, and after they have preached the principles of salvation, these men get up and charge that the Elders do not believe in God, but that they believe in Adam as their God, and they will bring up a few passages from sermons delivered by this or that man in the Church to substantiate this charge. Now, we are not ashamed of the glorious doctrine of eternal progression, that man may attain the position of those to whom came the word of God, that is, gods. [Sec. 76:55-62; 132:16-24, 37.] When Jesus was preaching unto the Jews on one occasion they stoned Him, and He wanted to know if they stoned Him for the good works He had been doing. Oh, no, they say, "for a good work we stone thee not; but for blasphemy; and because that thou, being a man, makest thyself God." To meet this, Jesus said:

D&C 116 1It is not written in your law, I said, Ye are gods? If he called them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the scriptures cannot be broken; Say ye of him, whom the Father hath sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemes; because I said, I am the Son of God? (John 10:34-36.)

D&C 116 1We believe that there are gods, as the Savior quoted. He repeated what was written in the law, and He did not say it was wrong, but used it as an argument against them. While, however, we believe, as the scripture states, that there are more gods, to us there is but one God. We worship the God that created the heavens and the earth. We worship the same God that came to our first parents in the Garden of Eden. In the revelation contained in Section 116 of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants the Lord speaks concerning Adam-ondi-Ahman, "the place where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of days shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel the prophet." In the 107th Section, the Lord speaks of Adam as "Michael, the Prince, the Archangel," and says that he shall be a prince over the nations forever. We may with perfect propriety call him prince, the ancient of days, or even God in the meaning of the words of Christ, which I have just quoted [Sec. 78:16] ; but we do not worship him, we worship the same God that he worshipped. (CR, October 1902, p. 81.)
