Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 4 ( 1965)

Section 118

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Far West, Missouri, July 8, 1838, in response to the supplication: Show us thy will, O Lord, concerning the Twelve.—Commandment given to fill the places of those who had fallen—Future mission of the Twelve beyond the seas—Date of their departure fixed.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

Also I received the following:

Revelation given at Far West, July 8, 1838, in answer to the question, Show unto us thy will, O Lord, concerning the Twelve: [Section 118, follows.] (HC 3:46, July 8, 1838.)

SCD&C 118 4D&C 118 5D&C 118 6Wilford Woodruff: 4-6

SCD&C 118 4D&C 118 5D&C 118 6The Twelve Apostles were called by revelation to go to Far West, Caldwell county, to lay the foundation of the cornerstone of the Temple. When that revelation was given this Church was in peace in Missouri. It is the only revelation that has ever been since the organization of the Church, that I know anything about, that had day and date given with it. The Lord called the Twelve Apostles, while in this state of prosperity, on the 26th day of April, 1838, to go to Far West to lay the cornerstone of the Temple; and from there to take their departure to England to preach the Gospel. Previous to the arrival of that period the whole Church was driven out of the State of Missouri, and it was as much as a man's life was worth to be found in the state if it was known that he was a Latter-day Saint; and especially was this the case with the Twelve. When the time came for the corner stone of the Temple to be laid, as directed in the revelation, the Church was in Illinois, having been expelled from Missouri by an edict from the Governor. Joseph and Hyrum Smith and Parley P. Pratt were in chains in Missouri for the testimony of Jesus. As the time drew nigh for the accomplishment of this work, the question arose. "What is to be done?" Here is a revelation commanding the Twelve to be in Far West on the 26th day of April, to lay the cornerstone of the Temple there; it has to be fulfilled. The Missourians had sworn by all the gods of eternity that if every other revelation given through Joseph Smith were fulfilled, that should not be, for the day and date being given they declared that it would fail. The general feeling in the Church, so far as I know, was that, under the circumstances, it was impossible to accomplish the work; and the Lord would accept the will for the deed. This was the feeling of Father Smith, the father of the Prophet. Joseph was not with us, he was in chains in Missouri, for his religion. When President [Brigham] Young asked the question of the Twelve, "Brethren, what will you do about this?" the reply was, "The Lord has spoken and it is for us to obey." We felt that the Lord God had given the commandment and we had faith to go forward and accomplish it, feeling that it was his business whether we lived or died in its accomplishment. We started for Missouri. There were two wagons. I had one and took brother [Orson] Pratt and President Young in mine; brother Cutler, and one of the building committee, had the other. We reached Far West and laid the corner stone according to the revelation that had been given to us. We cut off apostates and those who had sworn away the lives of the brethren. We ordained Darwin Chase and Norman Shearer into the Seventies. Brother George A. Smith and myself were ordained into the quorum of the Twelve on the corner stone of the Temple; we had been called before, but not ordained. We then returned, nobody having molested or made us afraid. We performed that work by faith, and the Lord blessed us in doing it. The devil, however, tried to kill us, for before we started for England everyone of the Twelve was taken sick and it was about as much as we could do to move or stir. (JD, December 12, 1869, 13:159.)

SCD&C 118 4D&C 118 5D&C 118 6Brigham Young: 4-6

SCD&C 118 4D&C 118 5D&C 118 6Early on the morning of the 26th of April [1839] , we held our Conference, cut off 31 persons from the Church and proceeded to ordain Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith to the office of the Twelve, to fill the places of those who had fallen. Darwin Chase and Norman Shearer, (who had just been liberated from Richmond prison, and arrived the evening previous) were then ordained to the office of the Seventies.

SCD&C 118 4D&C 118 5D&C 118 6The Twelve then offered up vocal prayer in the following order: Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, John E. Page, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith; after which we sang: "Adam-ondi-Ahman," and then we took our leave of the . . . Saints, agreeable to the revelation. . . .

SCD&C 118 4D&C 118 5D&C 118 6As the Saints were passing away from the meeting, brother [Theodore] Turley said to Page and Woodruff, "Stop a bit, while I bid Isaac Russell good-bye" and knocking at his house called brother Russell. His wife answered, "Come in; it is brother Turley." Russell replied, "It is not; he left here two weeks ago," and appeared quite alarmed; but on finding it was Turley, asked him to sit down; but he replied, "I cannot; I shall lose my company." "Who is your company," inquired Russell. "The Twelve." "The Twelve?" "Yes; don't you know that this is the twenty-sixth, and the day the Twelve were to take leave of their friends on the foundation of the Lord's house to go to the islands of the sea? The revelation is now fulfilled and I am going with them." Russell was speechless, and Turley bid him farewell.

SCD&C 118 4D&C 118 5D&C 118 6Thus was this revelation fulfilled, concerning which our enemies said, If all the other revelations of Joseph Smith were fulfilled that one should not, as it had day and date to it. (MS, September 12, 1863, 25:567, 583-84.)

D&C 118 6Wilford Woodruff: 6

D&C 118 6Let my servant . . . Wilford Woodruff . . . be appointed

D&C 118 6In the time of the great apostasy in Kirtland the Spirit of the Lord said to me, "Get you a partner and go to Fox Islands." I knew no more what was in Fox Islands than what was in Kolob. I went there, however, baptized a hundred and brought them up to Zion with me. It was upon that island where I received a letter from Joseph Smith, telling me that I was called by revelation to fill the place of one of the Twelve who had fallen. You will see it in the Doctrine and Covenants. That thing was revealed to me before I received the letter from Joseph Smith, but I did not feel disposed to tell it to any mortal man, for I knew it was my duty to keep such things to myself. (CR, April 1898, pp. 30-31.)
