Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 4 ( 1965)

Section 119

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Far West, Missouri, July 8, 1838, in answer to the supplication: O Lord, show unto thy servants how much thou requirest of the properties of thy people for a tithing.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

The three revelations which I received January 12, 1838, [these revelations have never been found] , the day I left Kirtland, were read in the public congregation at Far West; and the same day I inquired of the Lord, "O Lord! Show unto thy servant how much thou requirest of the properties of the people for a tithing," and received the following answer, which was also read in public: [Section 119, follows.] (HC 3:44, July 8, 1838; Far West, Missouri.)

Orson F. Whitney: Introduction

The Law of Tithing was given to supersede, for the time being, a greater law known as the Law of Consecration, [Sec. 42:30-42] the object of which was and is to sanctify the Lord's people and "prepare them for a place in the celestial world." [Sec. 78:7.] To that end it was designed to do away with selfishness, greed, pride, envy, poverty, and all the ills that spring from such conditions. For none of these things can be admitted into the kingdom of heaven. It was to institute an order of equality and consequent unity, in which every man, employed at that for which he was best fitted, would be "seeking the interest of his neighbor and doing all things with an eye single to the glory of God." [Sec. 82:19.] It is an ancient law. It was practised by Enoch and his people [Moses 7:18] , and later by the Apostles and their proselytes at Jerusalem [Acts 4:31-37] , and by the followers of Christ, both Nephites and Lamanites, upon this chosen land. [4 Nephi 2-3, 15-16.] A brave attempt to practice it was made by the Latter-day Saints, soon after this Church was organized. But they lacked experience, and did not completely rise to the occasion. Selfishness within, and persecution without, prevented a perfect achievement. So the Lord withdrew the Law of Consecration [see Sec. 105] , and gave to His people a lesser law, one easier to live, but pointing forward, like the other, to something grand and glorious in the future. That lesser law, the Law of Tithing, is as a schoolmaster, a disciplinary agent, to bring the Saints eventually up to the practice of the higher law, and meanwhile to keep their hearts open for its reception when it returns. Those who obey the Law of Tithing will be prepared to live the Law of Consecration. Those who do not obey it will not be prepared. That is the whole thing in a nut shell. We are tithed that the Church may have means to build and maintain temples and tabernacles, to found and sustain missions and schools, and otherwise carry on its great work throughout the world. But that is not all. The spiritual dividend that we draw from heaven as the reward of our obedience, is the principal purpose for which the Law of Tithing was instituted. All the rest is incidental or secondary. (CR, April 1931, pp. 65-66.)

SCD&C 119 1D&C 119 2D&C 119 3D&C 119 4D&C 119 5D&C 119 6D&C 119 7Joseph F. Smith: 1-7

SCD&C 119 1D&C 119 2D&C 119 3D&C 119 4D&C 119 5D&C 119 6D&C 119 7In order that there might be means with which to accomplish every temporal good for the people, the Lord instituted this law of tithing in the place of the greater and more perfect law of Zion. The Lord revealed to his people in the incipiency of His work at law which was more perfect than the law of tithing. It comprehended larger things, greater power and more speedy accomplishment of the purposes of the Lord. But the people were unprepared to live by it, and the Lord, out of mercy to the people, suspended the more perfect law, and gave the law of tithing, in order that there might be means in the storehouse of the Lord for the carrying out of the purposes He had in view; for the gathering of the poor, for the spreading of the Gospel to the nations of the earth, for the maintenance of those who were required to give their constant attention, day in and day out, to the work of the Lord, and for whom it was necessary to make some provision. [Sec. 42:33-36; 70:12; 106:3.] Without this law these things could not be done, neither could Temples be built and maintained, nor the poor fed and clothed. Therefore the law of tithing is necessary for the Church, so much so that the Lord has laid great stress upon it, as will be seen in these words: [Sec. 119:6-7, quoted.]

SCD&C 119 1D&C 119 2D&C 119 3D&C 119 4D&C 119 5D&C 119 6D&C 119 7By this principle the loyalty of the people of this Church shall be put to the test. By this principle it shall be known who is for the kingdom of God and who is against it. By this principle it shall be seen whose hearts are set on doing the will of God, and keeping His commandments, thereby sanctifying the land of Zion unto God, and who are opposed to this principle and have cut themselves off from the blessings of Zion. There is a great deal of importance connected with this principle, for by it shall be known whether we are faithful or unfaithful. In this respect it is as essential as faith in God, as repentance of sin, as baptism for the remission of sin, or as the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. For if a man keep all the law save in one point, and he offend in that, he is a transgressor of the law, and he is not entitled to the fulness of the blessings of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. [Sec. 93:10; James 2:10.] But when a man keeps all the law that is revealed, according to his strength, his substance and his ability, though what he does may be little, it is just as acceptable in the sight of God as if he were able to do a thousand times more. (CR, April 1900, p. 47.)

D&C 119 5D&C 119 1Franklin D. Richards: 1, 5

D&C 119 5D&C 119 1Surplus properties

D&C 119 5D&C 119 1We will now look at this short "revelation given through Joseph, the Prophet, at Far West, Missouri, July 8th, 1838."

D&C 119 5D&C 119 1Before going further I want to stop and consider the question asked by some, what He means where the Lord requires the surplus property of His people as the beginning of their tithing. Let us consider for a moment this word "surplus." What does it mean when applied to a man and his property? Surplus cannot mean that which is indispensably necessary for any given purpose, but what remains after supplying what is needed for that purpose. Is not the first and most necessary use of a man's property that he feed, clothe and provide a home for himself and family! This appears to be the great leading object for which we labor to acquire means, and as, until the time that this revelation was given, all public works and raising of all public funds had been by consecration, was not "surplus property," that which was over and above a comfortable and necessary substance? In the light of what had transpired and of subsequent events, what else could it mean? Can we take any other view of it when we consider the circumstances under which it was given in Far West, in July, 1838?

D&C 119 5D&C 119 1I have been unable in studying this subject to find any other definition of the term "surplus," as used in this revelation, than the one I have just given. I find that it was so understood and recorded by the Bishops and people in those days, as well as by the Prophet Joseph himself, who was unquestionably the ablest and best exponent of this revelation. (JD, November 6, 1882, 23:313.)

SCD&C 119 5D&C 119 6D&C 119 7D&C 119 1Joseph Fielding Smith: 1, 5-7

SCD&C 119 5D&C 119 6D&C 119 7D&C 119 1Their surplus . . . it shall not be a land of Zion

SCD&C 119 5D&C 119 6D&C 119 7D&C 119 1In more recent years the Church has not called upon the members to give all their surplus property to the Church, but it has been the requirement according to the covenant, that they pay the tenth. . . . If we are stingy with the Lord, he may be stingy with us, or in other words, withhold his blessings. Then again, we have those among us who are hoping for the coming of the law of consecration thinking that in that day they are going to profit by the equalizing of the wealth of other members of the Church. It is definitely true, however, that all those who will not obey the law of tithing, will not be entitled to enter into the covenants of consecration, but when the day comes for the establishing of Zion, and the redemption of the earth, such people will find themselves removed. (CHMR, 1949, 3:120.)

D&C 119 2Rudger Clawson: 2

D&C 119 2Now somebody will say: "Brother Clawson, is it not a fact that the law of tithing is absolutely and purely and simply a temporal law?" I would answer and say that the law of tithing, it is true, has to do with temporal things; but in a far deeper sense, the law of tithing is spiritual, and that is the thing I want to come to, to show that it is spiritual. Everything that we do connected with this law of tithing points to spiritual things. What is tithing for? It is for the building up of Zion. It is to build temples to God. . . . It takes money to build a temple. . . . But what does that temple represent; what does it amount to in and of itself. It is simply a building of wood and stone. That is all it is, nothing more. It is not the temple; it is what the temple represents to us that gives it importance and value. It is what we get in the temple, and we there obtain great and glorious spiritual blessings. That is the important thing. We get our washings and our anointings, and our sealings and do work for the living and the dead. That is spiritual, very spiritual. Beautiful! . . . Take the tabernacle here. That is a material thing, isn't it? Very material. It is built of wood and stone. It is nothing but a house; that is all. It is what the tabernacle represents to us; it is what is being done in the tabernacle. . . . It is what is said there; it is the valuable instructions that are given, counsels of the priesthood, admonitions, warnings, reproof, all intended to build up and strengthen the soul. This is spiritual, and it grows out of the law of tithing, because that great tabernacle was built from the tithes and offerings of the people. And so we might go on. There is a vast amount of the funds that comes from the tithing that is used for our Church schools. This is a great movement in Zion. We do not know, we do not appreciate what the Church schools are doing. But I will tell you who will appreciate it. The father that has his sons going to the Church schools, the parents that have daughters going there; and when they see that these children are imbibing Gospel principles, that faith is springing up in their hearts, that they are getting testimonies and being prepared to carry on the work of their father, they then begin to know what the Church schools mean to Zion. And let me tell you . . . in a wide sense, and in a very deep and important sense that is spiritual. (CR, October 1913, pp. 56-58.)

D&C 119 4Howard W. Hunter: 4

D&C 119 4One-tenth of all their interest annually

D&C 119 4The word "tithe" is derived from the Anglo-Saxon meaning "a tenth." It may be defined as a tenth of property or income which is paid over or dedicated for sacred uses or purposes. . . .

D&C 119 4Malachi began an even greater task of rebuilding the faith and the morale of a nation. In his supreme effort to strike out against the covetousness of those who were religious only in name, he lashed them with the accusation of a crime against God.

D&C 119 4Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings. Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole nation. Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it. (Mal. 3:8-10.)

D&C 119 4The words of Malachi in which he accused the people of robbing God bring back to my mind the memories of my class in crimes in law school. Larceny is the unlawful taking and carrying away of things personal with intent to deprive the owner of the same. Embezzlement is defined as the fraudulent appropriation of another's personal property by one to whom it has been entrusted. The distinction between larceny and embezzlement lies in the character of acquiring the possession of the property or money. In larceny there is an unlawful acquisition of the property, while in embezzlement the property which belongs to another is acquired lawfully and then fraudulently converted to the possessor's use.

D&C 119 4In order to memorize these distinctions, I pictured in my mind, to represent larceny, a masked burglar, sneaking about under the cover of darkness, taking that which was not his. To represent the theory of embezzlement I thought of a nontithepayer. The Lord's share came into his hands lawfully, but he misappropriated it to his own use. This seems to be the accusation.

D&C 119 4The law is simply stated as "one-tenth of all their interest." Interest means profit, compensation, increase. It is the wage of one employed, the profit from the operation of a business, the increase of one who grows or produces, or the income to a person from any other source. The Lord said it is a standing law "forever" as it has been in the past.

D&C 119 4The tithe is God's law for his children, yet the payment is entirely voluntary. In this respect it does not differ from the law of the Sabbath or from any other of his laws. We may refuse to obey any or all of them. Our obedience is voluntary, but our refusal to pay does not abrogate or repeal the law.

D&C 119 4If tithing is a voluntary matter, is it a gift or a payment of an obligation? There is a substantial difference between the two. A gift is a voluntary transfer of money or property without consideration. It is gratuitous. No one owes the obligation to make a gift. If tithing is a gift, we could give whatever we please, when we please, or make no gift at all. It would place our Heavenly Father in the very same category as the street beggar to whom we might toss a coin in passing.

D&C 119 4The Lord has established the law of tithing, and because it is his law, it becomes our obligation to observe it if we love him and have a desire to keep his commandments and receive his blessings. In this way it becomes a debt. The man who doesn't pay his tithing because he is in debt should ask himself if he is not also in debt to the Lord. The Master said: "But seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness: and all these things shall be added unto you." (Matt. 6:33.)

D&C 119 4We can't walk east and west at the same time. We can't serve both God and mammon. The man who rejects the law of tithe is the man who has not given it a fair try. Of course it costs something. It takes work and thought and effort to live any of the laws of the gospel or any of its principles. . . .

D&C 119 4The payment of tithing strengthens faith, increases spirituality and spiritual capacity, and solidifies testimony. It gives the satisfaction of knowing one is complying with the will of the Lord. It brings the blessings that come from sharing with others through the purposes for which tithing is used. We cannot afford to deny ourselves these blessings. We cannot afford not to pay our tithing. We have a definite relationship to the future as well as to the present. What we give, and how we give, and the way we meet our obligations to the Lord has eternal significance.

D&C 119 4A testimony of the law of tithing comes from living it. Like all others of God's laws, when we live them we receive the blessings. (CR, April 1964, pp. 33-36.)

D&C 119 4James E. Talmage: 4

D&C 119 4One-tenth of all their interest annually

D&C 119 4How much have you contributed by way of paying tithe, whether it be ten cents or a hundred dollars? For be it known that the one who pays with honest heart the ten cent tithe, if it be a true tithe, will rank higher on those books than the one who pays a thousand dollars when that is only a tenth of a tithe for him. What are we doing individually? I know what some are doing, for they have told me. Some are very busy trying to find excuses in the matter of tithing as in other duties. Some come with strange questions: "Tell me please, ought I to subtract this or deduct that before I calculate the amount of my tithes?" Very seldom do I find it necessary to analyze the case and to give an answer direct. Sometimes I have smiled because I could see the perfidy of the questioner's coming to me for excuses, and I did not feel complimented. But I have given him a rule, and I venture to give it here. I have found it helpful myself, and I think that all may profit by it.

D&C 119 4When you are in doubt as to just how you should calculate your tithes, reverse the terms as we sometimes do in solving complex mathematical problems, and suppose for the time being that the Lord had said this; let us postulate this is an assumed law given to the Church: "In order to show my love for my people, the faithful members of my Church, it is my will, saith the Lord, that each one shall receive from my storehouse, the storehouse of my Church, at regular intervals during the year, an amount equal to one-tenth of his income." Now my dear brother, sit down and calculate how much the Lord owes you under that kind of law, and then go pay it to your bishop. (CR, October 1928, p. 119.)

D&C 119 4Reed Smoot: 4

D&C 119 4One-tenth of all their interest annually

D&C 119 4I want to say to you . . . that the law of tithing is not a question of dollars and cents alone. I believe that the man who pays his honest tithing to God will not only be blessed by God himself, but that the nine-tenths will reach farther than the other ten-tenths would if he did not obey that law; for the man who believes in the law of tithes and offerings, believes also in the other requirements made by God of him and he does not spend money in breaking the Sabbath day nor in going to places where his very soul is in danger of partaking of things that are not good for Latter-day Saints to receive. (CR, October 1900, pp. 7-8.)

D&C 119 6James E. Talmage: 6

D&C 119 6By this law sanctify the land of Zion

D&C 119 6Do you know that the soil can be sanctified by the tithing of its products? The land can be sanctified. [Mal. 3:8-10.] There is a relationship between the elements and forces of nature and the actions of men. (CR, October 1929, p. 68.)

D&C 119 6Melvin J. Ballard: 6

D&C 119 6By this law sanctify the land of Zion

D&C 119 6Do we not hope and expect to have an inheritance in the celestial kingdom, even upon this earth in its redeemed and sanctified state? [Sec. 88:25-26; 130:9.] What are the terms under which we may obtain that inheritance? The law of tithing is the law of inheritance. It leads to it. No man may hope or expect to have an inheritance on this celestial globe who has failed to pay his tithing. By the payment of his honest tithing he is establishing a right and a title to this inheritance, and he cannot secure it upon any other terms but by complying with this and other just requirements; and this is one of the very essential things. (CR, October 1929, pp. 50-51.)
