Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 4 ( 1965)

Section 120

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Far West, Missouri, July 18, 1838, making known the disposition of the properties tithed as named in the preceding revelation, Section 119.

Verily, thus saith the Lord, the time is now come, that it shall be disposed of by a council, composed of the First Presidency of my Church, and of the bishop and his council, and by my high council; and by mine own voice unto them, saith the Lord. Even so. Amen.

D&C 120 1Charles W. Penrose:

D&C 120 1Read the 120th section and you will see how the Lord said it [tithing] should be disbursed at that time. That was in Zion, Jackson county, when they first went there. Of late years, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, in conference assembled, has voted for the power to handle the funds of the Church and the properties of the Church by the Trustee-in-trust for the Church. You have done that during this conference. We did it years and years ago. We have done it every conference from the time we came into these vales of the mountains. Now let me say that the authority is given of God to the man that stands at the head of this Church, to preside over the whole Church, and to be like unto Moses. [Sec. 28:2; 107:91-92.] He is a prophet, and a seer, and a revelator, and everything in the Church is under his direction. The Bishops receive the tithing. The presiding bishopric handle and keep an account of it, but the Trustee-in-trust is voted upon by the people to have the control and direction and to be responsible for all the funds and properties of the Church. We have endorsed that authority during this conference, as we always have done. It is no new thing. (CR, April 1905, p. 73.)

D&C 120 1J. Reuben Clark, Jr.:

D&C 120 1Pursuant to these revelations [Sections 119 and 20] , and as explained at recent conferences, the Church has a council on the Distribution of Tithes, made up of the First Presidency, the Council of the Twelve, and the Presiding Bishopric. This Council considers the proposed budget of the Church, which is itemized under general headings, and then approves and authorizes such expenditures as it deems proper.

D&C 120 1A subcommittee of this Council on the Distribution of Tithes then makes the detailed appropriations from the sums approved and authorized by the Council. This subcommittee is known as the Committee on Expenditures, and is made up of the First Presidency, three members of the Council of the Twelve, and the Presiding Bishopric. A Church Building Committee acts under the direction of the Committee on Expenditures. The Financial Secretary to the First Presidency acts as the secretary of the Committee of Expenditures. (CR, April 1948, pp. 116-17.)

D&C 120 1First Presidency (Joseph F. Smith, Anthon H. Lund, John Henry Smith):

D&C 120 1The subject of Church revenues may be touched upon perhaps with profit. The Latter-day Saints believe in tithing. It is a principle of their faith. It is an ancient observance reaching back to patriarchal times, as related in the Bible. [Gen. 14:20; Lev. 27:30; Mal. 3:8-10; Heb. 7:9.] It was established in the Church in the year 1838. The manner of its payment and disbursement is revealed by Divine authority and has appeared in the Church books ever since that date. It is complied with religiously by the Church Authorities themselves. It is not the property of the president. He does not claim it or collect it. Tithing is received and receipted for by the local bishops and in the respective wards, who are under the supervision of the local presidents of stakes. The whole income is accounted for to the presiding bishopric of the Church and is under their direction. Their office contains complete records of all the tithings paid during each year. Each tithepayer will find in that office his record. The entire receipts and disbursements are there accounted for in the most complete detail. An auditing committee composed of men well known in the community for their independence of character and business integrity, not of the leading Authorities of the Church, chosen by the general conference, thoroughly inspect and report annually upon them. The funds thus received are not the property of the president of the Church or his associates, nor of the Presiding Bishopric, nor of the local bishops. They belong to the Church and are used for Church purposes, including the building and maintenance of temples, meetinghouses, schools, colleges, universities and other structures, the aid of the poor and afflicted, the extension of missions abroad and the help of new colonies at home, and sundry other objects and but a small amount is used for the support of persons devoting their whole time to the service of the Church, and that not out of the tithing, but from the proceeds of investments made with profit. This includes the presidency and other Church leaders. (CR, April 1911, p. 130.)
