Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 4 ( 1965)

Section 121

Prayer and Prophecies, written by Joseph Smith the Prophet, while a prisoner in the jail at Liberty, Missouri, dated March 20, 1839. The Prophet with several companions had been months in prison. Their petitions and appeals directed to the executive officers and the judiciary had failed to bring them relief. See History of the Church, vol. 3, p. 289.—Fervent appeals to the Lord in behalf of the suffering Saints—The curse of the Lord to fall upon those who contend against his will—Men though called may not be chosen—The rights of the Priesthood inseparably connected with the powers of heaven—Unrighteous exercise of the powers of the Priesthood leads to apostasy—Powers of the Priesthood to be exercised in justice and mercy.

Orson F. Whitney: Introduction

The Mormons in Missouri in the summer of 1838 numbered in the neighborhood of twelve thousand souls. All were not located in Caldwell County. Lands had been purchased or pre-empted by them in other places as well. In two of the counties contiguous to Caldwell, namely: Daviess on the north, and Carroll on the east, in parts previously unoccupied or but thinly peopled, they had founded flourishing settlements. In Daviess County, as in Caldwell, a stake of Zion was organized.

Their chief settlement in Daviess County was Adam-ondi-Ahman,—abbreviated to Diahman; the one in Carroll County, Dewitt. . . .

It was the 6th of August, 1838, and the state election was in progress. To Gallatin, the principal town of Daviess County, went twelve Mormon citizens for the purpose of casting their ballots. Colonel William P. Peniston was a candidate in that district for representative to the Legislature. Having been prominent in the anti-Mormon agitation . . . [he organized a mob and tried to prevent them from voting, calling them horse thieves and robbers.]

The Mormons, pronouncing his charges false, insisted upon their right to vote. Immediately Peniston's party, crazed with drink and furious with rage, set upon them. The twelve Mormons, attacked by over a hundred men, stoutly defended themselves. Clubs, stones and fists were freely used, and even knives were unsheathed by some of the assailants. In the melee, though no lives were lost, some on both sides were wounded, and several mobocratic heads were broken. The Mormons withdrew from the scene, and the election proceeded.

This event, supplemented by incendiary speeches and articles in the local press, caused a general anti-Mormon uprising. All Daviess County was aroused, and even in parts adjacent, as ran the exaggerated rumor of the riot at Gallatin, the Missourians began arming and organizing. For what? They scarcely knew,—ignorant dupes as most of them were, tools of designing demagogues, of men without principle, who saw, as such characters quickly see, in a popular movement against an unpopular people, opportunities for plunder and promotion. . . .

Learning of the situation in Daviess County, the Governor [Lilburn W. Boggs] directed Major-General Atchison and other officers of militia to muster and equip men to put down the insurrection. . . .

Marching to the camp of the mobocrats near Millport, [General] Doniphan [commanding militia] ordered them to disperse. They protested that they were merely acting in self-defense. He then went to Diahman and conferred with Colonel Wight, commanding the Mormon force, "Host of Israel." He found them willing to disband, provided the enemy threatening them would disperse, and willing also to surrender any of their number accused of offenses against the laws to be dealt with by legal authority. The prisoners and weapons taken by the Mormons [militia] were delivered up at the demand of General Doniphan, who, on the 15th of September joined Generals Atchison and Parks at Gallatin.

The report of these officers to the Governor was substantially as follows: that affairs in Daviess County were not so bad as rumor had represented, and that his Excellency had been deceived by designing or half-crazy men; that the Mormons, so far as could be learned, had been acting on the defensive, showing no hostile intent, and evincing no disposition to resist the laws; that the officers, on their arrival there, had found a large body of men from other counties, armed and in the field, to assist the people of Daviess against the Mormons, without being called out by the proper authorities; and that the Daviess County men were still threatening, in the event of the failure of a certain committee on compromise to agree, to drive the Mormons with powder and lead. . . .

The scene now changes to Dewitt, in Carroll County. Enraged at being thwarted in their designs upon Diahman, the mob army, a portion of which had previously threatened Dewitt, appeared to bombard the town. . . .

The first gun was fired upon Dewitt on the 2nd of October. Colonel Hinkle waited forty-eight hours, and then ordered the fire returned. The bombardment continued at intervals for nine days. During its progress the Prophet made his way through much difficulty and danger from Far West to the beleaguered settlement. He found his people there hemmed in by their foes, their provisions exhausted, their cattle and horses stolen, their houses burned, and themselves threatened with death if they attempted to leave the town.

Through the agency of non-Mormon friends in that vicinity an appeal was made to Governor Boggs, in behalf of the beleaguered Saints. He replied that the quarrel was between the Mormons and the mob, and that they might "fight it out."

Finally the Mormons were permitted to evacuate Dewitt, which they did on the 11th of October. Under the treacherous fire of their foes the homeless and plundered refugees fled to Far West.

Eight hundred strong the mob army now marched upon Diahman. . . .

The battle of Crooked River was fought on the 25th of October. Captain David W. Patten, of the Far West militia, had been directed by Colonel Hinkle to proceed with a company of men to the ford of the river and disperse a band of marauders under Captain Bogart, who were committing depredations in that vicinity. They had captured three Mormons,—Nathan Pinkham, William Seely and Addison Green,—and had boasted of their intention to put them to death the next night. It was to rescue these men, as well as to put a stop to Bogart's operations that Captain Patten went forth. Leaving Far West about midnight, he and his company, seventy-five in number, came upon Bogart's band in ambush just at daybreak. As the Mormons crossed the Bluff above his camp, which was among the brush and willows in the river bottom, the mob leader ordered his men to fire. They obeyed, when young Patrick O'Banion, a Mormon, fell mortally wounded. Captain Patten then ordered his men to charge. Forward they dashed, returning the enemy's fire. After delivering a second volley Bogart's band broke and fled, crossing the river at the ford and abandoning their camp to the victorious Mormons. The three prisoners held by the mob were liberated, though one of them had been shot and wounded by his captors during the engagement.

But the victory had been dearly won. Captain Patten, like O'Banion, was mortally wounded, and Gideon Carter killed. Other Mormons were wounded, but not seriously. Bogart, whose force outnumbered the attacking party, lost one man. . . .

On the 27th of October Governor Boggs issued an order to Major-General John B. Clark, giving him command of an overwhelming force of militia, with instructions to proceed at once against the Mormons. "Their outrages are beyond all description," said the Governor, "They must be exterminated or driven from the State." Other generals were ordered to take part, under Clark, in the military crusade. . . .

Among the first fruits of the sanguinary edict of Missouri's executive was the Haun's Mill massacre. It occurred on the 30th of October. Haun's Mill was situated on Shoal Creek, about twenty miles south of Far West. Here dwelt, in the neighborhood of other lately arrived immigrants, all awaiting a lull in the war-like storm before proceeding farther, a few families of Latter-day Saints. Among them were Joseph Young and his family, lately from Kirtland.

About four o'clock in the afternoon a company of two hundred and forty men, commanded by one Nehemiah Comstock, fell upon the little settlement and butchered in cold blood, without warning or provocation, nearly a score of the unoffending Mormons. Men, women and children were shot down indiscriminately, their bodies stripped and mutilated, their camp plundered and their horses and wagons driven off by the murdering marauders. The dead bodies were thrown into an old well. . . .

On the day of the massacre the troops from Richmond reinforced to nearly three thousand men, advanced upon beleaguered Far West. General Clark was still at a distance, mustering his forces. The whole surrounding region was now being over-run by marauding bands, shooting, burning and pillaging wherever Mormons were to be found. As the survivors of these savage raids came fleeing into Far West for safety, their red-handed pursuers augmented the army of investment. Among those who thus joined the militia against the Mormons were Gilliam's painted guerillas and the perpetrators of the Haun's Mill massacre.

The inhabitants of the doomed city, their mails having been stopped, had not yet heard of the Governor's exterminating order but supposed the army of General Lucas to be an overwhelming military mob. Though greatly outnumbered by the besieging force, they prepared to make a vigorous defense and sell their lives as dearly as possible. Hastily throwing up some rude fortifications they awaited the onslaught of the foe. . . .

It was at this critical juncture that Colonel George M. Hinkle commanding the defenders of Far West, entered into negotiations with General Lucas, and without consulting his associates agreed upon a compromise, the terms of which were as follows:

(1) The Mormon leaders were to be delivered up to be tried and punished.

(2) The Far West militia were to surrender their arms.

(3) An appropriation was to be made of the property of all Mormons who had taken up arms, to indemnify for damages said to have been inflicted by them. This was afterwards construed to cover all the expenses of the militia in making war upon the Saints.

(4) The Mormons, as a body, excepting such as should be held as prisoners, were to forthwith leave the State. The prisoners were to include all Mormon participants in the Crooked River battle, who were to be tried for murder.

The observance of these conditions, it was promised, would avert bloodshed. The alternative was an immediate assault upon the city.

Under pretense of arranging a conference between the Mormon leaders and the besieging generals, and without notifying the former of the compact he had entered into, Colonel Hinkle, on the 31st of October, delivered up to General Lucas the following named persons, who had been demanded: Joseph Smith, junior, Sidney Rigdon, Parley P. Pratt, Lyman Wight and George W. Robinson. Later were added to the list, Hyrum Smith and Amasa M. Lyman. They were placed under a strong guard and treated as prisoners of war. . . .

Next day, the army having advanced nearer the city, the Mormon militia laid down their arms, and were then compelled at the point of the bayonet and the cannon's mouth to sign away their property to pay the expenses of the war waged upon them. They had made no agreement to do so, but Hinkle, forsooth, had made it for them. All the men, save those who had escaped, were held in temporary durance, and the town then given up to pillage. Nameless crimes were committed by the ruthless soldiery, and their yet more ruthless allies, the banditti. Women were abused, some of them till they died, within sight of their agonized husbands and fathers, powerless to protect them. Let imagination paint the horror from which the historian's pen recoils. . . .

On the evening of November 1st, General Lucas convened a court-martial, consisting of the principal officers of his army, and no less than seventeen Christian preachers. By a majority of this religio-military tribunal, Joseph Smith and his fellow prisoners, none of whom were permitted to be present during their trial, were sentenced to be shot at eight o'clock next morning, in the public square at Far West, in the presence of their wives and children. Generals Doniphan and Graham refused their assent to this decision, the former denouncing it as "cold-blooded murder," and threatening to withdraw his brigade from the scene of the proposed massacre. This caused Lucas and his murderous colleagues to hesitate, and finally to reconsider their action. On the morning set for the execution they decided, in lieu of killing the prisoners, to parade them in triumph through the neighboring counties. . . .

Joseph and Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Lyman Wight, Alexander McRae and Caleb Baldwin were now removed to Clay County, and immured in Liberty jail. The remainder of the prisoners were still held at Richmond. The Clay County captives were treated with great barbarity. Several times their food was poisoned, nearly causing their death, and they even declared that cooked human flesh, called by their guards "Mormon beef," was repeatedly served up to them.

Months passed. Various efforts were made by legal process to free the prisoners. Among those actively engaged in their behalf were Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball, who, being comparatively unknown by the Missourians, had escaped arrest and incarceration. Stephen Markham was another faithful friend. Generals Atchison and Doniphan lent their aid, and Judge Hughes, of the Supreme Court of Missouri, also favored the release of the captives. It was conceded by many that they were illegally held, but owing to the prevailing prejudice, their friends were powerless to do much for them. Again and again they were put upon trial and nothing was proven against them, even after their own witnesses had all been driven from the State. Finally by proceedings in habeas corpus Sidney Rigdon was let out on bail. Threatened by the mob after his liberation he was compelled to flee for his life. His companions were remanded to prison, where they passed the winter of 1838-9. (History of Utah, August 1838-March 1839, 1:142-64.)

J. Reuben Clark, Jr.: Introduction

In the midst of all this [persecution] , in Missouri, they arrested, on charges that apparently involved the death penalty, Joseph and Hyrum, Alexander McRae, Lyman Wight, Caleb Baldwin, and Sidney Rigdon. . . . Four and a half months, as nearly as I can count, they were in Liberty Jail, and during the time they were in Liberty Jail, the Prophet wrote a great epistle and certain parts of that epistle have been taken out and placed in the Doctrine and Covenants as revelations, as they were, glorious in their language, in their principle, and in their instructions. . . .

But these revelations [March 25, 1839, HC 3:289-305] , these great outpourings of wisdom and the Spirit of the Lord, came at a time when the Church was struggling for existence. They were threatening to exterminate us in Missouri. They were threatening to kill our leaders.

I have been just a little bit disappointed in noting that some of our historians are rather inclined to excuse or to explain the burnings, the robbings, the plunderings, the rapings, and all the rest. Personally, I have no desire to forget all those things—not that I want to cherish them and build hate in my heart, but I do want to have some understanding of what our forefathers went through in order that we might come here. And I recommend to you that you read the last chapters of Volume I, I think it is, of Roberts' Comprehensive History of the Church, in which he sums up what happened in Missouri after they had gotten rid of us. It is an amazing story, and I assume accurate.

While the brethren were in prison, the Prophet Joseph Smith and Hyrum and the rest, the Saints were led from Missouri to Illinois. Brigham Young led them. . . . That was a great experience, one that every descendant, literally or spiritually, and all of us come in the latter group, should find a demonstration, a proof, of the great faith which those stalwarts had. (CR, October 1958, pp. 81-82 .)

SCD&C 121 1D&C 121 2D&C 121 3D&C 121 4D&C 121 5D&C 121 6Joseph Fielding Smith: 1-6

SCD&C 121 1D&C 121 2D&C 121 3D&C 121 4D&C 121 5D&C 121 6It [Section 121] is a prayer and a prophecy and an answer by revelation from the Lord. None other but a noble soul filled with the spirit of love of Christ could have written such a letter. Considering the fact that these prisoners had been confined several months; were fed on food at times not fit for a pig, and at times impregnated with poison and once being offered human flesh, evidently from the body of one of their brethren, it is no wonder that the Prophet cried out in the anguish of his soul for relief. Yet, in his earnest pleading, there breathed a spirit of tolerance and love for his fellow man.

SCD&C 121 1D&C 121 2D&C 121 3D&C 121 4D&C 121 5D&C 121 6In his anguish the Savior cried unto his Father while on the cross. [Mark 15:34.] In his anguish yet pleading not so much for himself as for his afflicted brethren, the Prophet also cried in earnest pleading: [Sec. 121:1, quoted.] Did he feel that he had been forsaken? This he alone can answer. Yet his trust was in the Lord, for all other help had failed him. Earnestly he pleaded: [Sec. 121:2, quoted.] It was his people for whom he plead, more than for himself. [Sec. 121:3, 6, quoted.] (CHMR, 1949, 3:197.)

D&C 121 7George Q. Morris: 7

D&C 121 7Thine adversity and thine afflictions

D&C 121 7The Lord said to Adam that for his sake the earth was cursed and that he should eat his food in sorrow all the days of his life. [Moses 4:23.] The scriptures say that man is born unto trouble as the sparks fly upward, [Job 5:7] , which means that it is in the design of God that we should have these adversities and experiences in the world. In the midst of life, death and a sea of trials and troubles are ever with us. So none of us are free from them, and it follows that we should find some way of meeting them successfully. As the Lord planned this earth, and in these plans were these problems, trials, and difficulties, he would not leave us without the means of meeting them, and so sent his Only Begotten Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, to the world to bring us the means of meeting all of the conditions that we have to meet in this world. . . .

D&C 121 7The scriptures say: "It is better to go to the house of mourning than to the house of feasting. . . .

D&C 121 7"Sorrow is better than laughter; for by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better." (Eccl. 7:2-3.)

D&C 121 7"Sweet are the uses of adversity, which, like a toad, though ugly and venomous, wears yet a precious jewel in its head." (Shakespeare.)

D&C 121 7"Affliction is the wholesome soil of virtue, where patience, honor, sweet humility, and calm fortitude, take root and strongly flourish." (Mallet.)

D&C 121 7"Paradoxical as it may seem, God means not only to make us good, but to make us also happy, by sickness, disaster and disappointment." (C. A. Barton.)

D&C 121 7This short one, which evidently came from the heart of the woman who expressed it struck me forcibly: "Ah! If you only knew the peace there is in an accepted sorrow." (Madame Guion.)

D&C 121 7"It is a great thing, when the cup of bitterness is pressed to our lips, to feel that it is not fate or necessity, but divine love working upon us for good ends." (E. H. Chapin.)

D&C 121 7"Affliction comes to us all not to make us sad, but sober; not to make us sorry, but wise; not to make us despondent, but by its darkness to refresh us, as the night refreshes the day; not to impoverish, but to enrich us." (Henry Ward Beecher.)

D&C 121 7The Prophet Joseph Smith one time said, when someone had remarked that somebody had affliction because of his sins, that it is an unhallowed statement to make, that afflictions come to all. And M. Henry said: "Extraordinary afflictions are not always the punishment of extraordinary sins, but sometimes the trial of extraordinary graces. Sanctified afflictions are spiritual promotions."

D&C 121 7I wonder if we may not at some later time envy those splendid people who have had so many afflictions. "No Christian but has his Gethsemane; but every praying Christian will find there is no Gethsemane without its angel." (T. Binney.)

D&C 121 7The final one: "Strength is born in the deep silence of long-suffering hearts: not amid joy." (Mrs. Hemans.)

D&C 121 7The Lord has expressed himself about these adversities that come, and I speak for example, of the Prophet Joseph Smith, who had adversity from the moment he delivered his glorious message of the vision in the grove. You will remember in Liberty Jail he cried out: [Sec. 121:1, 3, quoted.]

D&C 121 7What was the Lord's answer to this prayer? [Sec. 121:7-8, quoted.] Then the Lord held up before him other trials and difficulties that were to come, some even worse than he had had, but then said to him:". . . know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good.

D&C 121 7"The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?" [D&C 122:7-8.]

D&C 121 7So, in adversity we may have that which will exalt us, or we may have that which will degrade us. We may have that which, "if we endure it well," will ennoble us, and we may have that which, if we indulge in self-pity and bitterness, may destroy us. In all our adversities there are these two elements, and the determining factor is how shall we endure them? Shall we endure them well? If not, they may destroy us. (CR, October 1958, pp. 70-72.)

D&C 121 10Lorenzo Snow: 10

D&C 121 10Thou art not yet as Job

D&C 121 10I wonder if there are a few here within the sound of my voice, that have feelings of this kind [everything is going wrong] , like old Job had, for instance. A poor man who wondered why his children were taken from him; why his herds were destroyed and why his houses, his dwellings, went up in flames, and why he was left without anything. Well, his friends came about him. They were supposed to be friends. . . . They came about him and wanted to show him that these evils came upon him because he had failed to do his duty in the past; because he had committed some sin. That was the kind of ideas that they communicated to him. But there was nothing of the kind. It was not so. They were vastly mistaken. The Lord had a certain position in which He sought to place Job in the future at some future time when years and years had rolled away perhaps, and He wanted to try him. He wanted to educate him so that he would not complain, no matter how illy he thought himself treated by the Lord. That was a glorious trial of Job's. It has come down in history; his experience and his trials, and it has been a wonderful consolation to the people of the Lord to read the history of his experiences and his trials and how well he passed through them. (CR, October 1900, p. 4.)

SCD&C 121 11D&C 121 12D&C 121 13D&C 121 14D&C 121 15D&C 121 16D&C 121 17D&C 121 18D&C 121 19D&C 121 20D&C 121 21D&C 121 22D&C 121 23D&C 121 24D&C 121 25George Q. Cannon: 11-25

SCD&C 121 11D&C 121 12D&C 121 13D&C 121 14D&C 121 15D&C 121 16D&C 121 17D&C 121 18D&C 121 19D&C 121 20D&C 121 21D&C 121 22D&C 121 23D&C 121 24D&C 121 25The Saints should not imagine that because they know the truth and the Work of God at the present time, that they will always know these things and therefore be able to stand. If they lose the Holy Spirit through their transgressions, from that moment their knowledge respecting the Word of God ceases to increase and becomes dead; a short time only elapses before such persons deny the faith. They may not deny that the Work was ever true, or that the Elders were ever the servants of God, but they will place a limit and say, "Up to such a time the work was true and the Elders were all right, but, after that, they went astray," that very period being the time at which they themselves had committed some act or acts to forfeit the Spirit of God and kill the growth of that knowledge which they had had bestowed upon them. This has been the case in numerous instances in the past. During the Prophet Joseph's lifetime, men who had lost the Spirit themselves through their transgressions would declare that he had gone astray, and in some instances attempt to point out the time when the spot where his departure from the right path had commenced. Many of them were not in the least degree loath to contend that the work was of God, and that Joseph had been the Prophet of God, but he had fallen, and they felt it to be their duty to deal with him and to rectify the errors and wrongs which he had committed. From his days until the present time numerous instances of this kind have occurred, and but few men have apostatized who have not been willing to affirm that the Work was all true and the servants of God were all right up to a certain point, since which everything had gone wrong. The progress of the Work of God and the blessings which have rested upon his servants and people have given abundant proofs that the fault has lain with these persons who have been so loud in their talk respecting the transgressions of the servants of God. Indeed, if these were not sufficient evidences, their decrease in everything that pertaineth to godliness and the miserable results which attend their efforts, would be quite ample of themselves to convince a Saint of God that his displeasure was resting upon such characters. It is plain that it is they who have transgressed, and thereby driven the Spirit of the Lord from them, and at the very time they say the Church of God strayed they themselves were guilty of transgression. (MS, August 8, 1863, 25:505-6.)

D&C 121 11Wilford Woodruff: 11

D&C 121 11They who do charge thee with transgression

D&C 121 11I passed through that scene [great apostasy in Kirtland] , as did some others who are now with us, and I wish now to refer to it because it is something we should lay to heart. Even Apostles took occasion to rise up and endeavored to dictate and direct the Prophet of God. Here . . . was a manifestation—and a very strange one, too—of the power that the devil had over the leading men whom God raised up to assist in laying the foundation of this Church and in bringing forth the Book of Mormon. Those who testified to the Book of Mormon were led away through not keeping the commandments of God and thinking that they themselves were great men. Some of them were learned men; some of them considered themselves very smart men, and they were so smart that they wanted to dictate and direct the Prophet of God. The consequence of all this was that they turned aside from the commandments of God. Some of them had been true and faithful in their labors in the ministry. I have heard Oliver Cowdery testify of the Book of Mormon by the power of God, when it seemed as if the very earth trembled under his feet. He was filled with the Holy Ghost and the power of God while he was faithful, and so were many of these men. But Oliver Cowdery yielded to the temptation of the evil one, and we may say he apostatized. So did Martin Harris, and several others connected with them. They left the Church, they turned against Joseph and they said he was a fallen prophet, and they themselves wanted to direct the Church. I have remarked that there was a time when there were but two of the quorum of the Twelve Apostles then in town of Kirtland who stood by Joseph Smith and upheld him as a Prophet, Seer and Revelator. I was not a member of that quorum at that time; I was a Seventy. Several of these men called upon me in that time of this apostasy and asked me to join them against the Prophet; the Prophet was fallen, they said. Now, I had seen enough myself of the Prophet of God and I had read enough of the revelations of God through him, to know that he was a Prophet of God and not a fallen prophet. I saw that these men were yielding to the devil, and I told them so. Said I: "You will all go to hell unless you repent. Joseph has been raised up by the power of God and to the Church and kingdom of God here on the earth, and you will fall and go to perdition unless you repent of your sins and turn from the position you are in today." A good many of them did fall. I will here name one instance. I saw one of these Apostles in the Kirtland Temple, while the Sacrament was being passed, stand in the aisle and curse the Prophet of God to his face while he was in the stand, and when the bread was passed he reached out his hand for a piece of bread and flung it into his mouth like a mad dog. He turned as black in the face almost as an African with rage and with the power of the devil. What did he do? He ate and drank damnation to himself. He did not go and hang himself, but he did go and drown himself, and the river went over his body while his spirit was cast into the pit where he ceased to have the power to curse either God or His Prophet in time or in eternity. (MS, May 30, 1895, 57:339-40.)

D&C 121 11J. Reuben Clark, Jr.: 11

D&C 121 11Their hope shall be blasted

D&C 121 11From the earliest days of the Church, malcontents, apostates, "soreheads," have railed out with slander, falsehood, derision, against those whom God called to lead the people. They so treated the Prophet, and Brother Brigham [Young] , and to a lesser degree, every President who has followed. But the Lord has always prospered the Church as it followed their leadership. The detractors have gone down to the oblivion they deserved. So it will always be. The Prophet of the Lord has stood above and beyond the carpings of those unrighteous critics. He has always lived, as our leader lives today, in the kindly light of the Lord's approval, the recipient of the Lord's choicest blessings, manifested openly to those who will but look. (CR, April 1940, p. 22.)

D&C 121 11Brigham Young: 11

D&C 121 11Their prospects shall melt away

D&C 121 11He is a God of system, order, law, science, and art; a God of knowledge and of power. He says to the human family, "Do as you please, but I will overrule the results of your actions." He says to the wicked, "You may fight these Latter-day Saints, but they are my people, I have called them, and commanded them to come out of Babylon and to gather themselves together. You, wicked world, may fight them; you may lay your plans and schemes, but with all your machinations and wisdom I will show you that I am greater than you all, and I will put you to shame, and blast your expectations, and disappoint your calculations, and your attempts to injure my people will be foiled; for Zion shall arise, her glory shall be seen, and the kings of the earth shall enquire of the wisdom of Zion; and God shall be great, and His name shall be terrible among the inhabitants of the earth; and He will bring forth His kingdom and establish His government, and Jesus will come and rule, King of Nations, as he does King of Saints." (JD, November 13, 1870, 13:306.)

D&C 121 13Joseph Fielding Smith: 13

D&C 121 13Because their hearts are corrupted

D&C 121 13It seems to be the heritage of the ungodly, of the bigoted, and of those who love iniquity, to sit in judgment and to place themselves as dictators saying what shall be done and what shall be said by the Authorities of the Church. They accuse the brethren of all manner of iniquity, dissimulation, falsehood, and try to cause a division between them and the people over whom they preside. They take unto themselves the prerogative of saying what shall and what shall not be the doctrine of the Church, what shall and what shall not be the government of the Church, when it concerns them not at all. But it is not of this class particularly that I desire to refer, but to those members of the Church who have entered into the waters of baptism and have made covenants before the Lord, that they will observe His laws, respect His priesthood, who have been persuaded or who are in danger of being persuaded, by such characters. Occasionally when a man has himself committed sin and has lost the spirit of the gospel, he will raise his voice against the actions of the Authorities who preside over the Church; he will call them in question, sit in judgment upon them and condemn them. I wish to raise a warning voice, to all such who hold membership in the Church, and say unto them, that they had better repent and turn unto the Lord, lest His judgments come upon them, lest they lose the faith and be turned from the truth.

D&C 121 13I desire to read a few words from some of our modern scriptures. . . . [Sec. 121:16-33, quoted.]

D&C 121 13Again I repeat that it is a serious thing for a man holding a membership in this Church to say in his heart, or openly, that these men holding the keys of the kingdom sinned, when they have not sinned and cause dissension, if it is in his power to do so among his brethren. The judgments of the Lord will overtake him. He will be brought in question before the Lord, and shall be cast out and find his place among the unbelievers; and those who flattered him and encouraged him to raise up his heel against his brethren will turn from him and leave him to his shame. . . . What time, since the organization of the Church has any of the brethren exercising the Spirit of the Lord ever taught this people that which was false? When have they ever said unto you that you should do that which was not right; that which would not make you better citizens and better members of the kingdom of God? You cannot, nor can any man, in righteousness, point to the time when any of them have willfully stated anything that was contrary to the principles of righteousness, or that did not tend to make the people better in every way, that did not build them up in their salvation, temporally as well as spiritually. (CR, October 1910, pp. 39-40.)

D&C 121 13Luke Johnson: 13

D&C 121 13The things . . . willing to bring upon others . . . may come upon themselves

D&C 121 13In the fall of 1831, while Joseph was yet at my father's, a mob of forty or fifty came to his house, a few entered his room in the middle of the night, and Carnot Mason dragged Joseph out of bed by the hair of his head; he was then seized by as many as could get hold of him, and taken about forty rods from the house, stretched on a board . . . they tore off the few night clothes that he had on, for the purpose of emasculating him, and had Dr. Dennison there to perform the operation; but when the Dr. saw the Prophet stripped and stretched on the plank, his heart failed him, and he refused to operate. The mob then scratched his body all over, saying, "Damn you, this is the way the Holy Ghost falls upon you." And in attempting to force open his jaws, they broke one of his front teeth to pour a vial of some obnoxious drug into his mouth.

D&C 121 13The mob became divided, and did not succeed, but poured tar over him, and then stuck feathers in it and left him, and went to an old brickyard to wash themselves and bury their filthy clothes. At this place a vial was dropped the content of which ran out and killed the grass. About the same time part of the mob went to the house that Sidney Rigdon occupied, and dragged him out, and besmeared him with tar and feathers. My father, hearing the outcry of the family, went to the door, but finding it held by some one on the outside, he called for his gun, when those who held the door left; he pursued and was knocked down; his collar bone was broken; he was taken back to the house, and hands laid upon him by David Whitmer, and immediately healed. A few minutes after this accident, we heard the voice of Joseph calling for a blanket; some person handed him one, and he came in, the tar trickling down his face; his wife was very much alarmed, supposing it to be blood, until he came near enough to see that it was tar. My mother got some lard, and rubbed it upon him to get the tar off, which they succeeded in removing.

D&C 121 13Waste, who was the strongest man on the Western Reserve, had boasted that he could take Joseph out alone. At the time they were taking him out of the house, Waste had hold of one foot, Joseph drew up his leg and gave him a kick, which sent him sprawling in the street. He afterwards said that the Prophet was the most powerful he ever had hold of in his life.

D&C 121 13Soon after this persecution, Mason had an attack of the spinal affliction. Fullars, one of the mobocrats, died of cholera in Cleveland; Dr. Dennison was sent to the penitentiary for ten years, and died before the term expired. (MS, December 31, 1864, 26:834-35.)

D&C 121 15Heber J. Grant: 15

D&C 121 15Not one of them is left to stand by the wall

D&C 121 15Our enemies have never done anything that has injured this work of God, and they never will. I look around, I read, I reflect, and I ask questions, where are the men of influence, of power and prestige, who have worked against the Latter-day Saints? Where is the reputation for honor and courage, of the governors of Missouri and Illinois, the judges, and all others who have come here to Utah on special missions against the Latter-day Saints? Where are there people to do them honor? They cannot be found. . . . Where are the men who have assailed this work? Where is their influence? They have faded away like dew before the sun. We need have no fears, we Latter-day Saints. God will continue to sustain this work; He will sustain the right. If we are loyal, if we are true, if we are worthy of this Gospel, of which God has given us a testimony, there is no danger that the world can ever injure us. We can never be injured . . . by any mortals, except ourselves. (CR, April 1909, p. 11.)

D&C 121 16Harold B. Lee: 16

D&C 121 16Cursed are all those . . . against mine anointed

D&C 121 16There are some who look upon the leaders of this Church and God's anointed as men who are possessed of selfish motives. By them the words of our leaders are always twisted to try to bring a snare to the work of the Lord. Mark well those who speak evil of the Lord's anointed for they speak from impure hearts. Only the "pure in heart" see the "God" or the divine in man and accept our leaders, accept them as prophets of the Living God.

D&C 121 16The testimonies of our leaders, in this connection, have been very significant to me. I remember hearing President [Heber J.] Grant on several occasions say:

D&C 121 16Whenever certain individuals who are not living good lives, begin to compliment me and to speak well of me, I say to myself, Heber J. Grant, what's the matter with you; you must not be doing your duty, or this kind of people wouldn't feel so kindly toward you.

D&C 121 16I remember the prophetic pronouncement that was made from this stand by President George Albert Smith eighteen months ago when he said:

D&C 121 16Many have belittled Joseph Smith, and those who have will be forgotten in the remains of mother earth and the odor of their infamy will be ever with them, but honor, majesty, and fidelity to God attached to Joseph Smith's name and exemplified by him will never die.

D&C 121 16I wish that statement could be heard to all the ends of the earth.

D&C 121 16I want to bear you my testimony that the experience I have had has taught me that those who criticize the leaders of this Church are showing signs of a spiritual sickness which, unless curbed, will bring about eventually spiritual death. I want to bear my testimony as well that those who in public seek by their criticism, to belittle our leaders or bring them into disrepute, will bring upon themselves more hurt than upon those whom they seek thus to malign. I have watched over the years, and I have read of the history of many of those who fell away from this Church, and I want to bear testimony that no apostate who ever left the Church ever prospered as an influence in his community thereafter.

D&C 121 16It is well that we remember today that statement of the prophet of old. . . . It was the Prophet Isaiah who said: ". . . Peace, peace, to him that is far off, and to him that is near, saith the Lord; and I will heal him. But the wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest; whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked." [Isaiah 57:19-21.] (CR, October 1941, pp. 66-67.)

D&C 121 17Hyrum M. Smith: 17

D&C 121 17Children of disobedience

D&C 121 17To apostatize from the Church would be your own loss. As has been said, no physical injury or harm of any other kind would come to you from the Church itself; but in leaving the faith which you have espoused you would only cut yourselves off from the fellowship of good men and women, and, what is more, from the fellowship of God our Eternal Father. We often hear it said that sacrifice brings forth the blessings of heaven, and that we should make sacrifices for the Gospel of Jesus Christ. All this may be true, but from my view-point the man who cuts himself off from the Church and denies himself full fellowship therein is the one who makes the greater sacrifice; for by so doing he sacrifices the fellowship of the Spirit of the Lord and welcomes darkness rather than light; in fact, there is no good thing that he does not sacrifice. (CR, October 1902, pp. 11-12.)

D&C 121 21Joseph F. Smith: 21

D&C 121 21Nor their posterity after them

D&C 121 21Infidels will say to you: "How unjust, how unmerciful, how un-Godlike it is to visit the iniquities of the parents upon the children to the third and fourth generations of them that hate God." How do you see it? This way; and it is strictly in accordance with God's law. The infidel will impart infidelity to his children if he can. The whoremonger will not raise a pure, righteous posterity. He will impart seeds of disease and misery, if not of death and destruction, upon his offspring, which will continue upon his children and descend to his children's children to the third and fourth generation. It is perfectly natural that the children should inherit from their fathers, and if they sow the seeds of corruption, crime and loathsome disease, their children will reap the fruits thereof. Not in accordance with God's wishes, for His wish is that men will not sin and therefore will not transmit the consequences of their sin to their children, but that they will keep His commandments, and be free from sin and from entailing the effects of sin upon their offspring; but inasmuch as men will not hearken unto the Lord, but will become a law unto themselves, and will commit sin they will justly reap the consequences of their own iniquity, and will naturally impart its fruits to their children to the third and fourth generation. The laws of nature are the laws of God, who is just; it is not God that inflicts these penalties, they are the effects of disobedience to His law. The results of men's own acts follow them. (CR, October 1912, p. 9.)

SCD&C 121 24D&C 121 25Brigham Young: 24-25

SCD&C 121 24D&C 121 25Swift judgment . . . according as his works shall be

SCD&C 121 24D&C 121 25You have read in the Scriptures [Rev. 20:12-13] , that the children of men will be judged according to their works, whether they be good or bad. If a man's days be filled up with good works, he will be rewarded accordingly. On the other hand, if his days be filled up with evil actions, he will receive according to those acts. (JD, January 16, 1853, 1:5.)

D&C 121 26Joseph Fielding Smith: 26

D&C 121 26Knowledge by his Holy Spirit

D&C 121 26I say to you that the Lord blesses this people through the inspiration that comes to His servants, as they direct, and teach, and expound the scriptures. The statement is often made by the enemies of the people . . . that there is no revelation in the Church. I say to you that there is revelation in the Church. The Lord not only blesses the men who stand at the head and hold the keys of the kingdom, but He also blesses every faithful individual with the spirit of inspiration. He gives His people revelation for their own guidance, wherein they keep His commandments and serve Him. That is a blessing promised, and within their power to receive. We are blest with revelation; the Church is built upon that foundation. All the revelations given do not have to be written. The inspiration may come as the Lord directs them. It does not have to be printed in a book. We have revelations that have been given that have been written; some of them have been published; some of them have not. (CR, October 1910, pp. 40-41.)

D&C 121 26Francis M. Lyman: 26

D&C 121 26The unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost

D&C 121 26We may not all be allowed to see the Father, yet we are all enjoined to know the Father and the Son, and to have the testimony of the Holy Ghost abiding in our hearts in regard to the Father and the Son: for when we know them we can rely confidently upon the promises that have been made to us, and the more we become acquainted with the Spirit of the Lord the more we become established, and the more we comprehend the things of God. Governors, judges, philosophers of the world do not know these things. The simplest Latter-day Saint in the Church has inspiration and light that the philosophers and the greatest among men have not tasted. There is a measure of light and inspiration that comes through the Holy Ghost to those who serve the Lord that the natural man, independent of the Holy Ghost, is not endowed with. It is the possession of this Spirit that makes us a peculiar people; and the reason we are not more different from the rest of the world than we are is because we do not live according to the light and inspiration of the Holy Ghost as we ought to do. (CR, April 1901, p. 47.)

D&C 121 28Brigham Young: 28

D&C 121 28A time to come . . . nothing shall be withheld

D&C 121 28It is not for man, with his limited intelligence, to grasp eternity in his comprehension. There is an eternity of life, from which we were composed by the wisdom and skill of superior Beings. It would be as easy for a gnat to trace the history of man back to his origin as for man to fathom the First Cause of all things, lift the veil of eternity, and reveal the mysteries that have been sought after by philosophers from the beginning. What, then, should be the calling and duty of the children of men? Instead of inquiring after the origin of the Gods—instead of trying to explore the depths of eternities that have been, that are, and that will be,—instead of endeavouring to discover the boundaries of boundless space, let them seek to know the object of their present existence, and how to apply, in the most profitable manner for their mutual good and salvation, the intelligence they possess. Let them seek to know and thoroughly understand things within their reach, and to make themselves well acquainted with the object of their being here, by diligently seeking unto a superior Power for information, and by the careful study of the best books. [Sec. 109:7.] (JD, October 9, 1859, 7:284-85.)

D&C 121 28Wilford Woodruff: 28

D&C 121 28Whether there be one God or many Gods

D&C 121 28I want to say this to all Israel: Cease troubling yourselves about who God is; who Adam is, who Christ is, who Jehovah is. For heaven's sake, let these things alone. Why trouble yourselves about these things? God has revealed Himself, and when the 121st section of the Doctrine and Covenants is fulfilled, whether there be one God or many Gods they will be revealed to the children of men as well as thrones and dominions, principalities, and powers. Then why trouble yourselves about these things? God is God. Christ is Christ. The Holy Ghost is the Holy Ghost. That should be enough for you and me to know. If we want to know any more wait till we get where God is in person. . . . Humble yourselves before the Lord; seek for light, for truth, and for a knowledge of the common things of the kingdom of God. The Lord is the same yesterday, to-day and forever. He changes not. (MS, June 6, 1895, 57:355-56.)

D&C 121 32First Presidency (Joseph F. Smith, Anthon H. Lund, Charles W. Penrose): 32

D&C 121 32The Eternal God of all other gods

D&C 121 32This [Moses 1:6-7] was repeated in substance, and for the same reasons, in the first of the Ten Commandments: "Thou shalt have no other gods before me,"—that is, beside me, above me, or equal to me, or to be an object of worship. (Exodus 20:2-5.) Or, as Paul put it: "For though there be many that are called gods whether in heaven or in earth, (as there are gods many and Lords many) yet to us there is one God the Father, of whom are all things, and one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things and we by him." (1 Cor. 8:5-6.)

D&C 121 32It should be remembered that it was Christ before He was in the flesh who gave the law and the commandments to Moses, and who spoke for the Father, as He explained to the Nephites when he appeared to them after his resurrection. (3 Nephi 15:5.) He "was in the beginning with God and was God," according to John 1:1. The Father was represented by Him and He acted and spoke for the Father, in the creation and from that time forward in all the divine dispensations. Angels also, under Him have been appointed to speak for God, being so authorized and empowered. (See Exod. 23:20, 21.) But the sole object of worship, God the Eternal Father, stands supreme and alone, and it is in the name of the Only Begotten that we thus approach Him, as Christ taught always. "God standeth in the congregation of the mighty; he judgeth among the gods." (Psalm 82:1.) Jesus quoted this and did not dispute it. (John 10:34-36.) All the perfected beings who are rightly called gods, being, like the Savior, possessed of "the fulness of the Godhead bodily," are ONE, just as the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost are one. (IE, April 1912, 15:434-35.)

D&C 121 29Bruce R. McConkie: 12

D&C 121 29Now what does it mean to be valiant in the testimony of Jesus?

D&C 121 29D&C 121 29It is to be courageous and bold; to use all our strength, energy, and ability in the warfare with the world; to fight the good fight of faith. "Be strong and of a good courage," the Lord commanded Joshua, and then specified that this strength and courage consisted of meditating upon and observing to do all that is written in the law of the Lord. (See Josh. 1:6-9.) The great cornerstone of valiance in the cause of righteousness is obedience to the whole law of the whole gospel.

D&C 121 29To be valiant in the testimony of Jesus is to "come unto Christ, and be perfected in him"; it is to deny ourselves "of all ungodliness," and "love God" with all our "might, mind and strength." (Moro. 10:32.)

D&C 121 29To be valiant in the testimony of Jesus is to believe in Christ and his gospel with unshakable conviction. It is to know of the verity and divinity of the Lord's work on earth.

D&C 121 29But this is not all. It is more than believing and knowing. We must be doers of the word and not hearers only. It is more than lip service; it is not simply confessing with the mouth the divine Sonship of the Savior. It is obedience and conformity and personal righteousness. "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 7:21.)

D&C 121 29To be valiant in the testimony of Jesus is to "press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men." It is to "endure to the end." (2 Ne. 31:20.) It is to live our religion, to practice what we preach, to keep the commandments. It is the manifestation of "pure religion" in the lives of men; it is visiting "the fatherless and widows in their affliction" and keeping ourselves "unspotted from the world." (James 1:27.)

D&C 121 29To be valiant in the testimony of Jesus is to bridle our passions, control our appetites, and rise above carnal and evil things. It is to overcome the world as did he who is our prototype and who himself was the most valiant of all our Father's children. It is to be morally clean, to pay our tithes and offerings, to honor the Sabbath day, to pray with full purpose of heart, to lay our all upon the altar if called upon to do so.

D&C 121 29To be valiant in the testimony of Jesus is to take the Lord's side on every issue. It is to vote as he would vote. It is to think what he thinks, to believe what he believes, to say what he would say and do what he would do in the same situation. It is to have the mind of Christ and be one with him as he is one with his Father.

D&C 121 29Our doctrine is clear: its application sometimes seems to be more difficult. Perhaps some personal introspection might be helpful. For instance:

D&C 121 29Am I valiant in the testimony of Jesus if my chief interest and concern in life is laying up in store the treasures of this earth, rather than the building up of the kingdom?

D&C 121 29Am I valiant if I have more of this world's goods than my just needs and wants require and I do not draw from my surplus to support missionary work, build temples, and care for the needy?

D&C 121 29Am I valiant if my approach to the Church and its doctrines is intellectual only, if I am more concerned with having a religious dialogue on this or that point than I am on gaining a personal spiritual experience?

D&C 121 29Am I valiant if I am deeply concerned about the Church's stand on who can or who cannot receive the priesthood and think it is time for a new revelation on this doctrine?

D&C 121 29Am I valiant if I use a boat, live in a country home, or engage in some other recreational pursuit on weekends that takes me away from my spiritual responsibilities?

D&C 121 29Am I valiant if I engage in gambling, play cards, go to pornographic movies, shop on Sunday, wear immodest clothes, or do any of the things that are the accepted way of life among worldly people? (CR, October 1974, pp. 45-46.)

D&C 121 32Brigham Young: 32

D&C 121 32In the midst of . . . all other gods

D&C 121 32How many Gods there are, I do not know. But there never was a time when there were not Gods and worlds, and when men were not passing through the same ordeals that we are now passing through. That course has been from all eternity, and it is and will be to all eternity. You cannot comprehend this; but when you can, it will be to you a matter of great consolation. (JD, October 8, 1859, 7:333-34.)

D&C 121 33John Henry Smith: 33

D&C 121 33As well might man . . . stop the Missouri river

D&C 121 33The gospel we have embraced is the truth. It came from the Master. It has been sent to renovate the world, to re-establish among mankind the living faith which had so largely departed from the breasts of the human family, and to bring them to a comprehension of the responsibilities they owe to the Divine Master. Nothing can stay its progress. You and I may fall by the wayside; we may lack the fortitude and faith to endure and fulfill our part; but the work itself has gone on from the day the announcement was made of the administration of heavenly beings, and it will continue in its onward march until every nation, kindred, tongue, and people throughout the universe shall hear the glad tidings of great joy and have the privilege of accepting or rejecting the same in the exercise of the agency our Father has given them. . . . It cannot be expected that its mission will be accomplished without opposition. It must meet adverse elements, it must overcome obstacles, it must secure the ground step by step, without fear and without favor, honoring our heavenly Father, and maintaining the dignity of that Priesthood God has given to us—the grandest heritage that was ever given to the children of men in any day and age of the world. (CR, October 1905, pp. 13-14.)

D&C 121 33Gordon B. Hinckley: 33

D&C 121 33Knowledge from heaven

D&C 121 33To the world we give our witness that there is revelation of the word of God as certainly in the atomic age as there was in the age of Jeremiah. It is just that simple and just that true.

D&C 121 33Joseph Smith was the anointed of the Lord to this dispensation. Well might we repeat the words of the Lord: ". . . What power shall stay the heavens? As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints." (D&C 121:33.) Knowledge has been and is being revealed. Those who accept it and obey it find that peace which passeth understanding and that growth which leads to eternal life. (CR, April 1964, p. 39.)

D&C 121 34Joseph Fielding Smith: 34

D&C 121 34There are many called

D&C 121 34On the one hundred and twenty-first section of the Doctrine and Covenants . . . I would like to make a comment. [Sec. 121:34-36, quoted.]

D&C 121 34Now who are those who are called? I take it that every man who is ordained to an office in the priesthood has been called. The Lord is willing that any man should serve him. (CR, October 1945, p. 97.)

D&C 121 36Stephen L Richards: 36

D&C 121 36Upon the principles of righteousness

D&C 121 36We are told very definitely in that great section of the Doctrine and Covenants, which I often characterize as the Constitution of the priesthood [Section 121] , that one cannot minister in any degree of unrighteousness, for if he does so, amen to the priesthood of that man. His effort, his labors, his ministry will not be efficacious. He must have the background of righteousness to make him able, capable, of administering the powers of Holy Priesthood. (CR, April 1955, p. 12.)

D&C 121 36N. Eldon Tanner: 36

D&C 121 36The principles of righteousness

D&C 121 36. . . Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these other things that are for your good will be added unto you. By that I think he means—"and his righteousness"—that whatever we do we will be honest, honorable, upright in our dealings, and that we will be honest, true, chaste, benevolent and virtuous, and strive to do good to all men, that we might enjoy his spirit and his blessings to lead, guide and direct us. (DNCS, June 20, 1964, p. 8.)

D&C 121 37George Q. Cannon: 37

D&C 121 37The heavens withdraw themselves

D&C 121 37When a person has been legally cut off from the Church of Christ, all the rights and privileges and authority which that person may have enjoyed as a Saint or servant of God are forfeited, and he or she becomes, to all intents and purposes, an alien to the covenant. On this point there can be no doubt. There may be extenuating circumstances in some cases which, in the sight of the Lord may view them with pity and mercy, as he has said that "unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required"; "But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes" [Luke 12:48] : yet when proper action has been taken with a member of the Church, and he is excommunicated, whether he knows much or little matters not, he is deprived of every claim to blessings which, by virtue of his being a recognized member of God's Church, he may have enjoyed. (MS, November 7, 1863, 25:713.)

D&C 121 37Wilford Woodruff: 37

D&C 121 37Amen to the priesthood or the authority

D&C 121 37If we as Apostles, bearing the Holy Priesthood, use that priesthood for any other purpose under heaven but to build up the Kingdom of God, if we do our power will fall like lightning from heaven. A good many men have undertaken this—men high in the priesthood, even the Apostleship—to build themselves up upon the authority of the priesthood. And where have they gone? You may say amen to their power and authority. They have lost their Bishopric and Apostleship. Let us reflect on these things. I say the same to myself. I say the same to the Apostles, Seventies and High Priests. You cannot use the priesthood for any other purpose under heaven but to build up the kingdom and do the will of. God; and when you attempt to do otherwise your power will be taken from you. (CR, April 1880, p. 83.)

D&C 121 38Harold B. Lee: 38

D&C 121 38To kick against the pricks, to persecute the saints

D&C 121 38Men begin to fall away. They first begin to "kick against the pricks." . . . These no doubt are the pricks of the gospel. I wonder, perhaps, if they are not those things President J. Reuben Clark . . . called "restraints," the restraints of the word of wisdom, the restraints imposed in keeping the Sabbath day holy, injunctions against card playing, the restraints imposed by following out the welfare program. And so we might go on. These are the restraints against which some people seem to rebel and are kicking constantly against—the "pricks" of the gospel. . . .

D&C 121 38These [persons] are the ones who next begin to "persecute the Saints" and, finally, to fight against God.

D&C 121 38Speaking of those who would persecute the Saints, I am reminded of what the Prophet Joseph said while he was upon the earth. He said:

D&C 121 38From apostates the faithful have received the severest persecutions. Judas was rebuked and immediately betrayed his Lord into the hands of his enemies because Satan entered into him. There is a superior intelligence bestowed upon such as obey the gospel with full purpose of heart, which, if sinned against, the apostate is left naked and destitute of the Spirit of God, and he is, in truth, nigh unto cursing, and his end is to be burned. When once that light which was in them is taken from them, they become as much darkened as they were previously enlightened, and then, no marvel, of all their powers should be enlisted against the truth and they, Judas like, seek the destruction of those who were their greatest benefactors. (Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 67.)

D&C 121 38Yes, persecution seems to be the part of those who would teach the truth. (CR, October 1947, pp. 65-66.)

D&C 121 39Orson F. Whitney: 39

D&C 121 39Almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority

D&C 121 39All men who hold position do not abuse its privileges, and the man who serves God humbly and faithfully never will, for the moment he yielded to the temptation so to do, that moment would he cease to serve the Lord; but there are many, alas, who sadly misuse the functions of their office, and prostitute every power and privilege to the gratification of self and the injury and embarrassment of their fellow men. It is dangerous to put some men into power. They swell up and become so distended with the ideas of their greatness and importance, that we are forcibly reminded of so many inflated toy balloons, which the slightest prick of a pin would burst and ruin forever. A very small office and a very little authority is sufficient to intoxicate some men and render them entirely unfit for duty.

D&C 121 39The Prophet Joseph, in the course of a prophecy uttered in March, 1839, speaks as follows: [Sec. 121:34-39, quoted.]

D&C 121 39It is certain indication of a weak mind when it can be overturned by a brief draught of authority. Like a ship which spreads sail, but lacks the necessary tonnage to hold it level with the sea, the individual who hoists his pride on high and is devoid of the indispensable ballast of common sense, will speedily run on to ruin and oblivion. SoIomon never said a wiser thing than that "Pride goeth beside destruction; and a haughty spirit before a fall." [Prov. 16:18.] But the truly great man is never so affected. (Scrapbook of Mormon Literature, 1882, 2:510-13.)

D&C 121 40Daniel H. Wells: 40

D&C 121 40Many are called, but few are chosen

D&C 121 40If we only reflect, when we enlisted in this cause it was for a lifetime—for eternity; not for a few days, or a year or two, and then to fall away and return again to the beggarly elements of the world. We did not receive these principles with any such idea; but we enlisted for time and all eternity under King Emanuel's banner. We covenanted that we would keep the law of God, walk humbly before Him, and do all in our power to build up Zion, and hold on to those principles made known in His kingdom, that we might attain to the blessings which were in the future. They who get weary and discontented think, perhaps, that they are not called and chosen. Why, we are called or chosen to be righteous, holy beings; and let us remember that the time for being chosen because we have been righteous will come after a while, and happy will be that individual who has so lived up to his privileges as to be among the chosen ones. If we wish to attain to this great blessing we must live for it, and not be neglectful in regard to the things of God. We must apply our religion to our daily lives. (JD, March 22, 1868, 12:233.)

D&C 121 41Stephen L Richards: 41

D&C 121 41Only by persuasion, by long-suffering

D&C 121 41The women of the Church rejoice in the priesthood of their husbands. They know that that priesthood is not expressed in autocratic or unrighteous dominion. They know that it is a divinely given power to be exercised only in long-suffering and patience, kindness and mercy. [Sec. 121:43, quoted.] They know that the priesthood has true virtue within it—the power to bless, the power to heal, the power to counsel, to make peace and harmony prevail. (CR, April 1958, p. 95.)

D&C 121 42Joseph F. Smith: 42

D&C 121 42By kindness, and pure knowledge

D&C 121 42Change the focus of your view, and of your eyes, from watching for evil to watching for that which is good, that which is pure, and leading, prompting those who err into that path which has no error in it, and that will not admit of mistakes. Look for good in men, and where they fail to possess it try to build it up in them; try to increase the good; and speak as little about the evil as you possibly can. It does not do any good to magnify evil, to publish evil or to promulgate it by tongue or pen. There is no good to be obtained by it. (CR, April 1913, pp. 7-8.)

D&C 121 43Joseph Smith: 43

D&C 121 43Reproving betimes with sharpness

D&C 121 43I frequently rebuke and admonish my brethren, and that because I love them, not because I wish to incur their displeasure, or mar their happiness. Such a course of conduct is not calculated to gain the good will of all, but rather the ill will of many; therefore, the situation in which I stand is an important one; so, you see, brethren, the higher the authority, the greater the difficulty of the station, from the perverseness of the brethren, for their temporal as well as spiritual welfare. (HC 2:478, April 6, 1837.)

D&C 121 43Stephen L Richards: 43

D&C 121 43Reproving betimes with sharpness

D&C 121 43It is a kindness to reprove in the spirit of love. It is an unkindness to mitigate the gravity of offenses in those for whose guidance and direction we have responsibility. . . . Teach duty, require duty, if need be, in children to bless their lives with proper understanding and practices essential to their happiness. (CR, April 1957, pp. 97-98.)

D&C 121 45Joseph Fielding Smith: 45

D&C 121 45Be full of charity towards all men

D&C 121 45Considering the fact that at the time this epistle was written [Section 121] the Prophet and his fellow prisoners were suffering intensely and unjustly at the hands of their enemies the nobleness and greatness of his character stands out most clearly. When we consider that he could write in the spirit of forgiveness, charity and humility, such as we find in this great document, we know surely the Spirit of the Lord was upon him. I repeat, that this is one of the great letters ever written. This we discover when we take the time to analyze it. Not all of this communication has been placed in the Doctrine and Covenants as revelation. It does appear in full in the Documentary History, Vol. 3, pages 289-305. The closing paragraphs of Section 121 are wonderfully inspiring and contain a beauty of sentiment and promise that should rejoice the heart of every Latter-day Saint: [Sec. 121:45-46, quoted.] (CHMR, 1949, 3:199-200.)

D&C 121 45John Taylor: 45

D&C 121 45Be full of charity towards all men

D&C 121 45When you get the Spirit of God, you feel full of kindness, charity, long-suffering, and you are willing all the day long to accord to every man that which you want yourself. You feel disposed all the day long to do unto all men as you would wish them to do unto you. What is it that will enable one man to govern his fellows aright? It is just as Joseph Smith said to a certain man who asked him, "How do you govern such a vast people as this?" "Oh," says Joseph, "it is very easy." "Why," says the man, "but we find it very difficult." "But," said Joseph, "it is very easy, for I teach the people correct principles and they govern themselves"; and if correct principles will do this in one family they will in ten, in a hundred and in ten hundred thousand. (JD, May 18, 1862, 10:57-58.)

D&C 121 45Heber J. Grant: 45

D&C 121 45Let virtue garnish thy thoughts

D&C 121 45How I wish that virtue garnished our thoughts unceasingly. How I wish that no man holding the Priesthood of the living God was ever guilty of allowing any words to fall from his lips that he could not repeat in the presence of his mother. Then he would be, to a very great extent, in that straight and narrow path that leads to life eternal.

D&C 121 45There are very few things in all the world that are more demoralizing than what are known as "shady" stories. There is nothing in all the world of the same value as a love of God and a desire to do those things that we know would please God. (CR, April 1937, pp. 11-12.)

D&C 121 46Heber C. Kimball: 46

D&C 121 46The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion

D&C 121 46The Holy Ghost in the people of God will control not only our domestic animals, our families, our servants, and our handmaids, but it will control the armies of men that are in the world, the mountains, seas, streams of water, tempests, famines and pestilence and every destructive power, that they come not nigh unto us, just as much as we can keep sickness from us by the power of faith and prayer and good works. If we live our religion, we shall never suffer as the world suffers. We shall not be perplexed with famine and pestilence, with the caterpillar, and other destructive insects which the Lord will send in the last days to afflict the wicked. (JD, October 7, 1859, 7:330.)

D&C 121 46Rudger Clawson: 46

D&C 121 46Thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion

D&C 121 46How extremely sacred is the Holy Priesthood, which is nothing more nor less than divine authority committed unto man. . . . "Whoso," (meaning any man and every man), "is faithful unto the obtaining these two priesthoods of which I have spoken, and the magnifying their calling," [Sec. 84:33] will enter into the possession of all things, for he will become a joint heir with Jesus Christ, the Lord, in such possession. Now, I ask you, what more could a faithful high priest receive than the promise of this blessing? Could he receive any more if he were an apostle? Could he receive any more if he were a counselor in the Presidency of the Church? Could he receive any more if he were the President of the Church, than a promise which gives to him a joint heirship in all things? No, he could not. And so it is with the faithful seventy, and so with the faithful elder in the Church.

D&C 121 46There is no need for envy. There is no need for overweening ambition. There is no need to reach out and try to grasp that to which we are not entitled. The essential thing is that every man should see to it, that he obtains the High Priesthood. If he advances no further than the office of an elder but is faithful in the magnifying of his calling, he will enter into his glory and exaltation and will receive the fulness of which the record speaks. (CR, October 1917, pp. 28-29.)

D&C 121 46Joseph Smith: 46

D&C 121 46Thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion

D&C 121 46Paul says, "There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for one star differeth from another star in glory. So also is the resurrection from the dead." [1 Cor. 15:41-42.] They who obtain a glorious resurrection from the dead, are exalted far above principalities, powers, thrones, dominions, and angels, and are expressly declared to be heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ, all having eternal power. (HC 6:478, June 16, 1844.)
