Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 4 ( 1965)

Section 122

The word of the Lord to Joseph Smith the Prophet, while a prisoner in the jail at Liberty, Missouri, March, 1839. See History of the Church, vol. 3, p. 300.—Comforting assurances—Further persecutions of the Prophet and his possible martyrdom foreshadowed—The Son of Man had likewise suffered.

Heber J. Grant: Introduction

The enemies of the work of God . . . imprisoned the Prophet in Liberty Jail, [Missouri] where he received two very remarkable revelations. [March 25, 1839, HC 3:289-305.] They are known as Sections 121 and 122 of the Doctrine and Covenants, also a remarkable document which was published regarding the persecutions of the Saints. (Section 123.) The mob could not prevent the Prophet from receiving communications from God. (CR, April 1937, p. 6.)

SCD&C 122 1D&C 122 2Bruce R. McConkie: 1-2

SCD&C 122 1D&C 122 2Here are the words of Deity, spoken to Joseph Smith, by which all men can judge the state of their own spiritual development: [Sec. 122:1-2, quoted.]

SCD&C 122 1D&C 122 2All men may well ask themselves where they stand with reference to Joseph Smith and his divine mission. Do they inquire after his name and seek that salvation found only in the gospel of Christ as revealed to his latter-day prophet, or do they deride and despise the Lord's living oracles and say that God no longer speaks to men in the way he did anciently? The great question which all men in our day must answer—and that at the peril of their own salvation—is: Was Joseph Smith called of God?

SCD&C 122 1D&C 122 2As for me and my house, we shall seek counsel and authority and blessing constantly from him and from those who now wear his prophetic mantle. (CR, April 1976, p. 144.)

D&C 122 3Francis M. Lyman: 3

D&C 122 3Thy people shall never be turned against thee

D&C 122 3Speaking of the experience of the Prophet Joseph in the early days, I want to say that though there were many who turned from him, yet he had true and devoted friends, who stood by his side and sustained him to the very last; and he rolled upon their shoulders the cause of the kingdom, and they have been true to that trust. This Church has been taken care of from that time to this, and these men have walked in the footsteps of their file leaders, in the footsteps of the Prophet Joseph, and they have built upon the foundations which he laid. (CR, October 1905, p. 11.)

D&C 122 4Charles W. Penrose: 4

D&C 122 4Thou shalt be had in honor

D&C 122 4I thank God that when I heard the gospel preached, it found a place in my soul, I was prepared for it in that singular and simple way, and ever since that time there is something about the very name of Joseph Smith and his work and mission which thrills me in every part of my nature. l rejoice in bearing testimony, as I have done in many countries and at many times that Joseph Smith was indeed a prophet of the living God, that he lived a prophet, that he died—that is, his spirit left his body—as a prophet, that he is still ministering in that capacity where he has gone in a sphere shut out from our gaze, like our former estate is shut out from our vision. But he lives and he will be troubled no more by the tyrants that followed him; he will be troubled no more with the false reports that were raised against his character; he is troubled no more with the conflicts of life, for he had to fight upstream all the time as he struggled along from year to year. But he has gone from the gaze of the world and from our gaze, for a time, and now is working in the world behind the veil, in that vast sphere where there are so many of the children of God who have lived in the flesh and have gone before us. (CR, October 1916, p. 18.)

D&C 122 4Parley P. Pratt: 4

D&C 122 4Thy voice . . . more terrible . . . than the fierce lion

D&C 122 4In one of those tedious nights [Winter, 1838-39, Richmond, Mo. jail] we had lain as if in sleep, till the hour of midnight had passed, and our ears and hearts had been pained, while we had listened for hours to the obscene jests, the horrid oaths, the dreadful blasphemies and filthy language of our guards, Colonel Price at their head, as they recounted to each other their deeds of rapine, murder, robbery, etc., which they had committed among the "Mormons" while at Far West and vicinity. They even boasted of defiling by force wives, daughters, and virgins, and of shooting or dashing out the brains of men, women and children.

D&C 122 4I had listened till I became so disgusted, shocked, horrified, and so filled with the Spirit of indignant justice, that I could scarcely refrain from rising upon my feet and rebuking the guards, but I had said nothing to Joseph or anyone else, although I lay next to him, and knew he was awake. On a sudden he arose to his feet and spoke in a voice of thunder, or as the roaring lion, uttering, as near as I can recollect, the following words:

D&C 122 4"Silence! Ye fiends of the infernal pit! In the name of Jesus Christ I rebuke you, and command you to be still; I will not live another minute and hear such language. Cease such talk, or you or I die this instant!"

D&C 122 4He ceased to speak. He stood erect in terrible majesty. Chained, and without a weapon, calm, unruffled, and dignified as an angel, he looked down upon his quailing guards, whose knees smote together, and who, shrinking into a corner, or crouching at his feet, begged his pardon, and remained quiet until an exchange of guards.

D&C 122 4I have seen ministers of justice, clothed in ministerial robes, and criminals arraigned before them, while life was suspended upon a breath in the courts of England; I have witnessed a congress in solemn session to give laws to nations; I have tried to conceive of kings, of royal courts, of thrones and crowns; and of emperors assembled to decide the fate of kingdoms; but dignity and majesty have I seen but once, as it stood in chains, at midnight, in a dungeon in an obscure village of Missouri. (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, 1938, pp. 210-11.)

D&C 122 7Orson F. Whitney: 7

D&C 122 7All these things . . . shall be for thy good

D&C 122 7It remained for the Prophet Joseph Smith to . . . set forth the why and wherefore of human suffering; and in revealing it he gave us a strength and power to endure that we did not before possess. For when men know why they suffer, and realize that it is for a good and wise purpose, they can bear it much better than they can in ignorance.

D&C 122 7The Prophet was lying in a dungeon [Liberty, Missouri] for the gospel's sake. He called upon God, "who controlleth and subjecteth the devil," and God answered telling him that his sufferings should be but "a small moment." "Thou art not yet as Job," said the Lord, "thy friends do not contend against thee." Job's friends, it will be remembered, tried to convince him that he must have done something wrong or those trials would not have come upon him. But Job had done no wrong; it was "without cause" that Satan had sought to destroy him. God said to Joseph: "If thou art called to pass through tribulation; if thou art in perils among false brethren; perils among robbers; perils by land and sea; if fierce winds become thine enemy; if the billowing surge conspire against thee, if the very jaws of hell shall gape open the mouth wide after thee, know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience and shall be for thy good."

D&C 122 7There is the reason. It is for our development, our purification, our growth, our education and advancement, that we buffet the fierce waves of sorrow and misfortune; and we shall be all the stronger and better when we have swum the flood and stand upon the farther shore. . . .

D&C 122 7The fall of Adam and Eve was a great calamity, but it brought forth a wonderful blessing; it gave us our bodies, with endless opportunities to advance and achieve. It brought death into the world, but it also brought forth the human family. There was the compensation. "Adam fell that men might be: and men are, that they might have joy." [2 Nephi 2:25.] The crucifixion of Christ was a terrible calamity, but the atonement connected with it was the foreordained means of man's salvation. Israel's calamitous fate proved a blessing to the world in general. God's promises to Abraham had to be made good. "In thee and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed." [Abr. 2:11.] This promise was fulfilled in Christ, but an important part of the fulfillment began when the children of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were flung broadcast over the world, and the barren wastes of unbelief might be sprinkled with the blood that believes, and made fruitful of faith and righteousness.

D&C 122 7So it is with all our troubles and sorrows; there is a compensation for them. The philosopher Emerson says:

D&C 122 7A fever, a mutilation, a cruel disappointment, a loss of wealth, a loss of friends, seems at the moment unpaid loss, and unpayable. But the sure years reveal the deep remedial force that underlies all facts. The death of a dear friend, wife, brother, lover, which seemed nothing but privation, somewhat later assumes the aspect of a guide or genius; for it commonly operates revolutions in our way of life, terminates an epoch of infancy or of youth which was waiting to be closed, breaks up a wonted occupation, or a household or a style of living, and allows the formation of new ones more friendly to the growth of character. It permits or constrains the formation of new acquaintances and the reception of new influences that prove of the first importance to the next years; and the man or woman who would have remained a sunny garden flower, with no room for its roots and too much sunshine for its head, by the falling of the walls and the neglect of the gardener, is made the banyan of the forest, yielding shade and fruit to wide neighborhoods of men.

D&C 122 7How true! To whom do we look, in days of grief and disaster, for help and consolation? Who are these friendly neighbors gathered in today? They are men and women who have suffered, and out of their experience in suffering they bring forth the riches of their sympathy and condolences as a blessing to those now in need. Could they do this had they not suffered themselves?

D&C 122 7When the sky darkens and the tempest threatens, where do we go for shelter? To the sagebrush or the willow? No, rather to some spreading oak that has withstood the storms of ages and become stronger because of the fierce winds that have swayed its branches and caused its roots to strike deeper and deeper into the soil. When we want counsel and comfort, we do not go to children, nor to those who know nothing but pleasure and self-gratification. We go to men and women of thought and sympathy, men and women who have suffered themselves and can give us the comfort that we need. Is not this God's purpose in causing his children to suffer? He wants them to become more like himself. God has suffered far more than man ever did or ever will, and is therefore the great source of sympathy and consolation. "Who are these arrayed in white, nearest to the throne of God?" asked John the Apostle, wrapt in his mighty vision. The answer was: "These are they who have come up through great tribulation, and washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb." [Rev. 7:13-14.]

D&C 122 7There is always a blessing in sorrow and humiliation. They who escape these things are not the fortunate ones. "Whom God loveth he chasteneth." [Heb. 12:6.] When he desires to make a great man he takes a little street waif, or a boy in the back-woods, such as Lincoln or Joseph Smith, and brings him up through hardship and privation to be the grand and successful leader of a people. Flowers shed most of their perfume when they are crushed. Men and women have to suffer just so much in order to bring out the best that is in them. (IE, November 1918, 22:5-7.)

D&C 122 6Joseph Smith: 6

D&C 122 6If thine enemies fall upon thee

D&C 122 6Myself and fellow prisoners were taken to the town, [Far West, Mo.] into the public square, and before departure we, after much entreaty, were suffered to see our families, being attended all the while by a strong guard. I found my wife and children in tears, who feared we had been shot by those who had sworn to take our lives, and that they would see me no more. When I entered my house, they clung to my garments, their eyes streaming with tears while mingled emotions of joy and sorrow were manifested in their countenances. I requested to have a private interview with them a few minutes, but this privilege was denied me by the guard. I was then obliged to take my departure. . . .

D&C 122 6My partner wept, my children clung to me, until they were thrust from me by the swords of the guards. I felt overwhelmed while I witnessed the scene, and could only recommend them to care of that God whose kindness had followed me to the present time, and who alone could protect them, and deliver me from the hands of my enemies, and restore me to my family. (HC 3:193, November 2, 1838.)

D&C 122 8Erastus Snow: 8

D&C 122 8Art thou greater than he?

D&C 122 8It is not necessary, in the providence of God, that we should all be martyrs; it is not necessary that all should suffer death upon the cross, because it was the will of the Father that Jesus should so suffer, neither is it necessary that all the Saints of this last dispensation should perish because our prophet perished, but yet it may be necessary that some should, that a sufficient number of faithful witnesses of God and of his Christ should suffer, and even perish by the hands of their enemies, to prove and show unto the world—the unbelieving and unthinking—that their testimony is true, and that they are ready not only to bear testimony inward, but in deed, to sustain and honor their testimony through their lives; and also in their death; and greater love than this no man can have for his friend or for his bosom companion, not even David and Jonathan, whose love for each other is said to have surpassed the love of woman. [1 Sam. 20.] No one can give a stronger assurance of his devotion to the principles he has received and which he teaches to his fellow man, than to patiently endure suffering and endurance even unto death. (JD, October 1879, 21:26.)

D&C 122 8Daniel H. Wells: 8

D&C 122 8Art thou greater than he?

D&C 122 8Do not let us be discouraged at difficulties and trials, for we are sent to this state of existence for the express purpose of descending below all things, that we may pass the ordeals and trials of this life and thereby prove our integrity and be prepared to rise above all things. And after all, we have not been called upon to endure to that extent that the Savior of the world was. But he was not subjected to the afflictions he had to endure without hope, neither are we; but we are called to pass through them that we may prove whether we have power and strength to stand in that day when all things shall be shaken, and nothing doubting, cleave to the Lord our God with full purpose of heart, no matter how much things are against us, apparently. If we can pass these tests and trials we shall prove to God and angels that we are worthy to receive the welcome plaudit, "well done, thou good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of the Lord." [Matt. 25:21-23.] (JD, March 22, 1868, 12:235.)

D&C 122 9Joseph Smith: 9

D&C 122 9Thy years shall not be numbered less

D&C 122 9I know what I say; I understand my mission and business. God Almighty is my shield; and what can man do if God is my friend? I shall not be sacrificed until my time comes; then I shall be offered freely. (HC 5:259, January 22, 1843.)

D&C 122 9Spencer W. Kimball: 9

D&C 122 9Thy days are known

D&C 122 9Was there frustration in the martyrdom of Joseph Smith? Joseph was protected and his life saved in every instance of persecution until his work was finished and he had done his part in the restoration of the gospel and the priesthood and all other keys of the dispensation, and until the organization of the kingdom was effected. He could not be killed before that time, though all hell raged against him. He wanted to live. Life was sweet to him. It held promise of sweet associations with his family, his brethren and the satisfaction of seeing the work blossom into a full-blown flower. But his work was done; other strong leaders could now carry on; he was needed in other fields. Only in his thirties, a very young man, he died, and commenced his work in other realms. (CR, April 1945, p. 59.)
