Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 4 ( 1965)

Section 131

Instructions by Joseph Smith the Prophet, given at Ramus, Illinois, May 16 and 17, 1843. See History of the Church, vol. 5, pp. 392, 393.—Degrees in the celestial glory—Significance of the new and everlasting covenant of marriage—The more sure word of prophecy—Impossibility of a man being saved in ignorance—Spirit is matter.

D&C 131 1Orson Pratt: 1

D&C 131 1The celestial glory

D&C 131 1The earth will have to pass away the same as our bodies do, and the dust thereof be mingled in a chaotic form. But that same being who organized the earth will again speak, and eternity will again hear his voice, and the materials of our earth will come together again, and when it unites them in one, and forms them into a world, it will be a glorious world, a habitation for immortal beings; for kings and for priests, and for those that have been faithful to the end. [Sec. 88:87-90.] (JD, March 9, 1879, 20:155.)

D&C 131 2George Q. Cannon: 2

D&C 131 2The new and everlasting covenant of marriage

D&C 131 2We believe in the eternal nature of the marriage relation, that man and woman are destined, as husband and wife, to dwell together eternally. We believe that we are organized as we are, with all these affections, with all this love for each other, for a definite purpose, something far more lasting than to be extinguished when death shall overtake us. We believe that when a man and woman are united as husband and wife, and they love each other, their hearts and feelings are one, that that love is as enduring as eternity itself, and that when death overtakes them it will neither extinguish nor cool that love, but that it will brighten and kindle it to a purer flame, and that it will endure through eternity; and that if we have offspring they will be with us and our mutual associations will be one of the chief joys of the heaven to which we are hastening. . . . God has restored the everlasting priesthood, by which ties can be formed, consecrated and consummated, which shall be as enduring as we ourselves are enduring, that is, as our spiritual nature; and husbands and wives will be united together, and they and their children will dwell and associate together eternally, and this, as I have said, will constitute one of the chief joys of heaven; and we look forward to it with delightful anticipations. (JD, December 3, 1871, 14:320-21.)

D&C 131 4Joseph Smith: 4

D&C 131 4He cannot have an increase

D&C 131 4Except a man and his wife enter into an everlasting covenant and be married for eternity, while in this probation, by the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood, they will cease to increase when they die; that is, they will not have any children after the resurrection. (HC 5:391, May 16, 1843.)

D&C 131 4Melvin J. Ballard: 4

D&C 131 4An increase

D&C 131 4What do we mean by endless or eternal increase? We mean that through the righteousness and faithfulness of men and women who keep the commandments of God they will come forth with celestial bodies, fitted and prepared to enter into their great, high and eternal glory in the celestial kingdom of God; and unto them, through their preparation, there will come children, who will be spirit children. I don't think that is very difficult to comprehend and understand. The nature of the offspring is determined by the nature of the substance that flows in the veins of the being. When blood flows in the veins of the being, the offspring will be what blood produces, which is tangible flesh and bone, but when that which flows in the veins is spirit matter, a substance which is more refined and pure and glorious than blood, the offspring of such beings will be spirit children. By that I mean they will be in the image of the parents. They will have a spirit body and have a spark of the eternal or divine that always did exist in them. (Sermons and Missionary Services of Melvin J. Ballard, 1949, pp. 239-40.)

D&C 131 4Orson Pratt: 4

D&C 131 4An increase

D&C 131 4The increase of those who are exalted in that kingdom will endure for ever; and the bringing forth of children will not be attended with sorrow, pain and distress as it is here: these evils have come in consequence of the fall of man and the transgression by him of God's holy laws. (JD, January 19, 1873, 15:320.)

D&C 131 5Joseph Smith: 5

D&C 131 5Your life [William Clayton] is hid with Christ in God, and so are many others. Nothing but the unpardonable sin can prevent you from inheriting eternal life for you are sealed up by the power of the Priesthood unto eternal life, having taken the step necessary for that purpose. [Sec. 132:26-27.] (HC 5:391, May 16, 1843.)

D&C 131 5Contend earnestly for the like precious faith with the Apostle Peter, "and add to your faith virtue," knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness, charity; "for if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ." [2 Pet. 1:5-8.] Another point, after having all these qualifications, he lays this injunction upon the people "to make your calling and election sure." He is emphatic upon this subject—after adding all this virtue, knowledge, etc., "Make your calling and election sure." [Ibid., v. 10.] What is the secret—the starting point?"According as His divine power hath given unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness." [Ibid., v. 3.] How did he obtain all things? Through the knowledge of Him who hath called him. There could not anything be given pertaining to life and godliness, without knowledge. Woe! woe! woe to Christendom!—especially the divines and priests if this be true.

D&C 131 5Salvation is for a man to be saved from all his enemies; for until a man can triumph over death, he is not saved. A knowledge of the priesthood alone will do this. (HC 5:402-3, May 21, 1843.)

D&C 131 5Marion G. Romney: 5

D&C 131 5This gift of eternal life in the world to come [Sec. 59:23] may not, of course, be fully realized during earth life. An assurance that it will be obtained in the world to come may, however, be had in this world. As a matter of fact, the blessings of the celestial kingdom are promised only to those who have such an assurance. According to the vision, a successful candidate for these blessings must qualify on three counts: First, he must ". . . have received the testimony of Jesus, and believed on his name" and been ". . . baptized after the manner of his burial;" second, he must have received "the Holy Spirit by the laying on of the hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto this power;" and, third, he must be "sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise." (D&C 76:51-53.)

D&C 131 5The Prophet Joseph taught that one so sealed would have within himself an assurance born of the spirit, that he would obtain eternal life in the world to come. He urgently and repeatedly admonished the Saints of his day to obtain such an assurance by making their calling and election sure. It is this assurance within a person which brings to him the peace in this world which will sustain him in every tribulation. [Sec. 59:23.]

D&C 131 5So taught the Prophet in explanation of the words of Peter. Although that apostle had heard the voice of God declare, when he was with the Savior on the holy mount, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased" [Matt. 17:5] , he nevertheless wrote to the Saints, "We have also a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye take heed." . . . (2 Peter 1:19.)

D&C 131 5Explaining this statement the Prophet said:

D&C 131 5Though they might hear the voice of God and know that Jesus was the Son of God, this would be no evidence that their election and calling was made sure, that they had part with Christ, and were joint heirs with him. They then would want that more sure word of prophecy, that they were sealed in the heavens, and had the promise of eternal life in the kingdom of God. Then, having this promise sealed unto them, it was an anchor to the soul, sure and steadfast. Though the thunders might roll and lightnings flash, and earthquakes bellow, and war gather thick around, yet this hope and knowledge would support the soul in every hour of trial, trouble and tribulation. (HC 5:388-89.)

D&C 131 5These fruits of the gospel—assurance that we shall obtain eternal life, peace in this world sustained by such an assurance, and finally eternal life in the world to come—are within the reach of all of us. . . . We assume that because we are members of the Church, we shall receive as a matter of course all the blessings of the gospel. I have heard people contend that they have a claim upon them because they have been through the temple, even though they are not careful to keep the covenants they there made. I do not think this will be the case. . . .

D&C 131 5I conceive the blessings of the gospel to be of such inestimable worth that the price of them must be very exacting, and if I correctly understand what the Lord has said on the subject, it is. The price, however, is within the reach of us all, because it is not to be paid in money nor in any of this world's goods but in righteous living. What is required is wholehearted devotion to the gospel and unreserved allegiance to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Speaking to this point, the Prophet taught ". . . that those who keep the commandments of the Lord and walk in his statutes to the end, are the only individuals" who shall receive the blessings. . . . We must be willing to sacrifice everything. Through self-discipline and devotion we must demonstrate to the Lord that we are willing to serve him under all circumstances. When we have done this, we shall receive an assurance that we shall have eternal life in the world to come. Then we shall have peace in this world. (CR, September 1949, pp. 41-44.)

D&C 131 5Joseph Smith: 5

D&C 131 5After a person has faith in Christ, repents of his sins, and is baptized for the remission of his sins and receives the Holy Ghost, (by the laying on of hands), which is the first Comforter, then let him continue to humble himself before God, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, and living by every word of God, and the Lord will soon say unto him, Son, thou shalt be exalted. When the Lord has thoroughly proved him, and finds that the man is determined to serve Him at all hazards, then the man will find his calling and his election made sure, then it will be his privilege to receive the other Comforter, which the Lord hath promised the Saints, as is recorded in the testimony of St. John, in the 14th chapter, from the 12th to the 27th verses. [Sec. 88:3.] (HC 3:380, June 26, 1839.)

D&C 131 6Joseph Smith: 6

D&C 131 6A man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge, for if he does not get knowledge, he will be brought into captivity by some evil power in the other world, as evil spirits will have more knowledge, and consequently more power than many men who are on the earth. Hence it needs revelation to assist us, and give us knowledge of the things of God. (HC 4:588, April 10, 1842.)

D&C 131 6Hugh B. Brown: 6

D&C 131 6Man can no more be saved in his ignorance than he can be saved in his sins. The gospel helps us to overcome both and here again it becomes the power unto our salvation, if we do our part. (Eternal Quest, 1956, p. 89.)

D&C 131 6John A. Widtsoe: 6

D&C 131 6Knowledge tested and tried is the beginning of faith. For that reason, "it is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance." The extent of a person's faith depends in part on the amount of his knowledge. The more knowledge he gathers, the more extensive becomes his field of faith.

D&C 131 6The degree of faith possessed by any man depends not upon the extent of his knowledge, but upon the certainty of his knowledge, which leads to the proper use of his knowledge. Thus a man of great knowledge may have weak faith, while one of limited information may have strong faith. (Alma 32:34-41.) (Joseph Smith, 1951, p. 163.)

D&C 131 6First Presidency (Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards): 6

D&C 131 6If man would be great in goodness, they must be intelligent, for no man can do good unless he knows how; therefore, seek after knowledge, all knowledge, and especially that which is from above, which is wisdom to direct in all things, and if you find anything that God does not know, you need not learn that thing; but strive to know what God knows, and use that knowledge as God uses it, and then you will be like him; will see as you are seen, and know as you are known; and have charity, love one another, and do each other good continually, and for ever, even as for yourselves.

D&C 131 6But if a man have all knowledge, and does not use it for good, it will prove a curse instead of a blessing as it did to Lucifer, the Son of the Morning. If a sinner is advised to repent, and be baptized for remission of his sins, and does it not, it will prove to his condemnation instead of a blessing, and he cannot receive the laying on of the hands of the Elders for the reception of the Holy Ghost. (MS, January 15, 1852, 14:17-25.)

D&C 131 6James E. Talmage: 6

D&C 131 6Not all knowledge is of equal worth. The knowledge that constitutes the wisdom of the heavens is all embraced in the Gospel as taught by Jesus Christ; and wilful ignorance of this, the highest type of knowledge, will regulate its victim to the inferior order of intelligences. Another latter-day scripture may be cited as an inspired generalization embodying an eternal truth relating to our subject: [Sec. 131:6, quoted.]

D&C 131 6Can it be otherwise? If a man be ignorant of the terms on which salvation is predicated he is unable to comply therewith, and consequently gain. The ignorance that thus condemns is responsible ignorance, involving wilful and sinful neglect. Lack of the saving knowledge that one has had no opportunity to acquire is but a temporary deficiency; for Eternal Justice provides means of education beyond the grave. Every one of us will be judged according to the measure of light and truth we have had opportunity to acquire. [Alma 12:9-11.] (The Vitality of Mormonism, 1919, p. 278.)

D&C 131 6George Teasdale: 6

D&C 131 6We talk about the progression of the Church in scholastic attainments. I would not give a fig for all your scholastic attainments if you have no faith. What better are you than the Gentile nations? They have the highest education that is possible to live, but they have little faith. They do not believe in God; they do not believe in the ordinances of His house; they are infidel to those precious principles that exalt men. Show me men and women who are advancing in faith and in righteousness, in meekness and in virtue, and I will show you a people that love the Lord God of Israel. Show me a people that are advancing in the iniquities of the world and I will show you a people who despise the Almighty and are more in favor of the establishment of the kingdom of the adversary. We show it by our works. It does not matter much what our reputation is, we manifest what we really are by our works. We prove that we love the Lord God when silently we meditate upon the principles of righteousness and practice them. (MS, August 15, 1895, 57:515.)

D&C 131 7Joseph Smith: 7

D&C 131 7All spirit is matter

D&C 131 7The spirit of man is not a created being; it existed from eternity, and will exist to eternity. [Sec. 93:29; Abr. 3:18.] Anything created cannot be eternal; and earth, water, etc., had their existence in an elementary state, from eternity. (HC 3:387, July 2, 1839.)

D&C 131 7Orson Pratt: 7

D&C 131 7The materials out of which this earth was formed, are just as eternal as the materials of the glorious personage of the Lord himself. . . . This Being, when he formed the earth, did not form it out of something that had no existence, but he formed it out of materials that had an existence from all eternity: they never had a beginning, neither will one particle of substance now in existence ever have an end. There are just as many particles now as there were at any previous period of duration, and will be while eternity lasts. Substance had no beginning; to say that laws had no beginning would be another thing; some laws might have been eternal, while others might have had a lawgiver. But the earth was formed out of eternal materials, and it was made to be inhabited and God peopled it with creatures of his own formation. (JD, 1878, 19:286.)

SCD&C 131 7D&C 131 8John A. Widtsoe: 7-8

SCD&C 131 7D&C 131 8He [Joseph Smith] taught that the spiritual and the material worlds are not sharply separated as had long been held, but are only two aspects of the same ultimate reality. There is really but one "world" in the universe. In his own words in the non-technical language of his day: [Sec. 131:7-8, quoted.]

SCD&C 131 7D&C 131 8Analogies supporting this doctrine exist in daily life; for example, the forces of nature are many, such as the electric current, radio, and magnetic waves, light, and heat. However, all these stem from the same fountain of energy, as shown by the fact that they may be converted one into the other. They are one in essence.

SCD&C 131 7D&C 131 8The doctrine of the one world was not wholly new. Some of the world's philosophers had faintly suggested it. Under the title, "Materialism Versus Immaterialism," it had been debated by theologians and philosophers. Some who could not accept the doctrine of the one world made themselves believe that "immaterialism" was possible, which implied in turn that something can be created out of nothing. To this confusing notion, the doctrines of Joseph Smith could give no support. God, angels, spirits, men, and all the things in the universe belong to the same world, are organized from existing materials. They differ only in their various forms of organization. (Joseph Smith, 1951, 147-48.)

D&C 131 8Rudger Clawson: 8

D&C 131 8The unseen world is much larger and greater and much more important than the world that is seen, the world in which we live. The world in which we live is greatly magnified by the fact that we can behold it with our mortal eyes. The unseen world suffers in this respect, because we do not see it with the mortal eye. Somebody may ask: "Can it be seen?" Yes, oh, yes, indeed, it can be seen. "But how shall we see it?" We must look at it through our spiritual eye, or in other words, the eye of faith. There is no doubt that what it exists, that greater world, and that it is very substantial. The Prophet Joseph Smith has said this concerning it: [Sec. 131:7-8, quoted.] (CR, April 1933, pp. 74-75.)
