Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 4 ( 1965)

Section 134

A Declaration of Belief regarding Governments and Laws in general, adopted by unanimous vote at a general assembly of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, held at Kirtland, Ohio, August 17, 1835, with the following preamble: That our belief with regard to earthly governments and laws in general may not be misinterpreted nor misunderstood, we have thought proper to present at the close of this volume our opinion concerning the same.—This was inserted near the end of the Book of Commandments, as compiled at that time. See History of the Church, vol. 2, p. 247.

Oliver Cowdery and Sidney Rigdon: Introduction

A general assembly of the Church of Latter-day Saints was held at Kirtland on the 17th of August, 1835, to take into consideration the labors of a committee appointed by a general assembly of the Church on the 24th of September, 1834, for the purpose of arranging the items of the doctrine of Jesus Christ for the government of the Church. The names of the committee were: Joseph Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon, Oliver Cowdery, and Frederick G. Williams, who, having finished said book according to the instructions given them, deem it necessary to call a general assembly of the Church to see whether the book be approved or not by the authorities of the Church: that it may, if approved, become a law and a rule of faith and practice to the Church. Wherefore, Oliver Cowdery and Sidney Rigdon, members of the First Presidency, (Presidents Joseph Smith, Jun., and Frederick G. Williams being absent on a visit to the Saints in Michigan,) appointed Thomas Burdick, Warren Parrish, and Sylvester Smith clerks, and proceeded to organize the whole assembly. . . .

President Oliver Cowdery then read the following article on "Governments and Laws in General," which was accepted and adopted and ordered to be printed in said book, by a unanimous vote: [Beginning of article.] "That our belief with regard to earthly governments and laws in general may not be misinterpreted nor misunderstood, we have thought proper to present, at the close of this volume, our opinion concerning the same." [Sec. 134, follows.] (HC 2:243, 247, August 17, 1835; Kirtland, Ohio.)

D&C 134 1Erastus Snow: 1

D&C 134 1Governments were instituted . . . for the benefit of man

D&C 134 1The Apostle Paul says truly: "For there is no power but of God: the powers that be are ordained of God." [Rom. 13:1.] At first this is a startling statement. . . . "The powers are ordained of God," not that they are always the best forms of government for the people, or that they afford liberty and freedom to mankind, but that any and all forms of government are better than none at all, having a tendency as they do to restrain the passions of human nature and to curb them, and to establish and maintain order to a greater or less degree. One monopoly is better than many; and the oppression of a mob, where every man is a law to himself and his own right arm, is his power to enforce his own will, is the worst form of government. (JD, April 4, 1881, 22:151.)

D&C 134 1Brigham Young: 1

D&C 134 1Governments were instituted. . . . for the benefit of man

D&C 134 1All governments are more or less under the control of the Almighty, and, in their forms, have sprung from the laws that he has from time to time given to man. Those laws, in passing from generation to generation, have been more or less adulterated, and the result has been the various forms of government now in force among the nations; for, as the Prophet says of Israel, "They have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinances, and broken the everlasting covenant." [Isa. 24:5.] (JD, July 31, 1859, 6:342.)

D&C 134 1Joseph Fielding Smith: 1

D&C 134 1Governments were instituted . . . for the benefit of man

D&C 134 1Taking this article [Section 134] in its entirety we are willing to accept it, for it contains sound principles that are acceptable today, and will be approved by the Church until that day comes when the Rightful Ruler of the earth shall come to set up his perfect government. [Sec. 38:21-22.] One statement in this article, we could modify and give a better meaning. "We believe that governments were instituted of God for the benefit of man," might be more nearly correct if stated: "A perfect government was instituted of God for the benefit of man." The statement that governments, if this is interpreted to mean all governments, were instituted of God, may be questioned. Yet it is true that he holds men accountable for their acts in relation to the governments which man has set up, and which are not approved of God. (CHMR, 1948, 2:63-64.)

D&C 134 1Joseph Smith: 1

D&C 134 1He holds men accountable for their acts in relation to . . . laws

D&C 134 1We need not doubt the wisdom and intelligence of the Great Jehovah; He will award judgment or mercy to all nations according to their several deserts, their means of obtaining intelligence, the laws by which they are governed, the facilities afforded them of obtaining correct information, and His inscrutable designs in relation to the human family. . . . (HC 4:596, April 15, 1842.)

D&C 134 1Stephen L Richards: 1

D&C 134 1He holds men accountable for their acts in relation to . . . laws

D&C 134 1Righteousness, in its last analysis, is a religious term. God is the author of righteousness. The framers of laws have, to a large extent, recognized that doctrine. The Gospel is the compilation, the aggregation of all principles of righteousness, and into the form of government which we uphold and support there have been woven the principles of individual and community righteousness which are underlain by truth which emanates from God himself. . . . [Constitution of the United States.] You can't have a good government without good people, and goodness is a religious term. Much as many of our philosophers would contend that it is to be defined in terms only of ethics, and of social convention and understanding, I maintain that all true morality is supported by and finds its basis in religion. . . . (CR, October 1923, p. 47.)

D&C 134 2David O. McKay: 2

D&C 134 2"Government represents the authority of the group, usually exercised in an external coercive way, to enforce the will of the group upon its individual member." That government is best which has as its aim the administration of justice, social well-being and the promotion of prosperity among its members. (CR, April 1930, p. 80.)

D&C 134 3David O. McKay: 3

D&C 134 3Our community is a great factor in the teaching of our children. Our officers, public servants, are teachers of the youth, and they carry the responsibility of teachers. It is our duty, therefore, as citizens of this republic, to exercise our right at the ballot box. It is our duty to see that men in both our great parties are chosen who will teach not only by precept but also by example, obedience to law; that these men so elected will appoint men under them who will not scoff at the law, or who will not in any way protect those men or women who violate moral laws. (CR, April 1928, pp. 105-8.)

D&C 134 3Brigham Young: 3

D&C 134 3Who is the most suitable judge between man and man? The man who is the most capable of judging between right and wrong; let him sit upon the judgment seat, and so not ask him whether he is a Democrat, a Whig, a Tory, or a Republican. Is he a just man, and will he render an impartial judgment? If so, I care not to what political party he belongs; I am content that he should adjudicate between me and my neighbor. (JD, May 31, 1863, 10:193.)

D&C 134 4Joseph Smith: 4

D&C 134 4Religion is instituted of God

D&C 134 4If . . . we admit that God is the source of all wisdom and understanding, we must admit that by His direct inspiration He has taught man that law necessary in order to govern and regulate His own immediate interest and welfare; for this reason, that law is beneficial to promote peace and happiness among men. . . . God is the source from whence proceeds all good; and if man is benefited by law, then certainly, law is good; and if law is good, then law, or the principle of it emanated from God; for God is the source of all good; consequently, then, he was the first Author of law, or the principle of it, to mankind. [Alma 5:40.] (HC 2:12-13, January 22, 1834.)

D&C 134 4John A. Widtsoe: 4

D&C 134 4A good government must secure for every citizen the free exercise of conscience. Matters of belief or religious practice should not be interfered with, unless they oppose laws formulated for the common good. There should be no mingling of religious influence with trespassing upon each others' field. (Joseph Smith, 1951, p. 215.)

D&C 134 4Heber J. Grant: 4

D&C 134 4One of the fundamental articles of faith promulgated by the Prophet Joseph Smith was:

D&C 134 4"We claim the privilege of worshiping Almighty God according to the dictates of our own conscience; and allow all men the same privilege, let them worship how, where, or what they may."

D&C 134 4But we claim absolutely no right, no prerogative whatever, to interfere with any other people. We desire the good will of all mankind, and we desire the advancement of all mankind, and we pray God to bless every man that is striving for the betterment of humanity in any of the walks of life; and we say of every man who believes that Jesus is the Christ and who proclaims it: O God, bless that man. But we cannot pray for those who pretend to preach the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ and deny the atoning blood of Jesus Christ, and who proclaim that he was only a man. (CR, April 1921, p. 203.)

D&C 134 4David O. McKay: 4

D&C 134 4When a man uses this God-given right to encroach upon the rights of another, he commits a wrong. Liberty becomes license, and the man a transgressor. It is the function of the state to curtail the violator and to protect the violated. (CR, April 1940, p. 118.)

D&C 134 5Joseph Smith: 5

D&C 134 5We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers, and magistrates, in obeying, honoring, and sustaining the law. (Twelfth Article of Faith of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.)

D&C 134 5 David O. McKay: 5

D&C 134 5The three significant words used in the 12th Article of Faith express the proper attitude of the membership of the Church toward law. These words are—obey, honor, and sustain.

D&C 134 5The Article does not say we believe in submission to the law. Obedience implies a higher attitude than mere submission, for obedience has its root in good intent; submission may spring from selfishness or meanness of spirit. Though obedience and submission both imply restraint on one's own will, we are obedient only from a sense of right; submissive from a sense of necessity.

D&C 134 5Honor expresses an act or attitude of an inferior towards a superior. When applied to things it is taken in the sense of holding in honor. Thus, in honoring the law, we look upon it as something which is above selfish desires or indulgences.

D&C 134 5To sustain signifies to hold up; to keep from falling. To sustain the law, therefore, is to refrain from saying or doing anything which will weaken it or make it ineffective.

D&C 134 5We obey law from a sense of right.

D&C 134 5We honor law because of its necessity and strength to society.

D&C 134 5We sustain law by keeping it in good repute. (CR, April 1937, p. 28.)

D&C 134 5First Presidency (Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards): 5

D&C 134 5Sustain the government of the nation wherever you are, and speak well of it, for this is right, and the government has a right to expect it of you so long as that government sustains you in your civil and religious liberty, in those rights which inherently belong to every person born on the earth; and if you are persecuted in your native land, and denied the privilege of worshipping the true God in spirit and in truth, flee to the land of Zion, to America—to the United States, where constitutional rights and freedom are not surpassed by any nation—where God saw fit, in these last days, to renew the dispensation of salvation, by revelations from the heavens, and where all, by the Constitution and laws of the land, when executed in righteousness, are protected in all the civil and religious freedom that man is capable of enjoying on earth; and our national institutions will never fail, unless it be through the wickedness of the people, and the designs of evil men in brief authority; for those rights were ordained of God on this land, for the establishment of the principles of truth on the earth; and our national organization originated in the heavens. (MS, July 17, 1852; 14:321-26.)

D&C 134 5James E. Talmage: 5

D&C 134 5All men are bound to sustain and uphold the respective governments in which they reside

D&C 134 5A question has many times been asked of the Church and of its individual members, to this effect: In the case of a conflict between the requirements made by the revealed word of God, and those imposed by the secular law, which of these authorities would the members of the Church be bound to obey? In answer, the words of Christ may be applied—it is the duty of the people to render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's. [Sec. 63:26; Matt. 22:21.] At the present time the kingdom of heaven as an earthly power, with a reigning King exercising direct and personal authority in temporal matters, has not been established upon the earth. The branches of the Church as such, and the members composing the same, are subjects of the several governments within whose separate realms the Church organizations exist. In this day of comparative enlightenment and freedom there is still cause for expecting any direct interference with the rights of private worship and individual devotion; in all civilized nations the people are accorded the right to pray, and this right is assured by what may be properly called a common law of humankind. No earnest soul is cut off from communion with his God; and with such an open channel of communication, relief from burdensome laws and redress from grievances may be sought from the power that holds control of nations.

D&C 134 5Pending the overruling by Providence in favor of religious liberty, it is the duty of the saints to submit themselves to the laws of their country. Nevertheless, they should use every proper method, as citizens or subjects of their several governments, to secure for themselves and for all men the boon of freedom in religious service. It is not required of thence to suffer without protest imposition by lawless persecutors, or through the operation of unjust laws; but their protests should be offered in legal and proper order. The saints have practically demonstrated their acceptance of the doctrine that it is better to suffer evil than to do wrong by purely human opposition to unjust authority. And if by thus submitting themselves to the laws of the land, in the event of such laws being unjust and subversive of human freedom, the people be prevented from doing the work appointed them of God, they are not to be held accountable for the failure to act under the higher law. [Sec. 124:49-50.] (AF, 1950, pp. 422-23.)

D&C 134 5Ezra Taft Benson: 5

D&C 134 5Not only should we seek humble, worthy, courageous leadership, but we should measure all proposals having to do with our national or local welfare by four standards:

D&C 134 5First, is the proposal, the policy or the idea being promoted, right as measured by the Gospel of Jesus Christ? I assure you it is much easier for one to measure a proposed policy by the Gospel of Jesus Christ if he has accepted the Gospel and is living it.

D&C 134 5Second, is it right as measured by the Lord's standard of constitutional government, wherein He says: "And that law of the land which is constitutional, supporting that principle of freedom in maintaining rights and privileges, belongs to all mankind, and is justifiable before me." (D&C 98:5.) Whether we live under a divinely inspired constitution, as here in the United States, or under some other form of government, the Lord's standard is a safe guide.

D&C 134 5Third, we might well ask the question: Is it right as measured by the counsel of the living oracles of God? It is my conviction that these living oracles are not only authorized, but are also obligated to give counsel to this people on any subject which is vital to the welfare of this people and to the upbuilding of the kingdom of God. So that measure should be applied. Is it right as measured by the counsel of the living oracles of God?

D&C 134 5Fourth, what will be the effect upon the morale and the character of the people if this or that policy is adopted? After all, as a Church, we are interested in building men and women and building character because character is the one thing we make in this world and take with us into the next. It must never be sacrificed for expediency. (Our Prophets and Principles, 1956, pp. 69-70.)

D&C 134 6Brigham Young: 6

D&C 134 6If we live our religion, honor our God and his Priesthood, then we shall honor every wholesome government and law there is upon the earth, and become aliens to all unrighteous, unjust and unlawful administrators, wherever they may be found. (JD, March 9, 1862, 10:41 .)

D&C 134 6Joseph Smith: 6

D&C 134 6Divine laws given of heaven

D&C 134 6God has given certain laws to the human family, which, if observed, are sufficient to prepare them to inherit this (celestial) rest. This, then, we conclude was the purpose of God in giving His laws to us: if not, why or for what were they given? (HC 2:12, January 22, 1834.)

D&C 134 8James E. Talmage: 8

D&C 134 8All men should step forward . . . in bringing offenders . . . to punishment

D&C 134 8Now, the Lord has provided that those in his Church shall live according to the law, and he makes a distinction between the law pertaining to the Church and what we call the secular law, or the law of the land, but he requires obedience to each. My love for my brother in this Church does not mean that I am to stand between him and righteous judgment. This Church is no organization like that of the secret combinations of old, which the Lord hath said he hates, the members of which were pledged, and bound by oath that they would cover up one another's crimes, that they would justify one another in theft and murder and in all things that were unclean. [Ether 8:13-19.] It is no such organization at all. It would not be of God if it were. (CR, 1920, p. 63.)

D&C 134 9First Presidency (Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, Anthon H. Lund): 9

D&C 134 9The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints holds to the doctrine of the separation of church and state; the non-interference of church authority in political matters; and the absolute freedom and independence of the individual in the performance of his political duties. If, at any time, there has been conduct at variance with this doctrine, it has been in violation of the well settled principles and the policy of the Church.

D&C 134 9We declare that from principle and policy, we favor:

D&C 134 9The absolute separation of church and state;

D&C 134 9No domination of the state by the church;

D&C 134 9No church interference with the functions of the state;

D&C 134 9No state interference with the functions of the church, or with the free exercise of religion;

D&C 134 9The absolute freedom of the individual from the domination of ecclesiastical authority in political affairs;

D&C 134 9The equality of all churches before the law. (CR, April 1907, p. 14.)

D&C 134 10John A. Widtsoe: 10

D&C 134 10The Church can try offenders only for their membership in the Church. Any further punishment is in the hands of the civil courts. Members of the Church may either be disfellowshiped or excommunicated. (Priesthood and Church Government, p. 209, 1939.)

D&C 134 10The Church applies only two kinds of punishment. The first and lightest is that of being disfellowshiped, which means that the hand of fellowship is withdrawn from the accused, who cannot then officiate in the activities of the Church, though he may be present and partake of the spirit of all Church gatherings. In the course of time, if his conduct justifies it, he is again admitted into full fellowship by the tribunal that found him guilty. Rebaptism is not necessary.

D&C 134 10The second punishment is that of excommunication. This means loss of membership in the Church. An excommunicated member can re-enter the Church only after showing full faith, and sincere repentance, by being baptized. (Program of the Church, 1938, p. 175.)

D&C 134 10There are really only three kinds of offenses of which the Church takes cognizance. First and most serious is the breaking of the moral law in any of its division. Second, deliberate disobedience to the regulations of the Church, which renders a person liable to such punishment as the Church can properly mete out to its members. Third, the incorrect interpretation of doctrine, coupled with an unwillingness to accept the correct view after proper explanations of the doctrine have been made. The first two types of violation are of conduct, the third of belief. All imply non-conformity to the practices or non-acceptance of the teachings of the Church. (Program of the Church, 1938, p. 164.)

D&C 134 11John Taylor: 11

D&C 134 11We shall abide all constitutional law, as we always have done; but while we are God-fearing and law-abiding, and respect all honorable men and officers, we are no craven serfs, and have not learned to lick the feet of oppressors, nor to bow in base submission to unreasoning clamor. We will contend inch by inch, legally and constitutionally, for our rights as American citizens. (The Life of John Taylor, 1882, p. 363.)

D&C 134 12Joseph Smith: 12

D&C 134 12Preach the gospel . . . warn the righteous to save themselves

D&C 134 12Remember that your business is to preach the Gospel in all humility and meekness, and warn sinners to repent and come to Christ. Avoid contentions and vain disputes with men of corrupt minds, who do not desire to know the truth. [Sec. 10:62-63.] Remember that "it is a day of warning, and not a day of many words." [Sec. 63:58.] If they receive not your testimony in one place, flee to another, remembering to cast no reflections, nor throw out any bitter sayings. If you do your duty, it will be just as well with you, as though all men embraced the Gospel. (HC 1:468, December 19, 1833.)

D&C 134 12Joseph Smith: 12

D&C 134 12Bond-servants . . . masters

D&C 134 12In my opinion, you will do well to search the Book of Covenants, in which you will see the belief of the Church, concerning masters and servants. All men are to be taught to repent; but we have no right to interfere with slaves, contrary to the mind and will of their masters. In fact, it would be much better, and more prudent, not to preach at all to slaves, until after their masters are converted, and then teach the masters to use them with kindness; remembering that they are accountable to God, and the servants are bound to serve their masters with singleness of heart without murmuring. (HC 2:440, April 9, 1836.)

D&C 134 12Joseph Smith: 12

D&C 134 12We do not believe it right to interfere with bond-servants

D&C 134 12It should be the duty of an Elder, when he enters into a house, to salute the master of that house, and if he gain his consent, then he may preach to all that are in that house; but if he gain not his consent, let him not go unto his slaves, or servants, but let the responsibility be upon the head of the master of that house, and the consequences thereof, and the guilt of that house is no longer upon his skirts, he is free; therefore, let him shake off the dust of his feet, and go his way. But if the master of that house give consent, the Elder may preach to his family, his wife, his children and his servants, his man-servants, or his maid-servants, or his slaves; then it should be the duty of the Elder to stand up boldly for the cause of Christ, and warn that people with one accord to repent and be baptized for the remission of sins, and for the Holy Ghost, always commanding them in the name of the Lord, in the spirit of meekness, to be kindly affectionate one toward another, that the fathers should be kind to their children, husbands to their wives, masters to their slaves or servants, children obedient to their parents, wives to their husbands, and slaves or servants to their masters. (HC 2:263-64, September 1, 1835.)
