Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 4 ( 1965)

Section 135

Martyrdom of Joseph Smith the Prophet, and his brother, Hyrum Smith the Patriarch, at Carthage, Illinois, June 27, 1844. See History of the Church, vol. 6, p. 612.

George Q. Cannon: Introduction

As the governor [Thomas Ford of Illinois] continued his preparations to depart from Carthage to Nauvoo, and as it was clear that he intended to break his solemn promise by failing to take Joseph with him, Cyrus H. Wheelock, Dan Jones and John P. Greene went in town to him and protested with all possible solemnity against his deed. He professed to reassure them; and then he took with him Captain Dunn, and his company—of all the militia the least vindictive against the Prophet; and left as a guard the Carthage Greys—of all the mob the most bloodthirsty. These Carthage Greys had but two days before been under arrest for insulting the commanding general; their conduct had shown them to be notoriously hostile to the prisoners; and they had often in the governor's hearing threatened the lives of Joseph and Hyrum. Of the disbanded troops the governor permitted two or three hundred under Colonel Levi Williams, a sectarian preacher and a sworn enemy to Joseph, to remain encamped in the vicinity of Carthage, awaiting the hour when they might safely descend upon the jail. . . .

At Carthage, after the governor left, the external situation was this: The guarding of the jail had been left to General Deming who had the Carthage Greys under his command; but Deming retired during the day for fear of his life, as he saw the determination of the troops to connive at murder. The main body of the company was stationed in the public square, one hundred and fifty yards from the jail, while eight men were detailed, under the command of Sergeant Frank A. Worrell, to guard the prisoners. The disbanded mob militia had come up to Carthage to the number of two hundred, with their faces blackened with powder and mud. The Carthage Greys were informed that the assassin band was ready; and it was then arranged that the guard at the jail should load with blank cartridges and that the mob should attack the prison and meet with some show of resistance.

Within the jail, the brethren, Joseph and Hyrum, John Taylor and Willard Richards, were confined in a room upstairs and were busy, during the day, writing letters, conversing and praying and singing. Between three and four o'clock at the Prophet's request, Apostle Taylor sang this sweet and comforting poem: "A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief."

And when it was done, Joseph asked him to repeat it. He replied that he did not feel like singing. He was oppressed with a sense of coming disaster; but to gratify Hyrum, he sang the hymn again, with much tender feeling.

At four o'clock the guard was changed. A little after five, the jailor came in and said that Stephen Markham had been surrounded by a mob and driven from Carthage. A little later there was a slight rustling at the outer door of the jail, and a cry of surrender, then a discharge of three or four guns. The plot had been carried out: two hundred of the mob came rushing into the jail yard, and the guards fired their pieces over the heads of the assailing party.

Many of the mob rushed up the stairs while others fired through the open windows of the jail into the room where the brethren were confined. The four prisoners sprang against the door, but the murderers burst it partly open and pushed their guns into the room. John Taylor and Willard Richards, each with a cane, tried to knock aside the weapons. A shower of bullets came up the stairway and through the door. Hyrum was in front of the door when a ball struck him in the face, and he fell back saying:

"I am a dead man."

As he was falling, another bullet from the outside passed through the swaying form, and two others from the doorway entered his body a moment later. When Hyrum fell, Joseph exclaimed, "Oh, my dear brother Hyrum! " and opening the door a few inches he discharged his pistol into the stairway—but two or three barrels missed fire.

When the door could no longer be held, and when he could no longer parry the guns, Elder Taylor sprang toward the window. A bullet from the doorway struck his left thigh. Paralyzed and unable to help himself he fell on the window sill, and felt himself falling out, when by some means which he did not understand at the time he was thrown backward into the room. A bullet fired from the outside struck his watch and the watch saved his life in two ways; it stopped the bullet, which probably would have killed him, and the force of the ball in striking it threw him into the room. The watch stopped at sixteen minutes and twenty-six seconds past 5 o'clock. After he fell into the room three other bullets struck him, spattering his blood like rain upon the walls and floor.

Joseph saw that there was no longer safety in the room; and thinking that he would save the life of Willard Richards if he himself should spring from the room, he turned immediately from the door, dropped his pistol and leaped into the window. Instantly two bullets pierced him from the door, and one entered his right breast from without, and he fell outward into the hands of his murderers exclaiming:

"Oh, Lord, my God!"

When his body struck the ground he rolled instantly upon his face—dead. As he lay there, one of the mob, barefooted and bareheaded, wearing no coat, with his trousers rolled above his knees and his shirt sleeves above his elbows, seized the body of the murdered Prophet and set it against the south side of the well curb. Colonel Levi Williams then ordered four men to shoot Joseph. Standing about eight feet from his body they fired simultaneously. The body slightly cringed as the bullets entered it, and once more Joseph fell upon his face. He had smiled with sweet compassion in his countenance as he gazed upon his murderers in the last moment of his life; and this was the expression when his face was set in death. (Life of Joseph Smith, 1907, pp. 517, 524 ff.)

Heber J. Grant: Introduction

I have understood that this splendid account [Section 135] of the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith was written by President John Taylor, known as the "Champion of Liberty" who received four shots in his body and who lived carrying some of those bullets to his grave, and who, years after the martyrdom, stood before the people in this stand as the President, Prophet, Seer and Revelator of the Church of Jesus Christ. (CR, October 1933, p. 7.)

D&C 135 1Orson Hyde: 1

D&C 135 1We announce the martyrdom of Joseph Smith the Prophet, and Hyrum Smith the Patriarch

D&C 135 1Twenty-seventh of June, 1844. Eventful period in the calendar of the nineteenth century! That awful night! I remember it well: I shall never forget it! A solemn thrill—a melancholy awe comes o'er my spirit! The memorable scene is fresh before me! It requires no art of the pencil, no retrospection of history, to portray it. The impression of the Almighty Spirit on that occasion will run parallel with eternity! The scene was not portrayed by earthquake, or thunderings, and lightnings, and tempests; but the majesty and sovereignty of Jehovah was felt far more impressively in the still, small voice of that significant hour, than the roaring of many waters, or the artillery of many thunders, when the spirit of Joseph was driven back into the bosom of God, by an ungrateful and bloodthirsty world. There was an unspeakable something, a portentous significancy on the firmament and among the inhabitants of the earth. Multitudes felt the whisperings of woe and grief, and the forebodings of tribulation and sorrow that they will never forget, though the tongue of man can never utter it. The Saints of God, whether near the scene of blood, or even a thousand miles distant, felt at the very moment the Prophet lay in royal gore, that an awful deed was perpetrated. O the repulsive chill! the melancholy vibrations of the very air, as the prince of darkness receded in hopeful triumph from the scene of slaughter! That night could not the Saints sleep, though uninformed by man of what had passed with the Seer and Patriarch, and far remote from the scene; yet to them sleep refused a visitation—the eyelids refused to close—the hearts of many sighed deeply in secret and inquired, "Why am I thus?"

D&C 135 1One of the Twelve Apostles, while traveling a hundred miles from the scene of assassination, and totally ignorant of what was done, was so unaccountably sad, and filled with such unspeakable anguish of heart without knowing the cause, that he was constrained to turn aside from the road and give utterance to his feelings in tears and supplications to God. Another Apostle, twelve hundred miles distant, while standing in Faneuil Hall, Boston, Massachusetts, with many others, was similarly affected, and was obliged to turn aside to hide the big tears that gushed thick and long from his eyes. Another, President of the High Priests, while in the distant state of Kentucky, in the solitude of midnight, being marvelously disquieted, God condescended to show him, in a vision, the mangled bodies of the two murdered worthies, all dripping in purple gore, who said to him, "We are murdered by a faithless state and cruel mob."

D&C 135 1Shall I attempt to describe the scene at Nauvoo on the memorable evening? If I could, surely you would weep, whatever may be your faith or skepticism, if the feelings of humanity are lodged in your bosom; all prejudice and mirth would slumber, till the eye of pity had bedewed the bier, and the heart had found relief in lamentation. (Scrapbook of Mormon Literature, June 27, 1849, 1:283-84.)

D&C 135 3John Taylor: 3

D&C 135 3Joseph Smith . . . has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world

D&C 135 3We are living in this dispensation, which is pregnant with greater events than any other dispensation that has ever existed on the earth, because in it is embraced all that ever existed any where among any people of the earth. [Sec. 128:19-22; Acts 3:19-21.] Hence why we look upon Joseph Smith as so great and important a character in the world's history. I think he was one of the greatest Prophets that ever lived, Jesus himself' excepted. (JD, December 31, 1876, 18:326-27.)

D&C 135 3Joseph F. Merrill: 3

D&C 135 3Joseph Smith . . . has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world

D&C 135 3I spoke to the theme of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, indicating that, aside from Jesus Christ, I looked upon him as second in greatness to no other religious teacher that ever lived. And judged by the same standard used in judging greatness in men—by his works—as with Shakespeare, Washington, Lincoln, Einstein, etc.—I still believe my view of him is correct and that he is the greatest man America ever produced. Hence I am convinced that he is deserving of a careful, thorough, and honest study by every person interested in his personal well-being. (CR, April 1948, p. 70.)

D&C 135 3Wilford Woodruff: 3

D&C 135 3For the salvation of men

D&C 135 3Why did he [the Lord] call him [Joseph Smith] into the spirit world? Because he held the keys of this dispensation, not only before he came to this world and while he was in the flesh, but he would hold them throughout the endless ages of eternity. [Sec. 90:3.] He held the keys of past generations—of the millions of people who dwelt on the earth in the fifty generations that had passed and gone who had not the law of the gospel, who never saw a prophet, never saw an Apostle, never heard the voice of any man who was inspired of God and had power to teach them the gospel of Christ, and to organize the church of Christ on earth. He went to unlock the prison doors of these people, as far as they would receive his testimony, and the Saints of God who dwell in the flesh will build temples and perform certain ordinances for the redemption of the dead. This was the work of Joseph the prophet in the spirit world. (CR, April 1880, pp. 8-9.)

D&C 135 3Joseph F. Smith: 3

D&C 135 3Joseph Smith was martyred in Carthage, Illinois, on the 27th of June, 1844—14 years after the organization of the Church. What did he accomplish in these 14 years? He opened up communication with the heavens in his youth. He brought forth the Book of Mormon, which contains the fullness of the Gospel; and the revelations contained in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants; restored the Holy Priesthood unto man; established and organized The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, an organization which has no parallel in all the world, and which all the cunning and wisdom of men for ages has failed to discover or produce and never could have done. He founded colonies in the States of New York, Ohio, Missouri and Illinois, and pointed the way for gathering of the Saints into the Rocky Mountains; sent the Gospel into Europe and to the islands of the sea; founded the town of Kirtland, Ohio, and there built a temple that cost about a quarter of a million of dollars; he founded the city of Nauvoo in the midst of persecution; gathered into Nauvoo and vicinity some 20,000 people, and commenced the building of the temple there, which when completed cost one million dollars; and in doing all this he had to contend against the prejudices of the age, against relentless persecution, mobocracy and vile calumny and slander, that were heaped upon him from all quarters without stint or measure. In a word, he did more in from 14 to 20 years for the salvation of man than any other man save Jesus only, that ever lived, and yet he was accused by his enemies of being an indolent and worthless man! Where shall we go to find another man that has accomplished the one thousandth part of good that Joseph Smith accomplished? . . . And yet no man in the nineteenth century, except Joseph Smith, has discovered to the world a ray of light upon the keys and power of the Holy Priesthood or the ordinances of the Gospel either for the living or the dead. Through Joseph Smith, God has revealed many things which were kept hid from the foundation of the world in fulfillment of the Prophets—and at no time since Enoch walked the earth has the Church of God been organized as perfectly as it is today—not excepting the dispensation of Jesus and His disciples—or if it was we have no record of it. And this is strictly in keeping with the objects and character of this great latter-day work, destined to consummate the great purpose and designs of God concerning the dispensation of the fulness of times. The principles of baptism for the redemption of the dead, with the ordinances appertaining thereto, for the complete salvation and exaltation of those who have died without the Gospel, as revealed through Joseph Smith, is alone worth more than all the dogmas of the so-called Christian world combined. [Sec. 128.] Joseph Smith is accused of being a false prophet. It is, however, beyond the power of the world to prove that he was a false Prophet. (JD, October 29, 1882, 24:14-15.)

D&C 135 3Hugh B. Brown: 3

D&C 135 3He has brought forth the Book of Mormon

D&C 135 3The Prophet Joseph Smith translated a record which was placed in his hands by an angel from God. It's a book of about 600 pages. He translated it in just under two months. It purports to be a sacred history of the ancient inhabitants of America. In it he told of cities and peoples, of wars, of civilizations, of political organizations. Now, among my congregation there are some teachers and students. I'd like to ask you if you would undertake to write a history of the ancient inhabitants of America and limit your source material to that which was available in 1829? . . . You must write 329 chapters—54 chapters to deal with wars; 21 historical chapters, 55 chapters on visions and prophecies and 71 chapters on doctrines and exhortations; 17 chapters on missionary work and 21 on the ministry of Christ, and remember that every word you write must be in meticulous agreement with the Holy Bible. Therefore you must become so well acquainted with the Bible that you can, with confidence, write your book with no inaccuracies or contradictions. (Joseph Smith Among the Prophets, December 7, 1958, p. 11.)

D&C 135 3David O. McKay: 3

D&C 135 3He . . . has brought forth the revelations . . . which compose this book of Doctrine and Covenants

D&C 135 3Nearly every passage in the Doctrine and Covenants is replete with admonitions, full of inspiration and wonderful revelations to men. Sometimes those revelations are couched in but few words, but by careful study one sees how closely related they are to all truth. Take for example the wonderful revelation simply expressed, in regard to government by the priesthood: "No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by the priesthood only by persuasion, long suffering, gentleness, meekness and with love unfeigned." [Sec. 121:41.] Just think of that use of the word "unfeigned." Love pretended has no influence. Love unfeigned always has the power to reach the heart. To continue: "Reproving betimes with sharpness, . . . afterwards showing forth an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy." [Sec. 121:43.] Why, it is a wonderful admonition and lesson in regard to the government, not only in quorums of priesthood in the Church offices but in our home life and in all phases of association in society. Consider again, the suggestion in regard to the worth of souls, "Remember the worth of souls is great." [Sec. 18:10.] Also the revelation in regard to true riches, "Seek after the riches I shall give, wisdom" and so on, "and the riches of the world will be added also." [Sec. 6:7; 59:16-20.] Such things are the real things in the world. And so we might continue, revelation after revelation as given in the Doctrine and Covenants, if studied and paid attention to by the Latter-day Saints, will establish faith in their hearts and make them rejoice at this great and wonderful organization placed among men for their salvation.

D&C 135 3Not the least among these by any means is that revelation on the word of wisdom. Now there are just one or two little paragraphs in it that refer to the use of strong drink: "If any man among you use strong drink, behold it is not good." Just a simple statement; it is unqualified, but there it stands. "Wine and strong drink are not good." [Sec. 89:5.] That revelation was given over eighty years ago—the word of God, not only to the people who are members of His Church but to the inhabitants of the world wherever that book has been published; wherever it has been distributed by the elders of the Church the word of God has been sounded to the world. (CR, October 1913, pp. 104-5.)

D&C 135 3Hugh B. Brown: 3

D&C 135 3He . . . gathered many thousands of the Latter-day Saints

D&C 135 3He [Joseph Smith] undertook to carry the gospel message to all parts of the world, and the success of that project is miraculous. He undertook to weld men from practically all parts of the world into a brotherhood. They came by the thousands from Germany, France, Italy, Holland, Belgium, the British Isles, the Scandinavian countries, and the isles of the sea; men of almost every nation, tongue and people, pursuant to the predictions of some of his predecessors. These people, despite national antagonisms, were bound together in a brotherhood such as is not known anywhere else in the world. That's a superhuman undertaking for a young man without education and with only thirty-nine years of life. (Joseph Smith Among the Prophets, December 7, 1958, p. 11.)

D&C 135 3Gordon B. Hinckley: 3

D&C 135 3Thousands of the Latter-day Saints

D&C 135 3Within the space of that twenty years preceding his death, Joseph Smith set in motion a program for carrying the gospel to the nations of the earth. I marvel at the boldness with which he moved. Even in the infant days of the Church, in times of dark adversity, men were called to leave their homes and families, to cross the sea, to proclaim the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ. His mind, his vision encompassed the entire earth.

D&C 135 3Seated in this hall [Salt Lake Tabernacle] today are those from North, Central, and South America; from the British Isles and Africa; from the nations of Europe; from the islands and continents of the Pacific; and from the ancient lands of Asia. You who have come from far and near, you are the flowering of the vision of Joseph Smith, the prophet of God. He was indeed a mighty seer, who saw this day and greater days yet to come as the work of the Lord moves over the earth. (CR, April 1977, p. 96.)

D&C 135 3John A. Widtsoe: 3

D&C 135 3And many other wise documents

D&C 135 3The Pearl of Great Price contains the Book of Moses as revealed to the Prophet in 1830 shortly after the organization of the Church. This book came as a part of the revision or inspired translation of the Bible. Since the Church has not yet attempted to publish Joseph's Bible revision in full, the Book of Moses, not complete, has been published separately. This publication was made in the days of Joseph Smith. The Book of Moses amplifies many of the brief accounts given in the Bible rendition of Genesis. It included doctrines of the utmost importance in forming a correct philosophy of life.

D&C 135 3The Book of Abraham came out of the translation of some Egyptian papyri from the catacombs of Egypt which fell into the hands of the Prophet. It gives a more lucid account of Abraham's early life and his doctrine than is found in other sacred scripture. It also contains a wealth of doctrinal information not to be found elsewhere. The account of the creation of the earth there found is perhaps the most challenging subject in the book. The Book of Abraham was also published in the days of the Prophet. . . .

D&C 135 3It [Pearl of Great Price] also includes a revision of chapter twenty-four of the Gospel of Matthew. The changes made are revealing to all students of sacred history.

D&C 135 3The Pearl of Great Price further contains extracts from the early history of the Prophet, recounting especially the events connected with the First Vision and the visitation of Moroni.

D&C 135 3The compilation closes with the Articles of Faith of the Church. These articles originally formed a part of a letter to Mr. John Wentworth, newspaper editor of Chicago. They are now used by the Church at home and abroad and are held to be the best brief cardinal statement of the faith of the Latter-day Saints. Not only were these articles written by Joseph Smith but also published in his day with his approval. . . .

D&C 135 3The History of the Church is another of the literary efforts of the Prophet Joseph Smith. . . . This history is an account, almost day by day, of his own doings and those of the Church. The personalities who helped build the early Church appear before the reader. . . .

D&C 135 3Fortunately, also, when in this history he notes that he gave an address somewhere, very often an abstract of what he said, made by others, also appears. These abstracts give added value to the history, since none others exist. . . .

D&C 135 3The History of the Church and the utterances therein contain, if read properly, a continued evidence that Joseph Smith told the truth about the coming forth of the restoration. It is a precious production that will be counted as a blessing throughout the years. (Joseph Smith, 1951, pp. 254-56.)

D&C 135 3Joseph F. Merrill: 3

D&C 135 3. . . you may be interested to hear what a nationally-known writer and publicist and once mayor of Boston, Josiah Quincy, wrote about Joseph Smith. In May 1844, Mr. Quincy and his cultured friend, Charles Francis Adams, son and grandson, respectively, of two United States Presidents, happened to make a two-day visit to Nauvoo. Being well-known, prominent men they were entertained at the Mansion House, Joseph Smith's residence. An account of this visit is given by Mr. Quincy, in the last chapter of his book entitled Figures of the Past, published in 1880. I quote the following from this twenty-four page chapter:

D&C 135 3It is by no means improbable that some future textbook for the use of generations yet unborn, will contain a question something like this: What historical American of the nineteenth century has exerted the most powerful influence upon the destinies of his countrymen? And it is by no means impossible that the answer to that interrogatory may be thus written: Joseph Smith, the Mormon Prophet. And the reply, absurd as it doubtless seems to most men now living, may be an obvious commonplace to their descendants. History deals in surprises and paradoxes quite as startling as this. The man who established a religion in this age of free debate, who was and is today accepted by hundreds of thousands as a direct emissary from the Most High,—such a rare human being is not to be disposed of by pelting his memory with unsavory epithets. Fanatic, impostor, charlatan, he may have been; but these hard names furnish no solution to the problem he presents to us. Fanatics and impostors are living and dying every day, and their memory is buried with them; but the wonderful influence which this founder of a religion exerted and still exerts throws him into relief before us, not as a rogue to be criminated, but as a phenomenon to be explained. The most vital questions Americans are asking each other today have to do with this man and what he has left us. . . . Joseph Smith, claiming to be an inspired teacher, faced adversity such as few men have been called to meet, enjoyed a brief season of prosperity such as few men have ever attained, and finally, forty-three days after I saw him, went cheerfully to a martyr's death.

D&C 135 3Born in the lowest ranks of poverty, without book-learning, and with the homeliest of all human names, he had made himself at the age of thirty-nine a power upon earth. Of the multitudinous family of Smith . . . none had won human hearts and shaped human lives as this Joseph. His influence, whether for good or evil, is potent today, and the end is not yet. . . .

D&C 135 3Mr. Quincy concludes his chapter with these words:

D&C 135 3"I have endeavored to give the details of my visit to the Mormon prophet with absolute accuracy. If the reader does not know just what to make of Joseph Smith, I cannot help him out of the difficulty. I myself stand helpless before the puzzle." (CR, April 1947, pp. 134-35.)

D&C 135 4Parley P. Pratt: 4

D&C 135 4While on this mission [Eastern States] , on the 27th of June, 1844, a mob murdered the Prophet Joseph Smith, and his brother Hyrum, in a jail at Carthage, Illinois, while Governor Ford had pledged the faith of the State for their protection.

D&C 135 4A day or two previous to this circumstance I had been constrained by the spirit to start prematurely for home without knowing why or wherefore; and on the same afternoon I was passing on a canal boat near Utica, New York, on my way to Nauvoo. My brother, William Pratt, being then on a mission in the same State (New York), happened providentially, to take passage on the same boat. As we conversed together on the deck, a strange and solemn awe came over me, as if the powers of hell were let loose. I was so overwhelmed with sorrow I could hardly speak; and after pacing the deck for some time in silence, I turned to my brother William and exclaimed—"Brother William, this is a dark hour; the powers of darkness seem to triumph, and the spirit of murder is abroad in the land; and it controls the hearts of the American people, and a vast majority of them sanction the killing of the innocent. My brother, let us keep silence and not open our mouths. If you have any pamphlets or books on the fulness of the gospel lock them up; show them not, neither open your mouth to the people; let us observe an entire and solemn silence, for this is a dark day, and the hour of triumph for the powers of darkness. O, how sensible I am of the spirit of murder which seems to pervade the whole land." This was June 27, 1844, in the afternoon, and as near as I can judge, it was the same hour that the Carthage mob were shedding the blood of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, and John Taylor, near one thousand miles distant. . . .

D&C 135 4The steamer touched at a landing in Wisconsin, some fifty or sixty miles from Chicago, and here some new passengers came on board and brought the news of the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. Great excitement prevailed on board, there being a general spirit of exultation and triumph at this glorious news, as it was called, much the same as is generally shown on the first receipt of the news of a great national victory in time of war. (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, 1844, pp. 330-31.)

D&C 135 4Joseph Smith: 4

D&C 135 4He was murdered in cold blood

D&C 135 4I told Stephen Markham that if I and Hyrum were ever taken again we should be massacred, or I was not a prophet of God. I want Hyrum to live to avenge my blood, but he is determined not to leave me. (HC 6:546, June 22, 1844.)

D&C 135 4It is thought by some that our enemies would be satisfied with my destruction; but I tell you that as soon as they have shed my blood they will thirst for the blood of every man in whose heart dwells a single spark of the spirit of the fullness of the Gospel. The opposition of these men is moved by the spirit of the adversary of all righteousness. It is not only to destroy me, but every man and woman who dares believe the doctrines that God hath inspired me to teach to this generation. (HC 6:498, June 18, 1844.)

D&C 135 6Joseph Fielding Smith: 6

D&C 135 6Hyrum . . . and Joseph Smith . . . will be classed among the martyrs of religion

D&C 135 6Hyrum Smith was six years older than his brother Joseph. These two men by divine appointment were entrusted with the keys and powers to stand at the head of the great dispensation of the fulness of times. By divine appointment they were special witnesses for Jesus Christ in these latter-days and during all the persecutions, drivings, and even to the death, they stood faithfully together. They had been given the keys of salvation for the human family as those powers concerned all living in this dispensation. Because of this power and authority which was to be used for the redemption of all who would repent from sin, they were hated. They had testified that Jesus Christ lives; that he is in very deed the Redeemer of the world. They spoke from knowledge for they were witnesses of this truth, for the heavens to them were not sealed. All their days were spent in seeking to bless and save mankind, just as were the days of their Lord before them in his ministry. Many of the righteous were gathered about them, and all who knew them loved them for their integrity and devotion to revealed truth. . . .

D&C 135 6It was necessary for Hyrum Smith, as well as Joseph Smith, to lay down his life as a witness, for . . . the Lord had honored him with the responsibility of holding the keys of authority in this dispensation jointly with his younger brother. "It is also written in your law," said Jesus to the Jews, "that the testimony of two men is true." [John 8:17.] And this law was binding upon Joseph and Hyrum Smith. The shedding of their blood also bound that testimony upon an unbelieving world and this testimony will stand at the judgment seat as a witness against all men who have rejected their words of eternal life. (IE, June 1944, 47:364.)

D&C 135 6George Q. Cannon: 6

D&C 135 6From age to age shall their names go down to posterity

D&C 135 6I would not have you indulge in man worship. God forbid. To Him be the glory always. We cannot glorify Joseph [Smith] without glorifying our Father in heaven. We must glorify our Lord Jesus Christ. We cannot indulge in any worship that will detract from or lessen our worship of our Great and Eternal Father and His Son Jesus Christ. But we can reverence the man of God; we can love him; we can emulate his example; we can cherish his memory; we can perpetuate this in our children; and we can seek to comprehend the truths that he taught, so that by comprehending and by practicing them we may be prepared to dwell with him, and dwell with our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ in eternity. 598

D&C 135 6. (MS, May 23, 1895, 57:326.)

D&C 135 7John A. Widtsoe: 7

D&C 135 7Innocent of any crime

D&C 135 7Joseph Smith was loved by his people, held in contempt by others, and misunderstood by the majority of men. Often he was hunted as if he were an animal. Arrest, imprisonment, trial followed one another until his death. It is said that about fifty times charges were made against him in the courts, yet, so the records prove, he was never found guilty of a violation of the law. (Joseph Smith, 1951, p. 33.)

D&C 135 7John Smith: 7

D&C 135 7Innocent of any crime

D&C 135 7I knew him [Joseph Smith] when at his mother's breast, I watched and counselled his youth, but when God spoke and taught him, I bowed to his superior knowledge, and although he was a boy and I an old man, and his uncle, yet I was not ashamed to learn true principles from him, and like Paul at the feet of Gamaliel drank in the truths which flowed from the prophet's lips. I was in jail with him and his brother Hyrum a few hours before they were killed, and I can testify before God, that they died innocent of any crime, and that they sealed their testimony with their blood. (CR, April 1927, p. 85.)

D&C 135 7John Taylor: 7

D&C 135 7Of all the martyrs under the altar that John saw

D&C 135 7But he [John the Revelator] , under the inspiration of the Almighty, and filled with the light and intelligence of heaven, could gaze upon the position of things in the eternal worlds, and saw the souls of those who had been slain for the testimony of Jesus, and the word of God, etc. They were told that they should rest yet for a little season, until their fellow servants also and their brethren that should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled. [Rev. 6:9-11.] . . . His servants who have been called to lay down their lives, will come forth with crowns upon their heads and reign upon the earth. (JD, August 24, 1884, 25:285.)
