Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 4 ( 1965)

Section 136

The Word and Will of the Lord, given through President Brigham Young, at the Winter Quarters of the Camp of Israel, Omaha Nation, West Bank of Missouri River, near Council Bluffs, Iowa, January 14, 1847.—Plan of organization for migration to the West—Admonitions to righteousness—The Lord to be praised both in times of joy and of sorrow—Needful that Joseph Smith the Prophet should have sealed his testimony with his blood.

Orson F. Whitney: Introduction

Brigham Young succeeded Joseph Smith as leader of the Latter-day Saints. Sidney Rigdon claimed the leadership. It was to secure it that he came from Pittsburgh on learning of the Prophet's death. Being his first counselor in the Presidency,—though Joseph, distrusting his fidelity, had long since virtually cast him off,—Elder Rigdon believed, or affected to believe that this entitled him to the succession. A small fraction of the Saints felt likewise.

But the hearts of the people, as a rule, were not with Sidney . . . Sidney's claim, though plausible, was not valid according to Church policy. The First Presidency to which he had belonged was no more. Death had dissolved that council. The Prophet in life had taught that "where he was not there was no First Presidency over the Twelve." [HC 2:374.] Next in order stood the Twelve—the Apostles—with Brigham Young as their President. Instinctively the people turned to Brigham, for they loved and trusted him, and by that "right divine," no less than of seniority and succession in the Priesthood, he became their President and spiritual guide.

Sidney Rigdon, after his rejection by the Saints, returned to Pittsburgh. Soon afterward he was excommunicated. . . .

In January, 1845, the Legislature of Illinois, yielding to long-continued popular pressure, repealed the Nauvoo charter. . . .

At a Mormon settlement called Morley, a few miles from Nauvoo, a band of incendiaries, on the night of September 10th, began operations. Deliberately setting fire to the house of Edmund Durfee they turned the inmates out of doors and threatened them with death if they did not at once leave the settlement. Durfee they subsequently killed. The mob continued its nefarious work until Morley was in ashes, and its people homeless. Green Plains and Bear Creek, localities also settled by the Saints, were next visited by the house-burners, and in like manner devastated. Such scenes continued for a week, during which nearly two hundred houses, shops and sheds were destroyed and the people driven away. A hundred and thirty-five teams went out from Nauvoo to bring in the homeless refugees, with what grain had been saved from the flames.

Intense excitement now reigned, not only at Nauvoo, and in the out-lying Mormon settlements that nightly anticipated attack, but throughout Hancock County. Non-Mormons not of the radical class disapproved of these deeds of vandalism, and Sheriff Backenstos, of Carthage—to his honor be it said—did everything in his power to quell the riots and punish the guilty parties. He first issued a proclamation, demanding that they desist. This order they ignored. He then called upon the posse comitatus—the power of the county—to assist him in dispersing the rioters. But there was no response. Finally he applied to the Mormons for a posse, which was furnished him, and he proceeded at once against the house-burners.

In the encounters that ensued two mobocrats were killed. . . . The Mormon settlements around Nauvoo were now evacuated, the people fearing pillage and massacre, gathering into the city for protection.

At this juncture Governor [Thomas] Ford put forth his hand to restore order. . . . The result was an agreement by the Latter-day Saints to leave Illinois; the exodus to begin in the spring. The demand came from a meeting of representatives of nine counties of the State, assembled at Carthage. . . .

Pursuant to the terms of the agreement, which satisfied General Hardin and his associate commissioners, and appeased for a time the anti-Mormons, preparations went forward all during the fall and winter for the spring exodus. Houses and land in and around Nauvoo were sold, leased or abandoned. Wagons by hundreds were purchased or manufactured, and horses, mules, oxen, riding draft and pack animals in general procured in large numbers. Clothing, bedding, provisions, tents, tools, household goods, family relics and camp equipage composed the lading, wherewith animals and vehicles were packed and loaded until little or no room remained.

At length, all being ready for a start, on the 4th of February, 1846, the exodus of the Mormons from Illinois began. . . . By the middle of February a thousand souls, with their wagons, teams and effects had been landed on the Iowa shore.

Sugar Creek, nine miles westward, was made the rendezvous and starting point of the great overland pilgrimage. Here the advance companies pitched their tents, and awaited the coming of their leaders. The weather was bitter cold, the ground snow-covered and desolate as to have dismayed souls less trustful in Providence, less inured to hardship and suffering than they. It was February 5th that the first camp formed on Sugar Creek. That night—a bitter night, nine wives became mothers; nine children were born in tents and wagons in that wintry camp. How these tender babes, these sick and delicate women were cared for under such conditions, is left to the imagination of the sensitive reader. How these Mormon exiles, outcasts of civilization, carrying their aged, infirm and helpless across the desolate plains and prairies, were tracked and trailed thereafter by the nameless graves of their dead, is a tale which though often attempted, has never been and never will be fully told. . . .

At various points between the Mississippi and the Missouri the Mormons founded temporary settlements, or, as they called them, "traveling stakes of Zion," fencing the land, building log cabins, and putting in crops for their own use or for the benefit of their people who came after them. Two of these "stakes" were named Garden Grove and Mount Pisgah; the former on the east fork of Grand River, one hundred and forty-five miles from Nauvoo, and the latter near the middle fork of the Grand, twenty-seven miles farther west. Mount Pisgah was on the Pottawatomie Indian lands.

A thousand west-bound wagons of the Saints were now rolling over the prairies of Iowa. . . .

Some of the Mormons had early crossed to the west side of the [Missouri] river, constructing a ferry-boat for that purpose, and settled, by permission of the Indians—Omahas—upon the lands set apart for their use by the Federal Government. . . .

As the season advanced the settlers on the west side were instructed to congregate in one place, and a site being chosen for that purpose they there founded their celebrated Winter Quarters. This place is now Florence, Nebraska, five miles above the city of Omaha. . . . Garden Grove and Mount Pisgah were still inhabited; their numbers now swelled by the refugees from Nauvoo. Here in these humble prairie settlements, surrounded by Indians, hopeful and even happy, though enduring much sickness and privation, which resulted in many deaths, the pilgrim Mormons passed the winter of 1846-7. . . . "The word and will of the Lord concerning the Camp of Israel in their journeyings to the West," was issued by President Young at Winter Quarters [Iowa] on the 14th of January 1847. A few paragraphs of this manifesto—the first of its kind, penned by the Prophet's successor—will convey some idea of the nature of the preparations for the continued exodus: [Sec. 136:2-11, 20-31, quoted.]

Agreeable to these instructions the Saints went to work with a will, and as spring opened all was life, bustle and stir at their camps on the Missouri, and at their other settlements on the prairies of Iowa. (History of Utah, 1892, 1:233-34, 237, 244-46, 248-49, 254, 278-80, 298-99.)

SCD&C 136 1D&C 136 2D&C 136 3D&C 136 4D&C 136 5D&C 136 6D&C 136 7D&C 136 8D&C 136 9D&C 136 10D&C 136 11D&C 136 12D&C 136 13D&C 136 14D&C 136 15Orson F. Whitney: 1-15

SCD&C 136 1D&C 136 2D&C 136 3D&C 136 4D&C 136 5D&C 136 6D&C 136 7D&C 136 8D&C 136 9D&C 136 10D&C 136 11D&C 136 12D&C 136 13D&C 136 14D&C 136 15In 1847 the Latter-day Saints, under the leadership of President Brigham Young began to fulfill the prediction of the Prophet Joseph who had declared, two years before his death, that the Saints would "become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains." In the book of Doctrine and Covenants there is a revelation entitled "The Word and Will of the Lord," to a people encamped upon the Missouri river, who had left civilization behind, who had been driven from their homes and were making preparation to cross the great plains and mountains and settle in this then empty and desolate land. That "Word and Will of the Lord" commanded the people of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to organize themselves into companies of hundreds, fifties, and tens preparatory to the long and wearisome ox-team journey to Salt Lake Valley. (CR, October 1916, pp. 54-55.)

D&C 136 22Anthony W. Ivins: 22

D&C 136 22Recognizing the hopelessness of reconciliation with their neighbors, determined to find a place where the Saints could worship the Lord without molestation, this modern Moses [Brigham Young] and his associates turned their faces westward, and after a journey unparalleled in the history of the world found asylum in these mountain valleys, where the body of the Church now resides.

D&C 136 22It is true that Moses led the Israelites out from the Egyptian captivity; the Puritans had left their homes in the old world and landed at Plymouth Rock.

D&C 136 22The impulse which prompted each of these great movements, which have meant so much to the world and its people, was similar, but the circumstances under which they were accomplished entirely different.

D&C 136 22The Israelites were going out from a grievous and humiliating bondage, and returning to their old home, in the land of their fathers. Modern Israel were leaving their homes, the lands of their fathers, and were going into a country unknown to them, a country uninhabited by civilized man.

D&C 136 22The Israelites were a people of one race, influenced in the accomplishment of their purpose by the traditions and religion of their fathers. The Latter-day Saints were composed of people gathered from various nations, bringing with them different traditions, different customs and different languages.

D&C 136 22Ancient Israel was separated from their destination by only about two hundred and fifty miles, in a direct line, and that over a country where great armies have marched from remote times. The "Mormon" Pioneers traveled over a road where a few had gone before, a distance of more than a thousand miles.

D&C 136 22Ancient Israel were led by great ocular demonstrations of the power of the Lord, and their daily bread was provided by manna sent down from Heaven. The "Mormon" Pioneers walked by divine faith, and provided for their daily necessities with the labor of their own hands.

D&C 136 22Reaching their destination, Ancient Israel found cities already built, orchards and vineyards already planted, and flocks and herds which the Lord delivered into their hands. Modern Israel found a desert waste, which could only be redeemed and made productive by infinite toil.

D&C 136 22So I feel justified in saying that this accomplishment has no parallel in the history of the world. (CR, April 1922, pp. 36-37.)

D&C 136 27Brigham Young: 27

D&C 136 27. . . Idleness and wastefulness are not according to the rules of heaven. Preserve all you can, that you may have abundance to bless your friends and your enemies. . . . (JD, May 8, 1870, 14:44.)

D&C 136 28David O. McKay: 28

D&C 136 28If thou art merry, praise the Lord

D&C 136 28The "Mormon" Church has always encouraged legitimate amusements; in this respect, at least, it has set a worthy example to the world. . . . Away back in the days of Nauvoo we find the drama introduced by the Prophet Joseph. We find acting in that drama men who later became prominent leaders in the Church. Among them was the man who succeeded the Prophet Joseph, Brigham Young. He, imbued with the necessity of influencing the people in their amusements and of using their recreation as a means of instilling virtue, integrity, and honesty, brought to these valleys that spirit. Why, even on the plains, after a day's march, the wagons were drawn up in a circle, a man with the violin would take his place by the campfire, and there on the prairie the sturdy pioneers would join hands in a dance, opening it by prayer, and participate in amusement that fostered the spirit of the gospel. Two years had not passed after their entrance into the "Valley" before they built the "bowery," and there presented, undoubtedly, the first drama that was ever given in the West. Later they built the Social Hall. . . . President Brigham Young . . . once said, in substance: "The atmosphere of the dance should be such that if any elder be called from the party to go to administer to a sick person, he could leave with the same spirit that he would go from his elder's quorum meeting." (CR, April 1920, pp. 116-17.)

D&C 136 28Joseph Fielding Smith: 28

D&C 136 28If thou art merry, praise the Lord . . . with a prayer

D&C 136 28Have we any right as Latter-day Saints who profess to keep the commandments of the Lord, to open our dances without prayer, or other amusements, and to close them in improper hours and without prayer? Have we that right, professing to be Latter-day Saints, keeping the commandments of the Lord? I say unto you, No. It makes no difference whether it is pleasure, whether it is our daily labor, whether it is the service of the Lord in teaching the gospel and trying to save mankind. Whatever it may be, that thing should be consecrated by prayer, and every performance, for the welfare of our souls. (CR, October 1919, p. 145.)

D&C 136 30Charles W. Penrose: 30

D&C 136 30Fear not

D&C 136 30. . . when the Lord commenced this work He commenced it "for the last days and for the last time." [Sec. 112:30.] It will not be thrown down or given to another people. It is to endure and abide forever, and, instead of being overcome by the things of this world, it is to overcome them. . . . it will conquer, it will endure. It matters not what may be brought against it, it will prevail; for it is the work of the Lord, and it is "a marvelous work and a wonder." [Isa. 29:14.] Let us not turn to the right or to the left through the influences of that Evil One, who deceives the nations. Many people will fail; many persons will turn aside, and they will endeavor to lead others astray. But this work will continue onward, and it will overcome everything that arises in its path; it will revolutionize the world. [Sec. 65:2; 71:9-11; 103:5-7.] (CR, April 1902, p. 54.)

D&C 136 30Brigham Young: 30

D&C 136 30Fear not thine enemies, for they are in mine hands

D&C 136 30Dear Brethren, we are sensible that the account of the death of the Prophet and Patriarch of the Church will be painful to your hearts; it is to ours. We feel and mourn their loss, but they have sealed their testimony with their blood; they have not counted their lives as dear unto themselves as the lives of the Church; they have died in the Lord and their works still follow them.

D&C 136 30The eyes of the Lord are upon those who have shed the blood of the Lord's anointed, and he will judge them with a righteous judgment. Let the Saints cultivate a meek and quiet spirit, and all things shall in the end work together for your good. (MS, July 18, 1844, 25:86.)

D&C 136 31Brigham Young, Jr.: 31

D&C 136 31My people must be tried in all things

D&C 136 31We had gone along from the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1844. We had passed through those terrible scenes while journeying through the then Territory of Iowa, when it seemed to me as if there was death on every hand. I was but a boy at the time, but it looked to me as if there would not be enough people to last till we could emerge from that dreadful ordeal in the months of February and March. Day after day those who were in the rear part of the train thought they were doing well if they could camp where the head of the train had camped the previous day. If they made in one day a journey of three miles, they thought they were doing excellently, because they had to bridge the streams, and over every swamp they had to build corduroy bridges. I never will forget them. They were like the lives of the Latter-day Saints. We have to journey sometimes in water up to our necks, where we can hardly keep our mouths above the surface, so it was at that time. We would make these corduroy bridges across swamps every two or three hundred yards, and they would sink till the wagon bed would be partly filled with water on some occasions. We traveled in this manner day after day, and I have seen the tracks of the wagons a quarter of a mile up and down a certain swale in the road, perhaps where they had diverged to cross a grassy place, because if a wagon cut through the sod there was not bottom to the lake underneath. I relate this to give you an idea of our condition in journeying through Iowa. I remember a little playmate of mine died, and was to be buried. In digging his grave as soon as they cut through above twelve inches of grass roots they struck a lake that seemed unfathomable, and they had to bury the child on the top of the sod. All who died in that country had to be buried on the sod, and a fence built around to preserve them from the wild animals. It was a condition that appalled the stoutest heart; and President Young and the brethren of the Apostles were laboring night and day to avert the evils that seemed to come upon the people. (CR, November 1901, pp. 77-78.)

SCD&C 136 36D&C 136 37D&C 136 38Spencer W. Kimball: 36-38

SCD&C 136 36D&C 136 37D&C 136 38Another day dawns—a new dispensation; the heavens are opened. The Father and the Son bear witness again to earth. Other heavenly visitors restore priceless blessings to men, and another martyr gives his precious life to testify to a faithless, skeptical, and unbelieving world that a personal God lives; that Jesus his Son is the Redeemer; and that truth is again restored. The details of the life of Joseph Smith are familiar to us. He announced at once his glorious vision of the Father and the Son and was immediately oppressed and persecuted. Modern scribes and Pharisees have published libelous books and articles by the hundreds, imprisoned him some forty-odd times, tarred and feathered him, shot at him, and did everything in their power to destroy him. In spite of their every effort to take his life, he survived through more than a score of years of bitter and violent persecution to fill his mission, until his hour should come.

SCD&C 136 36D&C 136 37D&C 136 38Twenty-four years of hell he suffered but also twenty-four years of ecstasy he enjoyed in converse with Gods and other immortals! His mission was finished—heaven and earth were linked again; the Church was organized; Brigham Young and other great leaders were trained to carry on; and he had conferred upon the heads of the Twelve every key and power belonging to the apostleship which he himself held, and he had said to them: "I have laid the foundations and you must build thereon, for upon your shoulders the kingdom rests." And his hour had come to seal with his blood his testimony, so often borne to multitudes of friends and foes. His Judas came from his own circle—Governor Ford was his Pontius Pilate, Nauvoo was his Gethsemane, and Carthage his Calvary. There were also modern Pharisees to goad the mobs and another martyr testified. . . . The shots rang out! And freely flowed the blood of martyrs, for Hyrum, his older brother, had chosen to remain with him. This precious blood soaked into the earth, sealing an undying and unanswerable testimony which continued to ring in minds and hearts. . . .

SCD&C 136 36D&C 136 37D&C 136 38His work was not lost. His testimony goes steadily forward on to infinity. As Alma had carried the torch for Abinadi, the apostles for the Savior, now came Brigham Young and the Twelve to continue the work of restoration.

SCD&C 136 36D&C 136 37D&C 136 38Men do not give their lives to perpetuate falsehoods. Martyrdom dissipates all questions as to the sincerity of the martyr. Personalities do not survive the ages. They rise like a shooting star, shine brilliantly for a moment and disappear from view, but a martyr for a living cause, like the sun, shines on forever. Great characters, students, businessmen, scientists, followed the youthful prophet to his death. They were not deceived. They lost him in martyrdom but inspired with the divinity of the Cause went forward without hesitancy. Thousands gave lives they could have saved, in Missouri, Illinois, and crossing the plains, and today a great people hailed for their education, practicability, and virtue, stand to bear witness that the martyrdom of Joseph Smith, like that of the martyrs before him, is another of the infallible proofs of the divinity of the gospel of Jesus Christ, restored in its fulness through that humble prophet. (CR, April 1946, pp. 45, 50.)

D&C 136 38George Albert Smith: 38

D&C 136 38Which foundation he did lay, and was faithful

D&C 136 38Under the Lord's direction, he [Joseph Smith] organized the Church of Christ, with apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists, etc., as the Church should be organized, to continue thus until all should come to a unity of the faith. He ministered unto the people, he healed the sick; he loved the souls of the children of men. But, as had been the case with prophets whom the Lord had raised up before, it seemed necessary in this case that the testimony of His servant should be sealed with his life's blood. No more pathetic page will be found in the history of the world than that upon which are inscribed the last sayings of our beloved Prophet Joseph Smith. He knew that his time was near at hand; he realized that his life's mission had been fulfilled. He had given the keys for the gifts and blessings of God unto the people, and the Father had continued to bless him; finally he realized that his labor was about done. (CR, April 1904, p. 63.)

D&C 136 39Wilford Woodruff: 39

D&C 136 39That he might be honored and the wicked might be condemned

D&C 136 39The Lord has suffered some of our Prophets and Apostles to be martyred; and what for? That the cup of the iniquity of the nations might be full and that his servants might be crowned heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ to a martyr's crown. (JD, September 27, 1857, 5:269.)

D&C 136 39Orson F. Whitney: 39

D&C 136 39Deep down, fundamentally, what was it that brought about the death of the Apostle Paul and the death of the Prophet Joseph? The fundamental reason was this: They were servants of God, and Satan wanted them out of the way. They stood as "lions in the path," and were building up God's kingdom in His own appointed way. Both these men had looked upon the face of Deity. Paul had been "caught up to the third heaven" [2 Cor. 12:2-5] , Joseph to the "seventh heaven" and there "heard things unlawful to be uttered." [Sec. 76:115.] Each was a divinely commissioned preacher of the gospel at the opening of a new dispensation. (CR, October 1912, p. 70.)

D&C 136 40George Q. Cannon: 40

D&C 136 40Have I not delivered you from your enemies . . . ?

D&C 136 40The blood of innocence has stained the soil of free America—the blood of a Prophet, of a Patriarch, and of other righteous men and women who have suffered for their religion, and for no other cause than that they chose to espouse the truth and to advocate it, living lives of purity, offending no one—that is, no one who should be offended—breaking no law, trampling upon no human right. They were cruelly murdered, and we as a people were driven out by violence, driven out from the midst of civilization, driven out from our homes and our hard-earned possessions, and our track is marked with the blood and with the graves of our own people from the borders of civilization till we reached these Rocky Mountains, and for no other cause for which we could be punished legally. We broke no law; we committed no offense against the majesty of the law. We have lived lives of purity as we do here in these mountains. But prejudice was created; men became excited; mobs were formed, and extermination was decided upon, and there was no alternative presented to us but this: either to submit to be killed off, men, women and children, from the face of the earth, or to take our flight as best we could in our poverty to some remote land where we could worship God according to the dictates of our own conscience in peace and in quietness. We chose the latter alternative. We preferred to come out among tribes of Indians of which we knew nothing, and live in their midst and trust to their mercies, savages though they were, than to remain among civilized men, men who called themselves Christians. We did this thirty-seven years ago. (JD, November 23, 1884, 26:285.)

D&C 136 42Francis M. Lyman: 42

D&C 136 42Be diligent . . . lest . . . your faith fail you

D&C 136 42Then I exhort you . . . to be faithful, to be humble. Do not neglect any duty that devolves upon you. Whenever you neglect your prayers, you are on dangerous ground. Whenever you neglect to worship the Lord, and break the Sabbath day, you are on dangerous ground. Whenever you neglect to deal righteously and honestly by any person in the world, you are on dangerous ground and in danger of falling into the grasp of Satan. You cannot afford to do it. Satan has great power in the world, and he is more anxious about this little body of people gathered in these mountains than about any nation on this earth. Why? Because these people have the Priesthood of God; they have the ordinances of the Gospel; they have the power of God for salvation to the world. Hence he is agitated, and he agitates others and stirs them up with prejudice and evil thoughts against the Latter-day Saints. We have the Church of Christ, and it will remain. You and I may get shaky; we may fall away; but this Church will endure; for it is established and planted here by our Father who is in Heaven. [Sec. 1:17-23; 65:2.] It does not depend upon any one man, or any number of men. The Lord has chosen spirits that have been sent here for the very work that has to be accomplished. Let us . . . develop the fact in our lives that we are among those that the Lord has selected to come here and perform His work. (MS, March 5, 1894, 56:149.)

D&C 136 42Heber J. Grant: 42

D&C 136 42Be diligent . . . lest . . . your faith fail you

D&C 136 42I wish to call your attention to the many failures that have been made because of failure to keep the commandments. The Lord told Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer that if they labored all their lives in bringing but one soul to the knowledge of God they should have great joy. [Sec. 18:10-16.] Notwithstanding this revelation, these men did not remain faithful, notwithstanding these men saw the angel of God; notwithstanding they gave their testimony to the Book of Mormon, in which they declare that they knew the plates had been translated by the gift and power of God, for "His voice hath declared it unto us; wherefore we know of a surety that the work is true." And again they testify that the angel came down and they beheld and saw the plates and the engravings thereon. . . . Notwithstanding all this, they failed to keep the commandments of God and fell by the wayside. Take Sidney Rigdon who was with Joseph Smith when he received that great vision and revelation wherein it is declared that they saw Jesus Christ who came into the world to bear the sins of the world and the testimony which they bore of Jesus. [Sec. 76:22-24.] . . . And they testify that they saw the angels and those that were sanctified singing praises to God. [Sec. 76:20-21.] I say, notwithstanding they saw the Savior and bore His testimony, this man Sidney Rigdon, fell by the wayside. I say to the Latter-day Saints, no amount of knowledge, no amount of testimony, no amount of sealing in the temples of God to our wives and children will save us; but the keeping of the commandments of God, being honest in our dealings with God and with our fellow men, paying our tithing, obeying the Word of Wisdom and doing our duty as Latter-day Saints—these are the things, and the only things that will save us. (CR, October 1900, pp. 59-60.)

SCD&C 136 41D&C 136 42First Presidency (Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards): 41-42

SCD&C 136 41D&C 136 42Finally, brethren, slacken not your hands, but be diligent to do with your might a good work in every just and laudable calling, and prove your own selves by embracing every opportunity to be useful, and magnify your callings, that you may be counted worthy of eternal life. Live your religion so manifestly and indisputably, that you may feel the peaceful and purifying fruits of it, and the power thereof, lest temptations seize upon you that you have not power to withstand, and you lose what you have seemed to gain. Let not your lives be such that your own hearts will condemn you, lest He who is greater than your hearts should prefer charges against you far more and greater than a misty, darkened mind has supposed. (MS, January 14, 1853, 16:17-19.)

SCD&C 136 41D&C 136 42George Q. Cannon: 41-42

SCD&C 136 41D&C 136 42We know when a man dies, inasmuch as he dies faithful to the truth, having kept the commandments of God and obeyed the ordinances of the house of God as far as they have been revealed and as he has had an opportunity, that he is secure, that his future is assured. He goes, as we are taught, to the Paradise of God, there to await the morning of the first resurrection. We know that his body will be called forth from the dust and from the tomb, and that his spirit will re-animate it, and he enter upon that glorious condition of existence concerning which so many promises have been made. [Sec. 88:27-29; 76:1-10, 50-70; 132:22-24.] In this respect the faith of the Latter-day Saints is not a chimera, it is something tangible. (JD, July 19, 1874, 17:136.)
